REFLECTIONS Previous to the Establishment of a Militia.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. Dodsley in Pall-Mall

M DCC LVI.

REFLECTIONS Previous to the Establishment of a Militia.

REMARKABLE Changes in Policy commonly arise from fome urgent Occasion ; and the Projects of speculative Men meet with little Attention, when not supported by a prevailing sense of Necessity or Expedience. One Step indeed may lead to another ; but political Bodies seem unable to move, in any Instant, beyond the Suggestion of their present Feelings. National Institutions therefore seldom come early enough to prevent Inconveniencies, they generally follow, and are intended to remove some real Complaint.

When we consider the Succession of Events in Britain it must be owned that few Nations have been so happy in the Changes they have undergone, or in the new Institutions they have occasionally adopted. Even Dissention, Faction, and Civil War have ended in some Accommodation to the Advantage of Liberty and just Government. Such a Reflection may reconcile us, in some Degree, to the bitter Experience which hath taught our Ancestors Wisdom, and diminish our Regret amidst Losses and Alarms, which give a Prospect: of any wise Establishment yet wanting in our Country.

In former Wars this Nation felt, only, their Strength, their Fleets were triumphant on every Sea, and carried the Terror of their Name to the most distant Parts of the Globe. Their Wealth found Allies, and put numerous Armies in Motion on the Continent, where their Enemy found sufficient Occupation for his Powers. In the present War, when engaged singly with a powerful Enemy, they have felt their Weakness too. Their Weapons, it seems, are formed to wound at a Distance, in close Fight their Bosom is bare and defenceless. No sooner did the Enemy threaten to invade this Island, but we appeared unequal to the Defence of any distant Possessions. Our numerous Fleets were occupied in guarding the Coast at home, and a Declaration of War, in which we threatened to force our Enemy to a Reparation of Injuries, seems to have brought upon us, only, a new Expence in defending ourselves. Such Appearances call for some wise and deep laid Establishment, which may form a domestic Strength, and provide for the Security of this Nation. Our Example hath taught the French to take Commerce in Aid of their military Power. They have felt the Advantage of trading Colonies, and the Necessity of a powerful Marine. Their Example, their Menaces, and the present Occasion, should teach us in our turn to mix the military Spirit with our civil and commercial Policy. The Nation is now come to a general Sense of this Truth, and almost, every Address to the Throne hath contained express Representations to this Purpose. It is far from my Intention to inflame any present Animosity. On the contrary, I think it Matter of Regret, that the Murmurs of a discontented Nation should afflict the Ears of an aged Prince, on the Verge of a Reign, so happy in its domestic Influence, tho' not remarkable for such Events as amuse Posterity.

It is indeed happy for us in many Respects, that the Public is free enough to censure, or to commend an Administration ; but it is the Manner of Men to judge abruptly from Events, and call for Redress, in their Troubles, with such Impatience, that the ablest Minister may appear tardy in giving the public Affairs a new and a more satisfying Aspect. A Minister, it is thought, on whom this Burden may fall, will find the Establishment of a Militia one Power by which his Labour may be diminished. But to arm a People, and to renew the Habits of military Men, will require great Wisdom in the Institution, and some Length of Time to attain its Maturity. It is hoped, however, that from such Beginnings, as the Times will, suggest, this Nation may proceed, and, by future Corrections, appear equally happy in this as in other Branches of their domestic Policy.

Every body will call to mind, on this Occasion, that our Ancestors were unacquainted with standing Armies ; that the People were once, not only sufficient for their own Defence, but often carried War with Success into their Enemy's Country. Their Bravery and military Spirit will be magnified, to serve as an Example to the present Times, and to silence such as pretend to treat a popular Militia with Contempt. The Examples of many an Age in Europe, the more recent Instances of a Militia opposed with Success even to regular Armies, will prove that what is proposed, and appears to be so earnestly desired by this Nation, is not impracticable. Such Examples are not, however, in all Points applicable to our present Case. Our Ancestors were a People, in many Respects, different from what we now are. The very Miseries and Inconveniencies they laboured under, bred them to the Use of Arms and a warlike Disposition. Laws were imperfect, and ill executed ; every Individual was forced to the Use of Arms for his own Security. What are now become Suits at Law, were then Quarrels decided by the Edge of the Sword. Every Family in the Country had its Rival, and the Dependents of each were nursed up in mutual Jealousy and Animosity ; they were fond of the Sword, because it was their best Security ; and Bravery was always esteemed in the first Rank of Virtue, because they were so often exposed to the Need of it. Thus used to Arms from their early Years, and marked out for Honour or Contempt as they excelled in the Use of them, the People consisted of Soldiers and Men of Valour, who, from Necessity, Habit, and Desire of Praise, were continually armed, and embraced Fatigue and Danger with Avidity. Arts and Commerce were little practised ; War furnished the only Profession thought worthy a Freeman. If to these Circumstances we add the Nature of their Government, so much akin to military Subordination, we shall see the Grounds of that martial Spirit which prevailed in the early Ages of our Country, and be able to account for the Readiness, with which the Militia in former times appeared in the Field. The Court was an Assembly of Barons, who held of the King by a military Tenure. Each Baron was followed by Vassals, who held of him upon a like Condition ; and the Subordination was continued downwards, by equal Steps, to the Mass of the People. In time of Peace they resembled a great Army in Cantonments, where each Band acknowledged its Leader ; and every Alarm brought them to the Field with a Love of Glory, and a Familiarity with Arms, more formidable than the exactest Discipline. The further we look back into History, the more we shall find this national Character sunk in Barbarity ; but, as we advance, mere Ferocity, and the Desire of Rapine, by Degrees give way to milder Principles. The same Distinction being still connected with the Profession of Arms, the same Vigour remained, arising from a Sense of national and personal Honour.

The Manners of a Nation shift by Degrees, and the State of civil Policy, and of Commerce, at which we are arrived, have greatly affected our Manners in this Particular. By the first, Individuals are fully secured under the Protection of the Laws. Wrongs are less frequent, and private Revenge is prohibited ; Family Animosities are no longer attended with Hostilities, and the Use of Arms, arising from the Necessity of Self-defence, hath ceased. Our Situation, as an Island, hath lessened our Fears even of a foreign Enemy, and we want that Vigilance which is found in other Nations, who, being more exposed, are reduced to study the Attack and Defence of a Frontier, as an Object of the first Importance. Other Nations in Europe are become equally mild; but our Situation is peculiar, and it may be doubted whether we must not, for ever, come short of our Neighbours in the several Particulars, which compose the Art of War, because we have not the same Occasion to study and practice them. Our Commerce hath no less affected our Manners. It has increased our Wealth, and Wealth has become in a great measure the Mark of Distinction and Honour. Our Hands are employed in Arts and Manufactures, and Traders are upon the same Level, and mixed with our Gentry. That Contempt of lucrative Arts, which prevailed in former Times, has disappeared, and we are now guided in the Choice of a Profession, by the Consideration of its Profits and Emoluments. Even our Gentry have learned to estimate Professions in the same Manner, and we may well be ashamed to own, how few are found in our Army, to whom the Pay is no Temptation. The Profession of Arms, so becoming the Birth and Station of a Gentleman, is not courted, because its Profits are trivial. This Reflection is to the Honour of a few who must be excepted, because, to resist the Stream, or rise above the common Level, is a Proof of uncommon Vigour ; and when in the Beginning of a War we find Gentlemen of independent Fortune crowd into the Army, we may congratulate the Nation on this Proof of her remaining Strength. In other Countries, People of Quality have no other Profession which they can follow with Dignity. In our's, the Contempt of it often assumes the Air of Wisdom ; and a Person who could never raise his Mind beyond the Ideas of Interest and Profit, still pretends to look down for an Inferiour. The Air and Dress of an Officer may dazzle at first ; but when it recurs that he has but little Money in his Pocket, the Name is turned to Derision and Contempt. It is the Condition of grovelling Minds, that they cannot form a Conception beyond their own Level, nor see that others move in a Sphere above them, who, negligent of Interest and Profit, are animated with the Love of Honour and commendable Action, and are rouzed when the Safety of their Country calls to Fatigue and Danger. It is to be hoped, that many of our young People discover a Fondness for the Army from such Principles. And when, in Preference to what is more lucrative, they embrace a Profession which appears bustling and active, connected with Honour and Glory, it were to be wished that our general Maxims were more favourable to feed and encourage this Spirit.

But when I impute the Decline of our martial Disposition to those very Circumstances which we must value the most, I shall perhaps be understood to speak unfavourably for the Institution which I have professed to recommend. The happy Form of our Government ; the sacred Authority with which our Laws execute themselves ; the Perfection to which Arts are arrived ; the Extent of our Commerce, and Increase of our People ; the Degrees of Taste and Literature which we posses ; the Probity and Humanity which prevail in our Manners ; are Circumstances which a Nation may be allowed to boast of. Such is the height to which every improving Nation aspires, and at which but a few have arrived. We are however to blame for having suffered these calm and halcyon Days to lull us so entirely asleep. It may be allowed that the Perfection now attained in every Art, and the Attention required to furnish what is demanded in every Branch of Business, have led away from the military Profession great Numbers of our People ; and that Applications are become frequent, which seem to disqualify Men in a great Degree for the Use of Arms. But Self-defence is the Business of all : and we have already gone too far, in the Opinion that Trade and Manufacture are the only Requisites in our Country. In Pursuit of such an Idea, we labour to acquire Wealth ; but neglect the Means of defending it. We would turn this Nation into a Company of Manufacturers, where each is confined to a particular Branch, and sunk into the Habits and Peculiarities of his Trade. In this we consult the Success of Manufadiure; but slight the Honours of the human Nature : we furnish good Work ; but educate Men, gross, sordid, void of Sentiment and Manners, who may be pillaged, insulted, and trod upon by the Enemies of their Country. We are yet many Degrees removed from this Extremity. The Body of a great People still remains, along with whose Occupations the occasional Use of Arms is natural ; we may even hope to stir the Lethargy of less favourable Occupations, and gain in Dignity and Strength the little we may lose on the Side of Industry. Our People are remarkable for Public Spirit ; it operates in our domestic Policy : but is not equally prepared against a foreign Enemy. Too scrupulous a Caution with respect to the Disturbances which might arise from Faction, and even our Attention to preserve the Game, have, with other Considerations, made our Government industrious to check and prohibit the use of Arms : and I do not know by what Fatality the Spirit of military Men has even declined among our Nobility. I will not spare any Censure where Persons of this honourable Class have formed themselves upon Maxims unworthy of their Station. Can Men born to Titles of Nobility, derived from honourable Ancestors, born to Affluence and a liberal Education, give up their Minds to the Views of Profit and Interest alone ? The Ideas of their Station are those of Distinction and Honour, their very Vices should spring from that Source, and the leading Virtue in their Breast should be a Contempt of Interest and of Life, when their own or their Country's Honour is at Stake. This Censure I hope willnot fall upon many ; we have indeed suffered Repose to steal upon our Minds, but the Spirit is not extinct. Perhaps the Business of an Officer in Time of Peace, appears to have no Temptation on the side of Glory, perhaps our Nobility are averse to the Subordination and Attendance it requires ; they fear the Vexations which every Constable may devise for them in Country Quarters ; they despise the incessant Duty of the Parade, or that of being employed as Recruiting Officers to ensnare the Refuse of their Country into the Service. It will be happy for us if any Excuse is found consistent with their Honour. If that Principle remains we are safe, and the Public may find Means of renewing its Activity.

I have been so particular in representing the State of our Manners, a State which every civilized, and above all every commerical People has a natural Tendency to ; that we might not rush upon this Subject without knowing its Difficulties. We have not now to do with the fierce and rapacious Spirit of our early Ancestors; nor with the sworn Fidelity of Vassals ; nor with the Idleness, Elevation of Mind, and Aversion to Labour, which threw every Freeman of old into the Profession of Arms. The Hearts of our People are not Steel, they are softened by a Disuse of Arms, by Security, and pacific Employments. We must not therefore think that the Name of a Militia, and a few Arms sent to the Country, will at once find Soldiers ready to receive them. The Springs must be cleared at the Bottom, otherwise what we do on the Surface will not enlarge or quicken the Stream. A few stated Hours of Exercise, without any other Use of Arms, might have exposed the Attempt to Ridicule, betrayed an Aversion to the Business, and for ever dishonoured the Name of a Militia.

The Feeling of a Man unaccustomed to use a Weapon, is a Fear that it may hurt himself; that of a Man familiar with the Use of it, is a Confidence that it will hurt hh Enemy ; and each is so much possessed with the Idea which strikes him, that he often forgets every other one. I will therefore be so bold, in the first Step on this Subject, as to propose that every Restraint should be taken away by which the People are hindered from having or amusing themselves with Arms. The Poachers of Great Britain, so much the Aversion of our Squires, if assembled in a Body might do excellent Service against an Enemy. Men are fond of trying a Skill, which they are conscious of, and if we abandon our Hares and Partridges to the People, we shall find them better qualified hereafter to defend our other Possessions. To mention such a Sacrifice hath an Air of Ridicule ; but Amusements which are habitual, and serve to fill up the Leisure of an idle Life, become Matters of Consequence. We will therefore chearfully own the Merit of Persons who abridge their Pleasure in such Articles ; but must insist that Gentlemen, who hold serious Meetings for the Preservation of the Game, would have some Regard to the Preservation of their Country. We would gladly hope that a late advertisement hath only called them together, to put an End to this Concert ; and they may perhaps favour us with an account of the Poachers, whom they have not been able to exterminate, that we may compute the present Strength of our Country. To the Profession of Poaching, we may join the frequent Practice of Shooting at a Mark, where the Prize as a Badge of Honour, and the Emulation might animate our People ; and surely to promote such Trials of Skill, would be more worthy of our Gentlemen, than the Matches and Betts, for which they are become the Objects of Ridicule to all Europe. 

Here I will venture to differ from a very common Opinion, and affirm that the Practice of such Motions as form the Military Exercise, is far from being sufficient to train a Soldier. He learns indeed to handle his Arms with Ease and Quickness ; but is not inspired with a love of Arms : on the contrary, they become his Aversion, from the Drudgery and tiresome Hours which they occasion. He acquires no Confidence in the Use of them, because no Part of his Exercise tends to shew their Effect. He learns to fire with the Multitude without seeing an Enemy, and can scarcely ever be brought to reserve his Fire till he can apply it to most Advantage. The Skill and Confidence derived from the Use of Arms in Sport or Trials of Dexterity are very different, and if united with some Degree of the former, our Militia would soon become a Strength to the Country. The best Lesson of the Parade is a Habit of Submission to absolute Command : there every Battalion learns to unite and obey ; it becomes like the Bundle of Rods, strong when in Order and united, even tho' Individuals have no great personal Confidence, or Fondness for the Business. This is the Effect of military Order and Obedience: but it may be doubted whether a Militia can ever sufficiently attain to it, and certainly should not trust to inferior Degrees of Order and Discipline alone. We must therefore study to inspire them with that Familiarity and Liking to Arms, which will give every single Man a Confidence. Men so prepared, in a Croud, and with llt-Order, are qualified to produce a like and
more fatal Confusion in the Battalions of an Enemy.

Along with this general Permission, the Law should perhaps enjoin that every Family possessing a certain Number of Acres, should be furnished with all the Particulars now required to arm one Man. The general Permission, it is hoped, would revive and diffuse the Love of Arms among our People ; and the last Article mentioned would secure a Force in the Hands of that Part of the Nation, which is the least corrupted, and the most to be trusted with its internal Peace. I cannot think it necessary to point at any Regulation, by which the military Spirit might be promoted among Our Gentry. When the Way is opened to them, the very Biass of their Situation will lead them into it. They are possessed of hereditary Distinction ; whatever therefore comes attended with farther Distinction and Honour must engage their Minds. And we may hope to see their Education better directed, and more effectual in furnishing their Minds with such Knowledge, and forming their Persons by such Exercises, as give the Accomplishments, the Manners, and Air of Gentlemen. If we succeed in rendering the People familiar with Arms, we may go on to settle the Form of a Militia with Confidence ; the Order of our Policy will lead us in adjusting the Particulars of Command and Subordination, and the Time which other Occupations may allow, for Exercise, and Parade, will be sufficient.

To create a military Force, two things are chiefly required. That the Body of the People out of which our Regiments are to be formed by Rotation, should be acquainted with Arms, and value themselves upon the Use of them. That the proper Degree of Authority and Subordination should be established, and the Habit of military Obedience provided for. 

In these two ways we strive to produce Courage and Discipline. For the first, I have already proposed a general Use of Arms among the People. It is an obvious and a promising Measure, and there is abundance of Reason to recommend it ; but Objections may croud upon us, which seem to ballance those Reasons, and dissuade the Measure. I shall therefore consider such of them, as appear the most important.

It may occur, that we are a divided People ; that Factions still subsist, which build their peculiar Tenets upon Views destructive of the Government, and our Liberties ; that therefore we cannot admit a promiscuous Use of Arms, without some Danger from this Quarter.

It has ever been the Practice of Parties in Power to disarm and depress their Adversaries. This indeed appears to be the high Road of Self-preservation and Security ; but we may still admit a Question : whether another Path might not be found, leading more directly to national Prosperity and Happiness. It will, I presume, be owned, that invidious Distinctions among a People serve to foment and embitter their Divisions : that Animosities, which might otherwise subside, are thereby perpetuated; and Differences, which might gradually be forgotten, are marked with such external Distinctions as for ever revive them in the Mind. The Difference of Opinion, and Party Views form one Ground of Animosity ; unequal Treatment and inferior Privilege furnish another still more exasperating. If a Faction should threaten immediate Disturbance, Vigilance and Severity no doubt must be opposed to it : but Men of Ability can easily discern such an Occasion, and will know, how to proportion the Marks of Distrust and Severity, and how to assume an Air of Serenity and Confidence as the Danger removes. Under such Treatment the Asperity of Faction is mitigated, and the Animosities of Men are suffered to shift with their Manners and the Revolutions of Ages. We would render those we trust more warlike, and the Objects of our Suspicion less dangerous: but it may be doubted, whether a Distinction made in permitting the Use of Arms would have this Effect. To be refused the Use of Arms, in the Face of a Country possess'd of this Advantage, would give the Spirit a new Edge; would create a Desire, and stir up a Rancour in the Heart, more hostile and dangerous than any Habit acquired by a free and common Use of Arms shared with the Multitude. Men of Reflection will give this Reasoning its proper Weight. Great Minds have been remarkable for Confidence, and have been remarkable too for Success, perhaps in some measure owing to the Attachment and Fidelity they every where found in return to their generous and engaging Proceedings. We may add, that a Distinction, which might become the Subject of Dispute, in the Case of every Person, who pretended to have Arms, would discover a new Scene for the Practice of Envy and Malice ; and give an Opportunity for servile and undeserving Men to assume an Air of Importance at the Expence of Merit. A little Acquaintance with the History of Great Britain may furnish Examples to this Purpose, and lead to Instances, wherein Government hath promoted Disaffection, by imputing it where it was not clearly due, and inflamed it by insulting Men with Marks of Distrust, whilst the proper Caution, against a Danger so increased, was neglected.

It must be owned, however, in the present Question, that the Numbers and Force of the Disaffected are to be considered. If we are in the Proportion of a Garrison to a conquered City, it is prudent to disarm and watch the Inhabitants that they may not overpower us : but if our Proportion is that of a whole Army to a few in its Ranks, who are inclined to favour the Enemy, or to desert, we cannot fear a Danger from the Arms of a few, whom we can force to act, even, against the Enemy they favour. I will not pretend to assign the Proportion, in which the Disaffected are found in any Part of this Island : but we may affirm with Confidence that the Proportion is in many Degrees below an Equality. Indeed whilst the Body of our People is disarmed, and pacific to a Degree which tempts an Invasion, we have Reason to apprehend Danger even from a few, whom the Spirit of Faction continues to stimulate. A few Banditti from the Mountains, trained by their Situation to a warlike Disposition, might over-run the Country, and, in a critical Time, give Law to this Nation ; but if our People were armed, and prepared to defend themselves, the Insults we have suffered, and the future Threatenings of an Enemy, would be equal Matter of Ridicule. The Spirit which seems to animate this Nation, is a Love of Liberty and Independence, along with a Confidence in Parliament ; the Cry of a Faction therefore, which contradicts our favourite Tenets, will only rouze us in the Defence of them. When the Lovers of Freedom and their Country have an equal Use of Arms, the Cause of a Pretender to the Dominion and Property of this Island, is from that Moment desperate.

Along with Scruples of this Kind, another Danger may present itself. It may be apprehended, perhaps, that a general Use of Arms among the People will encourage popular Leaders, and even furnish them with a military Force, by which they may aspire to subdue their Country. On this Head it may be observed, that whilst the Ideas of a Constitution remain, and animate the People to any Degree of national and public Spirit, we cannot fear that mere personal Attachments will lead them to sacrifice these Views to the Ambition of particular Men : yet, it will be said, that a Time of Corruption, may come, when the Ideas of a Constitution, of Liberty, and of Independence, will cease to operate in the Minds of our People : that in such a Conjuncture personal Attachments will divide them ; a Caesar will raise himself to the Head of one Party, and a Pompey to that of another. When the Zeal for a Country is lost in all, each will study to advance his Leader, that he may follow him to the Summit, and partake of the Power and the Spoil. Such as look forward to an Age of this Completion, may lay aside all Sollicitude about the Event of Commotions, which may then arise. They have figured to themselves a desperate Case, when Liberty and the Government of Laws must come to a Period. When the People become accessary to the Ambition of particular Men, it may indeed be doubtful which of the contending Parties will prevail ; but the Public is sure to find an absolute Master in either. In such a Conjuncture Rome found a Master, whose Reign appeared to be tolerable. The Conspirators, therefore, did wrong in killing him, because such a Master was then the greatest Blessing the Public had to hope for. Julius was killed only to make way for Octavius, and the Empire at Intervals found a Trajan and an Antoninus, but never more the Government of Laws secured by the Forms of a free State. Brutus and Cassius lived an Age too late, and fell a Sacrifice to Maxims which were no longer the Springs of public Action. The Danger here pointed at is distant ; that of foreign Conquest is more nearly impending ; we cannot therefore doubt that a military Force is necessary to defend our Country ; and they who insist upon this Objection as laid against a popular Militia alone, are concerned to shew that the Increase of a Standing Army is, in the Event, less dangerous to Liberty. Even the Example we have quoted will stand in the Way of such a Position. Caesar and even Pompey found their Strength in those Legions which they had too long commanded in different Provinces, Troops formed to all the Vices and Disadvantages of a Standing Army : the Event therefore is rather a Proof of Danger from that
Quarter.

It will be feared, perhaps, likewise, that a Familiarity with Arms may render private Quarrels and popular Riots more bloody. Should we admit this Consequence, it will not follow, that a few domestic Inconveniencies should deter us from the neccessary Steps, in our own Defence, against a foreign Enemy. Proper Laws, and an active Police, may in a great measure prevent such Inconveniencies ; nor, indeed, can we apprehend any remarkable Increase of such Disorders. Some military Spirit, we hope, may arise to the Advantage of our Country, but cannot fear that, in the present State of our Manners, this will degenerate into a savage Ferocity. In proportion as the Consequences of Riots and Qaurrels become serious, the Practice will become less frequent ; for when an Evil becomes extreme, Men avoid it with proportionable Care ; and, with a civilized People, the View of certain Consequences promotes Discretion, Sobriety, and Circumspection. From the same Consideration we need not fear, that the Quarrels of Gentlemen will become, in any great Degree more frequent, or more fatal. Whilst we lament the cosequence of such Quarrels, and condemn a Practice to be severely restrained, it will be fair to admit, that some other Vices are corrected by it : Petulance, Impertinence, and Brutality give way to the Evil we are speaking of. These indeed are not the Characteristics of our Nation, and we shall not bleed much when such Excrescences are lopt off. 

I have been particular in representing the State of our Manners, and in recommending what I think is wanting in such a State to render a Militia useful. I consider a People thus recalled to the Use of Arms, as a Mass, out of which we may form in every County a certain Number of Regiments, proportioned to its Extent. I consider every Man as deriving military Spirit more from the Use of Arms, and the Emulation revived in the Country, than from the stated Practice of any Motions, which we dignify with the Name of Military Discipline. If we have a People familiar with Arms, no Difficulty can remain about the Form of a Regiment, or in assigning the Time and Place of their Exersife. The great Point to be studied is, how we may give Command its proper Authority, and come, as near as the Freedom of a People will permit, to the regular Subordination of an Army, when it is required that any Part of this Body should act in that Capacity. The entire Force of military Law cannot be applied here, because we do not propose to give up our Liberties ; we propose to gain a Situation where we may better defend them. The Nomination of Officers, and supreme Command of the Militia, must no doubt belong to the King. He is more safely entrusted with this, than with the Command of a Standing Army. The Law, however, may provide, that the Nomination of Officers, in the different Ranks, should follow, as nearly as possible, that Subordination in point of Dignity and Wealth already subsisting in this Nation. By this Means we take the Benefit of an Authority already established, and we give it some new Addition, which will bring it still nearer to military Subordination. This Addition will arise from the Influence of such Rewards and Punishments as may be prescribed in a military Law.

But before I enter on the Consideration of such Rewards and Punishments, I will mention some further Particulars, which I consider as a necessary Foundation to the Superstructure we propose to raise. The Reader has already been led to consider the Necessity of permitting a general Use of Arms ; that our People may be familiar with those Weapons, they are to use in the Defence of their Country. It must be owned, however, that to excite in our People the Spirit which we desire, something more than a bare Permission is necessary. And altho' it were granted, that the Freedom of shooting the Game, and the Practice of contending for a Prize, might, to a certain Degree, promote the Use of Arms ; yet, a Question still remains, from what Motives we shall induce this People to take their Turn in the Militia, and submit to the Constraint and Attendance which the Time of their Service will require. The Law no doubt hath a coercive Power, and mayenact such Penalties as promise to have this Effect. Shall we therefore trust the Appearance of our People, in the Militia, to the Force of Compullion alone ? We live in a Time, perhaps, when Compulsion is not necessary, and in a Time of general Forwardness to receive, Arms which are prepared for the Defence of our Country. This Alacrity, however, is occasional ; it supposes an Alarm, and Times of no apparent Danger may be attended with other Inclinations. In such Times, therefore, we shall be obliged to compel the People to take their Turn in this Service, and in every Instance have to do with a Person who desires to avoid and shift his Appearance. Such a View of our Case will furnish no great Hopes of military Strength to the Nation. We know, indeed, that in despotic Governments, and in the hired Forces of freer States, the Method of Compulsion alone is sufficient ; and that, without any remarkable Courage from Nature, or Inclination to the Service, Men are kept to their Duty, and forced to act in the Face of an Enemy. But when we consider the Severities, by which this End is accomplished, we can no longer think of applying the same Means in the present Case : a Severity, which, without the Mixture of any other Power, can drive Men in the Face of Danger, and certain Death, is inconsistent with every Degree of civil Liberty. Those Chains must be heavy indeed, which bind Men to such a Task, and Punishments very prompt and terrifying, which make them forget the Love of Safety, and of Life. If we mean to perpetuate a military Force, upon the Principle of Compulsion, perhaps, no inferior Degrees will be sufficient ; and, if this were the only Principle, we could take hold of, it were sufficient to make us abandon the Project. So much is said to prevent our trusting to an Engine, which we can employ but faintly ; and which if not plied, in all its Powers, will be found unequal to the Work. We are encouraged, however, to go on, by the Examples of other Nations, who, consisting of Men inured to Arms, found Individuals not averse to take their Turn of military Service, and forward in the Face of Danger, from other Motives than the Fear of Punishment. Such Nations commanded the Respect of their Neighbours, and were ever formidable, at least, in their own Defence. The Reader will please to recollect, what Circumstance in the Character of their Policy and Manners, we are to consider as the Ground of this internal Strength. Upon recollecting what we know of the History of all Nations, it will appear, that none ever possess a permanent military Force lodged in the Nerves and Sinews of a People, where they, who carried the Arms of the Public, were not the most respectable Part of the Nation. The Courage, the liberal Spirit, the Generosity, and Self-denial of that Profession, deserve to be so classed, and will not have a Being upon other Terms. Men of high Mettle, who are formed for the Profession of Arms, are like wise fond of Honour ; and if we separate the one from the other, that Profession is instantly thrown among the Dregs of the People. A Nation is then obliged, by artificial Means, to patch up some military Power, which is held in Suspense between Jealousy and Contempt, and which, at every Interval of Peace, is dwindling into Weakness and Insignificance. We may cast our Eye upon a Nation, where Men of high Rank, in the Order of civil Policy, are above military Service : a Place in the Army, or the meanest Office in the Revenue, are made alike the Reward of a favourite Servant ; the Love of Pay therefore, or Compulsion, are the only Powers, which can fill up the Ranks of such an Army. We may observe another Nation, where the highest Dignities of the State derive a new Lustre from military Service, where even such Dignities are obscured without it. The People therefore in every Station will croud into this Quarter, and their Inducement is of such a Nature, as to captivate the most worthy. At Rome the several Branches of the Civil Magistracy, the Senate and the Forum, opened the Way to Distinction and Honour ; but when a Person laid his highest Claim to Consideration and Applause, he reckoned the Years of his military Service, he shewed the Wounds he had received in the Defence of his Country, or left the Chair of Dignity and State, which he filled in the City, to struggle with Dangers and Fatigue. Thus Rome was not only invincible, she became dangerous to the World. The former is all our Aim : we may, therefore, in military Honours, stop many Degrees short of the
Romans.

The People are now in expectation, that a Law may soon pass, to establish a Militia in this Country, and that every Individual will be obliged, in his Turn, to that Degree of Consinement and Attendance, which his Time of Service will require. If Men perform this Part with Chearfulness, and from a Public Spirit, they deserve such Marks of Honour and new Privilege, as the Policy and Manners of our Country will admit of; and if they appear with any Marks of Respect and Distinction, more, than half the Purpose of a compulsatory Law is provided for, with so much the greater Advantage, that the Inducement, which leads them to the Field, will continue to guide them in the Performance of their Duty.

When so much is said, I shall be called upon, to specify the Marks of Respect I have been pointing at. It would be ridiculous to propose any which might prove an Alteration in our Constitution, or be attended with Difficulty in the Practice. We are very happy in the Degrees of Subordination already established in Britain, and when we talk of investing the Military with new Dignity, it is only proposed to join that Character with what is already the most respectable and dignified in the State. The Character, therefore, must not only be separated from every Degree of Meanness, but connected with such Advantages as will draw the Attention of those we mean to captivate. It may be hoped, that the liberal and ingenuous Spirit of our People, will easily connect Honour with the Service of their Country; and that some slender Distinctions may be sufficient to settle their Minds in this Habit of thinking. Men of more fertile Invention, and more minute Acquaintance with the Train of our Policy, might be able to prompt or correct me in this Article. I will presume to mention, only, a few Particulars in Illustration of what has been already proposed.

That every Gentleman, who has served in the rank of Colonel, shall rise in his turn to the several Degrees of superior Rank. That he shall, however, continue to serve as a Colonel in his turn, and have no Command in the Capacity of a General Officer, in the County, until the King, upon the Formation of an Army, shall make choice of him for that Purpose.

That Rank in the Militia shall be equal, in all respects, to that which is acquired in the Standing Army. With such an Accession, his Majesty will be less confined, in the Choice of an Officer, where his Service requires a superior Capacity. Thus in some Countries the Prince finds, in the Person of every Nobleman about his Court, the Rank of an Officer, and is free to employ him, in the Conduct of an Enterprize, if his Capacity and military Endowments otherwise justify the Choice. And I am inclined to believe, that with little Drudgery on the Parade, or loitering in Country Quarters, a Person may have Greatness of Mind equal to the Conduct of Armies, and be furnished with that kind of Knowledge and Reflection, which will qualify him for
it. 

To this I will add, that military Ranks should give Precedence equal with Titles of Nobility. They no doubt will naturally accompany one another ; and where any of our Nobility decline this Service, they will bear with the Advancement of such as become the Safeguards of their Country. The Honours of our Nobility are derived from such Merit, and there can be no Impropriety In classing the Merit of our own times in that Rank, which derives its hereditary Lustre from a similar Title. In pursuit of this Idea, a Field Marshal, tho' only an Earl, or of an inferior Class of Nobility, would be held equal with a Duke. Such a Gradation pursued downwards, as far as it may with Propriety, should be observed in the Ceremonial of the Court, in the Lists of Parliament, and in the Order of State Processions. The same Honours should be communicated, by Courtesy, to the Wives and Children of such Officers.

The Train of our Policy will likewise furnish an Opportunity of distinguishing those of an inferior Class. Let such as actually serve in the Militia stand foremost in the List of every Grand or Petty Jury to which they are called : and let such alone be qualified to be chosen Foreman of a Jury.

Let them be married upon being only twice called in the Church.

Let them be the first in every County List, and have the Place of Honour in voting at all Elections.

From such a Distribution of Honours it may be expected, that the military Character will rise in the Esteem of the Public, and the Arms of the Nation settle in the Hands of those, who deserve its Confidence, on account of their personal Spirit, their Property, and Interest in its Preservation. We cannot apprehend that in such Hands they will be useless to the Public : Minds once possessed with the Love of Honour, are prepared for any Danger or Fatigue in Pursuit of it. We excite this Principle by pointing out a Path wherein it may exert itself ; we hinder the Office of a Soldier from devolving, by Substitution, on the meanest of our People, and we give our Manners an Edge, which will render the Nation formidable to our Enemies.

This I apprehend to be the Class, wherein military Men should stand, attended with the Respect and Consideration they deserve; and from such Reflections we may return, with Advantage, to consider the proper Sanctions of a military Law, which is to affect and govern a free People. When we have invested Men with a new Privilege and Dignity, we have given them a Sensibility to a new kind of Punishment. It were happy for us, if the Sentiments of Honour alone, and the Fear of what we might suffer on this delicate Point, were sufficient to occupy and govern the Minds of our People ; we bear Signs of a lamentable Defect, where other Motives are necessary. This Principle connects the Dignity of Virtue with the Lustre of a Station. It leads to commendable Actions, on the foot of Propriety and Decorum ; it flies from what is vile with an Apprehension of Meanness and Degradation : joined with British Integrity and Patriotism, it would form the greatest of Characters, would be a sure Foundation to the Virtues of Public Life, and furnish the best handle to military Punishments and Rewards. If Honour be the most natural Principle of military Virtue, every Sanction we devise, for the Government of a Militia, should tend to maintain it in the Minds of our People. Every Instance of Shame or Degradation seen in the View of a Punishment, awakens the Care of our own Honour and Reputation. Instances of imprisonment, corporal Punishment, or pecuniary Fines, tend to excite our Fears, and beget an Attention to sordid Considerations. We would render Men brave from a Principle of Fear, or magnanimous from a mercenary Motive. If the Cry of Shame from a dishonoured Nation cannot break the Heart of an Offender ; nor the Applause which attends an honourable Action fire and stimulate the Mind, we have Reason to be sollicitous for the Fate of our Country. Every criminal Prosecution for military Miscarriage, is a Consession of our Weakness. It is a Proof, that the Public Service hath devolved upon Persons, who seek for a Livelihood or a Fortune at our Expence. It is a Proof that some Regulation is yet wanting, which might bring, into public View, that Store of Capacity, Spirit, and Probity, which lies concealed in the mass of our People.

From such Reflections I am inclined to wish, that the military Law calculated for our militia, should build its Authority on the Foundation of Honour and Disgrace alone. The Liberties of a British Subject, and the Honour of a British Soldierr as it has been pointed at, lay open many Parts, wherein we may wound an Offender, without aiming at his Life or his Person. The Public will become the Judge of Reputation : the same Evasions will not save from Disgrace, which may prevent a formal Sentence. When we act from an Apprehension of the latter, it is sufficient, that we can save and palliate. If we fear the former, every Part of our Conduct must be clear of Suspicion, as well as real Blemishes. It will be proper, that we come to Particular, in order to consider this Scheme with a nearer View to its execution. The Law has already provided against Crimes and civil Offences : I shall, therefore, consider Mutiny in time of War, and deserting a Post in the Face of an Enemy, as the highest Offence a Soldier can be guilty of. The following Censure, or a like Degradation and Diminution of Privilege might be inflicted in such a Case. That every such Offender be dismissed the Militia for ever : that his Name and his Marks be published : that it shall be lawful to strike him : that he shall have no Action of Damages for an Assault, nor return a Blow, without being liable to such an Action : but that to maim his Body, or occasion his Death, shall be equally criminal as in the Case of any other his Majesty's Subjects. Humanity forbids the Cruelties he might meet with ; it is only intended that his Example should give an Opinion of Shame and Degradation in Cowardice.

From this Height, we may descend by, a proper Gradation of Penalties, to the smaller Offences. That, for Instance, Mutiny, or Disobedience of such Orders as relate to the Muster or Exercise of the Regiment in Time of Peace, shall forfeit all or any Branch of the Militia Privileges, as a Court Martial shall see fit to determine. That for Negligence, or  small Offences on the Parade, it shall be in the Power of the Colonel, or Commanding Officer of the Regiment, Company or Division, without Trial, to disgrace the Offender, by ordering him out of the Rank in which he stands, to one less honourable,
or to stand in the Front without his Arms, till the Exercise of the Day is over. 

A System of Penalties, upon such Principles, may at first sight appear, too refined and fanciful. It may be thought, that they will give little Authority to our Law, not being of a Nature, that will influence the Multitude. We may observe however, that Laws often form and assimilate the Minds of Men to their own Tendency ; and it might be expected, that the Signals of Honour and Disgrace thus held up to the Public, would meet with a new Degree of Attention. It may be affirmed, that great Numbers would receive the Impression, and be governed by the View of such Forfeitures as we have proposed : nor can we doubt, that inferior Numbers governed by such a Principle, would form a greater Strength and Security to this Nation, than any promiscuous Multitude trained to other Views. If the Law therefore shall direct us to exclude and disqualify for the Service, such as prove insensible to these Motives, the Militia will be only cleared of an Incumbrance, and our Force collected into a select Band which may be employed with Confidence.

Gentlemen will be pleased to consider, what other manner of Correction they would apply in this Case. Pecuniary Fines must be limited, and to very inconsiderable Sums. It will bring no Disgrace to be fined of a few Shillings or Pence. The Rich will boast of such a Censure, and be fond of shewing, that they can bear it with Ease. It may indeed distress the Poor, and lessen the Quantity of his own and his Children's Bread, but will not furnish him with a Motive to become a better Soldier. Imprisonment and corporal Punishment are on the Way to Despotism ; and if they linger short of that Termination, will prove ineffectual. If one Degree of Severity does not avail, we must proceed to a higher. The Ax must come in Aid of the Rod, and the Wheel and the Torture terminate the View of an obstinate Offender. Even if we should mix any Tincture of such Severity with our Punishments, they should still owe their chief Influence to the Shame and Disgrace which they bring. And when this Point is stretched to a certain Degree, an Offender should be disqualified to carry Arms ; because if, with such Marks upon him, he continues in the Rank and Class of our Militia, he will depress better Spirits, and bring the Character of a Soldier to his own Level.

When the Subject is brought so far, the Reader may expect to find some Plan for the Formation and Discipline of a Regiment. It was none of my Intention to offer any thing on that Head : nor does it appear a Matter of great Difficulty. I thought we were in danger of hurrying on to this Part of the Institution, without attending to Considerations, which were previously necessary. I have endeavoured to explain myself on these Points, and think that Regiments in whom their Country may confide, should be the Flower of a People familiar with Arms, and that they should find Esteem and Consideration connected with their Appearance in that Station. I have likewise hinted at the Scheme of a Discipline agreeable to this Idea of a Militia. The Paper, however, may appear to end abruptly without the Consideration of some other Particulars. It may be asked, by what Rule we are to proceed in the first levying and Formation of our Regiments ? Are we to make a compulsatory Law, or trust to the voluntary Appearance of our People ? I answer, that an Act may pass in the Form of a compulsatory Law, which yet will find a chearful and ready Compliance, and few Instances where its coercive Power will be felt. If his Majesty's Order is sent, into the Country, to enrol, without Choice or Distinction, every Person able to carry Arms, there will appear, perhaps, a general Inclination to decline the Burden. If, on the contrary, Persons of a certain Estimation alone are pointed at, such an Order will be understood as a Call unto a Station of Repute and Credit, and Men will be glad to find their Names stand in the List. I will explain myself in a few Particulars ; and the Reader will please to  remember, that the Limits of Rank and Qualification here mentioned, are rather given, in Illustration of the general Idea, than as Particulars fully digested and corrected.

Let the proper Officers in every County, City, and Borough, be directed to make out compleat Lists in the following Terms.

Of the Noblemen and Gentlemen possess'd of a certain Valuation, qualified for the Rank of Colonels.

Of all possess'd of a lower Valuation, qualified for Field Officers.

Of another Valuation, qualified for Captains. And let all Freeholders, having the Valuation of one hundred a Year, be understood to be qualified for inferior Officers, and not obliged to serve as Soldiers.

Let the remaining List consist of such as possess a certain Extent of Ground, and under one hundred a Year. Let a similar Method be followed in all Cities and Boroughs, that the lower Class, here likewise, may consist of such as are respectable among the Inhabitants.

This lower List, to avoid Repetition, I shall call, that of Freemen. It excludes all Cottagers, Day-Labourers and Servants. It must likewise exclude every Person at present, or for the future, who has, or shall be convicted of any criminal or infamous Charge before the Civil Magistrate.

When his Majesty is pleased to appoint his Officers, let them draw by Lot from the List of Freemen, the Names of such Persons as are to take the first Turn of military Duty ; and when their Time is expired, a new Appointment of Officers may proceed in the same Manner, until the whole have taken their Turn.

Let it be lawful for a Freeman to substitute another Freeman in his Place : but the Substitute alone, in this Case, shall enjoy the Honours and Privileges of the Militia. Let it be lawful for a Freeman to substitute his Son, who, tho' not in the List of Freemen, whilst he lives in his Father's Family, shall, in this Case, enjoy the Honours of the Militia, and communicate the fame to his Father likewife. Let the Names of such as refuse to present themselves, or substitute another in the above Terms, be struck off the List of Freemen, and excluded for Life : let this, if thought necessary, affect their Children.

If it is apprehended, that the List qualified for the Rank of inferior Officers, may exceed, in Proportion, the other Classes, let the Number of such Officers, appointed to a Regiment, be increased accordingly. And when, in the Field, the several Posts in a Battalion are disposed of, according to Rank and Seniority, the Supernumeraries may take Post by the Colours, which they are supposed to carry and defend. To this Particular, which seems to relate immediately to the Form of a Regiment, I will add another; That in every Company, once in three Months, a Prize shall be contended for, by shooting at a Mark. That all who have ever won such a Prize, in different Companies, shall, when the Regiment is assembled, form a Division apart, and take Post in the Flank, or advanced in the Front, commanded by four Officers from the Colours.

Such broken Hints may illustrate the Meaning of this Essay. A Person, tho' ill qualified to adjust every Particular, may yet strike out general Views, not unworthy of the public Attention. I will conclude this tedious Performance with observing, that if we rest our Militia upon its proper Basis, a general Use of Arms, and the Love of Honour, we shall find Men hardy enough to serve their Country; that Duty will employ the most deserving of our People, whose Sword, without alarming the public Liberty, will be a sure Defence against a foreign Enemy. If, on the contrary, these Points are neglected, the Form and pretended Discipline of a Militia will be vain, and our Arms must come by Substitution into the Hands of the least reputable Class of the People, who cannot be reduced into the Order of an Army, and who are Strangers to the Sentiments and the Attention to personal Character, which such a Duty would require.

FINIS.THE  MORALITY OF STAGE-PLAYS SERIOUSLY CONSIDERED. 

EDINBURGH: 

M,DCC,LVII. 
(Price Sixpence.) 



NOTHING can be more alarming, to every well-wisher to true religion, than to find disputes arising among its Professors, which may end in divisions and animosities hurtful to the spirit of religion itself. People who begin such disputes have much to answer for, unless they have sufficient reason for what they do. It is well known, that the people of this country are well disposed, sober and religious ; that they are ready to take every public offence much to heart, and, as far as their disapprobation will operate, that they strenuously contribute to remove it. We should therefore beware of trifling with their honest zeal, or of making them waste, against objects of a harmless or indifferent nature, that opposition, which should be all employed against real vices and corruptions. Mistakes in this article are attended with many ill consequences ; they mislead our apprehensions of duty ; they create ill-will, and become a source of groundless antipathy between persons, who should entertain sentiments of kindness and charity towards one another. I am sorry that there should be any appearances of this kind amongst us at present, and would think myself very happy in contributing to remove them. We are alarmed with an imputation of, irreligion, which is cast upon the entertainments of the Theatre ; and it may be apprehended, that persons who listen to this charge will think very unfavourably, if not with some degree of antipathy, of their neighbours, who continue to take any part in such entertainments. I hope that no person would chuse to bear the imputation of hating his brother without a cause, and that every well-disposed person will be glad to hear any observations which may help us to form a right judgment of one another. 

The Stage has subsisted in Britain about two hundred years ; it has been during this period the entertainment of people of distinction, and of others too, who were enabled to partake of it. Whether it has corrupted our people in any degree, is a question not easily determined. I am inclined to believe, that, considering the mixture of good and bad men which are to be found in every age, the people of this island are not inferior to those of any other age or country whatever. This will be a presumption, that, if Plays are a poison, it is at least but slow in its operations. Another observation which I will make by the way, is, that however the Stage may have corrupted our people, the manners of the people have so far prevailed, as, in some respects, to have reformed the Stage. On this head we may come to a sure conclusion, because we may compare Plays that were admitted during some part of this period, with those which are now chiefly in repute. In making this comparison it will appear, that a certain degree of indecency and licentiousness once permitted, is now rejected, and that Plays more pure, and of a better moral tendency are either chosen from our antient stock, or that these qualities at least are expelled from every Writer of the present age. We cannot be too anxious in forwarding this reformation, when it is in any degree incompleat. But I am sensible that it is in vain to speak in this manner, whilst an opinion remains, that the very name and form of a Play is offensive and pernicious. I confess that I am at a loss fully to account to myself for the prevalence of such an opinion. It is not derived from Scripture ; for I cannot recollect any thing like a warning against the Stage, either in the Old or New Testament. Our Saviour, who appeared at a time when Plays were in high repute in different parts of the Roman Empire, says nothing to warn us of their immorality. The Apostle Paul, in writing his Epistle to the Romans, amidst various instructions and cautions which he gives,  is silent on the subject of Plays, which were then in high repute amongst the people he was writing to. In preaching at Athens, the same Apostle expressly quotes a sentence from one of the Greek Poets, Acts xvii. 28. ; For in him we live, and move, and have our being ; as certain of your own Poets have said. This is a very sublime expression, and beautifully applied by the Apostle, as will appear on consulting the context. It shows that he was sensible of the instructions and good impressions which we may receive from poetry, and was directed, by that Spirit which supported him in his Ministry, to apply it so properly to those purposes. Nor is this the only proof he has given of an esteem for good performances of this nature. He has, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, xv. 33. inserted into the sacred text a line from a Greek Play, which now subsists : Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good manners. Who does not see that such sentiments, and such instructions must be improving to mankind, wherever they are found, whether in prose discourse, or in a Play ? And, if the whole strain of a Play is framed to this purpose, it surely deserves esteem and encouragement from every well disposed person, who has the means of filling up his vacant hours with such entertainments. I am sorry  that any person should have overlooked this consideration, or given reins to a headlong zeal against the Stage, so unlike the wisdom and discernment of the holy Apostle, whom we have quoted. The Stage indeed may be abused, and so may the wisest institutions of mankind : Religion itself can hardly be preserved from corruption : The Papists, and other Sectaries, daily misapply the doctrines of Scripture, to serve their own unlawful purposes. The pulpit, in the possession of every party, into which Christians are unhappily divided, has often rung with other sounds than those of the Gospel of peace, and put us in mind, that when the best things fall into the hands of corrupt men, then the wisest and most sacred institutions may suffer some abuse : But this will furnish no argument against any subject which is so abused.  I should be sorry to offer any apology for abuses which may have appeared on the Stage: I hope that every audience, in our times, will have judgment and severity enough to reject examples of this nature : But I cannot admit any such abuse, as a valid argument against the Stage in general. We do not prohibit the use of food and drink, because some men abuse them to excess ; nor do we forbid all relaxation from business, because some unhappy persons do mischief in their sports : Neither should we condemn every poetical composition, intended for the Stage, because some Writings of this kind have been found faulty and licentious. People, who are acquainted with performances of this nature, are sensible that a number of grave, moral and edifying pieces, would, by such an undistinguishing ruin, be lost to mankind. The Authors of such works have been esteemed worthy of great praise, and have been thought to bear a considerable part in promoting the interest of virtue. We cannot doubt of this, when we find any degree of regard paid to them in Holy Writ ; and what we have observed to this purpose above, is sufficient to connect their defence with the honour of Scripture itself. This is more than apology sufficient for endeavouring to show, that such performances may not only be innocent, but be of great benefit to mankind. I am sensible that persons who need much information on this head, may likewise need to be told what is the nature of a Play ; and I will now give some notion of it, that every person, if possible, may be enabled to judge for 
himself. 

Plays are of two kinds, called Tragedy and Comedy ; the one represents the actions of common life, and compositions of this nature have been the most liable to abuse ; because wit and ridicule are sometimes found to be petulant, and the familiarity of this style is more easily mixed with indecencies : But the perfection of Comedy consists in exposing to just ridicule the follies and absurd vices of ordinary men ; where it fails in this purpose, the abuse is manifest, and will be condemned by every judicious audience. Tragedy, on the other hand, is serious, grave and majestic; it represents the actions of great men, and their conduct chiefly on great and interesting occasions, their struggles in difficult and distressing situations, where the sentiments they express raise admiration or pity, and where the very faults they commit become so many warnings to the spectator. Every Tragedy therefore contains a story, and may convey instruction in the same manner with a parable or fable ; it differs only in the form, and not in the effect. In a Parable, the story is related ; in Tragedy, the subject is expressed by some action and conversation which is represented, and we are left to collect the story from the speeches of the persons concerned in it. In a Parable, we wait for the moral till the story is concluded, when the whole appears to have been an illustration of some moral precept ; in a good Tragedy, we have a continued moral from beginning to end ; the characters, the sentiments, and the observations, which come from the persons who speak, are calculated to move and instruct us; and we are deeply engaged by such representations, because we take part with amiable characters, and become anxious about the event. It must appear strange, to say, that every story, parable or fable, either in the form of narration, or in that of a Tragedy, must be a wrong thing in itself. One story, indeed, however told, may be dull, tiresome, and leave bad impressions ; but another story, we all know, may be agreeable, entertaining, and leave the best impressions on the hearts of the hearers. We cannot therefore condemn the story represented in any Tragedy, till we know of what kind it is, till we know whether it tends to leave good impressions or bad ones, in the minds of the hearers. If it is found to leave good impressions, it should certainly be commended, and highly deserves the countenance which the Apostle Paul hath given to such works, altho' written even by Heathens. In order to show in what manner a tender and affecting story improves the heart, and strengthens every good disposition, I shall confider the history of Joseph and his cruel brothers in that view. We find the elder brothers moved with envy and malice against an innocent child, because he had his father's affection, and was distinguished by forebodings of Divine favour. They resolved to shed his blood, when he came to them alone, in the desart ; but being diverted from this cruel purpose, they sold him as a slave to strangers who were passing thro' the wilderness. Every humane person, who reads this piece of history, will be moved at the distress of the innocent sufferer, and will feel a horror at the cruelty of the brothers. Here then we may observe, that companion for the distressed, and indignation at the wicked, are the best dispositions which men can entertain ; and that every story which leaves such impressions must be very edifying and instructive to good men. The remaining part of this history is very beautiful, and we cannot help considering it. Joseph was preserved, and, by the Divine favour, came to a station of honour and great power. Famine obliged his brothers to seek relief in that country where he was become a ruler. When they appeared before him, he disguised the first emotion of his soul, under an aspect of severity. He questioned them about his father's condition ; and, when mention was made of his younger brother, who had no share in the cruel offence committed against him, he discovered an earnest desire to see him. When, at last, he declared himself to be their brother Joseph, they were struck with remorse and terror : But he repaid their former cruelties with a generous forgiveness ; he relieved their distress; he saw again his aged father, and paid the duty of a grateful child. Whilst we are attending to a story of this kind, it nourishes every good disposition of the heart, and we are the better prepared by it to act a noble, generous and compassionate part towards our fellow-creatures. If we can imitate such circumstances in the story of a Tragedy, we may presume that the effect will be similar ; and it must appear strange, to find any Tragedy censured, before we pretend to show that it fails in this point. The subject we are now upon has been brought in question, on occasion of the Tragedy of DOUGLAS ; and no person sure can judge of that performance, who is not acquainted with the conduct of the story on which it is built. But, if any person has proceeded so far, from a general disapprobation of the Stage, I am persuaded, that a few reflexions upon the representations of this performance, would be sufficient to reconcile him to it. It was well received by every audience, and seemed to make a deep impression. The sentiments it excites are those of admiration of virtue, compassion to the distressed, and indignation against the wicked cause of their sufferings. In every story of distress, which is not merely accidental, wicked characters must appear, as well as good ones ; for we cannot impute injury and cruelty to any other but the wicked : Their appearance however improves the mind, by fostering our aversion to wickedness, in the same degree as the view of amiable characters heightens our love of virtue, by engaging our hearts in its behalf. Hence the generosity of Joseph, and the wickedness of his brothers, are equal matter of improvement and edification to our minds. 

When the Tragedy of Douglas becomes yet more public, it will appear to have a tendency similar to this. The designs of one person are painted in such colours of hateful depravity, as to become a necessary object of detestation. The mistakes of another awaken our caution, and become a lesson of prudence. The generous and elevated mind of a third, warm and exalt our sentiments ; and that person, on whom the chief distress of this story falls, moves to compassion, and proves at last a warning against rash and fatal despair. Agreeable to this short representation, the performance has found a favourable reception with the public, and given proof how far grave and serious competitions may engage the minds of men, and convey instruction under the shew of amusement. It has likewise had the ordinary testimony of distinguished merit ; it has struck out some sparks of envy and spite. This kind of fire, we may believe, is seldom extinct, but it only flames upon extraordinary occasions, when any remarkable merit, or a rising fame is to be consumed. People who carried it in their breast, have paid their duty regularly to every good Writer in every age ; in so much that their attendance is now required to compleat his honours : Their silence therefore would have been the severest blow they could have struck at the Author of Douglas. I think very differently indeed of those who are sincerely anxious for the interest of religion, and who censure every Writer of a Play, because they apprehend somewhat immoral and offensive in the very nature of the Stage. I respect the intentions of such, however I may think them mistaken in this particular, and flatter myself, that, whilst we agree in condemning any particular abuses which may have place on the Stage, we shall likewise be of one mind in applauding whatever will contribute to render the amusements of that place inoffensive and instructive. This is the only point I have laboured in this Paper, and only plead against an opinion which would place all Theatrical performances upon the same level. With the people who are likely to oppose me, the very name of a Play implies somewhat criminal and immoral. A near view of the subject should be sufficient to correct this apprehension ; but, whilst any respectable authority continues in favour of it, we can scarcely expect to remove it entirely. The authority of the Christian Church is supposed by some to be clearly on that side of the question : But will any body say, that the Christian Church has invariably discouraged good Plays. In the times of our Saviour and his Apostles, the purest times of the Christian Church, no such marks of disapprobation appear. The Fathers of the Church, whose authority is probably referred to on this occasion, ought surely to have very little credit with us on their own account : A great part of the superstition of the Church of Rome is derived from their inventions ; and we have already totally rejected the authority of them and their Oral Traditions, when we reformed the corruptions of the Popish Church. We may however, in charity, allow, that they might have had some reason for their opposition to Stage-Plays. Christianity, in their times, was struggling for a full establishment ; and they thought that Stage-Plays, being of Heathen composition, and having frequent reference to Pagan Divinity, might recal the minds of men to their former superstition. We have reason to believe, that, if Plays of a Christian strain had appeared, they would have met with no opposition from the friends of Christianity : For Gregory Nazianzen, a Father of the Church, and a person of great piety, endeavoured to supplant Heathen Plays, by introducing one which he wrote himself, on the most interesting subject of our religion. And we must so far confess that he acted a wise part : For, when corrupt performances are admitted on the Stage, the best thing we can do is to reject them, and supply their place with compositions more favourable to the important concerns of religion and morality. If the Plays on our Stage have not hitherto been altogether pure, we have certainly been unlucky in the long silence we have kept on that subject ; and doubly unlucky in breaking out with our censure, at a time when one very successful attempt was made to supply the Stage with a Play, which might contribute to its reformation. The Popish Clergy, we know, exclaimed against the Stage, when it took part with the Reformers, and helped to overturn their own power : For it is well known, that Plays were acted at the Reformation, which very much helped on that work, by exposing the Vices and absurdities of the Popish Clergy : It is no wonder therefore that they were enemies to the Stage ; but we cannot surely have any resentment to the Stage in our days, because it formerly offended the Popish Clergy in promoting the Reformation. 

When we come to confider the law and doctrine of our Church with respect to Stage-Plays, it will appear that the censure which performances of this nature now meet with, doth not arise from any law, statute or established doctrine in this Church. We may even venture to affirm, that the prejudice to Plays in general is of late origin. The only act of this Church relating to Stage-Plays, which I have ever heard quoted, is an act of the Assembly which met in the year 1574. An act in the following terms. * "That no Comedies or Tragedies or such Plays should be made on any subject of canonical Scriptures, nor on the Sabbath Day. If any Minister be the Writer of such a Play, he shall be deprived of his Ministry : As for Plays of another subject, they also should be examined before they be propounded publickly." [* Vid. Petrie's Church History.] This act of Assembly, we see, supposes that Plays are allowable, and that Ministers may write Plays on the subject of any history, which is not taken from canonical Scripture. So far the practice is agreeable to the laws of this established Church, and it is not pretended that there is any other ecclesiastical law now in being with respect to Stage-Plays. We hear indeed of certain Proceedings of the Presbytery of Edinburgh about thirty years ago, when they published an admonition to discourage the Stage. We would willingly believe, for the honour of the dead, that they took this step in opposition to some faulty and immoral Plays which were then acted, and that they would have been loth to discourage performances of a better tendency, which might promise a reformation of such abuses. Their example, at any rate, is no law ; and to follow them without examination would imply a concession of infallibility, which they never laid claim to. It is needless to mention the names of Clergymen of unquestioned reputation in the Christian Church, who have written Plays for the Stage ; or to mention how frequent it is to consider a right taste and judgment in such performances, as an accomplishment necessary to every man of letters, whether Clergyman or layman. Such authorities can be but of little avail after we have had the subject itself before us, and an opportunity of judging for ourselves. I shall therefore go on to take another view of the Stage, and confider some inconveniencies which are supposed to attend it. Few things of human concern are free from inconveniencies ; we need not therefore be surprized, that some are apprehended to belong to the Stage. We may suspect that Theatrical Entertainments engage the minds at least of our youth too much, and carry them away from other subjects of attention, which make a part either of their business or their education. This suspicion is equally well grounded with respect to every other amusement : For people who are disposed to be idle, will easily find avocations from business ; and the Stage has one peculiar advantage, its being the amusement only of a dated time, and not always at hand to tempt people who are idly disposed. This objection goes upon a supposition that persons of all tempers run with equal eagerness to the amusements of the Stage ; they differ however greatly from one another in this particular, and they who are the most captivated with them, acquire a degree of coolness and indifference from time and familiarity. We may venture to ask whether knowledge, whether industry and commerce have declined in this City since the Play-house was first opened here. It will be owned that they have rather increased. We may appeal to persons who have the care of the education of youth in other places, whether they would not gladly see their pupils come to the Theatre, and mix with grave and decent company, if by that means they could break up more dangerous meetings for low gaming and riot, where youth have no good example to lead them, and no restraint from a sense of decency or shame. The Stage, I think, may well bear a comparison with other amusements which youth will devise for themselves, if they are debarred from this. When we confider the strain of those Plays which have met with the most favourable reception from the public, observations will occur to the honour of human nature ; for they are Plays which excel in moving compassion, which interest an audience in behalf of amiable characters, which give the proper applause to virtue, and treat vice with ignominy and reproach. A tragedy, which fails in exciting these emotions, or which would shock our favourable apprehensions of virtue, would soon be rejected with disgust. We may consult on this point an author, whom we hold in such esteem, that we make our children read his works, almost as early as their catechism. He has observed, that a Play, tho' defective in ornament, and without any affectation to please by pompous and founding expression ; if it is furnished with a just moral and true representation of nature, will carry the preference with every audience from more splendid and showy performances. When we see an audience therefore in tears for an object of compassion, when we find them affected with the generous sentiments which come from a virtuous character, deeply engaged in wishes for the success of the good, and for the disappointment of the wicked ; it would scarcely occur that such an audience could be better employed in an hour of leisure. Whatever our peculiar occupations are, virtue is the business of all, and we should not be excluded from any place where it may be learned. We know how few amusements there are for which this plea can be offered : It is well, we think, if they are innocent relaxations from business, we seldom expect to find them schools of morality. But were this plea laid aside, we ought to make sure that other amusements, less favourable to the habits of business, may not come in the way of our youth ; and that our pretended severity may not prove the occasion of greater licentiousness. It will be laid that our youth may go too often to the Play-house. They may go too often to any amusement ; but we are assured here that they can go no oftener than plays are acted, which is by no means so frequent, as other avocations from business may occur to them. As there is a danger that youth may exceed in every amusement they are given to, those amusements should be most discouraged, in which the excess is most dangerous. I will venture to say that no place of public resort, under the influence of decency, and in the presence of respectable persons, can be so dangerous, as cabals which are formed in secret, and apart from such influence. If any abuses yet remain on our Stage, we should not delay to reform them. But I have mentioned these abuses so often, that some of my readers will begin to have a very terrible notion of them : However, I will venture to inform them, that no abuse was ever admitted on any Stage, but might pass for perfect decency, when compared to what they may have often heard at a gossiping, a merry-making, or a meeting of young fellows. The Play-house is frequented by people of both sexes, whose rank, whose age and manners, are sufficient to command respect, and to bring decency along with them into any place. It is an uncommon compliment we pay them, in supposing that our youth are corrupted in their company ; I should rather think, that, considering the nature of the entertainment, and the respect due to the company, we should see, with satisfaction, such spectacles become a part in the amusements of our youth, and hope that their idle, hours would find there, not only agreeable relaxation, but improvement too. 

It has, I understand, given offence of late, that persons of grave and respectable character, were present at the representation of a new tragedy, which they thought a good one. Great part of this offence should be removed, when we recoiled: that this, and many such performances, have a tendency very favourable to sobriety and morality ; for they must be very dignified characters indeed who must keep at a distance, when the advancement of virtue is in any degree concerned. Their part of the censure, however, is put in a new light. It is said, that altho' a practice may be innocent in itself, yet persons of grave character ought to avoid it, because it gives offence to other people; and being thought immoral, their neighbour may by such an example, be shaken and unsettled in what he thinks his own duty. We are instructed to this purpose in the eighth chapter of Paul's epistle to the Corinthians, where he confiders the practice of eating meat, which had been offered to idols. The reader will be pleased to observe, that this instruction relates to actions, in their own nature indifferent, and can not be applied to any other. The Apostle explains it in the eighth verse in these words : "Meat commendeth us not to God : for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse." He ends the chapter with this conclusion ; "Wherefore, if meat make my brother offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother offend." If the eating of such meat had been criminal in itself, he would have avoided, and forbid the practice on that account. If on the contrary it had been right, and a commendable practice, he would have embraced it, and studied to correct the prejudice which any person might have entertained against it. For his whole life was a continued course of opposition to both Jews and Gentiles, where their prejudices flood in need of correction. Let us therefore apply the Apostle's instruction and example to the present question. Is it perfectly indifferent to a man whether he goes to a play or no ? I shall suppose that it is. Is it likewise indifferent to the public what sort of people compose the ordinary audience at our Theatre ? I believe it is not. The Manager of every theatre must suit his entertainments to the company, and if he is not supported by the grave and the sober, he must suit himself to the licentious and profane. We know that the language of the theatre, or any other language whatever, may be employed either to recommend virtue, or to insinuate folly and licentiousness. If licentious people alone frequent this entertainment, they will perhaps encourage what they like to hear. But persons of sobriety, and regard to virtue, would make that entertainment form itself to a very different strain, and give the whole a very different influence on the manners of mankind. They would reject and condemn what was exceptionable, they would promote and encourage what was agreeable to sound reason, and favourable to virtue. Happily for us, this is no new thing ; for the Play-house has been long the resort of persons of both sexes, who are the most srupulous on the point of reputation and decency ; and their presence has, no doubt, contributed to reform some abuses, which may have, at some times, crept into the stage. Their presence therefore has done a great service to mankind ; and if any person is prejudiced enough to think otherwise, 'tis high time he was undeceived. The Apostle instructs us to refrain from an indifferent action, if it offend our brother ; but he has often commanded, and has shown the example, to do good in the face of prejudice, and every such prejudice in time will be corrected. We know that in every nation there must be amusements and public entertainments, and the Stage has always made one in every civilized and polished nation. We cannot hope to abolish it ; and if we could, we should only make way for the return of drunkenness, gaming, and rude cabals, which the more decent conversation and manners of civilized times, have in a great measure abolished. We should not even propose to abolish an entertainment, which is founded on the best principles of human nature, the love of virtue, and compassion to the distressed : For who would ever go to a tragedy, if he had not a heart formed to pity, and a mind susceptible of the admiration due to worthy characters. It is the duty of grave and respectable men to watch over an entertainment of this kind, that it may not deviate from the good purposes which it is calculated to serve. What they do to this purpose, either in opposing the bad or promoting the good, is matter of duty, and their conduct in it is not to be regulated by the opinion of any person who is pleased to take offence. 

The state of the poor has been mentioned, as a confederation which must render this entertainment at present pernicious and criminal. We cannot be too attentive to every circumstance which can affect the state of the poor, in the difficulties which they are now threatened with ; and we have reason to believe, that the Gentlemen of this country are well disposed to take any measures which may be thought proper for their relief. How the Theatre comes to be thought any hindrance to such measures, we cannot easily apprehend. The poor may be divided into two classes ; those who are indigent, but still in a condition to earn their bread by some sort of labour or industry ; and those, on the other hand, who, by reason of age or sickness, are unable to earn any subsistence. It is remarkable, that of late years more care has been taken than formerly to provide for the poor, who are unfit for any kind of labour. Poor-houses have been built in many parishes, under the management of the Gentlemen and people of substance, who have taxed themselves for that purpose. It were cruel therefore to load the body of our Gentlemen with an imputation of neglect in this article, at a time when their conduct deserves commendation. And it were imprudent by such an imputation to encourage any person able to work in the expectation that he may be idle, and yet receive gratuitous charities. If any person were rich enough for the undertaking, he could not possibly do a more signal mischief to his country, than that of maintaining the whole poor of Great Britain in idleness. It has pleased Providence, for wise purposes, to place men in different stations, and to bestow upon them different degrees of wealth. Without this circumstance there could be no subordination, no government, no order, no industry. Every person does good, and promotes the happiness of society, by living agreeable to the rank in which Providence has placed him. Whilst his gratuitous charities relieve the poor who are unable to work, his other expence becomes a fund for the subsistence of the industrious ; nor is it proper that they should expect subsistence upon any other terms than those of industry and sobriety. The money which the rich expends is paid for the labour of the poor. Different trades live upon the profits of furnishing his cloathing, his table, and his equipage. It is evident how many poor industrious people would starve, if he did not buy the works which they furnish him. The very money he lays out for amusement comes at last into the hands of the poor, and is paid as the price of their labour. A part of it we shall suppose is laid out for the amusements of the Theatre, and the people who receive it there, are so many hands who distribute that money among the industrious poor. Every Player must be cloathed, maintained and lodged : The money which he receives therefor is paid at last to the spinstress, the weaver, the clothier, and other tradesmen who live by furnishing the ordinary necessaries of life. Whilst from humanity we indulge the poor in their station, we ought from justice to indulge the wealthy in theirs, and to expect that they are to go on agreeable to the habits of living which belong to their station, and which in effect are necessary to the order and good of society, and to the maintenance of the poor. If we shut up our places of entertainment, and deprive people of distinction of that society and those amusements which they have a relish for, they must tire of living among us ; and the few who yet remain will chufe to remove to another place, where they will not meet with popular antipathy, on account of their most commendable amusements. Then indeed the money they expend would be lost to the poor of their native country. This and every other city would feel, in such a case, that the residence of persons of fortune is necessary to give any number of tradesmen, and industrious poor, the means of subsistence. How hard must it appear then, to give any encouragement to the poor to murmur against a circumstance from which their industry may derive such advantage ? We may ask, who are the most forward in this country to form charitable designs for the relief of the poor ? The Gentlemen of this neighbourhood, I think, have set the example ; and they too who were the readiest to shed tears, for the distresses represented in the Tragedy of Douglas, have been the most forward in compassion to the poor, and in liberal designs for their relief. 

After all I must confess that one consideration remains, which must renew my diffidence on this point, A body of men respectable for their learning and gravity, who constitute a judicature in this city, have, without any exception, declared their disapprobation of the Theatre in general ; and, to show that no exception could be admitted, have taken the alarm, just when the Tragedy, which I have had occasion to mention, was introduced. I cannot pretend to speak of their reasons for so doing, until they are pleased to publish them; but must entertain great expectations of their force, since they are sufficient to overpower what has appeared on the opposite side. Men of gravity are above trifling with the mistakes and misapprehensions of a people, and certainly cannot longly under any such imputation. Men of learning need not be told, that part of every liberal education consists, in learning to distinguish between Theatrical performances which are faulty, and those which have a moral dignity and a good tendency ; they know that a good Tragedy has been in all ages esteemed amongst the chief productions of human ability ; that the authors of such works become more renowned with posterity than the princes and monarchs of the earth. The names of Buchanan and Milton are more respected than those of Henry and James ; and the names of Cyrus and Xerxes are less celebrated than those of Sophocles and Euripides. I am, from these considerations, the more inclined to believe, that reasons have occured against the Stage, which will appear very urgent when they are produced ; and cannot imagine, that objections which ly against bad Plays only are now all the objections they have to plead against a good one, which may be considered as an attempt to make the Stage truly useful and instructive. 

This respectable body of men have passed a severe sentence against one of their number, for being present at this representation we are speaking of. This likewise seems to proceed from some powerful motive not sufficiently known : For they were not led to this act of severity, in execution of any law or statute of this Church. It must have been one of those extraordinary cases where a discretionary power is necessary. Such a power indeed is not assumed by any court of judicature in Europe, except one, which I will not name on this occasion. It is happy for us, that the law of our Church has expressly forbid the exercise of any such arbitrary and dangerous power. See Form of Process, cap. I. and 84. where it is expressly enacted, "That nothing be admitted by any Church-judicature as the ground of a process for censure but what  has been declared censurable by the Word of God, or by some act or universal custom of this National Church." They were perhaps led to a proceeding, in appearance so little agreeable to the fundamental laws of their own society, by a zeal to support the laws of the State. People indeed are often more fond of work which they devise for themselves, than they are of any business assigned them by others. It does not however appear, that they have done much honour to the legislature by their interposition on this occasion. They have cast an imputation of impiety upon an amusement which the law formally authorises in the Metropolis, which Our GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN honours with his presence, and which the most respectable persons in the legislature of Great Britain support by their countenance. 


FINIS. AN ESSAY ON THE HISTORY OF CIVIL SOCIETY.
By ADAM FERGUSON, LL.D. Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh.
DUBLIN: Printed by BOULTER GRIERSON, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXVII.
CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the General Characteristics of Human Nature.
SECTION I.
Of the Question relating to the State of Nature, Page 1
SECT II.
Of the Principles of Self-preservation, Page 15
SECT. III.
Of the Principles of Union among Mankind, Page 23
SECT. IV.
Of the Principles of War and Dissension, Page 29
SECT. V.
Of Intellectual Powers, Page 37
SECT. VI.
Of Moral Sentiment, Page 46
SECT. VII.
Of Happiness, Page 59
SECT. VIII.
The same Subject continued.
Page 71
SECT. IX.
Of National Felicity, Page 85
SECT. X.
The same Subject continued, Page 93
PART II. Of the History of Rude Nations.
SECTION I.
Of the Informations on this Subject, which are derived from Antiquity, Page 109
SECT. II.
Of Rude Nations prior to the Establishment of Property, Page 119
SECT. III.
Of Rude Nations, under the Impressions of Property and Interest, Page 142
PART III. Of the History of Policy and Arts.
SECTION I.
Of the Influences of Climate and Situation, Page 161
SECT. II.
The History of Subordination, Page 181
SECT. III.
Of National Objects in general, and of Establishments and Manners relating to them, Page 202
SECT. IV.
Of Population and Wealth, Page 206
SECT. V.
Of National Defence and Conquest, Page 219
SECT. VI.
Of Civil Liberty, Page 231
SECT. VII.
Of the History of Arts, Page 251
SECT. VIII.
Of the History of Literature, Page 256
PART. IV. Of Consequences that result from the Advancement of Civil and Commercial Arts.
SECTION. I.
Of the Separation of Arts and Professions, Page 269
SECT. II.
Of the Subordination consequent to the Separation of Arts and Professions, Page 275
SECT. III.
Of the Manners of Polished and Commercial Nations, Page 281
SECT. IV.
The same subject continued.
Page 288
PART. V. Of the Decline of Nations.
SECTION I.
Of supposed National Eminence, and of the Vicissitudes of Human Affairs, Page 305
SECT. II.
Of the Temporary Efforts and Relaxations of the National Spirit, Page 314
SECT. III.
Of Relaxations in the National Spirit incident to Polished Nations.
Page 321
SECT. IV.
The same Subject continued, Page 337
SECT. V.
Of National Waste.
Page 348
PART. VI. Of Corruption and Political Slavery.
SECTION I.
Of Corruption in general, Page 353
SECT. II.
Of Luxury, Page 365
SECT. III.
Of the Corruption incident to Polished Nations, Page 372
SECT. IV.
The same Subject continued, Page 382
SECT. V.
Of Corruption, as it tends to Political Slavery, Page 391
SECT. VI.
Of the Progress and Termination of Despotism, Page 406
AN ESSAY ON THE HISTORY OF CIVIL SOCIETY.
PART FIRST.
Of the General Characteristics of Human Nature.
SECTION I.
Of the question relating to the State of Nature.
N ATURAL productions are generally formed by degrees. Vegetables grow from a tender shoot, and animals from an infant state. The latter being destined to act, extend their operations as their powers increase: they exhibit a progress in what they perform, as well as in the faculties they acquire, This progress in the case of man is continued to a greater extent than in that of any other animal. Not only the individual advances from infancy to manhood, but the species itself from rudeness to civilization. Hence the supposed departure of mankind from the state of their nature; hence our conjectures and different opinions of what man must have been in the first age of his being. The poet, the historian, and the moralist, frequently allude to this ancient time; and under the emblems of gold, or of iron, represent a condition, and a manner of life, from which mankind have either degenerated, or on which they have greatly improved. On either supposition, the first state of our nature must have borne no resemblance to what men have exhibited in any subsequent period; historical monuments, even of the earliest date, are to be considered as novelties; and the most common establishments of human society are to be classed among the incroachments which fraud, oppression, or a busy invention, have made upon the reign of nature, by which the chief of our grievances or blessings were equally withheld.
AMONG the writers who have attempted to distinguish, in the human character, its original qualities, and to point out the limits between nature and art, some have represented mankind in their first condition, as possessed of mere animal sensibility, without any exercise of the faculties that render them superior to the brutes, without any political union, without any means of explaining their sentiments, and even without possessing any of the apprehensions and passions which the voice and the gesture are so well fitted to express. Others have made the state of nature to consist in perpetual wars, kindled by competition for dominion and interest, where every individual had a separate quarrel with his kind, and where the presence of a fellow-creature was the signal of battle.
THE desire of laying the foundation of a favourite system, or a fond expectation, perhaps, that we may be able to penetrate the secrets of nature, to the very source of existence, have, on this subject, led to many fruitless inquiries, and given rise to many wild suppositions. Among the various qualities which mankind possess, we select one or a few particulars on which to establish a theory, and in framing our account of what man was in some imaginary state of nature, we overlook what he has always appeared within the reach of our own observation, and in the records of history.
IN every other instance, however, the natural historian thinks himself obliged to collect facts, not to offer conjectures. When he treats of any particular species of animals, he supposes, that their present dispositions and instincts are the same they originally had, and that their present manner of life is a continuance of their first destination. He admits, that his knowledge of the material system of the world consists in a collection of facts, or at most, in general tenets derived from particular observations and experiments. It is only in what relates to himself, and in matters the most important, and the most easily known, that he substitutes hypothesis instead of reality, and confounds the provinces of imagination and reason, of poetry and science.
BUT without entering any farther on questions either in moral or physical subjects, relating to the manner or the origin of our knowledge; without any disparagement to that subtilty which would analyze every sentiment, and trace every mode of being to its source; it may be safely affirmed, That the character of man, as he now exists, that the laws of this animal and intellectual system, on which his happiness now depends, deserve our principal study; and that general principles relating to this, or any other subject, are useful only so far as they are founded on just observation, and lead to the knowledge of important consequences, or so far as they enable us to act with success when we would apply either the intellectual or the physical powers of nature, to the great purposes of human life.
IF both the earliest and the latest accounts collected from every quarter of the earth, represent mankind as assembled in troops and companies; and the individual always joined by affection to one party, while he is possibly opposed to another; employed in the exercise of recollection and foresight; inclined to communicate his own sentiments, and to be made acquainted with those of others; these facts must be admitted as the foundation of all our reasoning relative to man. His mixed disposition to friendship or enmity, his reason, his use of language and articulate sounds, like the shape and the erect position of his body, are to be considered as so many attributes of his nature: they are to be retained in his description, as the wing and the paw are in that of the eagle and the lion, and as different degrees of fierceness, vigilance, timidity, or speed, are made to occupy a place in the natural history of different animals.
IF the question be put, What the mind of man could perform, when left to itself, and without the aid of any foreign direction? we are to look for our answer in the history of mankind. Particular experiments which have been found so useful in establishing the principles of other sciences, could probably, on this subject, teach us nothing important, or new: we are to take the history of every active being from his conduct in the situation to which he is formed, not from his appearance in any forced or uncommon condition; a wild man therefore, caught in the woods, where he had always lived apart from his species, is a singular instance, not a specimen of any general character. As the anatomy of an eye which had never received the impressions of light, or that of an ear which had never felt the impulse of sounds, would probably exhibit defects in the very structure of the organs themselves, arising from their not being applied to their proper functions; so any particular case of this sort would only shew in what degree the powers of apprehension and sentiment could exist where they had not been employed, and what would be the defects and imbecilities of a heart in which the emotions that pertain to society had never been felt.
MANKIND are to be taken in groupes, as they have always subsisted. The history of the individual is but a detail of the sentiments and thoughts he has entertained in the view of his species; and every experiment relative to this subject should be made with intire societies, not with single men. We have every reason, however, to believe, that in the case of such an experiment made, we shall suppose, with a colony of children transplanted from the nursery, and left to form a society apart, untaught, and undisciplined, we should only have the same things repeated, which, in so many different parts of the earth, have been transacted already. The members of our little society would feed and sleep, would herd together and play, would have a language of their own, would quarrel and divide, would be to one another the most important objects of the scene, and, in the ardour of their friendships and competitions, would overlook their personal danger, and suspend the care of their self-preservation. Has not the human race been planted like the colony in question? Who has directed their course? whose instruction have they heard? or whose example have they followed?
NATURE, therefore, we shall presume, having given to every animal its mode of existence, its dispositions and manner of life, has dealt equally with those of the human race; and the natural historian who would collect the properties of this species, may fill up every article now, as well as he could have done in any former age. Yet one property by which man is distinguished, has been sometimes overlooked in the account of his nature, or has only served to mislead our attention. In other classes of animals, the individual advances from infancy to age or maturity; and he attains, in the compass of a single life, to all the perfection his nature can reach: but, in the human kind, the species has a progress as well as the individual; they build in every subsequent age on foundations formerly laid; and, in a succession of years, tend to a perfection in the application of their faculties, to which the aid of long experience is required, and to which many generations must have combined their endeavours. We observe the progress they have made; we distinctly enumerate many of its steps; we can trace them back to a distant antiquity; of which no record remains, nor any monument is preserved, to inform us what were the openings of this wonderful scene. The consequence is, that instead of attending to the character of our species, where the particulars are vouched by the surest authority, we endeavour to trace it through ages and scenes unknown; and, instead of supposing that the beginning of our story was nearly of a piece with the sequel, we think ourselves warranted to reject every circumstance of our present condition and frame, as adventitious, and foreign to our nature. The progress of mankind from a supposed state of animal sensibility, to the attainment of reason, to the use of language, and to the habit of society, has been accordingly painted with a force of imagination, and its steps have been marked with a boldness of invention, that would tempt us to admit, among the materials of history, the suggestions of fancy, and to receive, perhaps, as the model of our nature in its original state, some of the animals whose shape has the greatest resemblance to ours ROUSSEAU sur l'origine de l'inegalit parmi les hommes.
.
IT would be ridiculous to affirm, as a discovery, that the species of the horse was probably never the same with that of the lion; yet, in opposition to what has dropped from the pens of eminent writers, we are obliged to observe, that men have always appeared among animals a distinct and a superior race; that neither the possession of similar organs, nor the approximation of shape, nor the use of the hand Trait de l'esprit.
, nor the continued intercourse with this sovereign artist, has enabled any other species to blend their nature or their inventions with his; that in his rudest state, he is found to be above them; and in his greatest degeneracy, never descends to their level. He is, in short, a man in every condition; and we can learn nothing of his nature from the analogy of other animals. If we would know him, we must attend to himself, to the course of his life, and the tenor of his conduct. With him the society appears to be as old as the individual, and the use of the tongue as universal as that of the hand or the foot. If there was a time in which he had his acquaintance with his own species to make, and his faculties to acquire, it is a time of which we have no record, and in relation to which our opinions can serve no purpose, and are supported by no evidence.
WE are often tempted into those boundless regions of ignorance or conjecture, by a fancy which delights in creating rather than in merely retaining the forms which are presented before it: we are the dupes of a subtilty, which promises to supply every defect of our knowledge, and, by filling up a few blanks in the story of nature, pretends to conduct our apprehension nearer to the source of existence. On the credit of a few observations, we are apt to presume, that the secret may soon be laid open, and that what is termed wisdom in nature, may be referred to the operation of physical powers. We forget that physical powers, employed in succession, and combined to a salutary purpose, constitute those very proofs of design from which we infer the existence of God; and that this truth being once admitted, we are no longer to search for the source of existence; we can only collect the laws which the author of nature has established; and in our latest as well as our earliest discoveries, only come to perceive a mode of creation or providence before unknown.
WE speak of art as distinguished from nature; but art itself is natural to man. He is in some measure the artificer of his own frame, as well as his fortune, and is destined, from the first age of his being, to invent and contrive. He applies the same talents to a variety of purposes, and acts nearly the same part in very different scenes. He would be always improving on his subject, and he carries this intention where-ever he moves, through the streets of the populous city, or the wilds of the forest. While he appears equally fitted to every condition, he is upon this account unable to settle in any. At once obstinate and fickle, he complains of innovations, and is never sated with novelty. He is perpetually busied in reformations, and is continually wedded to his errors. If he dwell in a cave, he would improve it into a cottage; if he has already built, he would still build to a greater extent. But he does not propose to make rapid and hasty transitions; his steps are progressive and slow; and his force, like the power of a spring, silently presses on every resistance; an effect is sometimes produced before the cause is perceived; and with all his talent for projects, his work is often accomplished before the plan is devised. It appears, perhaps, equally difficult to retard or to quicken his pace; if the projector complain he is tardy, the moralist thinks him unstable; and whether his motions be rapid or slow, the scenes of human affairs perpetually change in his management: his emblem is a passing stream, not a stagnating pool. We may desire to direct his love of improvement to its proper object, we may wish for stability of conduct; but we mistake human nature, if we wish for a termination of labour, or a scene of repose.
THE occupations of men, in every condition, bespeak their freedom of choice, their various opinions, and the multiplicity of wants by which they are urged: but they enjoy, or endure, with a sensibility, or a phlegm, which are nearly the same in every situation. They possess the shores of the Caspian, or the Atlantic, by a different tenure, but with equal ease. On the one they are fixed to the soil, and seem to be formed for settlement, and the accommodation of cities: The names they bestow on a nation, and on its territory, are the same. On the other they are mere animals of passage, prepared to roam on the face of the earth, and with their herds, in search of new pasture and favourable seasons, to follow the sun in his annual course.
MAN finds his lodgement alike in the cave, the cottage, and the palace; and his subsistence equally in the woods, in the dairy, or the farm. He assumes the distinction of titles, equipage, and dress; he devises regular systems of government, and a complicated body of laws: or, naked in the woods, has no badge of superiority but the strength of his limbs and the sagacity of his mind; no rule of conduct but choice; no tie with his fellowcreatures but affection, the love of company, and the desire of safety. Capable of a great variety of arts, yet dependent on none in particular for the preservation of his being; to whatever length he has carried his artifice, there he seems to enjoy the conveniencies that suit his nature, and to have found the condition to which he is destined. The tree which an American, on the banks of the Oroonoko Lafitau moeurs des sauvages.
, has chosen to climb for the retreat, and the lodgement of his family, is to him a convenient dwelling. The sopha, the vaulted dome, and the colonade, do not more effectually content their native inhabitant.
IF we are asked therefore, Where the state of nature is to be found? we may answer, It is here; and it matters not whether we are understood to speak in the island of Great Britain, at the Cape of Good Hope, or the Straits of Magellan. While this active being is in the train of employing his talents, and of operating on the subjects around him, all situations are equally natural. If we are told, That vice, at least, is contrary to nature; we may answer, It is worse; it is folly and wretchedness. But if nature is only opposed to art, in what situation of the human race are the footsteps of art unknown? In the condition of the savage, as well as in that of the citizen, are many proofs of human invention; and in either is not any permanent station, but a mere stage through which this travelling being is destined to pass. If the palace be unnatural, the cottage is so no less; and the highest refinements of political and moral apprehension, are not more artificial in their kind, than the first operations of sentiment and reason.
IF we admit that man is susceptible of improvement, and has in himself a principle of progression, and a desire of perfection, it appears improper to say, that he has quitted the state of his nature, when he has begun to proceed; or that he finds a station for which he was not intended, while, like other animals, he only follows the disposition, and employs the powers that nature has given.
THE latest efforts of human invention are but a continuation of certain devices which were practised in the earliest ages of the world, and in the rudest state of mankind. What the savage projects, or observes, in the forest, are the steps which led nations, more advanced, from the architecture of the cottage to that of the palace, and conducted the human mind from the perceptions of sense, to the general conclusions of science.
ACKNOWLEDGED defects are to man in every condition matter of dislike. Ignorance and imbecility are objects of contempt: penetration and conduct give eminence, and procure esteem. Whither should his feelings and apprehensions on these subjects lead him? To a progress, no doubt, in which the savage, as well as the philosopher, is engaged; in which they have made different advances, but in which their ends are the same. The admiration Cicero entertained for literature, eloquence, and civil accomplishments, was not more real than that of a Scythian for such a measure of similar endowments as his own apprehension could reach.
Were I to boast, says a Tartar prince Abulgaze Bahadur Chan.; History of the Tartars.
, it would be of that wisdom I have received from God. For as, on the one hand, I yield to none in the conduct of war, in the disposition of armies, whether of horse or of foot, and in directing the movements of great or small bodies; so, on the other, I have my talent in writing, inferior perhaps only to those who inhabit the great cities of Persia or India. Of other nations, unknown to me, I do not speak.
MAN may mistake the objects of his pursuit; he may misapply his industry, and misplace his improvements. If under a sense of such possible errors, he would find a standard by which to judge of his own proceedings, and arrive at the best state of his nature, he cannot find it perhaps in the practice of any individual, or of any nation whatever; not even in the sense of the majority, or the prevailing opinion of his kind. He must look for it in the best conceptions of his understanding, in the best movements of his heart; he must thence discover what is the perfection and the happiness of which he is capable. He will find, on the scrutiny, that the proper state of his nature, taken in this sense, is not a condition from which mankind are for ever removed, but one to which they may now attain; not prior to the exercise of their faculties, but procured by their just application.
OF all the terms that we employ in treating of human affairs, those of natural and unnatural are the least determinate in their meaning. Opposed to affectation, frowardness, or any other defect of the temper or character, the natural is an epithet of praise; but employed to specify a conduct which proceeds from the nature of man, can serve to distinguish nothing: for all the actions of men are equally the result of their nature. At most, this language can only refer to the general and prevailing sense or practice of mankind; and the purpose of every important inquiry on this subject may be served by the use of a language equally familiar and more precise. What is just, or unjust? What is happy, or wretched, in the manners of men? What, in their various situations, is favourable or adverse to their amiable qualities? are questions to which we may expect a satisfactory answer; and whatever may have been the original state of our species, it is of more importance to know the condition to which we ourselves should aspire, than that which our ancestors may be supposed to have left.
SECT. II.
Of the principles of self-preservation.
IF in human nature there are qualities by which it is distinguished from every other part of the animal creation, men are themselves in different climates and in different ages greatly diversified. So far as we are able to account for this diversity on principles either moral or physical, we perform a task of great curiosity or signal utility. It appears necessary, however, that we attend to the universal qualities of our nature, before we regard its varieties, or attempt to explain differences consisting in the unequal possession or application of dispositions and powers that are in some measure common to all mankind.
MAN, like the other animals, has certain instinctive propensities, which, prior to the perception of pleasure or pain, and prior to the experience of what is pernicious or useful, lead him to perform many functions of nature relative to himself and to his fellow-creatures. He has one set of dispositions which refer to his animal preservation, and to the continuance of his race; another which lead to society, and by inlisting him on the side of one tribe or community, frequently engage him in war and contention with the rest of mankind. His powers of discernment, or his intellectual faculties, which, under the appellation of reason, are distinguished from the analogous endowments of other animals, refer to the objects around him, either as they are subjects of mere knowledge, or as they are subjects of approbation or censure. He is formed not only to know, but likewise to admire and to contemn; and these proceedings of his mind have a principal reference to his own character, and to that of his fellow-creatures, as being the subjects on which he is chiefly concerned to distinguish what is right from what is wrong. He enjoys his felicity likewise on certain fixed and determinate conditions; and either as an individual apart, or as a member of civil society, must take a particular course in order to reap the advantages of his nature. He is, withal, in a very high degree susceptible of habits; and can, by forbearance or exercise, so far weaken, confirm, or even diversify his talents, and his dispositions, as to appear, in a great measure, the arbiter of his own rank in nature, and the author of all the varities which are exhibited in the actual history of his species. The universal characteristics, in the mean time, to which we have now referred, must, when we would treat of any part of this history, constitute the first subject of our attention; and they require not only to be enumerated, but to be distinctly considered.
THE dispositions which refer to the preservation of the individual, while they continue to operate in the manner of instinctive desires, are nearly the same in man that they are in the other animals: but in him they are sooner or later combined with reflection and foresight; they give rise to his apprehensions on the subject of property, and make him acquainted with that object of care which he calls his interest. Without the instincts which teach the beaver and the squrrel, the ant and the bee, to make up their little hoards for winter, at first improvident, and, where no immediate object of passion is near, addicted to sloth, he becomes, in process of time, the great storemaster among animals. He finds in a provision of wealth, which he is probably never to employ, an object of his greatest solicitude, and the principal idol of his mind. He apprehends a relation between his person and his property, which renders what he calls his own in a manner a part of himself, a constituent of his rank, his condition, and his character, in which, independent of any real enjoyment, he may be fortunate or unhappy; and, independent of any personal merit, he may be an object of consideration or neglect; and in which he may be wounded and injured, while his person is safe, and every want of his nature completely supplied.
IN these apprehensions, while other passions only operate occasionally, the interested find the object of their ordinary cares; their motive to the practice of mechanic and commercial arts; their temptation to trespass on the laws of justice; and, when extremely corrupted, the price of their prostitutions, and the standard of their opinions on the subject of good and evil. Under this influence, they would enter, if not restrained by the laws of civil society, on a scene of violence or meanness, which would exhibit our species, by turns, under an aspect more terrible and odious, or more vile and contemptible than that of any animal which inherits the earth.
ALTHOUGH the consideration of interest is founded on the experience of animal wants and desires, its object is not to gratify any particular appetite, but to secure the means of gratifying all; and it imposes frequently a restraint on the very desires from which it arose, more powerful and more severe than those of religion or duty. It arises from the principles of self-preservation in the human frame; but is a corruption, or at least a partial result, of those principles, and is upon many accounts very improperly termed self-love.
LOVE is an affection which carries the attention of the mind beyond itself, and has a quality which we call tenderness, that never can accompany the considerations of interest. This affection being a complacency and a continued satisfaction in its object, independent of any external event, it has, in the midst of disappointment and sorrow, pleasures and triumphs unknown to those who act without any regard to their fellow-creatures; and in every change of condition, it continues entirely distinct from the sentiments which we feel on the subject of personal success or adversity. But as the care a man entertains for his own interest, and the attention his affection makes him pay to that of another, may have similar effects, the one on his own fortune, the other on that of his friend, we confound the principles from which he acts; we suppose that they are the same in kind, only referred to different objects; and we not only misapply the name of love, in conjunction with self, but, in a manner tending to degrade our nature, we limit the aim of this supposed selfish affection to the securing or accumulating the constituents of interest, or the means of mere animal life.
IT is somewhat remarkable, that notwithstanding men value themselves so much on qualities of the mind, on parts, learning and wit, on courage, generosity, and honour, those men are still supposed to be in the highest degree selfish or attentive to themselves, who are most careful of animal life, and who are least mindful of rendering that life an object worthy of care. It will be difficult, however, to tell why a good understanding, a resolute and generous mind, should not, by every man in his senses, be reckoned as much parts of himself, as either his stomach or his palate, and much more than his estate or his dress. The epicure, who consults his physician, how he may restore his relish for food, and by creating an appetite, may increase the means of enjoyment, might at least with an equal regard to himself, consult how he might strengthen his affection to a parent or a child, to his country or to mankind; and it is probable that an appetite of this sort would prove a source of enjoyment not less than the former.
BY our supposed selfish maxims, notwithstanding, we generally exclude from among the objects of our personal cares, many of the happier and more respectable qualities of human nature. We consider affection and courage as mere follies, that lead us to neglect or expose ourselves; we make wisdom consist in a regard to our interest; and without explaining what interest means, we would have it understood as the only reasonable motive of action with mankind. There is even a system of philosophy founded upon tenets of this sort, and such is our opinion of what men are likely to do upon selfish principles, that we think it must have a tendency very dangerous to virtue. But the errors of this system do not consist so much in general principles, as in their particular applications; not so much in teaching men to regard themselves, as in leading them to forget that their happiest affections, their candour, and their independence of mind, are in reality parts of themselves. And the adversaries of this supposed selfish philosophy, where it makes self-love the ruling passion with mankind, have had reason to find fault, not so much with its general representations of human nature, as with the obtrusion of a mere innovation in language for a discovery in science.
WHEN the vulgar speak of their different motives, they are satisfied with ordinary names, which refer to known and obvious distinctions. Of this kind are the terms benevolence and selfishness, by which they express their desire of the welfare of others, or the care of their own. The speculative are not always satisfied with this proceeding; they would analyze, as well as enumerate the principles of nature; and the chance is, that, merely to gain the appearance of something new, without any prospect of real advantage, they will disturb the order of vulgar apprehension. In the case before us, they have actually found, that benevolence is no more than a species of self-love; and would oblige us, if possible, to look out for a new set of words, by which we may distinguish the selfishness of the parent when he takes care of his child, from his selfishness when he only takes care of himself. For according to this philosophy, as in both cases he only means to gratify a desire of his own, he is in both cases equally selfish. The term benevolent, in the mean time, is not employed to characterise persons who have no desires of their own, but persons whose own desires prompt them to procure the welfare of others. The fact is, that we should need only a fresh supply of language, instead of that which by this seeming discovery we should have lost, in order to make the reasonings of men proceed as they formerly did. But it is certainly impossible to live and to act with men, without employing different names to distinguish the humane from the cruel, and the benevolent from the selfish.
THESE terms have their equivalents in every tongue; they were invented by men of no refinement, who only meant to express what they distinctly perceived or strongly felt. And if a man of speculation should prove that we are selfish in a sense of his own, it does not follow that we are so in the sense of the vulgar; or, as ordinary men would understand his conclusion, that we are condemned in every instance to act on motives of interest, covetousness, pusillanimity, and cowardice; for such is conceived to be the ordinary import of selfishness in the character of man.
AN affection or passion of any kind is sometimes said to give us an interest in its object; and humanity itself gives an interest in the welfare of mankind. This term interest, which commonly implies little more than our regard to property, is sometimes put for utility in general, and this for happiness; insomuch that, under these ambiguities, it is not surprising we are still unable to determine, whether interest is the only motive of human action, and the standard by which to distinguish our good from our ill.
SO much is said in this place, not from any desire to have a share in any controversy of this sort, but merely to confine the meaning of the term interest to its most common accep ation, and to intimate our intention of employing it in expressing those objects of care which refer to our external condition, and the preservation of our animal nature. When taken in this sense, it will not surely be thought to comprehend at once all the motives of human conduct. If men be not allowed to have disinterested benevolence, they will not be denied to have disinterested passions of another kind. Hatred, indignation, and rage, frequently urge them to act in opposition to their known interest, and even to hazard their lives, without any hopes of compensation in any future returns of preferment or profit.
SECT. III.
Of the principles of Union among Mankind.
MANKIND have always wandered or settled, agreed or quarrelled, in troops and companies. The cause of their assembling, whatever it be, is the principle of their alliance or union.
IN collecting the materials of history, we are seldom willing to put up with our subject merely as we find it. We are loth to be embarrassed with a multiplicity of particulars, and apparent inconsistencies. In theory we profess the investigation of general principles; and in order to bring the matter of our inquiries within the reach of our comprehension, are disposed to adopt any system. Thus, in treating of human affairs, we would draw every consequence from a principle of union, or a principle of dissension. The state of nature is a state of war or of amity, and men are made to unite from a principle of affection, or from a principle of fear, as is most suitable to the system of different writers. The history of our species indeed abundantly shews, that they are to one another mutual objects both of fear and of love; and they who would prove them to have been originally either in a state of alliance, or of war, have arguments in store to maintain their assertions. Our attachment to one division, or to one sect, seems often to derive much of its force from an animosity conceived to an opposite one: and this animosity in its turn, as often arises from a zeal in behalf of the side we espouse, and from a desire to vindicate the rights of our party.
MAN is born in society, says Montesquieu, and there he remains.
The charms that detain him are known to be manifold. We may reckon the parental affection, which, instead of deserting the adult, as among the brutes, embraces more close, as it becomes mixed with esteem, and the memory of its early effects; together with a propensity common to man and other animals, to mix with the herd, and, without reflection, to follow the croud of his species. What this propensity was in the first moment of its operation, we know not; but with men accustomed to company, its enjoyments and disappointments are reckoned among the principal pleasures or pains of human life. Sadness and melancholy are connected with solitude; gladness and pleasure with the concourse of men. The track of a Laplander on the snowy shore, gives joy to the lonely mariner; and the mute signs of cordiality and kindness which are made to him, awaken the memory of pleasures which he felt in society. In fine, says the writer of a voyage to the north, after describing a mute scene of this sort, We were extremely pleased to converse with men, since in thirteen months we had seen no human creature Collection of Dutch voyages.
.
But we need no remote observation to confirm this position: The wailings of the infant, and the languors of the adult, when alone; the lively joys of the one, and the chearfulness of the other, upon the return of company, are a sufficient proof of its solid foundations in the frame of our nature.
IN accounting for actions we often forget that we ourselves have acted; and instead of the sentiments which stimulate the mind in the presence of its object, we assign as the motives of conduct with men, those considerations which occur in the hours of retirement and cold reflection. In this mood frequently we can find nothing important, besides the deliberate prospects of interest; and a great work, like that of forming society, must in our apprehension arise from deep reflections, and be carried on with a view to the advantages which mankind derive from commerce and mutual support. But neither a propensity to mix with the herd, nor the sense of advantages enjoyed in that condition, comprehend all the principles by which men are united together. Those bands are even of a feeble texture, when compared to the resolute ardour with which a man adheres to his friend, or to his tribe, after they have for some time run the career of fortune together. Mutual discoveries of generosity, joint trials of fortitude, redouble the ardours of friendship, and kindle a flame in the human breast, which the considerations of personal interest or safety cannot suppress. The most lively transports of joy are seen, and the loudest shrieks of despair are heard, when the objects of a tender affection are beheld in a state of triumph or of suffering. An Indian recovered his friend unexpectedly on the island of Juan Fernandes: He prostrated himself on the ground, at his feet:
We stood gazing in silence, says Dampier, at this tender scene.
If we would know what is the religion of a wild American, what it is in his heart that most resembles devotion: it is not his fear of the sorcerer, nor his hope of protection from the spirits of the air or the wood; it is the ardent affection with which he selects and embraces his friend; with which he clings to his side in every season of peril; and with which he invokes his spirit from a distance, when dangers surprise him alone.
Charlevoix; Hist. Canada.
Whatever proofs we may have of the social disposition of man in familiar and contiguous scenes, it is possibly of importance, to draw our observations from the examples of men who live in the simplest condition, and who have not learned to affect what they do not actually feel.
MERE acquaintance and habitude nourish affection, and the experience of society brings every passion of the human mind upon its side. Its triumphs and prosperities, its calamities and distresses, bring a variety and a force of emotion, which can only have place in the company of our fellowcreatures. It is here that a man is made to forget his weakness, his cares of safety, and his subsistence; and to act from those passions which make him discover his force. It is here he finds that his arrows fly swifter than an eagle, and his weapons wound deeper than the paw of the lion, or the tooth of the boar. It is not alone his sense of a support which is near, nor the love of distinction in the opinion of his tribe, that inspire his courage, or swell his heart with a confidence that exceeds what his natural force should bestow. Vehement passions of animosity or attachment are the first exertions of vigour in his breast; under their influence, every consideration, but that of his object, is forgotten; dangers and difficulties only excite him the more.
THAT condition is surely favourable to the nature of any being, in which his force is increased; and if courage be the gift of society to man, we have reason to consider his union with his species as the noblest part of his fortune. From this source are derived, not only the force, but the very existence of his happiest emotions; not only the better part, but almost the whole of his rational character. Send him to the desert alone, he is a plant torn from its roots: the form indeed may remain, but every faculty droops and withers; the human personage and the human character cease to exist.
MEN are so far from valuing society on account of its mere external conveniencies, that they are commonly most attached where those conveniences are least frequent; and are there most faithful, where the tribute of their allegiance is paid in blood. Affection operates with the greatest force, where it meets with the greatest difficulties: In the breast of the parent, it is most solicitous amidst the dangers and distresses of the child: In the breast of a man, its flame redoubles where the wrongs or sufferings of his friend, or his country, require his aid. It is, in short, from this principle alone that we can account for the obstinate attachment of a savage to his unsettled and defenceless tribe, when temptations on the side of ease and of safety might induce him to fly from famine and danger, to a station more affluent, and more secure. Hence the sanguine affection which every Greek bore to his country, and hence the devoted patriotism of an early Roman. Let those examples be compared with the spirit which reigns in a commercial state, where men may be supposed to have experienced, in its full extent, the interest which individuals have in the preservation of their country. It is here, indeed, if ever, that man is sometimes found a detached and solitary being: he has found an object which sets him in competition with his fellow-creatures, and he deals with them as he does with his cattle and his soil, for the sake of the profits they bring. The mighty engine which we suppose to have formed society, only tends to set its members at variance, or to continue their intercourse after the bands of affection are broken.
SECT. IV.
Of the principles of War and Dissension.
THERE are some circumstances in the lot of mankind, says Socrates, that shew them to be destined to friendship and amity: Those are, their mutual need of one another; their mutual compassion; their sense of mutual benefits; and the pleasures arising in company. There are other circumstances which prompt them to war and dissension; the admiration and the desire which they entertain for the same subjects; their opposite pretensions; and the provocations which they mutually offer in the course of their competitions.
WHEN we endeavour to apply the maxims of natural justice to the solution of difficult questions, we find that some cases may be supposed, and actually happen, where oppositions take place, and are lawful, prior to any provocation, or act of injustice; that where the safety and preservation of numbers are mutually inconsistent, one party may employ his right of defence, before the other has begun an attack. And when we join with such examples, the instances of mistake, and misunderstanding, to which mankind are exposed, we may be satisfied that war does not always proceed from an intention to injure; and that even the best qualities of men, their candour, as well as their resolution, may operate in the midst of their quarrels.
THERE is still more to be observed on this subject. Mankind not only find in their condition the sources of variance and dissension; they appear to have in their minds the seeds of animosity, and to embrace the occasions of mutual opposition, with alacrity and pleasure In the most pacific situation there are few who have not their enemies, as well as their friends; and who are not pleased with opposing the proceedings of one, as much as with favouring the designs of another. Small and simple tribes, who in their domestic society have the firmest union, are in their state of opposition as separate nations, frequently animated with the most implacable hatred. Among the citizens of Rome, in the early ages of that republic, the name of a foreigner, and that of an enemy, were the same. Among the Greeks, the name of Barbarian, under which that people comprehended every nation that was of a race, and spoke a language, different from their own, became a term of indiscriminate contempt and aversion. Even where no particular claim to superiority is formed, the repugnance to union, the frequent wars, or rather the perpetual hostilities, which take place among rude nations and separate clans, discover how much our species is disposed to opposition, as well as to concert.
LATE discoveries have brought us to the knowledge of almost every situation in which mankind are placed. We have found them spread over large and extensive continents, where communications are open, and where national confederacy might be easily formed. We have found them in narrower districts, circumscribed by mountains, great rivers, and arms of the sea. They have been found in small and remote islands, where the inhabitants might be easily assembled, and derive an advantage from their union. But in all those situations, alike, they were broke into cantons, and affected a distinction of name and community. The titles of fellow-citizen and countryman, unopposed to those of alien and foreigner, to which they refer, would fall into disuse, and lose their meaning. We love individuals on account of personal qualities; but we love our country, as it is a party in the divisions of mankind; and our zeal for its interest, is a predilection in behalf of the side we maintain.
IN the promiscuous concourse of men, it is sufficient that we have an opportunity of selecting our company. We turn away from those who do not engage us, and we fix our resort where the society is more to our mind. We are fond of distinctions; we place ourselves in opposition, and quarrel under the denominations of faction and party, without any material subject of controversy. Aversion, like affection, is fostered by a continued direction to its particular object. Separation and estrangement, as well as opposition, widen a breach which did not owe its beginnings to any offence. And it would seem, that till we have reduced mankind to the state of a family, or found some external consideration to maintain their connection in greater numbers, they will be for ever separated into bands, and form a plurality of nations.
THE sense of a common danger, and the assaults of an enemy, have been frequently useful to nations, by uniting their members more firmly together, and by preventing the secessions and actual separations in which their civil discord might otherwise terminate. And this motive to union which is offered from abroad, may be necessary, not only in the case of large and extensive nations, where coalitions are weakened by distance, and the distinction of provincial names; but even in the narrow society of the smallest states. Rome itself was founded by a small party, which took its flight from Alba; her citizens were often in danger of separating; and if the villages and cantons of the Volsci had been further removed from the scene of their dissensions, the Mons Sacer might have received a new colony before the mother-country was ripe for such a discharge. She continued long to feel the quarrels of her nobles and her people; and the gates of Janus were frequently opened, to remind her inhabitants of the duties they owed to their country.
IF societies, as well as individuals, be charged with the care of their own preservation, and if in both we apprehend a separation of interest, which may give rise to jealousies and competitions, we cannot be surprised to find hostilities arise from this source. But were there no angry passions of a different sort, the animosities which attend an opposition of interest, should bear a proportion to the supposed value of the subject.
The Hottentot nations, says Kolben, trespass on one another by thefts of cattle and of women; but such injuries are seldom committed, except with a view to exasperate their neighbours, and bring them to a war.
Such depredations then are not the foundation of a war, but the effects of a hostile intention already conceived. The nations of North America, who have no herds to preserve, nor settlements to defend, are yet engaged in almost perpetual wars, for which they can assign no reason, but the point of honour, and a desire to continue the struggle their fathers maintained. They do not regard the spoils of an enemy; and the warrior who has seized any booty, easily parts with it to the first person who comes in his way See Charlevoix's history of Canada.
.
BUT we need not cross the Atlantic to find proofs of animosity, and to observe, in the collision of separate societies, the influence of angry passions, that do not arise from an opposition of interest. Human nature has no part of its character, of which more flagrant examples are given on this side of the globe. What is it that stirs in the breasts of ordinary men when the enemies of their country are named? Whence are the prejudices that subsist between different provinces, cantons, and villages, of the same empire and territory? What is it that excites one half of the nations of Europe against the other? The statesman may explain his conduct on motives of national jealousy and caution, but the people have dislikes and antipathies, for which they cannot account. Their mutual reproaches of perfidy and injustice, like the Hottentot depredations, are but symptoms of an animosity, and the language of a hostile disposition already conceived. The charge of cowardice and pusillanimity, qualities which the interested and cautious enemy should, of all others, like best to find in his rival, is urged with aversion, and made the ground of dislike. Hear the peasants on different sides of the Alps, and the Pyrenees, the Rhine, or the British channel, give vent to their prejudices and national passions; it is among them that we find the materials of war and dissension laid without the direction of government, and sparks ready to kindle into a flame, which the statesman is frequently disposed to extinguish. The fire will not always catch where his reasons of state would direct, nor stop where the concurrence of interest has produced an alliance.
My Father, said a Spanish peasant, would rise from his grave, if he could foresee a war with France.
What interest had he, or the bones of his father, in the quarrels of princes?
THESE observations seem to arraign our species, and to give an unfavourable picture of mankind; and yet the particulars we have mentioned are consistent with the most amiable qualities of our nature, and often furnish a scene for the exercise of our greatest abilities. They are sentiments of generosity and self-denial that animate the warrior in defence of his country; and they are dispositions most favourable to mankind, that become the principles of apparent hostility to men. Every animal is made to delight in the exercise of his natural talents and forces: The lion and the tyger sport with the paw; the horse delights to commit his mane to the wind, and forgets his pasture to try his speed in the field; the bull even before his brow is armed, and the lamb while yet an emblem of innocence, have a disposition to strike with the forehead, and anticipate, in play, the conflicts they are doomed to sustain. Man too is disposed to opposition, and to employ the forces of his nature against an equal antagonist; he loves to bring his reason, his eloquence, his courage, even his bodily strength, to the proof, His sports are frequently an image of war; sweat and blood are freely expended in play: and fractures or death are often made to terminate the pastimes of idleness and festivity. He was not made to live for ever, and even his love of amusement has opened a path that leads to the grave.
WITHOUT the rivalship of nations, and the practice of war, civil society itself could scarcely have found an object, or a form. Mankind might have traded without any formal convention, but they cannot be safe without a national concert. The necessity of a public defence, has given rise to many departments of state, and the intellectual talents of men have found their busiest scene in wielding their national forces. To overawe, or intimidate, or, when we cannot persuade with reason, to resist with fortitude, are the occupations which give its most animating exercise, and its greatest triumphs, to a vigorous mind; and he who has never struggled with his fellow-creatures, is a stranger to half the sentiments of mankind.
THE quarrels of individuals, indeed, are frequently the operations of unhappy and detestable passions; malice, hatred, and rage. If such passions alone possess the breast, the scene of dissension becomes an object of horror; but a common opposition maintained by numbers, is always allayed by passions of another sort. Sentiments of affection and friendship mix with animosity; the active and strenuous become the guardians of their society; and violence itself is, in their case, an exertion of generosity as well as of courage. We applaud, as proceeding from a national or party spirit, what we could not endure as the effect of a private dislike; and amidst the competitions of rival states, think we have found, for the patriot and the warrior, in the practice of violence and stratagem, the most illustrious career of human virtue. Even personal opposition here does not divide our judgment on the merits of men. The rival names of Agesilaus and Epaminondas, of Scipio and Hannibal, are repeated with equal praise; and war itself, which in one view appears so fatal, in another is the exercise of a liberal spirit; and in the very effects which we regret, is but one distemper more by which the author of nature has appointed our exit from human life.
THESE reflections may open our view into the state of mankind; but they tend to reconcile us to the conduct of Providence, rather than to make us change our own: where, from a regard to the welfare of our fellow-creatures, we endeavour to pacify their animosities, and unite them by the ties of affection. In the pursuit of this amiable intention, we may hope, in some instances, to disarm the angry passions of jealousy and envy; we may hope to instil into the breasts of private men sentiments of candour toward their fellowcreatures, and a disposition to humanity and justice. But it is vain to expect that we can give to the multitude of a people a sense of union among themselves, without admitting hostility to those who oppose them. Could we at once, in the case of any nation, extinguish the emulation which is excited from abroad, we should probably break or weaken the bands of society at home, and close the busiest scenes of national occupations and virtues.
SECT. V.
Of Intellectual Powers.
MANY attempts have been made to analyze the dispositions which we have now enumerated; but one purpose of science, perhaps the most important, is served, when the existence of a disposition is established. We are more concerned in its reality, and in its consequences, than we are in its origin, or manner of formation.
THE same observation may be applied to the other powers and faculties of our nature. Their existence and use are the principal objects of our study. Thinking and reasoning, we say, are the operations of some faculty; but in what manner the faculties of thought or reason remain, when they are not exerted, or by what difference in the frame they are unequal in different persons, are questions which we cannot resolve. Their operations alone discover them: when unapplied, they lie hid even from the person to whom they pertain; and their action is so much a part of their nature, that the faculty itself, in many cases, is scarcely to be distinguished from a habit acquired in its frequent exertion.
PERSONS who are occupied with different subjects, who act in different scenes, generally appear to have different talents, or at least to have the same faculties variously formed, and suited to different purposes. The peculiar genius of nations, as well as of individuals, may in this manner arise from the state of their fortunes. And it is proper that we endeavour to find some rule, by which to judge of what is admirable in the capacities of men, or fortunate in the application of their faculties, before we venture to pass a judgment on this branch of their merits, or pretend to measure the degree of respect they may claim by their different attainments.
TO receive the informations of sense, is perhaps the earliest function of an animal combined with an intellectual nature; and one great accomplishment of the living agent consists in the force and sensibility of his animal organs. The pleasures or pains to which he is exposed from this quarter, constitute to him an important difference between the objects which are thus brought to his knowledge; and it concerns him to distinguish well, before he commits himself to the direction of appetite. He must scrutinize the objects of one sense by the perceptions of another; examine with the eye, before he ventures to touch; and employ every means of observation, before he gratifies the appetites of thirst and of hunger. A discernment acquired by experience, becomes a faculty of his mind; and the inferences of thought are sometimes not to be distinguished from the perceptions of sense.
THE objects around us, beside their separate appearances, have their relations to one another. They suggest, when compared, what would not occur when they are considered apart; they have their effects, and mutual influences; they exhibit, in like circumstances, similar operations, and uniform consequences. When we have found and expressed the points in which the uniformity of their operations consists, we have ascertained a physical law. Many such laws, and even the most important, are known to the vulgar, and occur upon the smallest degrees of reflection: but others are hid under a seeming confusion, which ordinary talents cannot remove; and are therefore the objects of study, long observation, and superior capacity. The faculties of penetration and judgement, are, by men of business, as well as of science, employed to unravel intricacies of this sort; and the degree of sagacity with which either is endowed, is to be measured by the success with which they are able to find general rules, applicable to a variety of cases that seemed to have nothing in common, and to discover important distinctions between subjects which the vulgar are apt to confound.
TO collect a multiplicity of particulars under general heads, and to refer a variety of operations to their common principle, is the object of science. To do the same thing, at least within the range of his active engagements, pertains to the man of pleasure, or business: and it would seem, that the studious and the active are so far employed in the same task, from observation and experience, to find the general views under which their objects may be considered, and the rules which may be usefully applied in the detail of their conduct. They do not always apply their talents to different subjects; and they seem to be distinguished chiefly by the unequal reach and variety of their remarks, or by the intentions which they severally have in collecting them.
WHILST men continue to act from appetites and passions, leading to the attainment of external ends, they seldom quit the view of their objects in detail, to go far in the road of general inquiries. They measure the extent of their own abilities, by the promptitude with which they apprehend what is important in every subject, and the facility with which they extricate themselves on every trying occasion. And these, it must be confessed, to a being who is destined to act in the midst of difficulties, are the proper test of capacity and force. The parade of words, and general reasonings, which sometime carry an appearance of so much learning and knowledge, are of little avail in the conduct of life. The talents from which they proceed, terminate in mere ostentation, and are seldom connected with that superior discernment which the active apply in times of perplexity; much less with that intrepidity and force of mind which are required in passing through difficult scenes.
THE abilities of active men, however, have a variety corresponding to that of the subjects on which they are occupied. A sagacity applied to external and inanimate nature, forms one species of capacity; that which is turned to society and human affairs, another. Reputation for parts in any scene is equivocal, till we know by what kind of exertion that reputation is gained. That they understand well the subjects to which they apply, is all that can be said, in commending men of the greatest abilities: and every department, every profession, would have its great men, if there were not a choice of objects for the understanding, and of talents for the mind, as well as of sentiments for the heart, and of habits for the active character.
THE meanest professions, indeed, so far sometimes forget themselves, or the rest of mankind, as to arrogate, in commending what is distinguished in their own way, every epithet the most respectable claim as the right of superior abilities. Every mechanic is a great man with the learner, and the humble admirer, in his particular calling; and we can, perhaps, with more assurance pronounce what it is that should make a man happy and amiable, than what should make his abilities respected, and his genius admired. This, upon a view of the talents themselves, may perhaps be impossible. The effect, however, will point out the rule and the standard of our judgement. To be admired and respected, is to have an ascendant among men. The talents which most directly procure that ascendant, are those which operate on mankind, penetrate their views, prevent their wishes, or srustrate their designs. The superior capacity leads with a superior energy, where every individual would go, and shews the hesitating and the irresolute a clear passage to the attainment of their ends.
THIS description does not pertain to any particular craft or profession; or perhaps it implies a kind of ability, which the separate application of men to particular callings, only tends to suppress or to weaken. Where shall we find the talents which are fit to act with men in a collective body, if we break that body into parts, and confine the observation of each to a separate track?
TO act in the view of his fellow-creatures, to produce his mind in public, to give it all the exercise of sentiment and thought, which pertain to man as a member of society, as a friend, or an enemy, seems to be the principal calling and occupation of his nature. If he must labour, that he may subsist, he can subsist for no better purpose than the good of mankind; nor can he have better talents than those which qualify him to act with men. Here, indeed, the understanding appears to borrow very much from the passions; and there is a felicity of conduct in human affairs, in which it is difficult to distinguish the promptitude of the head from the ardour and sensibility of the heart. Where both are united, they constitute that superiority of mind, the frequency of which among men, in particular ages and nations, much more than the progress they have made in speculation, or in the practice of mechanic and liberal arts, should determine the rate of their genius, and assign the palm of distinction and honour.
WHEN nations succeed one another in the career of discoveries and inquiries, the last is always the most knowing. Systems of science are gradually formed. The globe itself is traversed by degrees, and the history of every age, when past, is an accession of knowledge to those who succeed. The Romans were more knowing than the Greeks; and every scholar of modern Europe is, in this sense, more learned than the most accomplished person that ever bore either of those celebrated names. But is he on that account their superior?
MEN are to be estimated, not from what they know, but from what they are able to perform; from their skill in adapting materials to the several purposes of life; from their vigour and conduct in pursuing the objects of policy, and in finding the expedients of war and national defence. Even in literature, they are to be estimated from the works of their genius, not from the extent of their knowledge. The scene of mere observation was extremely limited in a Grecian republic; and the bustle of an active life appeared inconsistent with study: but there the human mind, notwithstanding, collected its greatest abilities, and received its best informations, in the midst of sweat and of dust.
IT is peculiar to modern Europe, to rest so much of the human character on what may be learned in retirement, and from the information of books. A just admiration of ancient literature, an opinion that human sentiment, and human reason, without this aid, were to have vanished from the societies of men, have led us into the shade, where we endeavour to derive from imagination and thought, what is in reality matter of experience and sentiment: and we endeavour, through the grammar of dead languages, and the channel of commentators, to arrive at the beauties of thought and elocution, which sprang from the animated spirit of society, and were taken from the living impressions of an active life. Our attainments are frequently limited to the elements of every science, and seldom reach to that enlargement of ability and power which useful knowledge should give. Like mathematicians, who study the Elements of Euclid, but never think of mensuration, we read of societies, but do not propose to act with men: we repeat the language of politics, but feel not the spirit of nations: we attend to the formalities of a military discipline, but know not how to employ numbers of men to obtain any purpose by stratagem or force.
BUT for what end, it may be said, is it to point out a misfortune that cannot be remedied? If national affairs called for exertion, the genius of men would awake; but in the recess of better employment, the time which is bestowed on study, if even attended with no other advantage, serves to occupy with innocence the hours of leisure, and set bounds to the pursuit of ruinous and frivolous amusements. From no better reason than this, we employ so many of our early years, under the rod, to acquire what it is not expected we should retain beyond the threshold of the school; and whilst we carry the same frivolous character in our studies that we do in our amusements, the human mind could not suffer more from a contempt of letters, than it does from the false importance which is given to literature, as a business for life, not as a help to our conduct, and the means of forming a character that may be happy in itself, and useful to mankind.
IF that time which is passed in relaxing the powers of the mind, and in with-holding every object but what tends to weaken and to corrupt, were employed in fortifying those powers, and in teaching the mind to recognise its objects, and its strength, we should not, at the years of maturity, be so much at a loss for occupation; nor, in attending the chances of a gaming-table, misemploy our talents, or waste the fire which remains in the breast. They, at least, who by their stations have a share in the government of their country, might believe themselves capable of business; and while the state had its armies and councils, might find objects enough to amuse, without throwing a personal fortune into hazard, merely to cure the yawnings of a listless and insignificant life. It is impossible for ever to maintain the tone of speculation; it is impossible not sometimes to feel that we live among men.
SECT. VI.
Of Moral Sentiment.
UPON a slight observation of what passes in human life, we should be apt to conclude, that the care of subsistence is the principal spring of human actions. This consideration leads to the invention and practice of mechanical arts; it serves to distinguish amusement from business; and, with many, scarcely admits into competition any other subject of pursuit or attention. The mighty advantages of property and fortune, when stript of the recommendations they derive from vanity, or the more serious regards to independence and power, only mean a provision that is made for animal enjoyment; and if our solicitude on this subject were removed, not only the toils of the mechanic, but the studies of the learned, would cease; every department of public business would become unnecessary; every senate-house would be shut up, and every palace deserted.
IS man therefore, in respect to his object, to be classed with the mere brutes, and only to be distinguished by faculties that qualify him to multiply contrivances for the support and convenience of animal life, and by the extent of a fancy that renders the care of animal preservation to him more burdensome than it is to the herd with which he shares in the bounty of nature? If this were his case, the joy which attends on success, or the griefs which arise from disappointment, would make the sum of his passions. The torrent that wasted, or the inundation that enriched his possessions, would give him all the emotion with which he is seized, on the occasion of a wrong by which his fortunes are impaired, or of a benefit by which they are preserved and enlarged. His fellow-creatures would be considered merely as they affected his interest. Profit or loss would serve to mark the event of every transaction; and the epithets useful or detrimental would serve to distinguish his mates in society, as they do the tree which bears plenty of fruit, from that which serves only to cumber the ground, or intercept his view.
THIS, however, is not the history of our species. What comes from a fellow-creature is received with peculiar attention; and every language abounds with terms that express somewhat in the transactions of men, different from success and disappointment. The bosom kindles in company, while the point of interest in view has nothing to inflame; and a matter frivolous in itself, becomes important, when it serves to bring to light the intentions and characters of men. The soreigner, who believed that Othello, on the stage, was enraged for the loss of his handkerchief, was not more mistaken, than the reasoner who imputes any of the more vehement passions of men to the impressions of mere profit or loss.
MEN assemble to deliberate on business; they separate from jealousies of interest; but in their several collisions, whether as friends or as enemies, a fire is struck out which the regards to interest or safety cannot confine. The value of a favour is not measured when sentiments of kindness are perceived; and the term misfortune has but a feeble meaning, when compared to that of insult and wrong.
AS actors or spectators, we are perpetually made to feel the difference of human conduct, and from a bare recital of transactions which have passed in ages and countries remote from our own, are moved with admiration and pity, or transported with indignation and rage. Our sensibility on this subject gives their charm, in retirement, to the relations of history, and to the fictions of poetry; sends forth the tear of compassion, gives to the blood its briskest movement, and to the eye its liveliest glances of displeasure or joy. It turns human life into an interesting spectacle, and perpetually solicits even the indolent to mix, as opponents or friends, in the scenes which are acted before them. Joined to the powers of deliberation and reason, it constitutes the basis of a moral nature; and whilst it dictates the terms of praise and of blame, serves to class our fellow-creatures by the most admirable and engaging, or the most odious and contemptible, denominations.
IT is pleasant to find men, who, in their speculations, deny the reality of moral distinctions, forget in detail the general positions they maintain, and give loose to ridicule, indignation, and scorn, as if any of these sentiments could have place, were the actions of men indifferent; and with acrimony pretend to detect the fraud by which moral restraints have been imposed, as if to censure a fraud were not already to take a part on the side of morality Mandeville.
.
CAN we explain the principles upon which mankind adjudge the preference of characters, and upon which they indulge such vehement emotions of admiration or contempt? If it be admitted that we cannot, are the facts less true? or must we suspend the movements of the heart until they who are employed in framing systems of science have discovered the principle from which those movements proceed? If a finger burn, we care not for information on the properties of fire: if the heart be torn, or the mind overjoyed, we have not leisure for speculations on the subject of moral sensibility.
IT is fortunate in this, as in other articles to which speculation and theory are applied, that nature proceeds in her course, whilst the curious are busied in the search of her principles. The peasant, or the child, can reason, and judge, and speak his language, with a discernment, a consistency, and a regard to analogy, which perplex the logician, the moralist, and the grammarian, when they would find the principle upon which the proceeding is founded, or when they would bring to general rules, what is so familiar, and so well sustained in particular cases. The felicity of our conduct is more owing to the talent we possess for detail, and to the suggestion of particular occasions, than it is to any direction we can find in theory and general speculations.
WE must, in the result of every inquiry, encounter with facts which we cannot explain; and to bear with this mortification would save us frequently a great deal of fruitless trouble. Together with the sense of our existence, we must admit many circumstances which come to our knowledge at the same time, and in the same manner; and which do, in reality, constitute the mode of our being. Every peasant will tell us, that a man hath his rights; and that to trespass on those rights is injustice. If we ask him farther, what he means by the term right?
we probably force him to substitute a less significant, or less proper term, in the place of this; or require him to account for what is an original mode of his mind, and a sentiment to which he ultimately refers, when he would explain himself upon any particular application of his language.
THE rights of individuals may relate to a variety of subjects, and be comprehended under different heads. Prior to the establishment of property, and the distinction of ranks, men have a right to defend their persons, and to act with freedom; they have a right to maintain the apprehensions of reason, and the feelings of the heart; and they cannot for a moment converse with one another, without feeling that the part they maintain may be just or unjust. It is not, however, our business here to carry the notion of a right into its several applications, but to reason on the sentiment of favour with which that notion is entertained in the mind.
IF it be true, that men are united by instinct, that they act in society from affections of kindness and friendship; if it be true, that even prior to acquaintance and habitude, men, as such, are commonly to one another objects of attention, and some degree of regard; that while their prosperity is beheld with indifference, their afflictions are considered with commiseration; if calamities be measured by the numbers and the qualities of men they involve; and if every suffering of a fellowcreature draws a croud of attentive spectators; if even in the case of those to whom we do not habitually wish any positive good, we are still averse to be the instruments of harm; it should seem, that in these various appearances of an amicable disposition, the foundations of a moral apprehension are sufficiently laid, and the sense of a right which we maintain for ourselves, is by a movement of humanity and candour extended to our fellow-creatures.
WHAT is it that prompts the tongue when we censure an act of cruelty or oppression? What is it that constitutes our restraint from offences that tend to distress our fellow-creatures? It is probably, in both cases, a particular application of that principle, which, in presence of the sorrowful, sends forth the tear of compassion; and a combination of all those sentiments, which constitute a benevolent disposition; and if not a resolution to do good, at least an aversion to be the instrument of harm Mankind, we are told, are devoted to interest; and this, in all commercial nations, is undoubtedly true: but it does not follow, that they are, by their natural dispositions, averse to society and mutual affection: proofs of the contrary remain, even where interest triumphs most. What must we think of the force of that disposition to compassion, to candour, and good will, which, notwithstanding the prevailing opinion that the happiness of a man consists in possessing the greatest possible share of riches, preferments, and honours, still keeps the parties who are in competition for those objects, on a tolerable footing of amity, and leads them to abstain even from their own supposed good, when their seizing it appears in the light of a dettiment to others? What might we not expect from the human heart in circumstances which prevented this apprehension on the subject of fortune, or under the influence of an opinion as steady and general as the former, that human felicity does not consist in the indulgences of animal appetite, but in those of a benevolent heart; not in fortune or interest, but in the contempt of this very object, in the courage and freedom which arise from this contempt, joined to a resolute choice of conduct, directed to the good of mankind, or to the good of that particular society to which the party belongs?
.
IT may be difficult, however, to enumerate the motives of all the censures and commendations which are applied to the actions of men. Even while we moralize, every disposition of the human mind may have its share in forming the judgement, and in prompting the tongue. As jealousy is often the most watchful guardian of chastity, so malice is often the quickest to spy the failings of our neighbour. Envy, affectation, and vanity, may dictate the verdicts we give, and the worst principles of our nature may be at the bottom of our pretended zeal for morality; but if we only mean to inquire, why they who are well disposed to mankind, apprehend, in every instance, certain rights pertaining to their fellow-creatures, and why they applaud the consideration that is paid to those rights, we cannot perhaps assign a better reason, than that the person who applauds, is well disposed to the welfare of the parties to whom his applauses refer.
WHEN we consider, that the reality of any amicable propensity in the human mind has been frequently contested; when we recollect the prevalence of interested competitions, with their attendant passions of jealousy, envy, and malice; it may seem strange to alledge, that love and compassion are the most powerful principles in the human breast: but they are destined, on many occasions, to urge with the most irresistible vehemence; and if the desire of self-preservation be more constant, and more uniform, these are a more plentiful source of enthusiasm, satisfaction, and joy. With a power, not inferior to that of resentment and rage, they hurry the mind into every sacrifice of interest, and bear it undismayed through every hardship and danger.
THE disposition on which friendship is grafted, glows with satisfaction in the hours of tranquillity, and is pleasant, not only in its triumphs, but even in its sorrows. It throws a grace on the external air, and, by its expression on the countenance, compensates for the want of beauty, or gives a charm which no complexion or features can equal. From this source the scenes of human life derive their principal felicity; and their imitations in poetry, their principal ornament. Descriptions of nature, even representations of a vigorous conduct, and a manly courage, do not engage the heart, if they be not mixed with the exhibition of generous sentiments, and the pathetic, which is found to arise in the struggles, the triumphs, or the misfortunes of a tender affection. The death of Polites, in the Aeneid, is not more affecting than that of many others who perished in the ruins of Troy; but the aged Priam was present when this last of his sons was slain; and the agonies of grief and sorrow force the parent from his retreat, to fall by the hand that shed the blood of his child. The pathetic of Homer consists in exhibiting the force of affections, not in exciting mere terror and pity; passions he has never perhaps, in any instance, attempted to raise.
WITH this tendency to kindle into enthusiasm, with this command over the heart, with the pleasure that attends its emotions, and with all its effects in meriting confidence, and procuring esteem, it is not surprising, that a principle of humanity should give the tone to our commendations and our censures, and even where it is hindered from directing our conduct, should still give to the mind, on reflection, its knowledge of what is desirable in the human character, What hast thou done with thy brother Abel?
was the first expostulation in behalf of morality; and if the first answer has been often repeated, mankind have notwithstanding, in one sense, sufficiently acknowledged the charge of their nature. They have felt, they have talked, and even acted, as the keepers of their fellow-creatures: They have made the indications of candour and mutual affection the test of what is meritorious and amiable in the characters of men: They have made cruelty and oppression the principal objects of their indignation and rage: Even while the head is occupied with projects of interest, the heart is often seduced into friendship; and while business proceeds on the maxims of self-preservation, the careless hour is employed in generosity and kindness.
HENCE the rule by which men commonly judge of external actions, is taken from the supposed influence of such actions on the general good. To abstain from harm, is the great law of natural justice; to diffuse happiness is the law of morality; and when we censure the conferring a favour on one or a few at the expence of many, we refer to public utility, as the great object at which the actions of men should be aimed.
AFTER all, it must be confessed, that if a principle of affection to mankind, be the basis of our moral approbation and dislike, we sometimes proceed in distributing applause or censure, without precisely attending to the degree in which our fellow-creatures are hurt or obliged; and that besides the virtues of candour, friendship, generosity, and public spirit, which bear an immediate reference to this principle, there are others which may seem to derive their commendation from a different source. Temperance, prudence, fortitude, are those qualities likewise admired from a principle of regard to our fellow-creatures? Why not, since they render men happy in themselves, and useful to others? He who is qualified to promote the welfare of mankind, is neither a sot, a fool, nor a coward. Can it be more clearly expressed, that temperance, prudence, and fortitude, are necessary to the character we love and admire? I know well why I should wish for them in myself; and why likewise I should wish for them in my friend, and in every person who is an object of my affection. But to what purpose seek for reasons of approbation, where qualities are so necessary to our happiness, and so great a part in the perfection of our nature? We must cease to esteem ourselves, and to distinguish what is excellent, when such qualifications incur our neglect.
A PERSON of an affectionate mind, possessed of a maxim, That he himself, as an individual, is no more than a part of the whole that demands his regard, has found, in that principle, a sufficient foundation for all the virtues; for a contempt of animal pleasures, that would supplant his principal enjoyment; for an equal contempt of danger or pain, that come to stop his pursuits of public good.
A vehement and steady affection magnifies its object, and lessens every difficulty or danger that stands in the way.
Ask those who have been in love, says Epictetus, they will know that I speak truth.
I HAVE before me, says another eminent moralist Persian Letters.
, an idea of justice, which if I could follow in every instance, I should think myself the most happy of men.
And it is, perhaps, of consequence to their happiness, as well as to their conduct, if those can be disjoined, that men should have this idea properly formed: It is perhaps but another name for that good of mankind, which the virtuous are engaged to promote. If virtue be the supreme good, its best and most signal effect is to communicate and diffuse itself.
TO love, and even to hate, on the apprehension of moral qualities, to espouse one party from a sense of justice, to oppose another with indignation excited by iniquity, are the common indications of probity, and the operations of an animated, upright, and generous spirit. To guard against unjust partialities, and ill-grounded antipathies; to maintain that composure of mind, which, without impairing its sensibility or ardour, proceeds in every instance with discernment and penetration, are the marks of a vigorous and cultivated spirit. To be able to follow the dictates of such a Spirit through all the varieties of human life, and with a mind always master of itself, in prosperity or adversity, and possessed of all its abilities, when the subjects in hazard are life, or freedom, as much as in treating simple questions of interest, are the triumphs of magnanimity, and true elevation of mind.
The event of the day is decided. Draw this javelin from my body now, said Epaminondas, and let me bleed.
IN what situation, or by what instruction, is this wonderful character to be formed? Is it found in the nurseries of affectation, pertness, and vanity, from which fashion is propagated, and the genteel is announced? in great and opulent cities, where men view with one another in equipage, dress, and the reputation of fortune? Is it within the admired precincts of a court, where we may learn to smile without being pleased, to caress without affection, to wound with the secret weapons of envy and jealousy, and to rest our personal importance on circumstances which we cannot always with honour command? No: but in a situation where the great sentiments of the heart are awakened; where the characters of men, not their situations and fortunes, are the principal distinction; where the anxieties of interest, or vanity, perish in the blaze of more vigorous emotions; and where the human soul, having felt and recognised its objects, like an animal who has tasted the blood of his prey, cannot descend to pursuits that leave its talents and its force unemployed.
PROPER occasions alone operating on a raised and a happy disposition, may produce this admirable effect, whilst mere instruction may always find mankind at a loss to comprehend its meaning, or insensible to its dictates. The case however, is not desperate, till we have formed our system of politics, as well as manners; till we have sold our freedom for titles, equipage, and distinctions; till we see no merit but prosperity and power, no disgrace but poverty and neglect. What charm of instruction can cure the mind that is tainted with this disorder? What syren voice can awaken a desire of freedom, that is held to be meanness, and a want of ambition? or what persuasion can turn the grimace of politeness into real sentiments of humanity and candour?
SECT. VII.
Of Happiness.
HAVING had under our consideration the active powers and the moral qualities which distinguish the nature of man, is it still necessary that we should treat of his happiness apart? This significant term, the most frequent, and the most familiar, in our conversation, is, perhaps, on reflection, the least understood. It serves to express our satisfaction, when any desire is gratified: It is pronounced with a sigh, when our object is distant: It means what we wish to obtain, and what we seldom stay to examine. We estimate the value of every subject by its utility, and its influence on happiness; but we think that utility itself, and happiness, require no explanation.
THOSE men are commonly esteemed the happiest, whose desires are most frequently gratified. But if, in reality, the possession of what we desire, and a continued fruition, were requisite to happiness, mankind for the most part would have reason to complain of their lot. What they call their enjoyments, are generally momentary; and the object of sanguine expectation, when obtained, no longer continues to occupy the mind: A new passion succeeds, and the imagination, as before, is intent on a distant felicity.
HOW many reflections of this sort are suggested by melancholy, or by the effects of that very languor and inoccupation into which we would willingly sink, under the notion of freedom from care and trouble.
WHEN we enter on a formal computation of the enjoyments or sufferings which are prepared for mankind, it is a chance but we find that pain, by its intenseness, its duration, or frequency, is greatly predominant. The activity and eagerness with which we press from one stage of life to another, our unwillingness to return on the paths we have trod, our aversion in age to renew the frolics of youth, or to repeat in manhood the amusements of children, have been accordingly stated as proofs, that our memory of the past, and our feeling of the present, are equal subjects of dislike and displeasure Maupertuis; Essai de Morale.
.
THIS conclusion, however, like many others, drawn from our supposed knowledge of causes, does not correspond with experience. In every street, in every village, in every field, the greater number of persons we meet, carry an aspect that is chearful or thoughtless, indifferent, composed, busy, or animated. The labourer whistles to his team, and the mechanic is at ease in his calling; the frolicsome and the gay feel a series of pleasures, of which we know not the source; even they who demonstrate the miseries of human life, when intent on their argument, escape from their sorrows, and find a tolerable pastime in proving that men are unhappy.
THE very terms pleasure and pain, perhaps, are equivocal; but if they are confined, as they appear to be in many of our reasonings, to the mere sensations which have a reference to external objects, either in the memory of the past, the feeling of the present, or the apprehension of the future, it is a great error to suppose, that they comprehend all the constituents of happiness or misery; or that the good humour of an ordinary life is maintained by the prevalence of those pleasures which have their separate names, and are on reflection, distinctly remembered.
THE mind, during the greater part of its existence, is employed in active exertions, not in merely attending to its own feelings of pleasure or pain; and the list of its faculties, understanding, memory, foresight, sentiment, will, and intention, only contains the names of its different operations.
IF, in the absence of every sensation to which we commonly give the names either of enjoyment or suffering, our very existence may have its opposite qualities of bappiness or misery ; and if what we call pleasure or pain, occupies but a small part of human life, compared to what passes in contrivance and execution, in pursuits and expectations, in conduct, reflection, and social engagements; it must appear, that our active pursuits, at least on account of their duration, deserve the greater part of our attention. When their occasions have failed, the demand is not for pleasure, but for something to do; and the very complaints of a sufferer are not so sure a mark of distress, as the stare of the languid.
WE seldom, however, reckon any task which we are bound to perform, among the blessings of life. We always aim at a period of pure enjoyment, or a termination of trouble; and overlook the source from which most of our present satisfactions are really drawn. Ask the busy, Where is the happiness to which they aspire? they will answer, perhaps, That it is to be found in the object of some present pursuit. If we ask, Why they are not miserable in the absence of that happiness? they will say, That they hope to attain it. But is it hope alone that supports the mind in the midst of precarious and uncertain prospects? and would assurance of success fill the intervals of expectation with more pleasing emotions? Give the huntsman his prey, give the gamester the gold which is staked on the game, that the one may not need to fatigue his person, nor the other to perplex his mind, and both will probably laugh at our folly: the one will stake his money anew, that he may be perplexed; the other will turn his stag to the field, that he may hear the cry of the dogs, and follow through danger and hardship. Withdraw the occupations of men, terminate their desires, existence is a burden, and the iteration of memory is a torment.
THE men of this country, says one lady, should learn to sow and to knit; it would hinder their time from being a burden to themselves, and to other people. That is true, says another; for my part, though I never look abroad, I tremble at the prospect of bad weather; for then the gentlemen come mopping to us for entertainment; and the sight of a husband in distress, is but a melancholy spectacle.
IN devising, or in executing a plan, in being carried on the tide of emotion and sentiment, the mind seems to unfold its being, and to enjoy itself. Even where the end and the object are known to be of little avail, the talents and the fancy are often intensely applied, and business or play may amuse them alike. We only desire repose to recruit our limited and our wasting force: when business fatigues, amusement is often but a change of occupation. We are not always unhappy, even when we complain. There is a kind of affliction which makes an agreeable state of the mind; and lamentation itself is sometimes an expression of pleasure. The painter and the poet have laid hold of this handle, and find, among the means of entertainment, a favourable reception for works that are composed to awaken our sorrows.
TO a being of this description, therefore, it is a blessing to meet with incentives to action, whether in the desire of pleasure, or the aversion to pain. His activity is of more importance than the very pleasure he seeks, and langour a greater evil than the suffering he shuns.
THE gratifications of animal appetite are of short duration; and sensuality is but a distemper of the mind, which ought to be cured by remembrance, if it were not perpetually inflamed by hope. The chace is not more surely terminated by the death of the game, than the joys of the voluptuary by the means of completing his debauch. As a bond of society, as a matter of distant pursuit, the objects of sense make an important part in the system of human life. They lead us to fulfil the purpose of nature, in preserving the individual, and in perpetuating the species: but to rely on their use as a principal constituent of human felicity, were an error in speculation, and would be still more an error in practice. Even the master of the seraglio, for whom all the treasures of empire are extorted from the hoards of its frighted inhabitants, for whom alone the choicest emerald and the diamond are drawn from the mine, for whom every breeze is enriched with perfumes, for whom beauty is assembled from every quarter, and, animated by passions that ripen under the vertical sun, is confined to the grate for his use, is still, perhaps, more wretched than the very herd of the people, whose labours and properties are devoted to relieve him of trouble, and to procure him enjoyment.
SENSUALITY is easily overcome by any of the habits of pursuit which usually engage an active mind. When curiosity is awake, or when passion is excited, even in the midst of the feast when conversation grows warm, grows jovial, or serious, the pleasures of the table we know are forgotten. The boy contemns them for play, and the man of age declines them for business.
WHEN we reckon the circumstances that correspond to the nature of any animal, or to that of man in particular, such as safety, shelter, food, and the other means of enjoyment or preservation, we sometimes think that we have found a sensible and a solid foundation on which to rest his felicity. But those who are least disposed to moralize, observe, that happiness is not connected with fortune, although fortune includes at once all the means of subsistence, and the means of sensual indulgence. The circumstances that require abstinence, courage, and conduct, expose us to hazard, and are in description of the painful kind; yet the able, the brave, and the ardent, seem most to enjoy themselves when placed in the midst of difficulties, and obliged to employ the powers they possess.
SPINOLA being told, that Sir Francis Vere died of having nothing to do, said, That was enough to kill a general Life of Lord Herbert.
.
How many are there to whom war itself is a pastime, who chuse the life of a soldier, exposed to dangers and continued fatigues; of a mariner, in conflict with every hardship, and bereft of every conveniency; of a politician, whose sport is the conduct of parties and factions; and who, rather than be idle, will do the business of men and of nations for whom he has not the smallest regard. Such men do not chuse pain as preferable to pleasure, but they are incited by a restless disposition to make continued exertions of capacity and resolution; they triumph in the midst of their struggles; they droop, and they languish, when the occasion of their labour has ceased.
WHAT was enjoyment, in the sense of that youth, who, according to Tacitus, loved danger itself, not the rewards of courage? What is the prospect of pleasure, when the sound of the horn or the trumpet, the cry of the dogs, or the shout of war, awaken the ardour of the sportsman and the soldier? The most animating occasions of human life, are calls to danger and hardship, not invitations to safety and ease: and man himself, in his excellence, is not an animal of pleasure, nor destined merely to enjoy what the elements bring to his use; but, like his associates, the dog and the horse, to follow the exercises of his nature, in preference to what are called its enjoyments; to pine in the lap of ease and of affluence, and to exult in the midst of alarms that seem to threaten his being. In all which, his disposition to action only keeps pace with the variety of powers with which he is furnished; and the most respectable attributes of his nature, magnanimity, fortitude, and wisdom, carry a manifest reference to the difficulties with which he is destined to struggle.
IF animal pleasure becomes insipid when the spirit is roused by a different object, it is well known likewise, that the sense of pain is prevented by any vehement affection of the soul. Wounds received in a heat of passion, in the hurry, the ardour, or consternation of battle, are never felt till the ferment of the mind subsides. Even torment, deliberately applied, and industriously prolonged, are borne with firmness, and with an appearance of ease, when the mind is possessed with some vigorous sentiment, whether of religion, enthusiasm, or love to mankind. The continued mortifications of superstitious devotees in several ages of the Christian church; the wild penances, still voluntarily borne, during many years, by the religionists of the east; the contempt in which famine and torture are held by most savage nations; the chearful or obstinate patience of the soldier in the field; the hardships endured by the sportsman in his pastime, show how much we may err in computing the miseries of men, from the measures of trouble and of suffering they seem to incur. And if there be a refinement in affirming, that their happiness is not to be measured by the contrary enjoyments, it is a refinement which was made by Regulus and Cincinnatus before the date of philosophy; it is a refinement, which every boy knows at his play, and every savage confirms, when he looks from his forest on the pacific city, and scorns the plantation, whose master he cares not to imitate.
MAN, it must be confessed, notwithstanding all this activity of his mind, is an animal in the full extent of that designation. When the body sickens, the mind droops; and when the blood ceases to flow, the soul takes its departure. Charged with the care of his preservation, admonished by a sense of pleasure or pain, and guarded by an instinctive fear of death, nature has not intrusted his safety to the mere vigilance of his understanding, nor to the government of his uncertain reflections.
THE distinction betwixt mind and body is followed by consequences of the greatest importance; but the facts to which we now refer, are not founded on any tenets whatever. They are equally true, whether we admit or reject the distinction in question, or whether we suppose, that this living agent is formed of one, or is an assemblage of separate natures. And the materialist, by treating of man as of an engine, cannot make any change in the state of his history. He is a being, who, by a multiplicity of visible organs, performs a variety of functions. His joints are bent, and his muscles relax and contract in our sight; the heart beats in his breast, and the blood flows to every part of his frame. He performs other operations which we cannot refer to any corporeal organ. He perceives, he recollects, and forecasts; he desires, and he shuns; he admires, and contemns. He enjoys his pleasures, or he endures his pain. All these different functions, in some measure, go well or ill together. When the motion of the blood is languid, the muscles relax, the understanding is tardy, and the fancy is dull: when distemper assails him, the physician must attend no less to what he thinks, than to what he eats, and examines the returns of his passion, together with the strokes of his pulse.
WITH all his sagacity, his precautions, and his instincts, which are given to preserve his being, he partakes in the fate of other animals, and seems to be formed only that he may die. Myriads perish before they reach the perfection of their kind; and the individual, with an option to owe the prolongation of his temporary course to resolution and conduct, or to abject fear, frequently chuses the latter, and by a habit of timidity, imbitters the life he is so intent to preserve.
MAN, however, at times, exempted from this mortifying lot, seems to act without any regard to the length of his period. When he thinks intensely, or desires with ardour, pleasures and pains from any other quarter assail him in vain. Even in his dying hour, the muscles acquire a tone from his spirit, and the mind seems to depart in its vigour, and in the midst of a struggle to obtain the recent aim of its toils. Muley Moluck, borne on his litter, and spent with disease, still fought the battle, in the midst of which he expired; and the last effort he made, with a finger on his lips, was a signal to conceal his death: the precaution, perhaps, of all which he had hitherto taken, the most necessary to prevent a defeat.
CAN no reflections aid us in acquiring this hbit of the soul, so useful in carrying us through many of the ordinary scenes of life? If we say, that they cannot, the reality of its happiness is not the less evident. The Greeks and the Romans considered contempt of pleasure, endurance of pain, and neglect of life, as eminent qualities of a man, and a principal subject of discipline. They trusted, that the vigorous spirit would find worthy objects on which to employ its force; and that the first step towards a resolute choice of such objects was to shake off the meanness of a solicitous and timorous mind.
MANKIND, in general, have courted occasions to display their courage, and frequently, in search of admiration, have presented a spectacle, which to those who have ceased to regard fortitude on its own account, becomes a subject of horror. Scevola held his arm in the fire, to shake the soul of Porsenna. The savage inures his body to the torture, that in the hour of trial he may exult over his enemy. Even the Mussulman tears his flesh to win the heart of his mistress, and comes in gaiety, streaming with blood, to shew that he deserves her esteem Letters of the Right Hon. Lady M
y W
y M
e.
.
SOME nations carry the practice of inflicting, or of sporting with pain, to a degree that is either cruel or absurd; others regard every prospect of bodily suffering as the greatest of evils; and in the midst of their troubles, imbitter every real affliction, with the terrors of a feeble and dejected imagination. We are not bound to answer for the follies of either, nor, in treating a question which relates to the nature of man, make an estimate of its strength, or its weakness, from the habits or apprehensions peculiar to any nation or age.
SECT. VIII.
The same subject continued.
WHOEVER has compared together the different conditions and manners of men, under varieties of education or fortune, will be satisfied, that mere situation does not constitute their happiness or misery; nor a diversity of external observances imply any opposition of sentiments on the subject of morality. They express their kindness and their enmity in different actions; but kindness or enmity is still the principal article of consideration in human life. They engage in different pursuits, or acquiesce in different conditions; but act from passions nearly the same. There is no precise measure of accommodation required to suit their conveniency, nor any degree of danger or safety under which they are peculiarly fitted to act. Courage and generosity, fear and envy, are not peculiar to any station or order of men; nor is there any condition in which some of the human race have not shewn, that it is possible to employ, with propriety, the talents and virtues of their species.
WHAT, then, is that mysterious thing called Happiness, which may have place in such a variety of stations, and to which circumstances in one age or nation thought necessary, are in another held to be destructive, or of no effect? It is not the succession of mere animal pleasures, which, apart from the occupation or the company in which they serve to engage the mind, can fill up but a few moments in the duration of life. On too frequent a repetition, those pleasures turn to satiety and disgust; they tear the constitution to which they are applied in excess, and, like the lightning of night, only serve to darken the gloom through which they occasionally break. Happiness is not that state of repose, or that imaginary freedom from care, which at a distance is so frequent an object of desire, but with its approach brings a tedium, or a languor, more unsupportable than pain itself. If the preceding observations on this subject be just, it arises more from the pursuit, than from the attainment of any end whatever; and in every new situation to which we arrive, even in the course of a prosperous life, it depends more on the degree in which our minds are properly employed, than it does on the circumstances in which we are destined to act, on the materials which are placed in our hands, or the tools with which we are furnished.
IF this be confessed in respect to that class of pursuits which are distinguished by the name of amusement, and which, in the case of men who are commonly deemed the most happy, occupy the greater part of human life, we may apprehend, that it holds, much more than is commonly suspected, in many cases of business, where the end to be gained, and not the occupation, is supposed to have the principal value.
THE miser himself, we are told, can sometimes consider the care of his wealth as a pastime, and has challenged his heir, to have more pleasure in spending, than he in amassing his fortune. With this degree of indifference to what may be the conduct of others; with this confinement of his care to what he has chosen as his own province, more especially if he has conquered in himself the passions of jealousy and envy, which tear the covetous mind; why may not the man whose object is money, be understood to lead a life of amusement and pleasure, not only more entire than that of the spendthrift, but even as much as the virtuoso, the scholar, the man of taste, or any of that class of persons who have found out a method of passing their leisure without offence, and to whom the acquisitions made, or the works produced, in their several ways, perhaps, are as useless as the bag to the miser, or the counter to those who play from mere dissipation at any game of skill or of chance?
WE are soon tired of diversions that do not approach to the nature of business, that is, that do not engage some passion, or give an exercise proportioned to our talents, and our faculties. The chace and the gaming-table have each their dangers and difficulties, to excite and employ the mind. All games of contention animate our emulation, and give a species of party-zeal. The mathematician is only to be amused with intricate problems, the lawyer and the casuist with cases that try their subtilty, and occupy their judgement.
THE desire of active engagements, like every other natural appetite, may be carried to excess; and men may debauch in amusements, as well as in the use of wine, or other intoxicating liquors. At first, a trifling stake, and the occupation of a moderate passion, may have served to amuse the gamester; but when the drug becomes familiar, it fails to produce its effect: The play is made deep, and the interest increased, to awaken his attention; he is carried on by degrees, and in the end comes to seek for amusement, and to find it only in those passions of anxiety, hope, and despair, which are roused by the hazard into which he has thrown the whole of his fortunes.
IF men can thus turn their amusements into a scene more serious and interesting than that of business itself, it will be difficult to assign a reason, why business, and many of the occupations of human life, independent of any distant consequences, or future events, may not be chosen as an amusement, and adopted on account of the pastime they bring. This is, perhaps, the foundation on which, without the aid of reflection, the contented and the chearful have rested the gaiety of their tempers. It is perhaps the most solid basis of fortitude which any reflection can lay; and happiness itself is secured, by making a certain species of conduct our amusement; and, by considering life, in the general estimate of its value, as well as on every particular occasion, as a mere scene for the exercise of the mind, and the engagements of the heart.
I will try and attempt every thing, says Brutus, I will never cease to recal my country from this state of servility. If the event be favourable, it will prove matter of joy to us all; if not, yet I, notwithstanding, shall rejoice.
Why rejoice in a disappointment? Why not be dejected, when his country was overwhelmed? Because sorrow, perhaps, and dejection, can do no good. Nay, but they must be endured when they come. And whence should they come to me? might the Roman say; I have followed my mind, and can follow it still. Events may have changed the situation in which I am destined to act; but can they hinder my acting the part of a man? Shew me a situation in which a man can neither act nor die, and I will own he is wretched.
WHOEVER has the sorce of mind steadily to view human life under this aspect, has only to chuse well his occupations, in order to command that state of enjoyment, and freedom of soul, which probably constitute the peculiar felicity to which his active nature is destined.
THE dispositions of men, and consequently their occupations, are commonly divided into two principal classes; the selfish, and the social. The first are indulged in solitude; and if they carry a reference to mankind, it is that of emulation, competition, and enmity. The second incline us to live with our fellow-creatures, and to do them good; they tend to unite the members of society together; they terminate in a mutual participation of their cares and enjoyments, and render the presence of men an occasion of joy. Under this class may be enumerated the passions of the sexes, the affections of parents and children, general humanity, or singular attachments; above all, that habit of the soul by which we consider ourselves as but a part of some beloved community, and as but individual members of some society, whose general welfare is to us the supreme object of zeal, and the great rule of our conduct. This affection is a principle of candour, which knows no partial distinctions, and is confined to no bounds: it may extend its effects beyond our personal acquaintance; it may, in the mind, and in thought, at least, make us feel a relation to the universe, and to the whole creation of God.
Shall any one, says Antoninus, love the city of Cecrops, and you not love the city of God?
NO emotion of the heart is indifferent. It is either an act of vivacity and joy, or a feeling of sadness; a transport of pleasure, or a convulsion of anguish: and the exercises of our different dispositions, as well as their gratifications, are likely to prove matter of the greatest importance to our happiness or misery THE individual is charged with the care of his animal preservation. He may exist in solitude, and, far removed from society, perform many functions of sense, imagination, and reason. He is even rewarded for the proper discharge of those functions; and all the natural exercises which relate to himself, as well as to his fellow-creatures, not only occupy without distressing him, but in many instances are attended with positive pleasures, and fill up the hours of life with agreeable occupation.
THERE is a degree, however, in which we suppose that the care of ourselves becomes a source of painful anxiety and cruel passions; in which it degenerates into avarice, vanity, or pride; and in which, by fostering habits of jealousy and envy, of fear and malice, it becomes as destructive of our own enjoyments, as it is hostile to the welfare of mankind. This evil, however, is not to be charged upon any excess in the care of ourselves, but upon a mere mistake in the choice of our objects. We look abroad for a happiness which is to be found only in the qualities of the heart we think ourselves dependent on accidents; and are therefore kept in suspence and solicitude: we think ourselves dependent on the will of other men; and are therefore servile and timid: we think our felicity is placed in subjects for which our fellow-creatures are rivals and competitors; and in pursuit of happiness, we engage in those scenes of emulation, envy, hatred, animosity, and revenge, that lead to the highest pitch of distress. We act, in short, as if to preserve ourselves were to retain our weakness, and perpetuate our sufferings. We charge the ills of a distempered imagination, and a corrupt heart, to the account of our fellowcreatures, to whom we refer the pangs of our disappointment or malice; and while we foster our misery, are surprised that the care of ourselves is attended with no better effects. But he who remembers that he is by nature a rational being, and a member of society; that to preserve himself, is to preserve his reason, and to preserve the best feelings of his heart; will encounter with none of these inconveniencies; and in the care of himself, will find subjects only of satisfaction and triumph.
THE division of our appetites into benevolent and selfish, has probably, in some degree, helped to mislead our apprehension on the subject of personal enjoyment and private good; and our zeal to prove that virtue is disinterested, has not greatly promoted its cause. The gratification of a selfish desire, it is thought, brings advantage or pleasure to ourselves; that of benevolence terminates in the pleasure or advantage of others: whereas, in reality, the gratification of every desire is a personal enjoyment, and its value being proportioned to the particular quality or force of the sentiment, it may happen that the same person may reap a greater advantage from the good fortune he has procured to another, than from that he has obtained for himself.
WHILE the gratifications of benevolence, therefore, are as much our own as those of any other desire whatever, the mere exercises of this disposition are, on many accounts, to be considered as the first and the principal constituent of human happiness. Every act of kindness, or of care, in the parent to his child; every emotion of the heart, in friendship or in love, in public zeal, or general humanity, are so many acts of enjoyment and satisfaction. Pity itself, and compassion, even grief and melancholy, when grafted on some tender affection, partake of the nature of the stock; and if they are not positive pleasures, are at least pains of a peculiar nature, which we do not even wish to exchange but for a very real enjoyment, obtained in relieving our object. Even extremes, in this class of our dispositions, as they are the reverse of hatred, envy, and malice, so they are never attended with those excruciating anxieties, jealousies, and fears, which tear the interested mind; or if, in reality, any ill passion arise from a pretended attachment to our fellow-creatures, that attachment may be safely condemned, as not genuine. If we be distrustful or jealous, our pretended affection is probably no more than a desire of attention and personal consideration, a motive which frequently inclines us to be connected with our fellow-creatures; but to which we are as frequently willing to sacrifice their happiness. We consider them as the tools of our vanity, pleasure, or interest; not as the parties on whom we may bestow the effects of our good-will, and our love.
A MIND devoted to this class of its affections, being occupied with an object that may engage it habitually, is not reduced to court the amusements or pleasures with which persons of an ill temper are obliged to repair their disgusts: and temperance becomes an easy task when gratifications of sense are supplanted by those of the heart. Courage too is most easily assumed, or is rather inseparable from that ardour of the mind, in society, friendship, or in public action, which makes us forget subjects of personal anxiety or fear, and attend chiefly to the object of our zeal or affection, not to the trifling inconveniencies, dangers, or hardships, which we ourselves may encounter in striving to maintain it.
IT should seem, therefore, to be the happiness of man, to make his social dispositions the ruling spring of his occupations; to state himself as the member of a community, for whose general good his heart may glow with an ardent zeal, to the suppression of those personal cares which are the foundation of painful anxieties, fear, jealousy, and envy; or, as Mr. Pope expresses the same sentiment, Man, like the generous vine, supported lives;
The strength he gains, is from th'embrace he gives The same maxim will apply throughout every part of nature.
To love, is to enjoy pleasure: To bate, is to be in pain.
.
If this be the good of the individual, it is likewise that of mankind; and virtue no longer imposes a task by which we are obliged to bestow upon others that good from which we ourselves refrain; but supposes, in the highest degree, as possessed by ourselves, that state of felicity which we are required to promote in the world.
WE commonly apprehend, that it is our duty to do kindnesses, and our happiness to receive them: but if, in reality, courage, and a heart devoted to the good of mankind, are the constituents of human felicity, the kindness which is done infers a happiness in the person from whom it proceeds, not in him on whom it is bestowed; and the greatest good which men possessed of fortitude and generosity can procure to their fellowcreatures, is a participation of this happy character.
You will confer the greatest benefit on your city, says Epictetus, not by raising the roofs, but by exalting the souls of your fellowcitizens; for it is better that great souls should live in small habitations, than that abject slaves should burrow in great houses Mrs. Carter's translation of the works of Epictetus.
.
TO the benevolent, the satisfaction of others is a ground of enjoyment; and existence itself, in a world that is governed by the wisdom of God, is a blessing. The mind, freed from cares that lead to pusillanimity and meanness, becomes calm, active, fearless, and bold; capable of every enterprise, and vigorous in the exercise of every talent, by which the nature of man is adorned. On this foundation was raised the admirable character, which, during a certain period of their story, distinguished the celebrated nations of antiquity, and rendered familiar and ordinary in their manners, examples of magnanimity, which, under governments less favourable to the public affections, rarely occur; or which, without being much practised, or even understood, are made subjects of admiration and swelling panegyric.
Thus, says Xenophon, died Thrasybulus; who indeed appears to have been a good man.
What valuable praise, and how significant to those who know the story of this admirable person! The members of those illustrious states, from the habit of considering themselves as part of a community, or at least as deeply involved with some order of men in the state, were regardless of personal considerations: they had a perpetual view to objects which excite a great ardour in the soul; which led them to act perpetually in the view of their fellowcitizens, and to practise those arts of deliberation, elocution, policy, and war, on which the fortunes of nations, or of men, in their collective body, depend. To the force of mind collected in this career, and to the improvements of wit which were made in pursuing it, these nations owed, not only their magnanimity, and the superiority of their political and military conduct, but even the arts of poetry and literature, which among them were only the inferior appendages of a genius otherwise excited, cultivated, and refined.
TO the ancient Greek, or the Roman, the individual was nothing, and the public every thing. To the modern, in too many nations of Europe, the individual is every thing, and the public nothing. The state is merely a combination of departments, in which consideration, wealth, eminence, or power, are offered as the reward of service. It was the nature of modern government, even in its first institution, to bestow on every individual a fixed station and dignity, which he was to maintain for himself. Our ancestors, in rude ages, during the recess of wars from abroad, fought for their personal claims at home, and by their competitions, and the balance of their powers, maintained a kind of political freedom in the state, while private parties were subject to continual wrongs and oppressions. Their posterity, in times more polished, have repressed the civil disorders in which the activity of earlier ages chiefly consisted; but they employ the calm they have gained, not in fostering a zeal for those laws, and that constitution of government, to which they owe their protection, but in practising apart, and each for himself, the several arts of personal advancement, or profit, which their political establishments may enable them to pursue with success. Commerce, which may be supposed to comprehend every lucatrive art, is accordingly considered as the great object of nations, and the principal study of mankind.
SO much are we accustomed to consider personal fortune as the sole object of care, that even under popular establishments, and in states where different orders of men are summoned to partake in the government of their country, and where the liberties they enjoy cannot be long preserved, without vigilance and activity on the part of the subject; still they, who, in the vulgar phrase, have not their fortunes to make, are supposed to be at a loss for occupation, and betake themselves to solitary pastimes, or cultivate what they are pleased to call a taste for gardening, building, drawing, or music. With this aid, they endeavour to fill up the blanks of a listless life, and avoid the necessity of curing their languors by any positive service to their country, or to mankind.
THE weak or the malicious are well employed in any thing that is innocent, and are fortunate in finding any occupation which prevents the effects of a temper that would prey upon themselves, or upon their fellow-creatures. But they who are blessed with a happy disposition, with capacity and vigour, incur a real debauchery, by having any amusement that occupies an improper share of their time; and are really cheated of their happiness, in being made to believe, that any occupation or pastime is better fitted to amuse themselves, than that which at the same time produces some real good to their fellow-creatures.
THIS sort of entertainment, indeed, cannot be the choice of the mercenary, the envious, or the malignant. Its value is known only to persons of an opposite temper; and to their experience alone we appeal. Guided by mere disposition, and without the aid of reflection, in business, in friendship, and in public life, they often acquit themselves well; and borne with satisfaction on the tide of their emotions and sentiments, enjoy the present hour, without recollection of the past, or hopes of the future. It is in speculation, not in practice, they are made to discover, that virtue is a task of severity and self-denial.
SECT. IX.
Of National Felicity.
MAN is, by nature, the member of a community; and when considered in this capacity, the individual appears to be no longer made for himself. He must forego his happiness and his freedom, where these interfere with the good of society. He is only part of a whole; and the praise we think due to his virtue, is but a branch of that more general commendation we bestow on the member of a body, on the part of a fabric or engine, for being well fitted to occupy its place, and to produce its effect.
IF this follow from the relation of a part to its whole, and if the public good be the principal object with individuals, it is likewise true, that the happiness of individuals is the great end of civil society: for in what sense can a public enjoy any good, if its members, considered apart, be unhappy?
THE interests of society, however, and of its members, are easily reconciled. If the individual owe every degree of consideration to the public, he receives, in paying that very consideration, the greatest happiness of which his nature is capable; and the greatest blessing that the public can bestow on its members, is to keep them attached to itself. That is the most happy state, which is most beloved by its subjects; and they are the most happy men, whose hearts are engaged to a community, in which they find every object of generosity and zeal, and a scope to the exercise of every talent, and of every virtuous disposition.
AFTER we have thus found general maxims, the greater part of our trouble remains, their just application to particular cases. Nations are different in respect to their extent, numbers of people, and wealth; in respect to the arts they practise, and the accommodations they have procured. These circumstances may not only affect the manners of men; they even, in our esteem, come into competition with the article of manners itself; are supposed to constitute a national felicity, independent of virtue; and give a title, upon which we indulge our own vanity, and that of other nations, as we do that of private men, on the score of their fortunes and honours.
BUT if this way of measuring happiness, when applied to private men, be ruinous and false, it is so no less when applied to nations. Wealth, commerce, extent of territory, and the knowledge of arts, are, when properly employed, the means of preservation, and the foundations of power. If they fail in part, the nation is weakened; if they were entirely with-held, the race would perish: their tendency is to maintain numbers of men, but not to constitute happiness. They will accordingly maintain the wretched, as well as the happy. They answer one purpose, but are not therefore sufficient for all; and are of little significance, when only employed to maintain a timid, dejected, and servile people.
GREAT and powerful states are able to overcome and subdue the weak; polished and commercial nations have more wealth, and practise a greater variety of arts, than the rude: but the happiness of men, in all cases alike, consists in the blessings of a candid, an active, and strenuous mind. And if we consider the state of society merely as that into which mankind are led by their propensities, as a state to be valued from its effect in preserving the species, in ripening their talents, and exciting their virtues, we need not enlarge our communities, in order to enjoy these advantages. We frequently obtain them in the most remarkable degree, where nations remain independent, and are of a small extent.
TO increase the numbers of mankind, may be admitted as a great and important object; but to extend the limits of any particular state, is not, perhaps, the way to obtain it; while we desire that our fellow-creatures should multiply, it does not follow, that the whole should, if possible, be united under one head. We are apt to admire the empire of the Romans, as a model of national greatness and splendour: but the greatness we admire in this case, was ruinous to the virtue and the happiness of mankind; it was found to be inconsistent with all the advantages which that conquering people had formerly enjoyed in the articles of government and manners.
THE emulation of nations proceeds from their division. A cluster of states, like a company of men, find the exercise of their reason, and the test of their virtues, in the affairs they transact, upon a foot of equality, and of separate interest. The measures taken for safety, including great part of the national policy, are relative in every state to what is apprehended from abroad. Athens was necessary to Sparta, in the exercise of her virtue, as steel is to flint in the production of fire; and if the cities of Greece had been united under one head, we should never have heard of Epaminondas or Thrasybulus, of Lycurgus or Solon.
WHEN we reason in behalf of our species, therefore, although we may lament the abuses which sometimes arise from independence, and opposition of interest; yet, whilst any degrees of virtue remain with mankind, we cannot wish to croud, under one establishment, numbers of men who may serve to constitute several; or to commit affairs to the conduct of one senate, one legislative or executive power, which, upon a distinct and separate footing, might furnish an exercise of ability, and a theatre of glory, to many.
THIS may be a subject upon which no determinate rule can be given, but the admiration of boundless dominion is a ruinous error; and in no instance, perhaps, is the real interest of mankind more entirely mistaken.
THE measure of enlargement to be wished for any particular state, is often to be taken from the condition of its neighbours. Where a number of states are contiguous, they should be near an equality, in order that they may be mutually objects of respect and consideration, and in order that they may possess that independence in which the political life of a nation consists.
WHEN the kingdoms of Spain were united, when the great fiefs in France were annexed to the crown, it was no longer expedient for the nations of Great Britain to continue disjoined.
THE small republics of Greece, indeed, by their subdivisions, and the balance of their power, found almost in every village the object of nations. Every little district was a nursery of excellent men, and what is now the wretched corner of a great empire, was the field on which mankind have reaped their principal honours. But in modern Europe, republics of a similar extent, are like shrubs, under the shade of a taller wood, choked by the neighbourhood of more powerful states. In their case, a certain disproportion of force frustrates, in a great measure, the advantage of separation. They are like the trader in Poland, who is the more despicable, and the less secure, that he is neither master nor slave.
INDEPENDENT communities, in the mean time, however weak, are averse to a coalition, not only where it comes with an air of imposition, or unequal treaty, but even where it implies no more than the admission of new members to an equal share of consideration with the old. The citizen has no interest in the annexation of kingdoms; he must find his importance diminished, as the state is enlarged: but ambitious men, under the enlargement of territory, find a more plentiful harvest of power, and of wealth, while government itself is an easier task. Hence the ruinous progress of empire; and hence free nations, under the shew of acquiring dominion, suffer themselves, in the end, to be yoked with the slaves they had conquered.
OUR desire to augment the force of a nation is the only pretext for enlarging its territory; but this measure, when pursued to extremes, seldom fails to frustrate itself.
NOTWITHSTANDING the advantage of numbers, and superior resources in war, the strength of a nation is derived from the character, not from the wealth, nor from the multitude of its people. If the treasure of a state can hire numbers of men, erect ramparts, and furnish the implements of war; the possessions of the fearful are easily seized; a timorous multitude falls into rout of itself; ramparts may be scaled where they are not desended by valour; and arms are of consequence only in the hands of the brave. The band to which Agesilaus pointed as the wall of his city, made a defence for their country more permanent, and more effectual, than the rock and the cement with which other cities were fortified.
WE should owe little to that statesman who were to contrive a defence that might supersede the external uses of virtue. It is wisely ordered for man, as a rational being, that the employment of reason is necessary to his preservation: it is fortunate for him, in the pursuit of distinction, that his personal consideration depends on his character; and it is fortunate for nations, that, in order to be powerful and safe, they must strive to maintain the courage, and cultivate the virtues, of their people. By the use of such means, they at once gain their external ends, and are happy.
PEACE and unanimity are commonly considered as the principal foundations of public felicity; yet the rivalship of separate communities, and the agitations of a free people, are the principles of political life, and the school of men. How shall we reconcile these jarring and opposite tenets? It is, perhaps, not necessary to reconcile them. The pacific may do what they can to allay the animosities, and to reconcile the opinions, of men; and it will be happy if they can succeed in repressing their crimes, and in calming the worst of their passions. Nothing, in the mean time, but corruption or slavery can suppress the debates that subsist among men of integrity, who bear an equal part in the administration of state.
A PERFECT agreement in matters of opinion is not to be obtained in the most select company; and if it were, what would become of society?
The Spartan legislator, says Plutarch, appears to have sown the seeds of variance and dissension among his countrymen: he meant that good citizens should be led to dispute; he considered emulation as the brand by which their virtues were kindled; and seemed to apprehend, that a complaisance, by which men submit their opinions without examination, is a principal source of corruption.
FORMS of government are supposed to decide the happiness or misery of mankind. But forms of government must be varied, in order to suit the extent, the way of subsistence, the character, and the manners of different nations. In some cases, the multitude may be suffered to govern themselves; in others, they must be severely restrained. The inhabitants of a village in some primitive age, may have been safely intrusted to the conduct of reason, and to the suggestion of their innocent views; but the tenants of Newgate can scarcely be trusted, with chains locked to their bodies, and bars of iron fixed to their legs. How is it possible, therefore, to find any single form of government that would suit mankind in every condition?
WE proceed, however, in the following section, to point out the distinctions, and to explain the language which occurs in this place, on the head of different models for subordination and government.
SECT. X.
The same subject continued.
IT is a common observation, That mankind were originally equal. They have indeed by nature equal rights to their preservation, and to the use of their talents; but they are fitted for different stations; and when they are classed by a rule taken from this circumstance, they suffer no injustice on the side of their natural rights. It is obvious, that some mode of subordination is as necessary to men as society itself; and this, not only to attain the ends of government, but to comply with an order established by nature.
PRIOR to any political institution whatever, men are qualified by a great diversity of talents, by a different tone of the soul, and ardour of the passions, to act a variety of parts. Bring them together, each will find his place. They censure or applaud in a body; they consult and deliberate in more select parties; they take or give an ascendant as individuals; and numbers are by this means fitted to act in company, and to preserve their communities, before any formal distribution of office is made.
WE are formed to act in this manner; and if we have any doubts with relation to the rights of government in general, we owe our perplexity more to the subtilties of the speculative, than to any uncertainty in the feelings of the heart. Involved in the resolutions of our company, we move with the croud before we have determined the rule by which its will is collected. We follow a leader, before we have settled the ground of his pretensions, or adjusted the form of his election: and it is not till after mankind have committed many errors in the capacities of magistrate and subject, that they think of making government itself a subject of rules.
IF therefore, in considering the variety of forms under which societies subsist, the casuist is pleased to inquire, What title one man, or any number of men, have to controul his actions? he may be answered, None at all, provided that his actions have no effect to the prejudice of his fellow-creatures; but if they have, the rights of defence, and the obligation to repress the commission of wrongs, belong to collective bodies, as well as to individuals. Many rude nations, having no formal tribunals for the judgement of crimes, assemble, when alarmed by any flagrant offence, and take their measures with the criminal as they would with an enemy.
BUT will this consideration, which confirms the title to sovereignty, where it is exercised by the society in its collective capacity, or by those to whom the powers of the whole are committed, likewise support the claim to dominion, where-ever it is casually lodged, or even where it is only maintained by force?
THIS question may be sufficiently answered, by observing, that a right to do justice, and to do good, is competent to every individual, or order of men; and that the exercise of this right has no limits but in the defect of power. But a right to do wrong, and commit injustice, is an abuse of language, and a contradiction in terms. It is no more competent to the collective body of a people, than it is to any single usurper. When we admit such a prerogative in the case of any sovereign, we can only mean to express the extent of his power, and the force with which he is enabled to execute his pleasure. Such a prerogative is assumed by the leader of banditti at the head of his gang, or by a despotic prince at the head of his troops. When the sword is presented by either, the traveller or the inhabitant may submit from a sense of necessity or fear; but he lies under no obligation from a motive of duty or justice.
THE multiplicity of forms, in the mean time, which different societies offer to our view, is almost infinite. The classes into which they distribute their members, the manner in which they establish the legislative and executive powers, the imperceptible circumstances by which they are led to have different customs, and to confer on their governors unequal measures of power and authority, give rise to perpetual distinctions between constitutions the most nearly resembling one another, and give to human affairs a variety in detail, which, in its full extent, no understanding can comprehend, and no memory retain.
IN order to have a general and comprehensive knowledge of the whole, we must be determined on this, as on every other subject, to overlook many particulars and singularities, distinguishing different governments; to fix our attention on certain points, in which many agree; and thereby establish a few general heads, under which the subject may be distinctly considered. When we have marked the characteristics which form the general points of coincidence; when we have pursued them to their consequences in the several modes of legislation, execution, and judicature, in the establishments which relate to police, commerce, religion, or domestic life; we have made an acquisition of knowledge, which, though it does not supersede the necessity of experience, may serve to direct our inquiries, and, in the midst of affairs, to give an order and a method for the arrangement of particulars that occur to our observation.
WHEN I recollect what the President Montesquieu has written, I am at a loss to tell, why I should treat of human affairs: but I too am instigated by my reflections, and my sentiments; and I may utter them more to the comprehension of ordinary capacities, because I am more on the level of ordinary men. If it be necessary to pave the way for what follows on the general history of nations, by giving some account of the heads under which various forms of government may be conveniently ranged, the reader should perhaps be referred to what has been already delivered on the subject by this profound politician and amiable moralist. In his writings will be found, not only the original of what I am now, for the fake of order, to copy from him, but likewise probably the source of many observations, which, in different places, I may under the belief of invention, have repeated, without quoting their author.
THE ancient philosophers treated of government commonly under three heads; the Demoratic, the Aristocratic, and the Despotic. Their attention was chiefly occupied with the varieties of republican government; and they paid little regard to a very important distinction, which Mr. Montesquieu has made, between despotism and monarchy. He too has considered government as reducible to three general forms; and, to understand the nature of each, he observes, it is sufficient to recal ideas which are familiar with men of the least reflection, who admit three definitions, or rather three facts: That a republic is a state in which the people in a collective body, or a part of the people, possess the sovereign power: That monarchy is that in which one man governs according to fixed and determinate laws: and a despotism is that in which one man, without law, or rule of administration, by the mere impulse of will or caprice, decides, and carries every thing before him.
REPUBLICS admit of a very material distinction, which is pointed out in the general definition; that between democracy and aristocracy. In the first, supreme power remains in the hands of the collective body. Every office of magistracy, at the nomination of this sovereign, is open to every citizen; who, in the discharge of his duty, becomes the minister of the people, and accountable to them for every object of his trust.
IN the second, the sovereignty is lodged in a particular class, or order of men; who, being once named, continue for life; or by the hereditary distinctions of birth and fortune, are advanced to a station of permanent superiority. From this order, and by their nomination, all the offices of magistracy are filled; and in the different assemblies which they constitute, whatever relates to the legislation, the execution, or jurisdiction, is finally determined.
MR. Montesquieu has pointed out the sentiments or maxims from which men must be supposed to act under these different governments.
IN democracy, they must love equality; they must respect the rights of their fellow-citizens; they must unite by the common ties of affection to the state. In forming personal pretensions, they must be satisfied with that degree of consideration they can procure by their abilities fairly measured with those of an opponent; they must labour for the public without hope of profit; they must reject every attempt to create a personal dependence. Candour, force, and elevation of mind, in short, are the props of democracy; and virtue is the principle of conduct required to its preservation.
HOW beautiful a pre-eminence on the side of popular government! and how ardently should mankind wish for the form, if it tended to establish the principle, or were, in every instance, a sure indication of its presence!
BUT perhaps we must have possessed the principle, in order, with any hopes of advantage, to receive the form; and where the first is entirely extinguished, the other may be fraught with evil, if any additional evil deserves to be shunned where men are already unhappy.
AT Constantinople or Algiers, it is a miserable spectacle when men pretend to act on a foot of equality: they only mean to shake off the restraints of government, and to seize as much as they can of that spoil, which, in ordinary times, is ingrossed by the master they serve.
IT is one advantage of democracy, that the principal ground of distinction being personal qualities, men are classed according to their abilities, and to the merit of their actions. Though all have equal pretensions to power, yet the state is actually governed by a few. The majority of the people, even in their capacity of sovereign, only pretend to employ their senses; to feel, when pressed by national inconveniencies, or threatened by public dangers; and with the ardour which is apt to arise in crouded assemblies, to urge the pursuits in which they are engaged, or to repel the attacks with which they are menaced.
THE most perfect equality of rights can never exclude the ascendant of superior minds, nor the assemblies of a collective body govern without the direction of select councils. On this account, popular government may be confounded with aristocracy. But this alone does not constitute the character of aristocratical government. Here the members of the state are divided, at least, into two classes; of which one is destined to command, the other to obey. No merits or defects can raise or sink a person from one class to the other. The only effect of personal character is, to procure the individual a suitable degree of consideration with his own order, not to vary his rank. In one situation he is taught to assume, in another to yield the pre-eminence. He occupies the station of patron or client, and is either the sovereign or the subject of his country. The whole citizens may unite in executing the plans of state, but never in deliberating on its measures, or enacting its laws. What belongs to the whole people under democracy, is here confined to a part. Members of the superior order, are among themselves, possibly, classed according to their abilities, but retain a perpetual ascendant over those of inferior station. They are at once the servants and the masters of the state, and pay with their personal attendance and their blood for the civil or military honours they enjoy.
TO maintain for himself, and to admit in his fellow-citizen, a perfect equality of privilege and station, is no longer the leading maxim of the member of such a community. The rights of men are modified by their condition. One order claims more than it is willing to yield; the other must be ready to yield what it does not assume to itself: and it is with good reason that Mr. Montesquieu gives to the principle of such governments the name of moderation, not of virtue.
THE elevation of one class is a moderated arrogance; the submission of the other a limited deference. The first must be careful, by concealing the invidious part of their distinction, to palliate what is grievous in the public arrangement, and by their education, their cultivated manners, and improved talents, to appear qualified for the stations they occupy. The other must be taught to yield, from respect and personal attachment, what could not otherwise be extorted by force. When this moderation fails on either side, the constitution totters. A populace enraged to mutiny, may claim the right of equality to which they are admitted in democratical states; or a nobility bent on dominion, may chuse among themselves, or find already pointed out to them, a sovereign, who, by advantages of sortune, popularity, or abilities, is ready to seize for his own family, that envied power, which has already carried his order beyond the limits of moderation, and infected particular men with a boundless ambition.
MONARCHIES have accordingly been found with the recent marks of aristocracy. There, however, the monarch is only the first among the nobles; he must be satisfied with a limited power; his subjects are ranged into classes; he finds on every quarter a pretence to privilege, that circumscribes his authority; and he finds a force sufficient to confine his administration within certain bounds of equity, and determinate laws.
UNDER such governments, however, the love of equality is preposterous, and moderation itself is unnecessary. The object of every rank is precedency, and every order may display its advantages to their full extent. The sovereign himself owes great part of his authority to the sounding titles and the dazzling equipage which he exhibits in public. The subordinate ranks lay claim to importance by a like exhibition, and for that purpose carry in every instant the ensigns of their birth, or the ornaments of their fortune. What else could mark out to the individual the relation in which he stands to his fellow-subjects, or distinguish the numberless ranks that fill up the interval between the state of the sovereign and that of the peasant? Or what else could, in states of a great extent, preserve any appearance of order, among members disunited by ambition and interest, and destined to form a community, without the sense of any common concern?
MONARCHIES are generally found, where the state is enlarged in population and in territory, beyond the numbers and dimensions that are consistent with republican government. Together with these circumstances, great inequalities arise in the distribution of property; and the desire of preeminence becomes the predominant passion. Every rank would exercise its prerogative, and the sovereign is perpetually tempted to enlarge his own; if subjects, who despair of precedence, plead for equality, he is willing to favour their claims, and to aid them in procuring what must weaken a force with which he himself is, on many occasions, obliged to contend. In the event of such a policy, many invidious distinctions and grievances peculiar to monarchical government, may, in appearance, be removed; but the state of equality to which the subjects approach, is that of slaves, equally dependent on the will of a master, not that of freemen in a condition to maintain their own.
THE principle of monarchy, according to Montesquieu, is honour. Men may possess good qualities, elevation of mind, and fortitude; but the sense of equality, that will bear no incroachment on the personal rights of the meanest citizen; the indignant spirit, that will not court a protection, nor accept as a favour, what is due as a right; the public affection, which is founded on the neglect of personal considerations, are neither consistent with the preservation of the constitution, nor agreeable to the habits acquired in any station assigned to its members.
EVERY condition is possessed of peculiar dignity, and points out a propriety of conduct, which men of station are obliged to maintain. In the commerce of superiors and inferiors, it is the object of ambition, and of vanity, to refine on the advantages of rank; while, to facilitate the intercourse of polite society, it is the aim of good breeding, to disguise or reject them.
THOUGH the objects of consideration are rather the dignities of station than personal qualities; though friendship cannot be formed by mere inclination, nor alliances by the mere choice of the heart; yet men so united, and even without changing their order, are highly susceptible of moral excellence, or liable to many different degrees of corruption. They may act a vigorous part as members of the state, an amiable one in the commerce of private society; or they may yield up their dignity as citizens, even while they raise their arrogance and presumption as private parties.
IN monarchy, all orders of men derive their honours from the crown; but they continue to hold them as a right, and they exercise a subordinate power in the state, founded on the permanent rank they enjoy, and on the attachment of those whom they are appointed to lead and protect. Though they do not force themselves into national councils, and public assemblies, and though the name of senate is unknown; yet the sentiments they adopt must have weight with the sovereign; and every individual, in his separate capacity, in some measure, deliberates for his country. In whatever does not derogate from his rank, he has an arm ready to serve the community; in whatever alarms his sense of honour, he has aversions and dislikes, which amount to a negative on the will of his prince.
INTANGLED together by the reciprocal ties of dependence and protection, though not combined by the sense of a common interest, the subjects of monarchy, like those of republics, find themselves occupied as the members of an active society, and engaged to treat with their fellow-creatures on a liberal footing. If those principles of honour which save the individual from servility in his own person, or from becoming an engine of oppression in the hands of another, should fail; if they should give way to the maxims of commerce, to the refinements of a supposed philosophy, or to the misplaced ardours of a republican spirit; if they are betrayed by the cowardice of subjects, or subdued by the ambition of princes; what must become of the nations of Europe?
DESPOTISM is monarchy corrupted, in which a court and a prince in appearance remain, but in which every subordinate rank is destroyed; in which the subject is told, that he has no rights; that he cannot possess any property, nor fill any station, independent of the momentary will of his prince. These doctrines are founded on the maxims of conquest; they must be inculcated with the whip and the sword; and are best received under the terror of chains and imprisonment. Fear, therefore, is the principle which qualifies the subject to occupy his station: and the sovereign, who holds out the ensigns of terror so freely to others, has abundant reason to give this passion a principal place with himself. That tenure which he has devised for the rights of others, is soon applied to his own; and from his eager desire to secure, or to extend, his power, he finds it become, like the fortunes of his people, a creature of mere imagination and unsettled caprice.
WHILST we thus, with so much accuracy, can assign the ideal limits that may distinguish constitutions of government, we find them, in reality, both in respect to the principle and the form, variously blended together. In what society are not men classed by external distinctions, as well as personal qualities? In what state are they not actuated by a variety of principles; justice, honour, moderation, and fear? It is the purpose of science, not to disguise this confusion in its object, but, in the multiplicity and combination of particulars, to find the principal points which deserve our attention, and which, being well understood, save us from the embarrassment which the varieties of singular cases might otherwise create. In the same degree in which governments require men to act from principles of virtue, of honour, or of fear, they are more or less fully comprised under the heads of republic, monarchy, or despotism, and the general theory is more or less applicable to their particular case.
FORMS of government, in fact, mutually approach or recede by many, and often insensible gradations. Democracy, by admitting certain inequalities of rank, approaches to aristocracy. In popular, as well as aristocratical governments, particular men, by their personal authority, and sometimes by the credit of their family, have maintained a species of monarchical power. The monarch is limited in different degrees: even the despotic prince is only that monarch whose subjects claim the fewest privileges, or who is himself best prepared to subdue them by force. All these varieties are but steps in the history of mankind, and mark the fleeting and transient situations through which they have passed, while supported by virtue, or depressed by vice.
PERFECT democracy and despotism appear to be the opposite extremes to which constitutions of government are sometimes carried. Under the first, a perfect virtue is required; under the second, a total corruption is supposed: yet in point of mere form, there being nothing fixed in the ranks and distinctions of men, beyond the casual and temporary possession of power, societies easily pass from a condition in which every individual has an equal title to reign, into one in which they are equally destined to serve. The same qualities in both, courage, popularity, address, and military conduct, raise the ambitious to eminence. With these qualities, the citizen or the slave easily passes from the ranks to the command of an army, from an obscure to an illustrious station. In either, a single person may rule with unlimited sway; and in both, the populace may break down every barrier of order, and restraint of law.
IF we suppose that the equality established among the subjects of a despotic state, has inspired its members with confidence, intrepidity, and the love of justice; the despotic prince, having ceased to be an object of fear, must sink among the croud. If, on the contrary, the personal equality which is enjoyed by the members of a democratical state, should be valued merely as an equal pretension to the objects of avarice and ambition, the monarch may start up anew, and be supported by those who mean to share in his profits. When the covetous and mercenary assemble in parties, it is of no consequence under what leader they inlist, whether Caesar or Pompey; the hopes of rapine or power are the only motives from which they become attached to either.
IN the disorder of corrupted societies, the scene has been frequently changed from democracy to despotism, and from the last too, in its turn, to the first. From amidst the democracy of corrupt men, and from a scene of lawless consusion, the tyrant ascends a throne with arms reeking in blood. But his abuses, or his weaknesses, in the station which he has gained, in their turn, awaken and give way to the spirit of mutiny and revenge. The cries of murder and desolation, which in the ordinary course of military government terrified the subject in his private retreat, are carried through the vaults, and made to pierce the grates and iron doors of the seraglio. Democracy seems to revive in a scene of wild disorder and tumult: but both the extremes are but the transient fits of paroxysm or languor in a distempered state.
IF men be any where arrived at this measure of depravity, there appears no immediate hope of redress. Neither the ascendency of the multitude, nor that of the tyrant, will secure the administration of justice: neither the licence of mere tumult, nor the calm of dejection and servitude, will teach the citizen that he was born for candour and affection to his fellow-creatures. And if the speculative would find that habitual state of war which they are sometimes pleased to honour with the name of the state of nature, they will find it in the contest that subsists between the despotical prince and his subjects, not in the first approaches of a rude and simple tribe to the condition and the domestic arrangement of nations.
PART SECOND.
Of the History of Rude Nations.
SECTION I.
Of the Informations on this subject which are derived from Antiquity.
THE history of mankind is confined within a limited period, and from every quarter brings an intimation that human affairs have had a beginning. Nations, distinguished by the possession of arts, and the felicity of their political establishments, have been derived from a feeble original, and still preserve in their story the indications of a slow and gradual progress, by which this distinction was gained. The antiquities of every people, however diversified, and however disguised, contain the same information on this point.
IN sacred history, we find the parents of the species, as yet a single pair, sent forth to inherit the earth, and to force a subsistence for themselves amidst the briers and thorns which were made to abound on its surface. Their race, which was again reduced to a few, had to struggle with the dangers that await a weak and infant species; and after many ages elapsed, the most respectable nations took their rise from one or a few families that had pastured their flocks in the desert.
THE Grecians derive their own origin from unsettled tribes, whose frequent migrations are a proof of the rude and infant state of their communities; and whose warlike exploits, so much celebrated in story, only exhibit the struggles with which they disputed for the possession of a country they afterwards, by their talent for fable, by their arts, and their policy, rendered so famous in the history of mankind.
ITALY must have been divided into many rude and feeble cantons, when a band of robbers, as we are taught to consider them, found a secure settlement on the banks of the Tiber, and when a people, yet composed only of one sex, sustained the character of a nation. Rome, for many ages, saw, from her walls, on every side, the territory of her enemies, and found as little to check or to sti the weakness of her infant power, as she did afterwards to restrain the progress of her extended empire. Like a Tartar or a Scythian horde, which had pitched on a settlement, this nascent community was equal, if not superior, to every tribe in its neighbourhood; and the oak which has covered the field with its shade, was once a feeble plant in the nursery, and not to be distinguished from the weeds by which its early growth was restrained.
THE Gauls and the Germans are come to our knowledge with the marks of a similar condition; and the inhabitants of Britain, at the time of the first Roman invasions, resembled, in many things, the present natives of North America: they were ignorant of agriculture; they painted their bodies; and used for cloathing, the skins of beasts.
SUCH therefore appears to have been the commencement of history with all nations, and in such circumstances are we to look for the original character of mankind. The inquiry refers to a distant period, and every conclusion should build on the facts which are preserved for our use. Our method, notwithstanding, too frequently, is to rest the whole on conjecture; to impute every advantage of our nature to those arts which we ourselves possess; and to imagine, that a mere negation of all our virtues is a sufficient description of man in his original state. We are ourselves the supposed standards of politeness and civilization; and where our own features do not appear, we apprehend, that there is nothing which deserves to be known. But it is probable that here, as in many other cases, we are ill qualified, from our supposed knowledge of causes, to prognosticate effects, or to determine what must have been the properties and operations, even of our own nature, in the absence of those circumstances in which we have seen it engaged. Who would, from mere conjecture, suppose, that the naked savage would be a coxcomb and a gamester? that he would be proud and vain, without the distinctions of title and fortune? and that his principal care would be to adorn his person, and to find an amusement? Even if it could be supposed that he would thus share in our vices, and, in the midst of his forest, vie with the follies which are practised in the town; yet no one would be so bold as to affirm, that he would likewise, in any instance, excel us in talents and virtues; that he would have a penetration, a force of imagination and elocution, an ardour of mind, an affection and courage, which the arts, the discipline, and the policy of few nations would be able to improve. Yet these particulars are a part in the description which is delivered by those who have had opportunities of seeing mankind in their rudest condition: and beyond the reach of such testimony, we can neither safely take, nor pretend to give, information on the subject.
IF conjectures and opinions formed at a distance, have not sufficient authority in the history of mankind, the domestic antiquities of every nation must, for this very reason, be received with caution. They are, for most part, the mere conjectures or the fictions of subsequent ages, and even where at first they contained some resemblance of truth, they still vary with the imagination of those by whom they are transmitted, and in every generation receive a different form. They are made to bear the stamp of the times through which they have passed in the form of tradition, not of the ages to which their pretended descriptions relate. The information they bring, is not like the light reflected from a mirrour, which delineates the object from which it originally came; but, like rays that come broken and dispersed from an opaque or unpolished surface, only give the colours and features of the body from which they were last reflected.
WHEN traditionary fables are rehearsed by the vulgar, they bear the marks of a national character; and though mixed with absurdities, often raise the imagination, and move the heart: when made the materials of poetry, and adorned by the skill and the eloquence of an ardent and superior mind, they instruct the understanding, as well as engage the passions. It is only in the management of mere antiquaries, or stript of the ornaments which the laws of history forbid them to wear, that they become even unfit to amuse the fancy, or to serve any purpose whatever.
IT were absurd to quote the fable of the Iliad or Odyssey, the legends of Hercules, Theseus, or OEdipus, as authorities in matter of fact relating to the history of mankind; but they may, with great justice, be cited to ascertain what were the conceptions and sentiments of the age in which they were composed, or to characterise the genius of that people, with whose imaginations they were blended, and by whom they were fondly rehearsed and admired.
IN this manner fiction may be admitted to vouch for the genius of nations, while history has nothing to offer that is intitled to credit. The Greek fable accordingly conveying a character of its authors, throws light on an age of which no other record remains. The superiority of this people is indeed in no circumstance more evident than in the strain of their fictions, and in the story of those fabulous heroes, poets, and sages, whose tales, being invented or embellished by an imagination already filled with the subject for which the hero was celebrated, served to inflame that ardent enthusiasm with which this people afterwards proceeded in the pursuit of every national object.
IT was no doubt of great advantage to those nations, that their system of fable was original, and being already received in popular traditions, served to diffuse those improvements of reason, imagination, and sentiment, which were afterwards, by men of the finest talents, made on the fable itself, or conveyed in its moral. The passions of the poet pervaded the minds of the people, and the conceptions of men of genius being communicated to the vulgar, became the incentives of a national spirit.
A MYTHOLOGY borrowed from abroad, a literature founded on references to a strange country, and fraught with foreign allusions, are much more confined in their use: they speak to the learned alone; and though intended to inform the understanding, and to mend the heart, may, by being confined to a few, have an opposite effect: they may foster conceit on the ruins of common sense, and render what was, at least innocently, sung by the Athenian mariner at his oar, or rehearsed by the shepherd in attending his flock, an occasion of vice, and the foundation of pedantry and scholastic pride.
OUR very learning, perhaps, where its influence extends, serves, in some measure, to depress our national spirit. Our literature being derived from nations of a different race, who flourished at a time when our ancestors were in a stat of barbarity, and consequently when they were despised by those who had attained to the literary arts, has given rise to a humbling opinion, that we ourselves are the offspring of mean and contemptible nations, with whom the human imagination and sentiment had no effect, till the genius was in a manner inspired by examples, and directed by lessons that were brought from abroad. The Romans, from whom our accounts are chiefly derived, have admitted, in the rudeness of their own ancestors, a system of virtues, which all simple nations perhaps equally possess; a contempt of riches, love of their country, patience of hardship, danger, and fatigue. They have, notwithstanding, vilified our ancestors for having perhaps only resembled their own; at least, in the defect of their arts, and in the neglect of conveniencies which those arts are employed to procure.
IT is from the Greek and the Roman historians, however, that we have not only the most authentic and instructive, but even the most engaging, representations of the tribes from whom we descend. Those sublime and intelligent writers understood human nature, and could collect its features, and exhibit its characters in every situation. They were ill succeeded in this task by the early historians of modern Europe; who, generally bred to the profession of monks, and confined to the monastic life, applied themselves to record what they were pleased to denominate facts, while they suffered the productions of genius to perish, and were unable, either by the matter they selected, or the style of their compositions, to give any representation of the active spirit of mankind in any condition. With them, a narration was supposed to constitute history, whilst it did not convey any knowledge of men; and history itself was allowed to be complete, while, amidst the events and the succession of princes that are recorded in the order of time, we are left to look in vain for those characteristics of the understanding and the heart, which alone, in every human transaction, render the story either engaging or useful.
WE therefore willingly quit the history of our early ancestors, where Caesar and Tacitus have dropped them; and perhaps, till we come within the reach of what is connected with present affairs, and makes a part in the system on which we now proceed, have little reason to expect any subject to interest or inform the mind. We have no reason, however, from hence to conclude, that the matter itself was more barren, or the scene of human affairs less interesting, in modern Europe, than it has been on every stage where mankind were engaged to exhibit the movements of the heart, the efforts of generosity, magnanimity, and courage.
THE trial of what those ages contained, is not even fairly made, when men of genius and distinguished abilities, with the accomplishments of a learned and a polished age, collect the materials they have found, and, with the greatest success, connect the story of illiterate ages with transactions of a later date: it is difficult even for them, under the names which are applied in a new state of society, to convey a just apprehension of what mankind were in situations so different, and in times so remote from their own.
IN deriving from historians of this character the instruction which their writings are fit to bestow, we are frequently to forget the general terms that are employed, in order to collect the real manners of an age, from the minute circumstances that are occasionally presented. The titles of Royal and Noble were applicable to the families of Tarquin, Collatinus, and Cincinnatus; but Lucretia was employed in domestic industry with her maids, and Cincinnatus followed the plough. The dignities, and even the offices, of civil society, were known many ages ago, in Europe, by their present appellations; but we find in the history of England, that a king and his court being assembled to solemnize a festival, an outlaw, who had subsisted by robbery, came to share in the feast. The king himself arose to force this unworthy guest from the company, a scuffle ensued between them, and the king was killed Hume's History, ch. 8. p. 278.
. A chancellor and prime minister, whose magnificence and sumptuous furniture were the subject of admiration and envy, had his appartments covered every day in winter with clean straw and hay, and in summer with green rushes or boughs. Even the sovereign himself, in those ages, was provided with forage for his bed Ibid. p. 73.
. These picturesque features and characteristical strokes of the times, recal the imagination from the supposed distinction of monarch and subject, to that state of rough familiarity in which our ancestors lived, and under which they acted, with a view to objects, and on principles of conduct, which we seldom comprehend, when we are employed to record their transactions, or to study their characters.
THUCYDIDES, notwithstanding the prejudice of his country against the name of Barbarian, understood that it was in the customs of barbarous nations he was to study the more ancient manners of Greece.
THE Romans might have found an image of their own ancestors, in the representations they have given of ours: and if ever an Arab clan shall become a civilized nation, or any American tribe escape the poison which is administered by our traders of Europe, it may be from the relations of the present times, and the descriptions which are now given by travellers, that such a people, in after ages, may best collect the accounts of their origin. It is in their present condition, that we are to behold, as in a mirrour, the features of our own progenitors; and from thence we are to draw our conclusions with respect to the influence of situations, in which, we have reason to believe, our fathers were placed.
WHAT should distinguish a German or a Briton, in the habits of his mind or his body, in his manners or apprehensions, from an American, who, like him, with his bow and his dart, is left to traverse the forest; and in a like severe or variable climate, is obliged to subsist by the chace?
IF, in advanced years, we would form a just notion of our progress from the cradle, we must have recourse to the nursery, and from the example of those who are still in the period of life we mean to describe, take our representation of past manners, that cannot, in any other way, be recalled.
SECT. II.
Of rude nations prior to the Establishment of Property.
FROM one to the other extremity of America; from Kamschatka westward to the river Oby, and from the Northern sea, over that length of country, to the confines of China, of India, and Persia; from the Caspian to the Red sea, with little exception, and from thence over the inland continent and the western shores of Africa; we every where meet with nations on whom we bestow the appellations of barbarous or savage. That extensive tract of the earth, containing so great a variety of situation, climate, and soil, should, in the manners of its inhabitants, exhibit all the diversities which arise from the unequal influence of the sun, joined to a different nourishment and manner of life. Every question, however, on this subject is premature, till we have first endeavoured to form some general conception of our species in its rude state, and have learned to distinguish mere ignorance from dullness, and the want of arts from the want of capacity.
OF the nations who dwell in those, or any other of the less cultivated parts of the earth, some intrust their subsistence chiefly to hunting, fishing, or the natural produce of the soil. They have little attention to property, and scarcely any beginnings of subordination or government. Others having possessed themselves of herds, and depending for their provision on pasture, know what it is to be poor and rich. They know the relations of patron and client, of servant and master, and suffer themselves to be classed according to their measures of wealth. This distinction must create a material difference of character, and may furnish two separate heads, under which to consider the history of mankind in their rudest state; that of the savage, who is not yet acquainted with property; and that of the barbarian, to whom it is, although not ascertained by laws, a principal object of care and desire.
IT must appear very evident, that property is a matter of progress. It requires, among other particulars which are the effects of time, some method of defining possession. The very desire of it proceeds from experience; and the industry by which it is gained, or improved, requires such a habit of acting with a view to distant objects, as may overcome the present disposition either to sloth or to enjoyment. This habit is slowly acquired, and is in reality a principal distinction of nations in the advanced state of mechanic and commercial arts.
IN a tribe which subsists by hunting and fishing, the arms, the utensils, and the fur, which the individual carries, are to him the only subjects of property. The food of to morrow is yet wild in the forest, or hid in the lake; it cannot be appropriated before it is caught; and even then, being the purchase of numbers, who fish or hunt in a body, it accrues to the community, and is applied to immediate use, or becomes an accession to the stores of the public.
WHERE savage nations, as in most parts of America, mix with the practice of hunting some species of rude agriculture, they still follow, with respect to the soil and the fruits of the earth, the analogy of their principal object. As the men hunt, so the women labour together; and after they have shared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy the fruits of the harvest in common. The field in which they have planted, like the district over which they are accustomed to hunt, is claimed as a property by the nation, but is not parcelled in lots to its members. They go forth in parties to prepare the ground, to plant, and to reap. The harvest is gathered into the public granary, and from thence, at stated times, is divided into shares for the maintenance of separate families.
History of the Caribbees.
Even the returns of the market, when they trade with foreigners, are brought home to the stock of the nation Charlevoix.
.
AS the fur and the bow pertain to the individual, the cabbin and its utensils are appropriated to the family; and as the domestic cares are committed to the women, so the property of the household seems likewise to be vested in them. The children are considered as pertaining to the mother, with little regard to descent on the father's side. The males, before they are married, remain in the cabbin in which they are born; but after they have formed a new connection with the other sex, they change their habitation, and become an accession to the family in which they have found their wives. The hunter and the warrior are numbered by the matron as a part of her treasure; they are reserved for perils and trying occasions; and in the recess of public councils, in the intervals of hunting or war, are maintained by the cares of the women, and loiter about in mere amusement or sloth Lafitau.
.
WHILE one sex continue to value themselves chiefly on their courage, their talent for policy, and their warlike atchievments, this species of property which is bestowed on the other, is in reality a mark of subjection; not, as some writers alledge, of their having acquired an ascendant Ibid.
. It is the care and trouble of a subject with which the warrior does not chuse to be embarrassed. It is a servitude, and a continual toil, where no honours are won; and they whose province it is, are in fact the slaves and the helots of their country. If in this destination of the sexes, while the men continue to indulge themselves in the contempt of sordid and mercenary arts, the cruel establishment of slavery is for some ages deferred; if in this tender, though unequal alliance, the affections of the heart prevent the severities practised on slaves; we have in the custom itself, as perhaps in many other instances, reason to prefer the first suggestions of nature, to many of her after refinements.
IF mankind, in any instance, continue the article of property on the footing we have now represented, we may easily credit what is farther reported by travellers, that they admit of no distinctions of rank or condition; and that they have in fact no degree of subordination different from the distribution of function, which follows the differences of age, talents, and dispositions. Personal qualities give an ascendant in the midst of occasions which require their exertion; but in times of relaxation, leave no vestige of power or prerogative. A warrior who has led the youth of his nation to the slaughter of their enemies, or who has been foremost in the chace, returns upon a level with the rest of his tribe; and when the only business is to sleep, or to feed, can enjoy no preeminence; for he sleeps and he feeds no better than they.
WHERE no profit attends dominion, one party is as much averse to the trouble of perpetual command, as the other is to the mortification of perpetual submission:
I love victory, I love great actions, says Montesquieu in the character of Sylla;
but have no relish for the languid detail of pacific government, or the pageantry of high station.
He has touched perhaps what is a prevailing sentiment in the simplest state of society, when the weakness of motives suggested by interest, and the ignorance of any elevation not founded on merit, supplies the place of disdain.
THE character of the mind, however, in this state, is not founded on ignorance alone. Men are conscious of their equality, and are tenacious of its rights. Even when they follow a leader to the field, they cannot brook the pretensions to a formal command: they liften to no orders; and they come under no military engagements, but those of mutual fidelity, and equal ardour in the enterprise Charlevoix.
.
THIS description, we may believe, is unequally applicable to different nations, who have made unequal advances in the establishment of property. Among the Caribbees, and the other natives of the warmer climates in America, the dignity of chieftain is hereditary, or elective, and continued for life: the unequal distribution of property creates a visible subordination Wafer's account of the Isthmus of Darien.
. But among the Iroquois, and other nations of the temperate zone, the titles of magistrate and subject, of noble and mean, are as little known as those of rich and poor.
The old men, without being invested with any coercive power, employ their natural authority in advising or in prompting the resolutions of their tribe: the military leader is pointed out by the superiority of his manhood and valour: the statesman is distinguished only by the attention with which his counsel is heard; the warrior by the confidence with which the youth of his nation follow him to the field: and if their concerts must be supposed to constitute a species of political government, it is one to which no language of ours can be applied. Power is no more than the natural ascendency of the mind; the discharge of office no more than a natural exercise of the personal character; and while the community acts with an appearance of order, there is no sense of disparity in the breast of any of its members Colden's History of the Five Nations.
.
IN these happy, though informal, proceedings, where age alone gives a place in the council; where youth, ardour, and valour in the field, give a title to the station of leader; where the whole community is assembled on any alarming occasion, we may venture to say, that we have found the origin of the senate, the executive power, and the assembly of the people; institutions for which ancient legislators have been so much renowned. The senate among the Greeks, as well as the Latins, appears, from the etymology of its name, to have been originally composed of elderly men. The military leader at Rome, in a manner not unlike to that of the American warrior, proclaimed his levies, and the citizen prepared for the field, in consequence of a voluntary engagement. The suggestions of nature, which directed the policy of nations in the wilds of America, were followed before on the banks of the Eurotas and the Tyber; and Lycurgus and Romulus found the model of their institution where the members of every rude nation find the earliest mode of uniting their talents, and combining their forces.
AMONG the North-American nations, every individual is independent; but he is engaged by his affections and his habits in the cares of a family. Families, like so many separate tribes, are subject to no inspection or government from abroad; whatever passes at home, even bloodshed and murder, are only supposed to concern themselves. They are, in the mean time, the parts of a canton; the women assemble to plant their maize; the old men go to council; the huntsman and the warrior joins the youth of his village in the field. Many such cantons assemble to constitute a national council, or to execute a national enterprise. When the Europeans made their first settlements in America, six such nations had formed a league, had their amphyctiones or states-general, and, by the firmness of their union, and the ability of their councils, had obtained an ascendant from the mouth of the St. Laurence to that of the Missisippi Lafitau, Charlevoix, Colden, &c.
. They appeared to understand the objects of the confederacy, as well as those of the separate nation; they studied a balance of power; the statesman of one country watched the designs and proceedings of another; and occasionally threw the weight of his tribe into a different scale. They had their alliances and their treaties, which, like the nations of Europe, they maintained, or they broke, upon reasons of state; and remained at peace from a sense of necessity or expediency, and went to war upon any emergence of provocation or jealousy.
THUS, without any settled form of government, or any bond of union, but what resembled more the suggestion of instinct, than the invention of reason, they conducted themselves with the concert, and the force, of nations. Foreigners, without being able to discover who is the magistrate, or in what manner the senate is composed, always find a council with whom they may treat, or a band of warriors with whom they may fight. Without police or compulsory laws, their domestic society is conducted with order, and the absence of vicious dispositions, is a better security than any public establishment for the suppression of crimes.
DISORDERS, however, sometimes occur, especially in times of debauch, when the immoderate use of intoxicating liquors, to which they are extremely addicted, suspends the ordinary caution of their demeanour, and inflaming their violent passions, engages them in quarrels and bloodshed. When a person is slain, his murderer is seldom called to an immediate account: but he has a quarrel to sustain with the family and the friends; or, if a stranger, with the countrymen of the deceased; sometimes even with his own nation at home, if the injury committed be of a kind to alarm the society. The nation, the canton, or the family, endeavour, by presents, to atone for the offence of any of their members; and, by pacifying the parties aggrieved, endeavour to prevent what alarms the community more than the first disorder, the subsequent effects of revenge and animosity Lafitau.
. The shedding of blood, however, if the guilty person remain where he has committed the crime, seldom escapes unpunished: the friend of the deceased knows how to disguise, though not to suppress his resentment; and even after many years have elapsed, is sure to repay the injury that was done to his kindred or his house.
THESE considerations render them cautious and circumspect, put them on their guard against their passions, and give to their ordinary deportment an air of phlegm and composure superior to what is possessed among polished nations. They are, in the mean time, affectionate in their carriage, and in their conversations pay a mutual attention and regard, says Charlevoix, more tender and more engaging, than what we profess in the ceremonial of polished societies.
THIS writer has observed, that the nations among whom he travelled in North America, never mentioned acts of generosity or kindness under the notion of duty. They acted from affection, as they acted from appetite, without regard to its consequences. When they had done a kindness, they had gratified a desire; the business was finished, and it passed from the memory. When they received a favour, it might, or it might not, prove the occasion of friendship: if it did not, the parties appeared to have no apprehensions of gratitude, as a duty by which the one was bound to make a return, or the other intitled to reproach the person who had failed in his part. The spirit with which they give or receive presents, is the same which Tacitus observed among the ancient Germans: They delight in them, but do not consider them as matter of obligation Muneribus gaudent, sed nec data imputant, noc acceptis obligantur.
. Such gifts are of little consequence, except when employed as the seal of a bargain or treaty.
IT was their favourite maxim, That no man is naturally indebted to another; that he is not, therefore, obliged to bear with any imposition, or unequal treatment Charlevoix.
. Thus, in a principle apparently fullen and inhospitable, they have discovered the foundation of justice, and observe its rules with a steadiness and candour which no cultivation has been found to improve. The freedom which they give in what relates to the supposed duties of kindness and friendship, serves only to engage the heart more entirely, where it is once possessed with affection. We love to chuse our object without any restraint, and we consider kindness itself as a talk, when the duties of friendship are exacted by rule. We therefore, by our demand for attentions, rather corrupt than improve the system of morality; and by our exactions of gratitude, and our frequent proposals to inforce its observance, we only shew, that we have mistaken its nature; we only give symptoms of that growing sensibility to interest, from which we measure the expediency of friendship and generosity itself; and by which we would introduce the spirit of traffic into the commerce of affection. In consequence of this proceeding, we are often obliged to decline a favour with the same spirit that we throw off a servile engagement, or reject a bribe. To the unrefining savage every favour is welcome, and every present received without reserve or reflection.
THE love of equality, and the love of justice, were originally the same: and although, by the constitution of different societies, unequal privileges are bestowed on their members; and although justice itself requires a proper regard to be paid to such privileges; yet he who has forgotten that men were originally equal, easily degenerates into a slave or in the capacity of a master, is not to be trusted with the rights of his fellow-creatures. This happy principle gives to the mind its sense of independence, renders it indifferent to the favours which are in the power of other men, checks it in the commission of injuries, and leaves the heart open to the affections of generosity and kindness. It gives to the untutored American that air of candour, and of regard to the welfare of others, which, in some degree, softens the arrogant pride of his carriage, and in times of confidence and peace, without the assistance of government or law, renders the approach and commerce of strangers secure.
AMONG this people, the foundations of honour are eminent abilities and great fortitude; not the distinctions of equipage and fortune: The talents in esteem are such as their situation leads them to employ, the exact knowledge of a country, and stratagem in war. On these qualifications, a captain among the Carribbes underwent an examination. When a new leader was to be chosen, a scout was sent forth to traverse the forests which led to the enemy's country, and, upon his return the candidate was desired to find the track in which he had travelled. A brook, or a fountain, was named to him on the frontier, and he was desired to find the nearest path to a particular station, and to plant a stake in the place Latfiau.
. They can accordingly, trace a wild beast, or the human foot, over many leagues of a pathless forest, and find their way across a woody and uninhabited continent, by means of refined observations, which escape the traveller who has been accustomed to different aids. They steer in slender cannoes, across stormy seas, with a dexterity equal to that of the most experienced Pilot Charlevoix.
. They ca y a penetrating eye for the thoughts and intentions of those with whom they have to deal; and when they mean to deceive, they cover themselves with arts which the most subtile can seldom elude. They harangue in their public councils with a nervous and figurative elocution; and conduct themselves in the management of their treaties with a perfect discernment of their national interests.
THUS being able masters in the detail of their own affairs, and well qualified to acquit themselves on particular occasions, they study no science, and go in pursuit of no general principles. They even seem incapable of attending to any distant consequences, beyond those they have experienced in hunting or war. They intrust the provision of every season to itself; consume the fruits of the earth in summer; and, in winter, are driven in quest of their prey, through woods, and over deserts covered with snow. They do not form in one hour those maxims which may prevent the errors of the next; and they fail in those apprehensions, which, in the intervals of passion, produce ingenuous shame, compassion, remorse, or a command of appetite. They are seldom made to repent of any violence; nor is a person, indeed, thought accountable in his sober mood, for what he did in the heat of a passion, or in a time of debauch.
THEIR superstitions are groveling and mean: and did this happen among rude nations alone, we could not sufficiently admire the effects of politeness; but it is a subject on which few nations are intitled to censure their neighbours. When we have considered the superstitions of one people, we find little variety in those of another. They are but a repetition of similar weaknesses and absurdities, derived from a common source, a perplexed apprehension of invisible agents, that are supposed to guide all precarious events to which human foresight cannot extend.
IN what depends on the known or the regular course of nature, the mind trusts to itself; but in strange and uncommon situations, it is the dupe of its own perplexity, and, instead of relying on its prudence or courage, has recourse to divination, and a variety of observances, that, for being irrational, are always the more revered. Superstition being founded in doubts and anxiety, is fostered by ignorance and mystery. Its maxims, in the mean time, are not always confounded with those of common life; nor does its weakness or folly always prevent the watchfulness, penetration, and courage, men are accustomed to employ in the management of common affairs. A Roman consulting futurity by the pecking of birds, or a King of Sparta inspecting the intrails of a beast, Mithridates consulting his women on the interpretation of his dreams, are examples sufficient to prove, that a childish imbecility on this subject is consistent with the greatest military and political talents.
CONFIDENCE in the effect of superstitious observances is not peculiar to any age or nation. Few, even of the accomplished Greeks and Romans, were able to shake off this weakness. In their case, it was not removed by the highest measures of civilization. It has yielded only to the light of true religion, or to the study of nature, by which we are led to substitute a wise providence operating by physical causes, in the place of phantoms that terrify or amuse the ignorant.
THE principal point of honour among the rude nations of America, as indeed in every instance where mankind are not greatly corrupted, is sortitude. Yet their way of maintaining this point of honour, is very different from that of the nations of Europe. Their ordinary method of making war is by ambuscade; and they strive, by over-reaching an enemy, to commit the greatest slaughter, or to make the greatest number of prisoners, with the least hazard to themselves. They deem it a folly to expose their own persons in assaulting an enemy, and do not rejoice in victories which are stained with the blood of their own people. They do not value themselves, as in Europe, on defying their enemy upon equal terms. They even boast, that they approach like foxes, or that they fly like birds, not less than that they devour like lions. In Europe, to fall in battle is accounted an honour; among the natives of America, it is reckoned disgraceful Charlevoix.
. They reserve their fortitude for the trials they abide when attacked by surprise, or when fallen into their enemies hands; and when they are obliged to maintain their own honour, and that of their nation, in the midst of torments that require efforts of patience more than of valour.
ON these occasions, they are far from allowing it to be supposed that they wish to decline the conflict. It is held infamous to avoid it, even by a voluntary death; and the greatest affront which can be offered to a prisoner, is to refuse him the honours of a man, in the manner of his execution:
With-hold, says an old man, in the midst of his torture, the stabs of your knife; rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your allies, from beyond the seas, may learn to suffer like men Colden.
.
With terms of defiance, the victim, in those solemn trials, commonly excites the animosity of his tormentors, as well as his own; and whilst we suffer for human nature, under the effect of its errors, we must admire its force.
THE people with whom this practice prevailed, were commonly desirous of repairing their own losses, by adopting prisoners of war into their families: and even in the last moment, the hand which was raised to torment, frequently gave the sign of adoption, by which the prisoner became the child or the brother of his enemy, and came to share in all the privileges of a citizen. In their treatment of those who suffered, they did not appear to be guided by principles of hatred or revenge: they observed the point of honour in applying as well as in bearing their torments; and, by a strange kind of affection and tenderness, were directed to be most cruel where they intended the highest respect: the coward was put to immediate death by the hands of women: the valiant was supposed to be intitled to all the trials of fortitude that men could invent or employ:
It gave me joy, says an old man to his captive, that so gallant a youth was allotted to my share: I proposed to have placed you on the couch of my nephew, who was slain by your countrymen; to have transferred all my tenderness to you; and to have solaced my age in your company: but maimed and mutilated as you now appear, death is better than life: prepare yourself therefore to die like a man Charlevoix.
.
IT is perhaps with a view to these exhibitions, or rather in admiration of fortitude, the principle from which they proceed, that the Americans are so attentive, in their earliest years, to harden their nerves Ib.
This writer says, that he has seen a boy and a girl, having bound their naked arms together, place a burning coal between them, to try who would shake it off first.
. The children are taught to vie with each other in bearing the sharpest torments; the youth are admitted into the class of manhood, after violent proofs of their patience; and leaders are put to the test, by famine, burning, and suffocation Lafitau.
.
IT might be apprehended, that among rude nations, where the means of subsistence are procured with so much difficulty, the mind could never raise itself above the consideration of this subject; and that man would, in this condition, give examples of the meanest and most mercenary spirit. The reverse, however is true. Directed in this particular by the desires of nature, men, in their simplest state, attend to the objects of appetite no further than appetite requires; and their desires of fortune extend no further than the meal which gratifies their hunger: they apprehend no superiority of rank in the possession of wealth, such as might inspire any habitual principle of covetousness, vanity, or ambition: they can apply to no task that engages no immediate passion, and take pleasure in no occupation that affords no dangers to be braved, and no honours to be won.
IT was not among the ancient Romans alone that commercial arts, or a sordid mind, were held in contempt. A like spirit prevails in every rude and independent society.
I am a warrior, and not a merchant, said an American to the governor of Canada, who proposed to give him goods in exchange for some prisoners he had taken;
your cloaths and utensils do not tempt me; but my prisoners are now in your power, and you may seize them: if you do, I must go forth and take more prisoners, or perish in the attempt; and if that chance should besal me, I shall die like a man; but remember that our nation will charge you as the cause of my death Charlevoix.
.
With these apprehensions, they have an elevation, and a stateliness of carriage, which the pride of nobility, where it is most revered by polished nations, seldom bestows.
THEY are attentive to their persons, and employ much time, as well as endure great pain, in the methods they take to adorn their bodies, to give the permanent stains with which they are coloured, or preserve the paint, which they are perpetually repairing, in order to appear with advantage.
THEIR aversion to every sort of employment which they hold to be mean, makes them pass great part of their time in idleness or sleep; and a man who, in pursuit of a wild beast, or to surprise his enemy, will traverse a hundred leagues on snow, will not, to procure his food, submit to any species of ordinary labour.
Strange, says Tacitus, that the same person should be so much averse to repose, and so much addicted to sloth.
GAMES of hazard are not the invention of polished ages; men of curiosity have looked for their origin, in vain, among the monuments of an obscure antiquity; and it is probable that they belonged to times too remote and too rude even for the conjectures of antiquarians to reach. The very savage brings his furs, his utensils, and his beads, to the hazard-table: he finds here the passions and agitations which the applications of a tedions industry could not excite: and while the throw is depending, he tears his hair, and beats his breast, with a rage which the more accomplished gamester has sometimes learned to repress: he often quits the party naked, and stripped of all his possessions; or where slavery is in use, stakes his freedom to have one chance more to recover his former loss Tacitus, Lafitau, Charlevoix.
.
WITH all these infirmities, vices, or respectable qualities, belonging to the human species in its rudest state; the love of society, friendship, and public affection, penetration, eloquence, and courage, appear to have been its original properties, not the subsequent effects of device or invention. If mankind are qualified to improve their manners, the subject was furnished by nature; and the effect of cultivation is not to inspire the sentiments of tenderness and generosity, nor to bestow the principal constituents of a respectable character, but to obviate the casual abuses of passion; and to prevent a mind, which feels the best dispositions in their greatest force, from being at times likewise the sport of brutal appetite and ungovernable violence.
WERE Lycurgus employed anew to operate on the materials we have described, he would find them, in many important particulars, prepared by nature herself for his use. His equality in matters of property being already established, he would have no faction to apprehend from the opposite interests of the poor and the rich; his senate, his assembly of the people, is constituted; his discipline is in some measure adopted; and the place of his helots is supplied by the task allotted to one of the sexes. With all these advantages, he would still have had a very important lesson for civil society to teach, that by which a few learn to command, and the many are taught to obey: he would have all his precautions to take against the future intrusion of mercenary arts, the admiration of luxury, and the passion for interest: he would still perhaps have a more difficult task than any of the former, in teaching his citizens the command of appetite, and an indifference to pleasure, as well as a contempt of pain; in teaching them to maintain, in the field, the formality of uniform precautions, and as much to avoid being themselves surprised, as they endeavour to surprise their enemy.
FOR want of these advantages, rude nations in general, though they are patient of hardship and fatigue, though they are addicted to war, and are qualified by their stratagem and valour to throw terror into the armies of a more regular enemy; yet, in the course of a continued struggle, always yield to the superior arts, and the discipline of more civilized nations. Hence the Romans were able to over-run the provinces of Gaul, Germany, and Britain; and hence the Europeans have a growing ascendency over the nations of Africa and America.
ON the credit of a superiority which certain nations possess, they think that they have a claim to dominion; and even Caesar appears to have forgotten what were the passions, as well as the rights of mankind, when he complained, that the Britons, after having sent him a submissive message to Gaul, perhaps to prevent his invasion, still pretended to fight for their liberties, and to oppose his descent on their island Caesar questus, quod quum ultro in continentem legatis missis pacem a se petissent, bellum sine causa intulissent.
Lib. 4.
.
THERE is not, perhaps, in the whole description of mankind a circumstance more remarkable than that mutual contempt and aversion which nations, under a different state of commercial arts, bestow on each other. Addicted to their own pursuits, and considering their own condition as the standard of human felicity, all nations pretend to the preference, and in their practice give sufficient proof of sincerity. Even the savage still less than the citizen, can be made to quit that manner of life in which he is trained: he loves that freedom of mind which will not be bound to any task, and which owns no superior: however tempted to mix with polished nations, and to better his fortune, the first moment of liberty brings him back to the woods again; he droops and he pines in the streets of the populous city; he wanders dissatisfied over the open and the cultivated field; he seeks the frontier and the forest, where, with a constitution prepared to undergo the hardships and the difficulties of the situation, he enjoys a delicious freedom from care, and a seducing society, where no rules of behaviour are prescribed, but the simple dictates of the heart.
SECT. III.
Of Rude Nations under the Impressions of Property and Interest.
IT was a proverbial imprecation in use among the hunting nations on the confines of Siberia, That their enemy might be obliged to live like a Tartar, and be seized with the folly of breeding and attending his cattle Abulgaze's Genealogical History of the Tartars.
. Nature, it seems, in their apprehension, by storing the woods and the desert with game, rendered the task of the herdsman unnecessary, and left to man only the trouble of selecting and of seizing his prey.
THE indolence of mankind, or rather their aversion to any application in which they are not engaged by immediate instinct and passion, retards their progress in extending the notion of property. It has been found, however, even while the means of subsistence are left in common, and the stock of the public is yet undivided, that this notion is already applied to different subjects; as the sur and the bow pertain to the individual; the cottage, with its furniture, are appropiated to the family.
WHEN the parent begins to desire a better provision for his children than is sound under the promiscuous management of many copartners, when he has applied his labour and his skill apart, he aims at an exclusive possession, and seeks the property of the soil, as well as the use of its fruits.
WHEN the individual no longer finds among his associates the same inclination to commit every subject to public use, he is seized with concern for his personal fortune; and is alarmed by the cares which every person entertains for himself. He is urged as much by emulation and jealousy, as by the sense of necessity. He suffers considerations of interest to rest on his mind, and when every present appetite is sufficiently gratified, he can act with a view to futurity, or rather finds an object of vanity in having amassed what is become a subject of competition, and a matter of universal esteem. Upon this motive, where violence is restrained, he can apply his hand to lucrative arts, confine himself to a tedious task, and wait with patience for the distant returns of his labour.
THUS mankind acquire industry by many and by slow degrees. They are taught to regard their interest; they are taught to abstain from unlawful profits; they are secured in the possession of what they fairly obtain; and by these methods the habits of the labourer, the mechanic, and the trader, are gradualiy formed. A hoard, collected from the simple productions of nature, or a herd of cattle, are, in every rude nation, the first species of wealth. The circumstances of the soil, and the climate, determine whether the inhabitant shall apply himself chiefly to agriculture or pasture; whether he shall fix his residence, or be moving continually about with all his possessions.
IN the west of Europe; in America, from south to north, with a few exceptions; in the torrid zone, and every where within the warmer climates; mankind have generally applied themselves to some species of agriculture, and have been disposed to settlement. In the east and the north of Asia, they depended entirely on their herds, and were perpetually shifting their ground in search of new pasture. The arts which pertain to settlement have been practised, and variously cultivated, by the inhabitants of Europe. Those which are consistent with perpetual migration, have, from the earliest accounts of history, remained nearly the same with the Scythian or Tartar. The tent pitched on a moveable carriage, the horse applied to every purpose of labour, and of war, of the dairy, and of the butcher's stall, from the earliest to the latest accounts, have made up the riches and equipage of this wandering people.
BUT in whatever way rude nations subsist, there are certain points in which, under the first impressions of property, they nearly agree. Homer either lived with a people in this stage of their progress, or found himself engaged to exhibit their character. Tacitus has made them the subject of a particular treatise; and if this be an aspect under which mankind deserve to be viewed, it must be confessed, that we have singular advantages in collecting their features. The portrait has already been drawn by the ablest hands, and gives, at one view, in the writings of these celebrated authors, whatever has been scattered in the relations of historians, or whatever we have opportunities to observe in the actual manners of men, who still remain in a similar state.
IN passing from the condition we have described, to this we have at present in view, mankind still retain many parts of their earliest character. They are still averse to labour, addicted to war, admirers of fortitude, and, in the language of Tacitus, more lavish of their blood than of their sweat Pigrum quin immo et iners videtur, sudore acquirere quod possis sanguine parare.
. They are fond of fantastic ornaments in their dress, and endeavour to fill up the listless intervals of a life addicted to violence, with hazardous sports, and with games of chance. Every servile occupation they commit to women or slaves. But we may apprehend, that the individual having now found a separate interest, the bands of society must become less firm, and domestic disorders more frequent. The members of any community, being distinguished among themselves by unequal shares in the distribution of property, the ground of a permanent and palpable subordination is laid.
THESE particulars accordingly take place among mankind, in passing from the savage to what may be called the barbarous state. Members of the same community enter into quarrels of competition or revenge. They unite in following leaders, who are distinguished by their fortunes, and by the lustre of their birth. They join the desire of spoil with the love of glory; and from an opinion, that what is acquired by force, justly pertains to the victor, they become hunters of men, and bring every contest to the decision of the sword.
EVERY nation is a band of robbers, who prey without restraint, or remorse, on their neighbours. Cattle, says Achilles, may be seized in every field; and the coasts of the Aegean sea were accordingly pillaged by the heroes of Homer, for no other reason, than because those heroes chose to possess themselves of the brass and iron, the cattle, the slaves, and the women, which were found among the nations around them.
A Tartar mounted on his horse, is an animal of prey, who only inquires where cattle are to be found, and how far he must go to possess them. The monk, who had fallen under the displeasure of Mangu Chan, made his peace, by promising, that the Pope, and the Christian princes, should make a surrender of all their herds Rubruquis.
.
A similar spirit reigned, without exception, in all the barbarous nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The antiquities of Greece and Italy, and the fables of every ancient poet, contain examples of its force. It was this spirit that brought our ancestors first into the provinces of the Roman empire; and that afterward, more perhaps than their reverence for the cross, led them to the East, to share with the Tartars in the spoils of the Saracen empire.
FROM the descriptions contained in the last section, we may incline to believe, that mankind, in their simplest state, are on the eve of erecting republics. Their love of equality, their habit of assembling in public councils, and their zeal for the tribe to which they belong, are qualifications that fit them to act under that species of government; and they seem to have but a few steps to make, in order to reach its establishment. They have only to define the numbers of which their councils shall consist, and to settle the forms of their meeting: They have only to bestow a permanent authority for repressing disorders, and to enact a few rules in favour of that justice they have already acknowledged, and from inclination so strictly observe.
BUT these steps are far from being so easily made, as they appear on a slight or a transient view. The resolution of chusing, from among their equals, the magistrate to whom they give from thenceforward a right to controul their own actions, is far from the thoughts of simple men; and no eloquence, perhaps, could make them adopt this measure, or give them any sense of its use.
EVEN after nations have chosen a military leader, they do not intrust him with any species of civil authority. The captain, among the Caribbees, did not pretend to decide in domestic disputes; the terms jurisdiction and government were unknown in their tongue History of the Caribbees.
.
BEFORE this important change is admitted, men must be accustomed to the distinction of ranks; and before they are sensible that subordination is matter of choice, must arrive at unequal conditions by chance. In desiring property, they only mean to secure their subsistence: but the brave who lead in war, have likewise the largest share in its spoils. The eminent are fond of devising hereditary honours; and the multitude, who admire the parent, are ready to extend their esteem to his offspring.
POSSESSIONS descend, and the lustre of family grows brighter with age. Hercules, who perhaps was an eminent warrior, became a god with posterity, and his race was set apart for royalty and sovereign power. When the distinctions of fortune and those of birth are conjoined, the chieftain enjoys a pre-eminence, as well at the feast as in the field. His followers take their place in subordinate stations; and instead of considering themselves as parts of a community, they rank as the followers of a chieftain, and take their designation from the name of their leader. They find a new object of public affection, in defending his person, and in supporting his station; they lend of their substance to form his estate; they are guided by his smiles and his frowns; and court, as the highest distinction, a share in the feast which their own contributions have furnished.
AS the former state of mankind seemed to point at democracy, this seems to exhibit the rudiments of monarchical government. But it is yet far short of that establishment which is known in after ages by the name of monarchy.
The distinction between the leader and the follower, the prince and the subject, is still but imperfectly marked: their pursuits and occupations are not different; their minds are not unequally cultivated; they feed from the same dish; they sleep together on the ground; the children of the king, as well as those of the subject, are employed in tending the flock; and the keeper of the swine was a prime counsellor at the court of Ulysses.
THE chieftain, sufficiently distinguished from his tribe, to excite their admiration, and to flatter their vanity by a supposed affinity to his noble descent, is the object of their veneration, not of their envy: he is considered as the common bond of connection, not as their common master; is foremost in danger, and has a principal share in their troubles: his glory is placed in the number of his attendants, in his superior magnanimity and valour; that of his followers, in being ready to shed their blood in his service Tacitus de moribus Germanorum.
.
THE frequent practice of war tends to strengthen the bands of society, and the practice of depredation itself engages men in trials of mutual attachment and courage. What threatened to ruin and overset every good disposition in the human breast, what seemed to banish justice from the societies of men, tends to unite the species in clans and fraternities; formidable, indeed, and hostile to one another, but in the domestic society of each, faithful, disinterested, and generous. Frequent dangers, and the experience of fidelity and valour, awaken the love of those virtues, render them a subject of admiration, and endear their possessors.
ACTUATED by great passions, the love of glory, and the desire of victory; roused by the menaces of an enemy, or stung with revenge; in suspense between the prospects of ruin or conquest, the barbarian spends every moment of relaxation in the indulgence of sloth. He cannot descend to the pursuits of industry or mechanical labour: the beast of prey is a sluggard; the hunter and the warrior sleeps, while women or slaves are made to toil for his bread. But shew him a quarry at a distance, he is bold, impetuous, artful, and rapacious: no bar can withstand his violence, and no fatigue can allay his activity.
EVEN under this description mankind are generous and hospital to strangers, as well as kind, affectionate, and gentle, in their domestic society Jean du Plan Carpen. Rubruquis, Caesar, Tacit.
. Friendship and enmity are to them terms of the greatest importance: they mingle not their functions together; they have singled out their enemy, and they have chosen their friend. Even in depredation, the principal object is glory; and spoil is considered as a badge of victory. Nations and tribes are their prey: the solitary traveller, by whom they can acquire only the reputation of generosity, is suffered to pass unhurt, or is treated with splendid munificence.
THOUGH distinguished into small cantons under their several chieftains, and for the most part separated by jealousy and animosity; yet when pressed by wars and formidable enemies, they sometimes unite in greater bodies. Like the Greeks in their expedition to Troy, they follow some remarkable leader, and compose a kingdom of many separate tribes. But such coalitions are merely occasional; and even during their continuance, more resemble republic than monarchy. The inferior chieftains reserve their importance, and intrude, with an air of equality, into the councils of their leader, as the people of their several clans commonly intrude upon them Kolbe; Description of the Cape of Good Hope.
. Upon what motive indeed could we suppose, that men who live together in the greatest familiarity, and amongst whom the distinctions of rank are so obscurely marked, would resign their personal sentiments and inclinations, or pay an implicit submission to a leader who can neither overawe nor corrupt?
MILITARY force must be employed to extort, or the hire of the venal to buy, that engagement which the Tartar comes under to his prince, when he promises, That he will go where he shall be commanded; that he will come when he shall be called; that he will kill whoever is pointed out to him; and for the future, that he will consider the voice of the King as a sword Simon de St. Quintin.
.
THESE are the terms to which even the stubborn heart of the barbarian has been reduced, in consequence of a despotism he himself had established; and men have, in that low state of the commercial arts, in Europe, as well as in Asia, tasted of political slavery. When interest prevails in every breast, the sovereign and his party cannot escape the infection: he employs the force with which he is intrusted, to turn his people into a property, and to command their possessions for his profit or pleasure. If riches are by any people made the standard of good and of evil, let them beware of the powers they intrust to their prince.
With the Suiones, says Tacitus, riches are in high esteem; and this people are accordingly disarmed, and reduced to slavery De moribus Germanorum.
.
IT is in this woful condition that mankind, being slavish, interested, insidious, deceitful, and bloody, bear marks, if not of the least curable, surely of the most lamentable, sort of corruption Chardin's Travels.
. Among them, war is the mere practice of rapine, to enrich the individual; commerce is turned into a system of snares and impositions; and government by turns oppressive or weak.
IT were happy for the human race, when guided by interest, and not governed by laws, that being split into nations of a moderate extent, they found in every canton some natural bar to its further enlargement, and met with occupation enough in maintaining their independence, without being able to extend their dominion.
THERE is not disparity of rank, among men in rude ages, sufficient to give their communities the form of legal monarchy; and in a territory of considerable extent, when united under one head, the warlike and turbulent spirit of its inhabitants seems to require the bridle of despotism and military force. Where any degree of freedom remains, the powers of the prince are, as they were in most of the rude monarchies of Europe, extremely precarious, and depend chiefly on his personal character: where, on the contrary, the powers of the prince are above the control of his people, they are likewise above the restrictions of law. Rapacity and terror become the predominant motives of conduct, and form the character of the only parties into which mankind are divided, that of the oppressor, and that of the oppressed.
THIS calamity threatened Europe for ages, under the conquest and settlement of its new inhabitants See Hume's history of the Tudors.There seemed to be nothing wanting to establish a perfect despotism in that house, but a few regiments of troops under the command of the crown.
. It has actually taken place in Asia, where similar conquests have been made; and even without the ordinary opiates of effeminacy, or a servile weakness, founded on luxury, it has surprised the Tartar on his wain, in the rear of his herds. Among this people, in the heart of a great continent, bold and enterprising warriors arose: they subdued, by surprise, or superior abilities, the contiguous hords; they gained, in their progress, accessions of numbers and of strength; and, like a torrent increasing as it descends, became too strong for any bar that could be opposed to their passage. The conquering tribe, during a succession of ages, furnished the prince with his guards; and while they themselves were allowed to share in its spoils, were the voluntary tools of oppression. In this manner has despotism and corruption made their way into regions so much renowned for the wild freedom of nature: a power which was the terror of every effeminate province is disarmed, and the nursery of nations is itself gone to decay See the History of the Huns.
.
WHERE rude nations escape this calamity, they require the exercise of foreign wars to maintain domestic peace: when no enemy appears from abroad, they have leisure for private feuds, and employ that courage in their dissensions at home, which, in time of war, is employed in defence of their country.
AMONG the Gauls, says Caesar, there are subdivisions, not only in every nation, and in every district and village, but almost in every house, every one must fly to some patron for protection De Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
.
In this distribution of parties, not only the feuds of clans, but the quarrels of families, even the differences and competitions of individuals, are decided by force. The sovereign, when unassisted by superstition, endeavours in vain to employ his jurisdiction, or to procure a submission to the decisions of law. By a people who are accustomed to owe their possessions to violence, and who despise fortune itself without the reputation of courage, no umpire is admitted but the sword. Scipio offered his arbitration to terminate the competition of two Spaniards in a disputed succession:
That, said they, we have already refused to our relations: we do not submit our difference to the judgement of men; and even among the gods, we appeal to Mars alone Livy.
IT is well known that the nations of Europe carried this mode of proceeding to a degree of formality unheard of in other parts of the world: the civil and criminal judge could, in most cases, do no more than appoint the list, and leave the parties to decide their cause by the combat: they apprehended that the victor had a verdict of the gods in his favour: and when they dropped in any instance this extraordinary form of process, they substituted in its place some other more capricious appeal to chance; in which they likewise thought that the judgement of the gods was declared.
THE fierce nations of Europe were even fond of the combat as an exercise and a sport. In the absence of real quarrels, companions challenged each other to a trial of skill, in which one of them frequently perished. When Spicio celebrated the funeral of his father and his uncle, the Spaniards came in pairs to fight, and, by a public exhibition of their duels, to increase the solemnity Ib. lib. 3.
.
IN this wild and lawless state, where the effects of true religion would have been so desireable, and so salutary, superstition frequently disputes the ascendant even with the admiration of valour; and an order of men, like the Druids among the ancient Gauls and Britons Caesar.
, or some pretender to divination, as at the Cape of Good Hope, finds, in the credit which is paid to his sorcery, a way to the possession of power: his magic wand comes in competition with the sword itself; and, in the manner of the Druids, gives the first rudiments of civil government to some, or, like the supposed descendent of the sun among the Natchez, and the Lama among the Tartars, to others, an early taste of despotism and absolute slavery.
WE are generally at a loss to conceive how mankind can subsist under customs and manners extremely different from our own; and we are apt to exaggerate the misery of barbarous times, by an imagination of what we ourselves should suffer in a situation to which we are not accustomed. But every age hath its consolations, as well as its sufferings Priscus, when employed on an embassy to Attila, was accosted in Greek, by a person who wore the dress of a Scythian. Having expressed surprise, and being desirous to know the cause of his stay in so wild a company, was told, that this Greek had been a captive, and for some time a slave, till he obtained his liberty in reward of some remarkable action.
I live more happily here, says he, than ever I did under the Roman government: for they who live with the Scythians, if they can endure the fatigues of war, have nothing else to molest them; they enjoy their possessions undisturbed: whereas you are continually a prey to foreign enemies, or to bad government; you are forbid to carry arms in your own defence; you suffer from the remissness and ill conduct of those who are appointed to protect you; the evils of peace are even worse than those of war; no punishment is ever inflicted on the powerful or the rich; no mercy is shown to the poor; although your institutions were wisely devised, yet in the management of corrupted men, their effects are pernicious and cruel.
Excerpta de legationibus.
. In the interval of occasional outrages, the friendly intercourses of men, even in their rudest condition, is affectionate and happy D'Arvieux's Hist. of the Wild Arabs.
. In rude ages, the persons and properties of individuals are secure; because each has a friend, as well as an enemy; and if the one is disposed to molest, the other is ready to protect; and the very admiration of valour, which in some instances tends to sanctify violence, inspires likewise certain maxims of generosity and honour, that tend to prevent the Commission of wrongs.
MEN bear with the defects of their policy, as they do with hardships and inconveniencies in their manner of living. The alarms and the fatigues of war become a necessary recreation to those who are accustomed to them, and who have the tone of their passions raised above less animating or trying occasions. Old men, among the courtiers of Attila, wept, when they heard of heroic deeds, which they themselves could no longer perform Ibid.
. And among the Celtic nations, when age rendered the warrior unfit for his former toils, it was the custom, in order to abridge the languors of a listless and inactive life, to sue for death at the hands of his friends Ubi transcendit florentes viribus annos, Impatiens aevi spernit novisse senectam, Silius, lib. 1. 225.
.
WITH all this ferocity of spirit, the rude nations of the West were subdued by the policy and more regular warfare of the Romans. The point of honour, which the barbarians of Europe adopted as individuals, exposed them to a peculiar disadvantage, by rendering them, even in their national wars, averse to assailing their enemy by surprise, or taking the benefit of stratagem; and though separately bold and intrepid, yet, like other rude nations, they were, when assembled in great bodies, addicted to superstition, and subject to panics.
THEY were, from a consciousness of their personal courage and force, sanguine on the eve of battle; they were, beyond the bounds of moderation, elated on success, and dejected in adversity; and being disposed to consider every event as a judgement of the gods, they were never qualified by an uniform application of prudence, to make the most of their forces, to repair their misfortunes, or to improve their advantages.
RESIGNED to the government of affection and passion, they were generous and faithful where they had fixed an attachment; implacable, froward, and cruel, where they had conceived a dislike: addicted to debauchery, and the immoderate use of intoxicating liquors, they deliberated on the affairs of state in the heat of their riot; and in the same dangerous moments, conceived the designs of military enterprise, or terminated their domestic dissensions by the dagger or the sword.
IN their wars they preferred death to captivity. The victorious armies of the Romans, in entering a town by assault, or in forcing an incampment, have found the mother in the act of destroying her children, that they might not be taken; and the dagger of the parent, red with the blood of his family, ready to be plunged at last into his own breast Liv. lib. xli. 11, Dio Cass.
.
IN all these particulars we perceive that vigour of spirit, which renders disorder itself respectable, and which qualifies men, if fortunate in their situation, to lay the basis of domestic liberty, as well as to maintain against foreign enemies their national independence and freedom.
PART THIRD.
Of the History of Policy and Arts.
SECT. I.
Of the Influences of Climate and Situation.
WHAT we have hitherto observed on the condition and manners of nations, though chiefly derived from what has passed in the temperate climates, may, in some measure, be applied to the rude state of mankind in every part of the earth: but if we intend to pursue the history of our species in its further attainments, we may soon enter on subjects which will confine our observation to more narrow limits. The genius of political wisdom and civil arts appears to have chosen his seats in particular tracts of the earth, and to have selected his favourites in particular races of men.
MAN, in his animal capacity, is qualified to subsist in every climate. He reigns with the lion and the tyger under the equatorial heats of the sun, or he associates with the bear and the raindeer beyond the polar circle. His versatile disposition fits him to assume the habits of either condition, or his talent for arts enables him to supply its defects. The intermediate climates, however, appear most to favour his nature; and in whatever manner we account for the fact, it cannot be doubted, that this animal has always attained to the principal honours of his species within the temperate zone. The arts, which he has on this scene repeatedly invented, the extent of his reason, the fertility of his fancy, and the force of his genius in literature, commerce, policy, and war, sufficiently declare either a distinguished advantage of situation, or a natural superiority of mind.
THE most remarkable races of men, it is true, have been rude before they were polished. They have in some cases returned to rudeness again: and it is not from the actual possession of arts, science, or policy, that we are to pronounce of their genius.
THERE is a vigour, a reach of capacity, and a sensibility of mind, which may characterise as well the savage as the citizen, the slave as well as the master; and the same powers of the mind may be turned to a variety of purposes. A modern Greek, perhaps, is mischievous, slavish, and cunning, from the same animated temperament that made his ancestor ardent, ingenious, and bold, in the camp, or in the council of his nation. A modern Italian is distinguished by sensibility, quickness, and art, while he employs on trifles the capacity of an ancient Roman; and exhibits now, in the scene of amusement, and in the search of a frivolous applause, that fire, and those passions, with which Gracchus burned in the Forum, and shook the assemblies of a severer people.
THE commercial and lucrative arts have been, in some climates, the principal object of mankind, and have been retained through every disaster; in others, even under all the fluctuations of fortune, they have still been neglected; while in the temperate climates of Europe and Asia, they have had their ages of admiration as well as contempt.
IN one state of society, arts are slighted, from that very ardour of mind, and principle of activity, by which, in another, they are practised with the greatest success. While men are ingrossed by their passions, heated and roused by the struggles and dangers of their country; while the trumpet sounds, or the alarm of social engagement is rung, and the heart beats high, it were a mark of dullness, or of an abject spirit, to find leisure for the study of ease, or the pursuit of improvements, which have mere convenience or ease for their object.
THE frequent vicissitudes and reverses of fortune, which nations have experienced on that very ground where the arts have prospered, are probably the effects of a busy, inventive, and versatile spirit, by which men have carried every national pursuit to extremes. They have raised the fabric of despotic empire to its greatest height, where they had best understood the foundations of freedom. They perished in the flames which they themselves had kindled; and they only, perhaps, were capable of displaying, by turns, the greatest improvements, or the lowest corruptions, to which the human mind can be brought.
ON this scene, mankind have twice, within the compass of history, ascended from rude beginnings to very high degrees of refinement. In every age, whether destined by its temporary disposition to build or to destroy, they have left the vestiges of an active and vehement spirit. The pavement and the ruins of Rome are buried in dust, shaken from the feet of barbarians, who trod with contempt on the refinements of luxury, and spurned those arts, the use of which it was reserved for the posterity of the same people to discover and to admire. The tents of the wild Arab are even now pitched among the ruins of magnificent cities; and the waste fields which border on Palestine and Syria, are perhaps become again the nursery of infant nations. The chieftain of an Arab tribe, like the founder of Rome, may have already fixed the roots of a plant that is to flourish in some future period, or laid the foundations of a fabric, that will attain to its grandeur in some distant age.
GREAT part of Africa has been always unknown; but the silence of same, on the subject of its revolutions, is an argument, where no other proof can be found, of weakness in the genius of its people. The torrid zone, every where round the globe, however known to the geographer, has furnished few materials for history; and though in many places supplied with the arts of life in no contemptible degree, has no where matured the more important projects of political wisdom, nor inspired the virtues which are connected with freedom, and required in the conduct of civil affairs.
IT was indeed in the torrid zone that mere arts of mechanism and manufacture were found, among the inhabitants of the new world, to have made the greatest advance: it is in India, and in the regions of this hemisphere, which are visited by the vertical sun, that the arts of manufacture, and the practice of commerce, are of the greatest antiquity, and have survived, with the smallest diminution, the ruins of time, and the revolutions of empire.
THE sun, it seems, which ripens the pineapple and the tamarind, inspires a degree of mildness that can even assuage the rigours of despotical government: and such is the effect of a gentle and pacific disposition in the natives of the East, that no conquest, no irruption of barbarians, terminates, as they did among the stubborn natives of Europe, by a total destruction of what the love of ease and of pleasure had produced.
TRANSFERRED, without any great struggle, from one master to another, the natives of India are ready, upon every change, to pursue their industry, to acquiesce in the enjoyment of life, and the hopes of animal pleasure: the wars of conquest are not prolonged to exasperate the parties engaged in them, or to desolate the land for which those parties contend: even the barbarous invader leaves untouched the commercial settlement which has not provoked his rage: though master of opulent cities, he only incamps in their neighbourhood, and leaves to his heirs the option of entering, by degrees, on the pleasures, the vices, and the pageantries his acquisitions afford: his successors, still more than himself, are disposed to foster the hive, in proportion as they taste more of its sweets; and they spare the inhabitant, together with his dwelling, as they spare the herd or the stall, of which they are become the proprietors.
THE modern description of India is a repetition of the ancient, and the present state of China is derived from a distant antiquity, to which there is no parallel in the history of mankind. The succession of monarchs has been changed; but no revolutions have affected the state. The African and the Samoiede are not more uniform in their ignorance and barbarity, than the Chinese and the Indian, if we may credit their own story, have been in the practice of manufacture, and in the observance of a certain police, which was calculated only to regulate their traffic, and to protect them in their application to servile or lucrative arts.
IF we pass from these general representations of what mankind have done, to the more minute description of the animal himself, as he has occupied different climates, and is diversified in his temper, complexion, and character, we shall find a variety of genius corresponding to the effects of his conduct, and the result of his story.
MAN, in the perfection of his natural faculties, is quick and delicate in his sensibility; extensive and various in his imaginations and reflections; attentive, penetrating, and subtile, in what relates to his fellow-creatures; firm and ardent in his purposes; devoted to friendship or to enmity; jealous of his independence and his honour, which he will not relinquish for safety or for profit: under all his corruptions or improvements, he retains his natural sensibility, if not his force; and his commerce is a blessing or a curse, according to the direction his mind has received.
BUT under the extremes of heat or of cold, the active range of the human soul appears to be limited; and men are of inferior importance, either as friends, or as enemies. In the one extreme, they are dull and slow, moderate in their desires, regular and pacific in their manner of life; in the other, they are feverish in their passions, weak in their judgements, and addicted by temperament to animal pleasure. In both the heart is mercenary, and makes important concessions for childish bribes; in both the spirit is prepared for servitude: in the one it is subdued by fear of the future; in the other it is not roused even by its sense of the present.
THE nations of Europe who would settle or conquer on the south or the north of their own happier climates, find little resistance: they extend their dominion at pleasure, and find no where a limit but in the ocean, and in the satiety of conquest. With few of the pangs and the struggles that precede the reduction of nations, mighty provinces have been successively annexed to the territory of Russia; and its sovereign, who accounts within his domain, entire tribes, with whom perhaps none of his emissaries have ever conversed, dispatched a few geometers to extend his empire, and thus to execute a project, in which the Romans were obliged to employ their consuls and their legions See Russian Atlas.
. These modern conquerors complain of rebellion, where they meet with repugnance; and are surprised at being treated as enemies, where they come to impose their tribute.
IT appears, however, that on the shores of the Eastern sea, they have met with nations Tchutzi.
who have questioned their title to reign, and who have considered the requisition of a tax as the demand of effects for nothing. Here perhaps may be found the genius of ancient Europe, and under its name of ferocity, the spirit of national independence Notes to the Genealogical History of the Tartars.
; that spirit which disputed its ground in the West with the victorious armies of Rome, and baffled the attempts of the Persian monarchs to comprehend the villages of Greece within the bounds of their extensive dominion.
THE great and striking diversities which obtain betwixt the inhabitants of climates far removed from each other, are, like the varieties of other animals in different regions, easily observed: The horse and the rain-deer are just emblems of the Arab and the Laplander: the native of Arabia, like the animal for whose race his country is famed, whether wild in the woods, or tutored by art, is lively, active, and fervent in the exercise on which he is bent. This race of men, in their rude state, fly to the desert for freedom, and in roving bands alarm the frontiers of empire, and strike a terror in the province to which their moving encampments advance D'Arvieux.
. When roused by the prospect of conquest, or disposed to act on a plan, they spread their dominion, and their system of imagination, over mighty tracts of the earth: when possessed of property and of settlement, they set the example of a lively invention, and superior ingenuity, in the practice of arts, and the study of science. The Laplander, on the contrary, like the associate of his climate, is hardy, indefatigable, and patient of famine; dull rather than tame; serviceable in a particular tract; and incapable of change. Whole nations continue from age to age in the same condition, and, with immoveable phlegm, submit to the appellations of Dane, of Swede, or of Muscovite, according to the land they inhabit; and suffer their country to be severed like a common, by the line on which those nations have traced their limits of empire.
IT is not in the extremes alone that these varieties of genius may be clearly distinguished. Their continual change keeps pace with the variations of climate with which we suppose them connected: and though certain degrees of capacity, penetration, and ardour, are not the lot of entire nations, nor the vulgar properties of any people; yet their unequal frequency, and unequal measure, in different countries, are sufficiently manifest from the manners, the tone of conversation, the talent for business, amusement, and literary composition, which predominate in each.
IT is to the Southern nations of Europe, both ancient and modern, that we owe the invention and the embellishment of that mythology, and those early traditions, which continue to furnish the materials of fancy, and the field of poetic allusion. To them we owe the romantic tales of chivalry, as well as the subsequent models of a more rational style, by which the heart and the imagination are kindled, and the understanding informed THE fruits of industry have abounded most in the North, and the study of science has here received its most solid improvements: the efforts of imagination and sentiment were most frequent and most successful in the South. While the shores of the Baltic became famed for the studies of Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler, those of the Mediterranean were celebrated for giving birth to men of genius in all its variety, and for having abounded with poets and historians, as well as with men of science.
ON one side, learning took its rise from the heart and the fancy; on the other, it is still confined to the judgement and the memory. A faithful detail of public transactions, with little discernment of their comparative importance; the treaties and the claims of nations, the births and genealogies of princes, are, in the literature of Northern nations, amply preserved; while the lights of the understanding, and the feelings of the heart, are suffered to perish. The history of the human character; the interesting memoir, founded no less on the careless proceedings of a private life, than on the formal transactions of a public station; the ingenious pleasantry, the piercing ridicule, the tender, pathetic, or the elevated strain of elocution, have been confined in modern as well as ancient times, with a few exceptions, to the same latitudes with the fig and the vine.
THESE diversities of natural genius, if real, must have great part of their foundation in the animal frame: and it has been often observed, that the vine flourishes, where, to quicken the ferments of the human blood, its aids are the least required. While spiritous liquors are, among Southern nations, from a sense of their ruinous effects, prohibited; or from a love of decency, and the possession of a temperament sufficiently warm, not greatly desired; they carry in the North a peculiar charm, while they awaken the mind, and give a taste of that lively fancy and ardour of passion, which the climate is found to deny.
THE melting desires, or the fiery passions, which in one climate take place between the sexes, are in another changed into a sober consideration, or a patience of mutual disgust. This change is remarked in crossing the Mediterranean, in following the course of the Missisippi, in ascending the mountains of Caucasus, and in passing from the Alps and the Pyrenees to the shores of the Baltic.
THE female sex domineers on the frontier of Louisiana, by the double engine of superstition, and of passion. They are slaves among the native inhabitants of Canada, and chiefly valued for the toils they endure, and the domestic service they yield Charlevoix.
.
THE burning ardours, and the torturing jealousies, of the seraglio and the haram, which have reigned so long in Asia and Africa, and which, in the Southern parts of Europe, have scarcely given way to the difference of religion and civil establishments, are found, however, with an abatement of heat in the climate, to be more easily changed, in one latitude, into a temporary passion which ingrosses the mind, without enfeebling it, and which excites to romantic atchievements: by a farther progress to the North, it is changed into a spirit of gallantry, which employs the wit and the fancy more than the heart; which prefers intrigue to enjoyment; and substitutes affectation and vanity, where sentiment and desire have failed. As it departs from the sun, the same passion is farther composed into a habit of domestic connection, or frozen into a state of insensibility, under which the sexes at freedom scarcely chuse to unite their society.
THESE variations of temperament and character, do not indeed correspond with the number of degrees that are measured from the equator to the pole; nor does the temperature of the air itself depend on the latitude. Varieties of soil and position, the distance or neighbourhood of the sea, are known to affect the atmosphere, and may have signal effects in composing the animal frame.
THE climates of America, though taken under the same parallel, are observed to differ from those of Europe. There, extensive marshes, great lakes, aged, decayed, and crouded forests, with the other circumstances that mark an uncultivated country, are supposed to replenish the air with heavy and noxious vapours, that give a double asperity to the winter, and, during many months, by the frequency and continuance of fogs, snow, and frost, carry the inconveniencies of the frigid zone far into the temperate. The Samoiede and the Laplander, however, have their counterpart, though on a lower latitude, on the shores of America: the Canadian and the Iroquois bear a resemblance to the ancient inhabitants of the middling climates of Europe: the Mexican, like the Asiatic of India, being addicted to pleasure, was sunk in effeminacy; and in the neighbourhood of the wild and the free, had suffered to be raised on his weakness, a domineering superstition, and a permanent fabric of despotical government.
GREAT part of Tartary lies under the same parallels with Greece, Italy, and Spain; but the climates are found to be different; and while the shores, not only of the Mediterranean, but even those of the Atlantic, are favoured with a moderate change and vicissitude of seasons, the eastern parts of Europe, and the northern continent of Asia, are afflicted with all their extremes. In one season, we are told, that the plagues of an ardent summer reach almost to the frozen sea; and that the inhabitant is obliged to screen himself from noxious vermin in the same clouds of smoke in which he must, at a different time of the year, take shelter from the rigours of cold, When winter returns, the transition is rapid, and with an asperity almost equal in every latitude, lays waste the face of the earth, from the northern confines of Siberia, to the descents of Mount Caucasus and the frontier of India.
WITH this unequal distribution of climate, by which the lot, as well as the national character, of the Northern Asiatic may be deemed inferior to that of Europeans who lie under the same parallels, a similar gradation of temperament and spirit, however, has been observed, in following the meridian on either tract; and the Southern Tartar has over the Tonguses and the Samoiede, the same pre-eminence that certain nations of Europe are known to possess, over their Northern neighbours, in situations more advantageous to both.
THE Southern hemisphere scarcely offers a subject of like observation. The temperate zone is there still undiscovered, or is only known in two promontories, the Cape of Good Hope, and Cape Horn, which stretch into moderate latitudes on that side of the line. But the savage of South America, notwithstanding the interposition of the nations of Peru and of Mexico, is found to resemble his counterpart on the North; and the Hottentot in many things, the barbarian of Europe: he is tenacious of freedom, has rudiments of policy, and a national vigour, which serve to distinguish his race from the other African tribes, who are exposed to the more vertical rays of the sun.
WHILE we have, in these observations, only thrown out what must present itself on the most cursory view of the history of mankind, or what may be presumed from the mere obscurity of some nations, who inhabit great tracts of the earth, as well as from the lustre of others, we are still unable to explain the manner in which climate may affect the temperament, or foster the genius, of its inhabitant.
THAT the temper of the heart, and the intellectual operations of the mind, are, in some measure, dependent on the state of the animal organs, is well known from experience. Men differ from themselves in sickness and in health; under a change of diet, of air, and of exercise: but we are, even in these familiar instances at a loss how to connect the cause with its supposed effect: and though climate, by including a variety of such causes, may, by some-regular influence, affect the characters of men, we can never hope to explain the manner of those influences till we have understood what probably we shall never understand, the structure of those finer organs with which the operations of the soul are connected.
WHEN we point out, in the situation of a people, circumstances which, by determining their pursuits, regulate their habits, and their manner of life; and when, instead of referring to the supposed physical source of their dispositions, we assign their inducements to a determinate conduct; in this we speak of effects and of causes whose connection is more familiarly known. We can understand, for instance, why a race of men like the Samoiede, confined, during great part of the year, to darkness, or retired into caverns, should differ, in their manners and apprehensions, from those who are at liberty in every season; or who, instead of seeking relief from the extremities of cold, are employed in search of precautions against the oppressions of a burning sun. Fire and exercise are the remedies of cold; repose and shade the securities from heat. The Hollander is laborious and industrious in Europe; he becomes more languid and slothful in India The Dutch sailors who were employed in the of Malaco, tore or burnt the sail-cloth which was given them to make tents, that they might not have the trouble of making or pitching them.
Voy. de Matelief.
.
GREAT extremities, either of heat or cold, are, perhaps, in a moral view, equally unfavourable to the active genius of mankind, and by presenting alike insuperable difficulties to be overcome, or strong inducements to indolence and sloth, equally prevent the first applications of ingenuity, or limit their progress. Some intermediate degrees of inconvenience in the situation, at once excite the spirit, and, with the hopes of success, encourage its efforts.
It is in the least favourable situations, says Mr. Rousseau, that arts have flourished the most. I could show them in Egypt, as they spread with the overflowing of the Nile; and in Africa, as they mounted up to the clouds, and from a rocky soil and from barren sands; while on the fertile banks of the Eurotas, they were not able to fasten their roots.
WHERE mankind from the first subsist by toil, and in the midst of difficulties, the defects of their situation are supplied by industry: and while dry, tempting, and healthful lands are left uncultivated Compare the state of Hungary with that of Holland.
, the pestilent marsh is drained with great labour, and the sea is fenced off with mighty barriers, the materials and the cost of which, the soil to be gained can scarcely afford or repay. Harbours are opened, and crouded with shipping, where vessels of burden, if they are not constructed with a view to the situation, have not water to float. Elegant and magnificent edifices are raised on foundations of slime; and all the conveniencies of human life are made to abound, where nature does not seem to have prepared a reception of men. It is in vain to expect, that the residence of arts and commerce should be determined by the possession of natural advantages. Men do more when they have certain difficulties to surmount, than when they have supposed blessings to enjoy: and the shade of the barren oak and the pine are more favourable to the genius of mankind, than that of the palm or the tamarind.
AMONG the advantages which enable nations to run the carrier of policy, as well as of arts, it may be expected, from the observations already made, that we should reckon every circumstance which enables them to divide and to maintain themselves in distinct and in independent communities. The society and concourse of other men, are not more necessary to form the individual, than the rivalship and competition of nations are to invigorate the principles of political life in a state. Their wars, and their treaties, their mutual jealousies, and the establishments which they devise with a view to each other, constitute more than half the occupations of mankind, and furnish materials for their greatest and most improving exertions. For this reason, clusters of islands, a continent divided by many natural barriers, great rivers, ridges of mountains, and arms of the sea, are best fitted for becoming the nursery of independent and respectable nations. The distinction of states being clearly maintained, a principle of political life is established in every division, and the capital of every district, like the heart in an animal body, communicates with ease the vital blood and the national spirit to its members.
THE most respectable nations have always been found where at least one part of the frontier has been washed by the sea. This barrier, perhaps the strongest of all in the times of barbarity, does not, however, even then supersede the cares of a national defence; and in the advanced state of arts, gives the greatest soope and facility to commerce.
THRIVING and independent nations were accordingly scattered on the shores of the Pacific and the Atlantic. They surrounded the Red sea, the Mediterranean, and the Baltic; while, a few tribes excepted, who retired among the mountains bordering on India and Persia, or who have found some rude establishment among the creeks and the shores of the Caspian and the Euxine, there is scarcely a people in the vast continent of Asia who deserves the name of a nation. The unbounded plain is traversed at large by hordes, who are in perpetual motion, or who are displaced and harrassed by their mutual hostilities. Although they are never perhaps actually blended together in the course of hunting, or in the search of pasture, they cannot bear one great distinction of nations, which is taken from the territory, and which is deeply impressed by an affection to the native seat. They move in troops, without the arrangement or the concert of nations; they become easy accessions to every new empire among themselves, or to the Chinese and the Muscovite, with whom they hold a traffic for the means of subsistence, and the materials of pleasure.
WHERE a happy system of nations is formed, they do not rely for the continuance of their separate names, and for that of their political independence, on the barriers erected by nature. Mutual jealousies lead to the maintenance of a balance of power; and this principle, more than the Rhine and the Ocean, than the Alps and the Pyrenees in modern Europe; more than the straits of Thermopylae, the mountains of Thrace, or the bays of Salamine and Corinth in ancient Greece; tended to prolong the separation, to which the inhabitants of these happy climates have owed their felicity as nations, the lustre of their fame, and their civil accomplishments.
IF we mean to pursue the history of civil society, our attention must be chiefly directed to such examples, and we must here bid farewel to those regions of the earth, on which our species, by the effects of situation or climate, appear to be restrained in their national pursuits, or inferior in the powers of the mind.
SECT. II.
The History of Subordination.
WE have hitherto observed mankind, either united together on terms of equality, or disposed to admit of a subordination founded merely on the voluntary respect and attachment which they paid to their leaders; but, in both cases, without any concerted plan of government, or system of laws.
THE savage, whose fortune is comprised in his cabin, his fur, and his arms, is satisfied with that provision, and with that degree of security, he himself can procure. He perceives, in treating with his equal, no subject of discussion that should be referred to the decision of a judge; nor does he find in any hand the badges of magistracy, or the ensigns of a perpetual command.
THE barbarian, though induced by his admiration of personal qualities, the lustre of a heroic race, or a superiority of fortune, to follow the banners of a leader, and to act a subordinate part in his tribe, knows not, that what he performs from choice, is to be made a subject of obligation. He acts from affections unacquainted with forms; and when provoked, or when engaged in disputes, he recurs to the sword, as the ultimate means of decision, in all questions of right.
HUMAN affairs, in the mean time, continue their progress. What was in one generation a propensity to herd with the species, becomes, in the ages which follow, a principle of national union. What was originally an alliance for common defence, becomes a concerted plan of political sorce; the care of subsistence becomes an anxiety for accumulating wealth, and the foundation of commercial arts.
MANKIND, in following the present sense of their minds, in striving to remove inconveniencies, or to gain apparent and contiguous advantages, arrive at ends which even their imagination could not anticipate, and pass on, like other animals, in the track of their nature, without perceiving its end. He who first said, I will appropriate this field; I will leave it to my heirs;
did not perceive, that he was laying the foundation of civil laws and political establishments. He who first ranged himself under a leader, did not perceive, that he was setting the example of a permanent subordination, under the pretence of which, the rapacious were to seize his possessions, and the arrogant to lay claim to his service.
MEN, in general, are sufficiently disposed to occupy themselves in forming projects and schemes: but he who would scheme and project for others, will find an opponent in every person who is disposed to scheme for himself. Like the winds, that come we know not whence, and blow whithersoever they list, the forms of society are derived from an obscure and distant origin; they arise, long before the date of philosophy, from the instincts, not from the speculations, of men. The croud of mankind, are directed in their establishments and measures, by the circumstances in which they are placed; and seldom are turned from their way, to follow the plan of any single projector.
EVERY step and every movement of the multitude, even in what are termed enlightened ages, are made with equal blindness to the future; and nations stumble upon establishments, which are indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human design De Retz Memoirs.
. If Cromwell said, That a man never mounts higher, than when he knows not whither he is going; it may with more reason be affirmed of communities, that they admit of the greatest revolutions where no change is intended, and that the most refined politicians do not always know whither they are leading the state by their projects.
IF we listen to the testimony of modern history, and to that of the most authentic parts of the ancient; if we attend to the practice of nations in every quarter of the world, and in every condition, whether that of the barbarian or the polished, we shall find very little reason to retract this assertion. No constitution is formed by concert, no government is copied from a plan. The members of a small state contend for equality; the members of a greater, find themselves classed in a certain manner that lays a foundation for monarchy. They proceed from one form of government to another, by easy transitions, and frequently under old names adopt a new constitution. The seeds of every form are lodged in human nature; they spring up and ripen with the season. The prevalence of a particular species is often derived from an imperceptible ingredient mingled in the soil.
WE are therefore to receive, with caution, the traditionary histories of ancient legislators, and founders of states. Their names have long been celebrated; their supposed plans have been admired; and what were probably the consequences of an early situation, is, in every instance, considered as an effect of design. An author and a work, like cause and effect, are perpetually coupled together. This is the simplest form under which we can consider the establishment of nations: and we ascribe to a previous design, what came to be known only by experience, what no human wisdom could foresee, and what, without the concurring humour and disposition of his age, no authority could enable an individual to execute.
IF men during ages of extensive reflection, and employed in the search of improvement, are wedded to their institutions; and, labouring under many acknowledged inconveniencies, cannot break loose from the trammels of custom; what shall we suppose their humour to have been in the times of Romulus and Lycurgus? They were not surely more disposed to embrace the schemes of innovators, or to shake off the impressions of habit: they were not more pliant and ductile, when their knowledge was less; not more capable of refinement, when their minds were more circumscribed.
WE imagine, perhaps, that rude nations must have so strong a sense of the defects under which they labour, and be so conscious that reformations are requisire in their manners, that they must be ready to adopt, with joy, every plan of improvement, and to receive every plausible proposal with implicit compliance. And we are thus inclined to believe, that the harp of Orpheus could effect, in one age, what the eloquence of Plato could not produce in another. We mistake, however, the characteristic of simple ages: mankind then appear to feel the fewest defects, and are then least desirous to enter on reformations.
THE reality, in the mean time, of certain establishments at Rome and at Sparta, cannot be disputed: but it is probable, that the government of both these states took its rise from the situation and genius of the people, not from the projects of single men; that the celebrated warrior and statesman, who are considered as the founders of those nations, only acted a superior part among numbers who were disposed to the same institutions; and that they left to posterity a renown, pointing them out as the inventors of many practices which had been already in use, and which helped to form their own manners and genius, as well as those of their countrymen.
IT has been formerly observed, that, in many particulars, the customs of simple nations coincide with what is ascribed to the invention of early statesmen; that the model of republican government, the senate, and the assembly of the people; that even the equality of property, or the community of goods, were not reserved to the invention or contrivance of singular men.
IF we consider Romulus as the founder of the Roman state, certainly he who killed his brother that he might reign alone, did not desire to come under restraints from the controuling power of the senate, nor to refer the councils of his sovereignty to the decision of a collective body. Love of dominion is, by its nature, averse to constraint; and this chieftain, like every leader in a rude age, probably found a class of men ready to intrude on his councils, and without whom he could not proceed. He met with occasions, on which, as at the sound of a trumpet, the body of the people assembled, and took resolutions, which any individual might in vain dispute, or attempt to controul; and Rome, which commenced on the general plan of every artless society, found lasting improvements in the pursuit of temporary expedients, and digested her political frame in adjusting the pretensions of parties which arose in the state.
MANKIND, in very early ages of society, learn to covet riches, and to admire distinction: they have avarice and ambition, and are occasionally led by them to depredation and conquest: but in their ordinary conduct, these motives are balanced or restrained by other habits and other pursuits; by sloth, or intemperance; by personal attachments, or personal animosities; which mislead from the attention to interest. These circumstances render mankind, at times, remiss or outrageous: they prove the source of civil peace or disorder, but disqualify those who are actuated by them, from maintaining any fixed usurpation; slavery and rapine are first threatened from abroad, and war, either offensive or defensive, is the great business of every tribe. The enemy occupy their thoughts; they have no leisure for domestic dissensions. It is the desire of every separate community, however, to secure itself; and in proportion as it gains this object, by strengthening its barrier, by weakening its enemy, or by procuring allies, the individual at home bethinks him of what he may gain or lose for himself: the leader is disposed to enlarge the advantages which belong to his station; the follower becomes jealous of rights which are open to incroachment; and parties who united before, from affection and habit, or from a regard to their common preservation, disagree in supporting their several claims to prececedence or profit.
WHEN the animosities of faction are thus awakened at home, and the pretensions of freedom are opposed to those of dominion, the members of every society find a new scene upon which to exert their activity. They had quarrelled, perhaps, on points of interest; they had balanced between different leaders; but they had never united as citizens to withstand the encroachments of sovereignty, or to maintain their common rights as a people. If the prince, in this contest, finds numbers to support, as well as to oppose his pretensions, the sword which was whetted against foreign enemies, may be pointed at the bosom of fellowsubjects, and every interval of peace from abroad, be filled with domestic war. The sacred names of Liberty, Justice, and Civil Order, are made to resound in public assemblies; and, during the absence of other alarms, give to society, within itself, an abundant subject of ferment and animosity.
IF what is related of the little principalities which, in ancient times, were formed in Greece, in Italy, and over all Europe, agrees with the character we have given of mankind under the first impressions of property, of interest, and of hereditary distinctions, the seditions and domestic wars which followed in those very states, the expulsion of their kings, or the questions which arose concerning the prerogatives of the sovereign, or privilege of the subject, are agreeable to the representation which we now give of the first step toward political establishment, and the desire of a legal constitution.
WHAT this constitution may be in its earliest form, depends on a variety of circumstances in the condition of nations: It depends on the extent of the principality in its rude state; on the degree of disparity to which mankind had submitted before they began to dispute its abuses: it depends likewise on what we term accidents, the personal character of an individual, or the events of a war.
EVERY community is originally a small one. That propensity by which mankind at first unite, is not the principle from which they afterwards act in extending the limits of empire. Small tribes, where they are not assembled by common objects of conquest or safety, are even averse to a coalition. If, like the real or fabulous confederacy of the Greeks for the destruction of Troy, many nations combine in pursuit of a single object, they easily separate again, and act anew on the maxims of rival states.
THERE is, perhaps, a certain national extent, within which the passions of men are easily communicated from one, or a few, to the whole; and there are certain numbers of men who can be assembled, and act in a body. If, while the society is not enlarged beyond this dimension, and while its members are easily assembled, political contentions arise, the state seldom fails to proceed on republican maxims, and to establish democracy. In most rude principalities, the leader derived his prerogative from the lustre of his race, and from the voluntary attachment of his tribe: the people he commanded, were his friends, his subjects and his troops. If we suppose, upon any change in their manners, that they cease to revere his dignity, that they pretend to equality among themselves, or are seized with a jealousy of his assuming too much, the foundations of his power are already withdrawn. When the voluntary subject becomes refractory; when considerable parties, or the collective body, chuse to act for themselves; the small kingdom, like that of Athens, becomes of course a republic.
THE changes of condition, and of manners, which, in the progress of mankind, raise up to nations a leader and a prince, create, at the same time, a nobility, and a variety of ranks, who have, in a subordinate degree, their claim to distinction. Superstition, too, may create an order of men, who, under the title of priesthood, engage in the pursuit of a separate interest; who, by their union and firmness as a body, and by their incessant ambition, deserve to be reckoned in the list of pretenders to power. These different orders of men are the elements of whose mixture the political body is generally formed; each draws to its side some part from the mass of the people. The people themselves are a party upon occasion; and numbers of men, however classed and distinguished, become, by their jarring pretensions and separate views, mutual interruptions and checks; and have, by bringing to the national councils the maxims and apprehensions of a particular order, and by guarding a particular interest, a share in adjusting or preserving the political form of the state.
THE pretensions of any particular order, if not checked by some collateral power, would terminate in tyranny; those of a prince, in despotism; those of a nobility or priesthood, in the abuses of aristocracy; of a populace, in the confusions of anarchy. These terminations, as they are never the professed, so are they seldom even the disguised, object of party: but the measures which any party pursues, if suffered to prevail, will lead, by degrees, to every extreme.
IN their way to the ascendant they endeavour to gain, and in the midst of interruptions which opposite interests mutually give, liberty may have a permanent or a transient existence; and the constitution may bear a form and a character as various as the casual combination of such multiplied parts can effect.
TO bestow on communities some degree of political freedom, it is perhaps sufficient, that their members, either singly, or as they are involved with their several orders, should insist on their rights; that under republics, the citizen should either maintain his own equality with firmness, or restrain the ambition of his fellow-citizen within moderate bounds: that under monarchy, men of every rank should maintain the honours of their private or their public stations; and sacrifice, neither to the impositions of a court, nor to the claims of a populace, those dignities which are destined, in some measure, independent of fortune, to give stability to the throne, and to procure a respect to the subject.
AMIDST the contentions of party, the interests of the public, even the maxims of justice and candour, are sometimes forgotten; and yet those fatal consequences which such a measure of corruption seems to portend, do not unavoidably follow. The public interest is often secure, not because individuals are disposed to regard it as the end of their conduct, but because each, in his place, is determined to preserve his own. Liberty is maintained by the continued differences and oppositions of numbers, not by their concurring zeal in behalf of equitable government. In free states, therefore, the wisest laws are never, perhaps, dictated by the interest and spirit of any order of men: they are moved, they are opposed, or amended, by different hands; and come at last to express that medium and composition which contending parties have forced one another to adopt.
WHEN we consider the history of mankind in this view, we cannot be at a loss for the causes which, in small communities, threw the balance on the side of democracy; which, in states more enlarged in respect to territory and numbers of people, gave the ascendant to monarchy; and which, in a variety of conditions and of different ages, enabled mankind to blend and unite the characters of different forms; and, instead of any of the simple constitutions we have mentioned Part 1. sect. 10.
, to exhibit a medly of all.
IN emerging from a state of rudeness and simplicity, men must be expected to act from that spirit of equality, or moderate subordination, to which they have been accustomed. When crouded together in cities, or within the compass of a small territory, they act by contagious passions, and every individual feels a degree of importance proportioned to his figure in the croud, and the smallness of its numbers. The pretenders to power and dominion appear in too familiar a light to impose upon the multitude, and they have no aids at their call, by which they can bridle the refractory humours of a people who resist their pretensions. Theseus, King of Attica, we are told, assembled the inhabitants of its twelve cantons into one city. In this he took an effectual method to unite into one democracy, what were before the separate members of his monarchy, and to hasten the downfal of the regal power.
THE monarch of an extensive territory has many advantages in maintaining his station. Without any grievance to his subjects, he can support the magnificence of a royal estate, and dazzle the imagination of his people, by that very wealth which themselves have bestowed. He can employ the inhabitants of one district against those of another; and while the passions that lead to mutiny and rebellion, can at any one time seize only on a part of his subjects, he feels himself strong in the possession of a general authority. Even the distance at which he resides from many of those who receive his commands, augments the mysterious awe and respect which are paid to his government.
WITH these different tendencies, accident and corruption, however, joined to a variety of circumstances, may throw particular states from their bias, and produce exceptions to every general rule. This has actually happened in some of the later principalities of Greece, and modern Italy, in Sweden, Poland, and the German empire. But the united states of the Netherlands, and the Swiss cantons, are perhaps the most extensive communities, which maintaining the union of nations, have, for any considerable time, resisted the tendency to monarchical government; and Sweden is the only instance of a republic established in a great kingdom on the ruins of monarchy.
THE sovereign of a petty district, or a single city, when not supported, as in modern Europe, by the contagion of monarchical manners, holds the sceptre by a precarious tenure, and is perpetually alarmed by the spirit of mutiny in his people, is guided by jealousy, and supports himself by severity, prevention, and force.
THE popular and aristocratical powers in a great nation, as in the case of Germany and Poland, may meet with equal difficulty in maintaining their pretensions; and in order to avoid their danger on the side of kingly usurpation, are obliged to with-hold from the supreme magistrate even the necessary trust of an executive power.
THE states of Europe, in the manner of their first settlement, laid the foundations of monarchy, and were prepared to unite under regular and extensive governments. If the Greeks, whose progress at home terminated in the establishment of so many independent republics, had under Agamemnon effected a conquest and settlement in Asia, it is propable, that they might have furnished an example of the same kind. But the original inhabitants of any country, forming many separate cantons, come by slow degrees to that coalition and union into which conquering tribes are, in effecting their conquests, or in securing their possessions, hurried at once. Caesar encountered some hundreds of independent nations in Gaul, whom even their common danger did not sufficiently unite. The German invaders, who settled in the lands of the Romans, made, in the same district, a number of separate establishments, but far more extensive than what the ancient Gauls, by their conjunctions and treaties, or in the result of their wars, could after many ages have reached.
THE seeds of great monarchies, and the roots of extensive dominion, were every where planted with the colonies that divided the Roman empire. We have no exact account of the numbers, who, with a seeming concert, continued, during some ages, to invade and to seize this tempting prize. Where they expected resistance, they endeavoured to muster up a proportionable force; and when they proposed to settle, entire nations removed to share in the spoil. Scattered over an extensive province, where they could not be secure, without maintaining their union, they continued to acknowledge the leader under whom they had fought; and, like an army sent by divisions into separate stations, were prepared to assemble whenever occasion should require their united operations or counsels.
EVERY separate party had its post assigned, and every subordinate chieftain his possessions, from which he was to provide his own subsistence, and that of his followers. The model of government was taken from that of a military subordination, and a fief was the temporary pay of an officer proportioned to his rank See Dr. Robertson's History of Scotland, b. 1.
. There was a class of the people destined to military service, another to labour, and to cultivate lands for the benefit of their masters. The officer improved his tenure by degrees, first changing a temporary grant into a tenure for his life; and this also, upon the observance of certain conditions, into a grant including his heirs.
THE rank of the nobles became hereditary in every quarter, and formed a powerful and permanent order of men in every state. While they held the people in servitude, they disputed the claims of their sovereign; they withdrew their attendance upon occasion, or turned their arms against him. They formed a strong and insurmountable barrier against a general despotism in the state; but they were themselves, by means of their warlike retainers, the tyrants of every little district, and prevented the establishment of order, or any regular applications of law. They took the advantage of weak reigns or minorities, to push their incroachments on the sovereign; or having made the monarchy elective, they by successive treaties and stipulations, at every election, limited or undermined the monarchical power. The prerogatives of the prince have been, in some instances, as in that of the German empire in particular, reduced to a mere title; and the national union itself preserved in the observance only of a few insignificant formalities.
WHERE the contest of the sovereign, and of his vassals, under hereditary and ample prerogatives annexed to the crown, had a different issue, the feudal lordships were gradually stript of their powers, the nobles were reduced to the state of subjects, and obliged to hold their honours, and exercise their jurisdictions, in a dependence on the prince. It was his supposed interest to reduce them to a state of equal subjection with the people, and to extend his own authority, by rescuing the labourer and the dependent from the oppressions of their immediate superiors.
IN this project the princes of Europe have variously succeeded. While they protected the people, and thereby encouraged the practice of commercial and lucrative arts, they paved the way for despotism in the state; and with the same policy by which they relieved the subject from many oppressions, they increased the powers of the crown.
BUT where the people had by the constitution a representative in the government, and a head, under which they could avail themselves of the wealth they acquired, and of the sense of their personal importance, this policy turned against the crown; it formed a new power to restrain the prerogative, to establish the government of law, and to exhibit a spectacle new in the history of mankind; monarchy mixed with republic, and extensive territory, governed, during some ages, without military force.
SUCH were the steps by which the nations of Europe have arrived at their present establishments: in some instances, they have come to the possession of legal constitutions; in others, to the exercise of a mitigated despotism; or continue to struggle with the tendency which they severally have to these different extremes.
THE progress of empire, in the early ages of Europe, threatened to be rapid, and to bury the independent spirit of nations in that grave which the Ottoman conquerors found for themselves; and for the wretched race they had vanquished. The Romans were led by slow degrees to extend the limits of their empire; every new acquisition was the result of a tedious war, and required the sending of colonies, and a variety of measures, to secure any new possession. But the feudal superior being animated, from the moment he had gained an establishment, with a desire of extending his territory, and of enlarging the list of his vassals, made frequent annexation of new provinces, merely by bestowing investiture, and received independent states, without any material innovation in the form of their policy, as the subjects of his growing dominion.
SEPARATE principalities were, like the parts of an engine, ready to be joined, and, like the materials of a building, ready to be erected. They were in the result of their struggles put together or taken asunder with facility. The independence of weak states was preserved only by the mutual jealousies of the strong, or by the general attention of all to maintain a balance of power.
THE happy system of policy on which European states have proceeded in preserving this balance; the degree of moderation which is, in adjusting their treaties, become habitual even to victorious and powerful monarchies, does honour to mankind, and may give hopes of a lasting felicity to be derived from a prepossession, never, perhaps, equally strong in any former period, or among any number of nations, that the first conquering people will ruin themselves, as well as their rivals.
IT is in such states, perhaps, as in a fabric of a large dimension, that we can perceive most distinctly the several parts of which a political body consists; and observe that concurrence or opposition of interests, which serve to unite or to separate different orders of men, and lead them, by maintaining their several claims, to establish a variety of political forms. The smallest republics, however; consist of parts similar to these, and of members who are actuated by a similar spirit. They furnish examples of government diversified by the casual combinations of parties, and by the different advantages with which those parties engage in the conflict.
IN every society there is a casual subordination, independent of its formal establishment, and frequently adverse to its constitution. While the administration and the people speak the language of a particular form, and seem to admit no pretensions to power, without a legal nomination in one instance, or without the advantage of hereditary honours, in another, this casual subordination, possibly arising from the distribution of property, or from some other circumstance that bestows unequal degrees of influence, gives the state its tone, and fixes its character.
THE plebeian order at Rome having been long considered as of an inferior condition, and excluded from the higher offices of magistracy, had sufficient force, as a body, to get this invidious distinction removed; but the individual still acting under the impressions of a subordinate rank, gave in every competition his suffrage to a patrician, whose protection he had experienced, and whose personal authority he felt. By this means, the ascendency of the patrician families was, for a certain period; as regular as it could be made by the avowed maxims of aristocracy; but the higher offices of state being gradually shared by plebeians, the effects of former distinctions were prevented or weakened. The laws that were made to adjust the pretensions of different orders were easily eluded. The populace became a faction, and their alliance was the surest road to dominion. Clodius, by a pretended adoption into a plebeian family, was qualified to become tribune of the people; and Caesar, by espousing the cause of this faction, made his way to usurpation and tyranny.
IN such fleeting and transient scenes, forms of government are only modes of proceeding, in which every subsequent age may differ from the former. Faction is ever ready to seize all occasional advantages; and mankind, when in hazard from any party, seldom find a better protection than that of its rival. Cato united with Pompey in opposition to Caesar, and guarded against nothing so much as that reconciliation of parties, which was in effect to be a combination of different leaders against the freedom of the republic. This illustrious personage stood distinguished in his age like a man among children, and was raised above his opponents, as much by the justness of his understanding, and the extent of his penetration, as he was by the manly fortitude and disinterestedness with which he strove to baffle the designs of a vain and childish ambition, that was operating to the ruin of mankind.
ALTHOUGH free constitutions of government seldom or never take their rise from the scheme of any single projector, yet are they often preserved by the vigilance, activity, and zeal, of single men. Happy are they who understand and who chuse this object of care; and happy it is for mankind when it is not chosen too late. It has been reserved to signalize the lives of a Cato or a Brutus, on the eve of fatal revolutions; to foster in secret the indignation of Thrasea and Helvidius; and to occupy the reflections of speculative men in times of corruption. But even in such late and ineffectual examples, it was happy to know, and to value, an object which is so important to mankind. The pursuit, and the love of it, however unsuccessful, has thrown a lustre on human nature.
SECT. III.
Of National Objects in general, and of Establishments and Manners relating to them.
WHILE the mode of subordination is casual, and forms of government take their rise, chiefly from the manner in which the members of a state have been originally classed, and from a variety of circumstances that procure to particular orders of men a sway in their country, there are certain objects that claim the attention of every government, that lead the apprehensions and the reasonings of mankind in every society, and that not only furnish an employment to statesmen, but in some measure direct the community to those institutions, under the authority of which the magistrate holds his power. Such are the national defence, the distribution of justice, the preservation and internal prosperity of the state. If these objects be neglected, we must apprehend that the very scene in which parties contend for power, for privilege, or equality, must disappear, and society itself no longer exist THE consideration due to these objects will be pleaded in every public assembly, and will produce, in every political contest, appeals to that common sense and opinion of mankind, which, struggling with the private views of individuals, and the claims of party, may be considered as the great legislator of nations.
THE measures required for the attainment of most national objects, are connected together, and must be jointly pursued: they are often the same. The force which is prepared for defence against foreign enemies, may be likewise employed to keep the peace at home: the laws made to secure the rights and liberties of the people, may serve as encouragements to population and commerce: and every community, without considering how its objects may be classed or distinguished by speculative men, is, in every instance, obliged to assume or to retain that form which is best fitted to preserve its advantages, or to avert its misfortunes.
NATIONS, however, like private men, have their favourite ends, and their principal pursuits, which diversify their manners, as well as their establishments. They even attain to the same ends by different means; and, like men who make their fortune by different professions, retain the habits of their principal calling in every condition at which they arrive. The Romans became wealthy in pursuing their conquests; and probably, for a certain period, increased the numbers of mankind, while their disposition to war seemed to threaten the earth with desolation. Some modern nations proceed to dominion and enlargement on the maxims of commerce; and while they only intend to accumulate riches at home, continue to gain an imperial ascendant abroad.
THE characters of the warlike and the commercial are variously combined: they are formed in different degrees by the influence of circumstances that more or less frequently give rise to war, and excite the desire of conquest; of circumstances that leave a people in quiet to improve their domestic resources, or to purchase, by the fruits of their industry, from foreigners, what their own soil and their climate deny.
THE members of every community are more or less occupied with matters of state, in proportion as their constitution admits them to a share in the government, and summons up their attention to objects of a public nature. A people are cultivated or unimproved in their talents, in proportion as those talents are employed in the practice of arts, and in the affairs of society: they are improved or corrupted in their manners, in proportion as they are encouraged and directed to act on the maxims of freedom and justice, or as they are degraded into a state of meanness and servitude. But whatever advantages are obtained, or whatever evils are avoided, by nations, in any of these important respects, are generally considered as mere occasional incidents: they are seldom admitted among the objects of policy, or entered among the reasons of state.
WE hazard being treated with ridicule, when we require political establishments, merely to cultivate the talents of men, and to inspire the sentiments of a liberal mind: we must offer some motive of interest, or some hopes of external advantage, to animate the pursuits, or to direct the measures, of ordinary men. They would be brave, ingenious, and eloquent, only from necessity, or for the sake of profit: they magnify the uses of wealth, population, and the other resources of war; but often forget that these are of no consequence without the direction of able capacities, and without the supports of a national vigour. We may expect, therefore, to find among states the bias to a particular policy, taken from the regards to public safety; from the desire of securing personal freedom, or private property; seldom from the consideration of moral effects, or from a view to the genius of mankind.
SECT. IV.
Of Population and Wealth.
WHEN we imagine what the Romans must have felt when the tidings came that the flower of their city had perished at Cannae; when we think of what the orator had in his mind when he said, That the youth among the people was like the spring among the seasons;
when we hear of the joy with which the huntsman and the warrior is adopted, in America, to sustain the honours of the family and the nation; we are made to feel the most powerful motives to regard the increase and preservation of our fellow-citizens. Interest, affection, and views of policy, combine to recommend this object; and it is treated with entire neglect only by the tyrant who mistakes his own advantage, by the statesman who trifles with the charge committed to his care, or by the people who are become corrupted, and who consider their fellow-subjects as rivals in interest, and competitors in their lucrative pursuits.
AMONG rude societies, and among small communities in general, who are engaged in frequent struggles and difficulties, the preservation and increase of their members is a most important object. The American rates his defeat from the numbers of men he has lost, or he estimates his victory from the prisoners he has made; not from his having remained the master of a field, or from his being driven from a ground on which he encountered his enemy. A man with whom he can associate in all his pursuits, whom he can embrace as his friend; in whom he finds an object to his affections, and an aid in his struggles, is to him the most precious accession of fortune.
EVEN where the friendship of particular men is out of the question, the society, being occupied in forming a party that may defend itself, and annoy its enemy, finds no object of greater moment than the increase of its numbers. Captives who may be adopted, or children of either sex who may be reared for the public, are accordingly considered as the richest spoil of an enemy. The practice of the Romans in admitting the vanquished to share in the privileges of their city, the rape of the Sabines, and the subsequent coalition with that people, were not singular or uncommon examples in the history of mankind. The same policy has been followed, and was natural and obvious where-ever the strength of a state consisted in the arms of a few, and where men were valued in themselves, distinct from the consideration of estate or of fortune.
IN rude ages, therefore, while mankind subsist in small divisions, it should appear, that if the earth be thinly peopled, this defect does not arise from a disregard to numbers on the part of states. It is even probable, that the most effectual course that could be taken to increase the species, would be, to prevent the coalition of nations, and to oblige mankind to act in such small bodies as would make the preservation of their numbers, a principal object of their care. This alone, it is true, would not be sufficient: we must probably add the encouragement for rearing families, which mankind enjoy under a favourable policy, and the means of subsistence which they owe to the practice of arts.
THE mother is unwilling to increase her offspring, and is ill provided to rear them, where she herself is obliged to undergo great hardships in the search of her food. In North America, we are told, that she joins to the reserves of a cold or a moderate temperament, the abstinencies to which she submits from the consideration of this difficulty. In her apprehension, it is matter of prudence, and of conscience, to bring one child to the condition of feeding on venison, and of following on foot, before she will hazard a new burden in travelling the woods.
IN warmer latitudes, by the different temperament, perhaps, which the climate bestows, and by a greater facility in procuring subsistence, the numbers of mankind increase, while the object itself is neglected; and the commerce of the sexes, without any concern for population, is made a subject of mere debauch. In some places, we are told, it is even made the object of a barbarous policy, to defeat or to restrain the intentions of nature. In the island of Formosa, the males are prohibited to marry before the age of forty; and females, if pregnant before the age of thirty-six, have an abortion procured by order of the magistrate, who employs a violence that endangers the life of the mother, together with that of the child Collection of Dutch voyages.
.
IN China, the permission given to parents to kill or to expose their children, was probably meant as a relief from the burden of a numerous offspring. But notwithstanding what we hear of a practice so repugnant to the human heart, it has not, probably, the effects in restraining population, which it seems to threaten; but, like many other institutions, has an influence the reverse of what it seemed to portend. The parents marry with this means of relief in their view, and the children are saved.
HOWEVER important the object of population may be held by mankind, it will be difficult to find, in the history of civil policy, any wise or effectual establishments solely calculated to obtain it. The practice of rude or feeble nations is inadequate, or cannot surmount the obstacles which are found in their manner of life. The growth of industry, the endeavours of men to improve their arts, to extend their commerce, to secure their possessions, and to establish their rights, are indeed the most effectual means to promote population: but they arise from a different motive; they arise from regards to interest and personal safety. They are intended for the benefit of those who exist, not to procure the increase of their numbers.
IT is, in the mean time, of importance to know, that where a people are fortunate in their political establishments, and successful in the pursuits of industry, their population is likely to grow in proportion. Most of the other devices thought of for this purpose, only serve to frustrate the expectations of mankind, or to mislead their attention.
IN planting a colony, in striving to repair the occasional wastes of pestilence or war, the immediate contrivance of statesmen may be useful; but if in reasoning on the increase of mankind in general, we overlook their freedom, and their happiness, our aids to population become weak and ineffectual. They only lead us to work on the surface, or to pursue a shadow, while we neglect the substantial concern; and in a decaying state, make us tamper with palliatives, while the roots of an evil are suffered to remain. Octavius revived or inforced the laws that related to population at Rome: but it may be said of him, and of many sovereigns in a similar situation, that they administer the poison, while they are devising the remedy; and bring a damp and a palsy on the principles of life, while they endeavour, by external applications to the skin, to restore the bloom of a decayed and a sickly body.
IT is indeed happy for mankind, that this important object is not always dependent on the wisdom of sovereigns, or the policy of single men. A people intent on freedom, find for themselves a condition in which they may follow the propensities of nature with a more signal effect, than any which the councils of state could devise. When sovereigns, or projectors, are the supposed masters of this subject, the best they can do, is to be cautious of hurting an interest they cannot greatly promote, and of making breaches they cannot repair.
When nations were divided into small territories, and petty commonwealths, where each man had his house and his field to himself, and each county had its capital free and independent what a happy situation for mankind, says Mr. Hume, how favourable to industry and agriculture, to marriage, and to population!
Yet here were probably no schemes of the statesman for rewarding the married, or for punishing the single; for inviting foreigners to settle, or for prohibiting the departure of natives. Every citizen finding a possession secure, and a provision for his heirs, was not discouraged by the gloomy fears of oppression or want: and where every other function of nature was free, that which furnished the nursery could not be restrained. Nature has required the powerful to be just; but she has not otherwise intrusted the preservation of her works to their visionary plans. What fewel can the statesman add to the fires of youth? Let him only not smother it, and the effect is secure. Where we oppress or degrade mankind with one hand, it is vain, like Octavius, to hold out in the other, the baits of marriage, or the whip to barrenness. It is vain to invite new inhabitants from abroad, while those we already possess are made to hold their tenure with uncertainty; and to tremble, not only under the prospect of a numerous family, but even under that of a precarious and doubtful subsistence for themselves, The arbitrary sovereign, who has made this the condition of his subjects, owes the remains of his people to the powerful instincts of nature, not to any device of his own.
MEN will croud where the situation is tempting, and, in a few generations, will people every country to the measure of its means of subsistence. They will even increase under circumstances that portend a decay. The frequent wars of the Romans, and of many a thriving community; even the pestilence, and the market for slaves, find their supply, if, without destroying the source, the drain become regular; and if an issue is made for the offspring, without unsettling the families from which they arise. Where a happier provision is made for mankind, the statesman, who by premiums to marriage, by allurements to foreigners, or by confining the natives at home, apprehends, that he has made the numbers of his people to grow, is often like the fly in the fable, who admired its success, in turning the wheel, and in moving the carriage: he has only accompanied what was already in motion; he has dashed with his oar, to hasten the cataract; and waved with his fan, to give speed to the winds.
PROJECTS of mighty settlement, and of sudden population, however successful in the end, are always expensive to mankind. Above a hundred thousand peasants, we are told, were yearly driven, like so many cattle, to Petersburgh, in the first attempts to replenish that settlement, and yearly perished for want of subsistence Strachlenberg.
. The Indian only attempts to settle in the neighbourhood of the plantain Dampier.
, and while his family increases, he adds a tree to the walk.
IF the plantain, the cocoa, or the palm, were sufficient to maintain an inhabitant, the race of men in the warmer climates might become as numerous as the trees of the forest. But in many parts of the earth, from the nature of the climate, and the soil, the spontaneous produce being next to nothing; the means of subsistence are the fruits only of labour and skill. If a people, while they retain their frugality, increase their industry, and improve their arts, their numbers must grow in proportion. Hence it is, that the cultivated fields of Europe are more peopled than the wilds of America, or the plains of Tartary.
BUT even the increase of mankind which attends the accumulation of wealth, has its limits. The necessary of life is a vague and a relative term: it is one thing in the opinion of the savage; another in that of the polished citizen: it has a reference to the fancy, and to the habits of living. While arts improve, and riches increase; while the possessions of individuals, or their prospects of gain, come up to their opinion of what is required to settle a family, they enter on its cares with alacrity. But when the possession, however redundant, falls short of the standard, and a fortune supposed sufficient for marriage is attained with difficulty, population is checked, or begins to decline. The citizen, in his own apprehension, returns to the state of the savage; his children, he thinks, must perish for want; and he quits a scene overflowing with plenty, because he has not the fortune which his supposed rank, or his wishes, require. No ultimate remedy is applied to this evil, by merely accumulating wealth; for rare and costly materials, whatever these are, continue to be sought; and if silks and pearl are made common, men will begin to covet some new decorations, which the wealthy alone can procure. If they are indulged in their humour, their demands are repeated: For it is the continual increase of riches, not any measure attained, that keeps the craving imagination at ease.
MEN are tempted to labour, and to practise lucrative arts, by motives of interest. Secure to the workman the fruit of his labour, give him the prospects of independence or freedom, the public has found a faithful minister in the acquisition of wealth, and a faithful steward in hoarding what he has gained. The statesman in this, as in the case of population itself, can do little more than avoid doing mischief. It is well, if, in the beginnings of commerce, he knows how to repress the frauds to which it is subject. Commerce, if continued, is the branch in which men committed to the effects of their own experience, are least apt to go wrong.
THE trader, in rude ages, is short-sighted, fraudulent, and mercenary; but in the progress and advanced state of his art, his views are enlarged, his maxims are established: he becomes punctual, liberal, faithful, and enterprising; and in the period of general corruption, he alone has every virtue, except the force to defend his acquisitions. He needs no aid from the state, but its protection; and is often in himself its most intelligent and respectable member. Even in China, we are informed, where pilfering, fraud, and corruption, are the reigning practice with all the other orders of men, the great merchant is ready to give, and to procure confidence: while his countrymen act on the plans and under the restrictions of a police adjusted to knaves, he acts on the reasons of trade, and the maxims of mankind.
IF population be connected with national wealth, liberty and personal security is the great foundation of both: and if this foundation be laid in the state, nature has secured the increase and the industry of its members; the one by desires the most ardent in the human frame; the other by a consideration the most uniform and constant of any that possesses the mind. The great object of policy, therefore, with respect to both, is, to secure to the family its means of subsistence and settlement; to protect the industrious in the pursuit of his occupation; to reconcile the restrictions of police, and the social affections of mankind, with their separate and interested pursuits.
IN matters of particular profession, industry, and trade, the experienced practitioner is the master, and every general reasoner is a novice. The object in commerce is to make the individual rich; the more he gains for himself, the more he augments the wealth of his country. If a protection be required, it must be granted; if crimes and frauds be committed, they must be repressed; and government can pretend to no more. When the refined politician would lend an active hand, he only multiplies interruptions and grounds of complaint; when the merchant forgets his own interest to lay plans for his country, the period of vision and chimera is near, and the solid basis of commerce withdrawn. He might be told, perhaps, that while he pursues his advantage, and gives no cause of complaint, the interest of commerce is safe.
THE general police of France, proceeding on a supposition that the exportation of corn must drain the country where it has grown, had, till of late, laid that branch of commerce under a severe prohibition. The English landholder and the farmer had credit enough to obtain a premium for exportation, to favour the sale of their commodity; and the event has shewn, that private interest is a better patron of commerce and plenty, than the refinements of state. One nation lays the refined plan of a settlement on the continent of North America, and trusts little to the conduct of traders and short-sighted men; another leaves men to find their own position in a state of freedom, and to think for themselves. The active industry and the limited views of the one, made a thriving settlement; the great projects of the other were still in idea.
BUT I willingly quit a subject in which I am not much conversant, and still less engaged by the views with which I write. Speculations on commerce and wealth have been delivered by the ablest writers, who have left nothing so important to be offered on the subject, as the general caution, not to consider these articles as making the sum of national felicity, or the principal object of any state.
ONE nation, in search of gold and of precious metals, neglect the domestic sources of wealth, and become dependent on their neighbours for the necessaries of life: another so intent on improving their internal resources, and on increasing their commerce, that they become dependent on foreigners for the defence of what they acquire. It is even painful in conversation to find the interests of trade give the tone to our reasonings, and to find a subject perpetually offered as the great business of national councils, to which any interposition of government is seldom, with propriety, applied, or never beyond the protection it affords.
WE complain of a want of public spirit; but whatever may be the effect of this error in practice, in speculation it is none of our faults we reason perpetually for the public; but the want of national views were frequently better than the possession of those we express: we would have nations, like a company of merchants, think of nothing but the increase of their stock; assemble to deliberate on profit and loss; and, like them too, intrust their protection to a force which they do not possess in themselves.
BECAUSE men, like other animals are maintained in multitudes, where the necessaries of life are amassed, and the store of wealth is enlarged, we drop our regards for the happiness, the moral and political character of a people; and anxious for the herd we would propagate, carry our views no farther than the stall and the pasture. We forget that the few have often made a prey of the many; that to the poor there is nothing so enticing as the coffers of the rich; and that when the price of freedom comes to be paid, the heavy sword of the victor may fall into the opposite scale.
WHATEVER be the actual conduct of nations in this matter, it is certain, that many of our arguments would hurry us, for the sake of wealth and of population, into a scene where mankind being exposed to corruption, are unable to defend their possessions; and where they are, in the end, subject to oppression and ruin. We cut off the roots, while we would extend the branches, and thicken the foliage.
IT is possibly from an opinion that the virtues of men are secure, that some who turn their attention to public affairs, think of nothing but the numbers and wealth of a people: it is from a dread of corruption, that others think of nothing but how to preserve the national virtues. Human society has great obligations to both. They are opposed to one another only by mistake; and even when united, have not strength sufficient to combat the wretched party, that refers every object to personal interest, and that cares not for the safety or increase of any stock but its own.
SECT. V.
Of National Defence and Conquest.
IT is impossible to ascertain how much of the policy of any state has a reference to war, or to national safety.
Our legislator, says the Cretan in Plato, thought that nations were by nature in a state of hostility: he took his measures accordingly; and observing that all the possessions of the vanquished pertain to the victor, he held it ridiculous to propose any benefit to his country, before he had provided that it should not be conquered.
CRETE, which is supposed to have been a model of military policy, is commonly considered as the original from which the celebrated laws of Lycurgus were copied. Mankind, it seems, in every instance, must have some palpable object to direct their proceedings, and must have a view to some point of external utility, even in the choice of their virtues. The discipline of Sparta was military; and a sense of its use in the field, more than the force of unwritten and traditionary laws, or the supposed engagements of the public faith obtained by the lawgiver, may have induced this people to persevere in the observance of many rules, which to other nations do not appear necessary, except in the presence of an enemy.
EVERY institution of this singular people gave a lesson of obedience, of fortitude, and of zeal for the public: but it is remarkable that they chose to obtain, by their virtues alone, what other nations are fain to buy with their treasure; and it is well known, that, in the course of their history, they came to regard their discipline merely on account of its moral effects. They had experienced the happiness of a mind courageous, disinterested, and devoted to its best affections; and they studied to preserve this character in themselves, by resigning the interests of ambition, and the hopes of military glory, even by sacrificing the numbers of their people.
IT was the fate of Spartans who escaped from the field, not of those who perished with Cleombrotus at Leuctra, that filled the cottages of Lacedemon with mourning and serious reflection Xenophon.
: it was the fear of having their citizens corrupted abroad, by intercourse with servile and mercenary men, that made them quit the station of leaders in the Persian war, and leave Athens, during fifty years, to pursue, unrivalled, that career of ambition and profit, by which she made such acquisitions of power and of wealth Thucydides, book. 1.
.
WE have had occasion to observe, that in every rude state, the great business is war; and that in barbarous times, mankind, being generally divided into small parties, are engaged in almost perpetual hostilities. This circumstance gives the military leader a continued ascendant in his country, and inclines every people, during warlike ages, to monarchical government.
THE conduct of an army can least of all subjects be divided: and we may be justly surprised to find, that the Romans, after many ages of military experience, and after having recently felt the arms of Hannibal, in many encounters, associated two leaders at the head of the same army, and left them to adjust their pretensions, by taking the command, each a day in his turn. The same people, however, on other occasions, thought it expedient to suspend the exercise of every subordinate magistracy, and in the time of great alarms, to intrust all the authority of the state in the hands of one person.
REPUBLICS have generally found it necessary, in the conduct of war, to place great confidence in the executive branch of their government. When a consul at Rome had proclaimed his levies, and administered the military oath, he became from that moment master of the public treasury, and of the lives of those who were under his command Polybius.
. The axe and the rods were no longer a mere badge of magistracy, or an empty pageant, in the hands of the lictor: they were, at the command of the father, stained with the blood of his own children; and fell, without appeal, on the mutinous and the disobedient of every condition.
IN every free state, there is a perpetual necessity to distinguish the maxims of martial law from those of the civil; and he who has not learned to give an implicit obedience, where the state has given him a military leader, and to resign his personal freedom in the field, from the same magnanimity with which he maintains it in the political deliberations of his country, has yet to learn the most important lesson of civil society, and is only fit to occupy a place in a rude, or in a corrupted state, where the principles of mutiny and of servility being joined, the one or the other is frequently adopted in the wrong place.
FROM a regard to what is necessary in war, nations inclined to popular or aristocratical government, have had recourse to establishments that bordered on monarchy. Even where the highest office of the state was in common times administered by a plurality of persons, the whole power and authority belonging to it was, on particular occasions, committed to one; and upon great alarms, when the political fabric was shaken or endangered, a monarchical power has been applied, like a prop, to secure the state against the rage of the tempest. Thus were the dictators occasionally named at Rome, and the stadtholders in the United Provinces; and thus, in mixed governments, the royal prerogative is occasionally enlarged, by the temporary suspension of laws In Britain, by the suspension of the Habeas corpus.
, and the barriers of liberty appear to be removed, in order to vest a dictatorial power in the hands of the king.
HAD mankind, therefore, no view but to warfare, it is probable that they would continue to prefer monarchical government to any other; or at least that every nation, in order to procure secret and united councils, would intrust the executive power with unlimited authority. But, happily for civil society, men have objects of a different sort: and experience has taught, that although the conduct of armies requires an absolute and undivided command; yet a national force is best formed, where numbers of men are inured to equality; and where the meanest citizen may consider himself, upon occasion, as destined to command as well as to obey. It is here that the dictator finds a spirit and a force prepared to second his councils; it is here too that the dictator himself is formed, and that numbers of leaders are presented to the public choice; it is here that the prosperity of a state is independent of single men, and that a wisdom which never dies, with a system of military arrangements permanent and regular, can, even under the greatest misfortunes, prolong the national struggle. With this advantage, the Romans, finding a number of distinguished leaders arise in succession, were at all times almost equally prepared to contend with their enemies of Asia or Africa; while the fortune of those enemies, on the contrary depended on the casual appearance of singular men, of a Mithridates, or of a Hannibal.
THE soldier, we are told, has his point of honour; and a fashion of thinking, which he wears with his sword. This point of honour, in free and uncorrupted states, is a zeal for the public; and war to them, is an operation of passions, not the mere pursuit of a calling. Its good and its ill effects are felt in extremes: the friend is made to experience the warmest proofs of attachment, the enemy the severest effects of animosity. On this system the celebrated nations of antiquity made war under their highest attainments of civility, and under their greatest degrees of refinement.
IN small and rude societies, the individual finds himself attacked in every national war; and none can propose to devolve his defence on another.
The King of Spain is a great prince, said an American chief to the governor of Jamaica, who was preparing a body of troops to join in an enterprise against the Spaniards:
do you propose to make war upon so great a king with so small a force?
Being told that the forces he saw were to be joined by troops from Europe, and that the governor could then command no more:
Who are these then, said the American, who form this croud of spectators? are they not your people? and why do you not all go forth to so great a war?
He was answered, That the spectators were merchants, and other inhabitants, who took no part in the service:
Would they be merchants still, continued this statesman, if the King of Spain was to attack you here? For my part, I do not think that merchants should be permitted to live in any country: when I go to war, I leave no body at home but the women.
It should seem that this simple warrior considered merchants as a kind of neutral persons, who took no part in the quarrels of their country; and that he did not know how much war itself may be made a subject of traffic; what mighty armies may be put in motion from behind the counter; how often human blood is, without any national animosity, bought and sold for bills of exchange; and how often the prince, the nobles, and the statesmen, in many a polished nation, might, in his account, be considered as merchants.
IN the progress of arts and of policy, the members of every state are divided into classes; and in the commencement of this distribution, there is no distinction more serious than that of the warrior and the pacific inhabitant; no more is required to place men in the relation of master and slave. Even when the rigours of an established slavery abate, as they have done in modern Europe, in consequence of a protection, and a property, allowed to the mechanic and labourer, this distinction serves still to separate the noble from the base, and to point out that class of men who are destined to reign and to domineer in their country.
IT was certainly never foreseen by mankind, that in the pursuit of refinement, they were to reverse this order; or even that they were to place the government, and the military force of nations, in different hands. But is it equally unforeseen, that the former order may again take place? and that the pacific citizen, however distinguished by privilege and rank, must one day bow to the person with whom he has intrusted his sword. If such revolutions should actually follow, will this new master revive in his own order the spirit of the noble and the free? Will he renew the characters of the warrior and the statesman? Will he restore to his country the civil and military virtues? I am afraid to reply. Montesquieu observes, that the government of Rome, even under the emperors, became in the hands of the troops, elective and republican: but the Fabii or the Bruti were heard of no more, after the praetorian bands became the republic.
WE have enumerated some of the heads under which a people, as they emerge from barbarity, may come to be classed. Such are, the nobility, the people, the adherents of the prince; and even the priesthood have not been forgotten: when we arrive at times of refinement, the army must be joined to the list. The departments of civil government and of war being severed, and the preeminence being given to the statesman, the ambitious will naturally devolve the military service on those who are contented with a subordinate station. They who have the greatest share in the division of fortune, and the greatest interest in defending their country, having resigned the sword, must pay for what they have ceased to perform; and armies, not only at a distance from home, but in the very bosom of their country, are subsisted by pay. A discipline is invented to inure the soldier to perform, from habit, and from the fear of punishment, those hazardous duties, which the love of the public, or national spirit, no longer inspire.
WHEN we consider the breach that such an establishment makes in the system of national virtues, it is unpleasant to observe, that most nations who have run the career of civil arts, have, in some degree, adopted this measure. Not only states, which either have wars to maintain, or precarious possessions to defend at a distance; not only a prince jealous of his authority, or in haste to gain the advantage of discipline, are disposed to employ foreign troops, or to keep standing armies; but even republics, with little of the former occasion, and none of the motives which prevail in monarchy, have been found to tread in the same path.
IF military arrangements occupy so considerable a place in the domestic policy of nations, the actual consequences of war are equally important in the history of mankind. Glory and spoil were the earliest subject of quarrels; a concession of superiority, or a ransom, were the prices of peace. The love of safety, and the desire of dominion, equally lead mankind to wish for accessions of strength. Whether as victors or as vanquished, they tend to a coalition; and powerful nations considering a province, or a fortress acquired on their frontier, as so much gained, are perpetually intent on extending their limits.
THE maxims of conquest are not always to be distinguished from those of self-defence. If a neighbouring state be dangerous, if it be frequently troublesome, it is a maxim founded in the consideration of safety, as well as of conquest, That it ought to be weakened or disarmed: If, being once reduced, it be disposed to renew the contest, it must from thenceforward be governed in form. Rome never avowed any other maxims of conquest; and she every where sent her insolent armies, under the specious pretence of procuring to herself and her allies a lasting peace, which she alone would reserve the power to disturb.
THE equality of those alliances which the Grecian states formed against each other, maintained, for a time, their independence and separation; and that time was the shining and the happy period of their story. It was prolonged more by the vigilance and conduct which they severally applied, than by the moderation of their councils, or by any peculiarities of domestic policy which arrested their progress. The victors were sometimes contented, with merely changing to a resemblance of their own forms the government of the states they subdued. What the next step might have been in the progress of impositions, is hard to determine. But when we consider, that one party fought for the imposition of tributes, another for the ascendant in war, it cannot be doubted, that the Athenians, from a national ambition, and from the desire of wealth, and the Spartans, though they originally only meant to defend themselves, and their allies, were both, at last, equally willing to become the masters of Greece; and were preparing for each other at home, that yoke, which both, together with their confederates, were obliged to receive from abroad.
IN the conquests of Philip, the desire of selfpreservation and security seemed to be blended with the ambition natural to princes. He turned his arms successively to the quarters on which he found himself hurt, from which he had been alarmed or provoked: and when he had subdued the Greeks he proposed to lead them against their ancient enemy of Persia. In this he laid the plan which was carried into execution by his son.
THE Romans, become the masters of Italy, and the conquerors of Carthage, had been alarmed on the side of Macedon, and were led to cross a new sea in search of a new field, on which to exercise their military force. In prosecution of their wars, from the earliest to the latest date of their history, without intending the very conquests they made, perhaps without foreseeing what advantage they were to reap from the subjection of distant provinces, or in what manner they were to govern their new acquisitions, they still proceeded to seize what came successively within their reach; and, stimulated by a policy which engaged them in perpetual wars, which led to perpetual victory and accessions of territory, they extended the frontier of a state, which, but a few centuries before, had been confined within the skirts of a village, to the Euphrates, the Danube, the Weser, the Forth, and the ocean.
IT is vain to affirm, that the genius of any nation is adverse to conquest. Its real interests indeed most commonly are so; but every state which is prepared to defend itself, and to obtain victories, is likewise in hazard of being tempted to conquer.
IN Europe, where mercenary and disciplined armies are every where formed, and ready to traverse the earth, where like a flood pent up by slender banks, they are only restrained by political forms, or a temporary balance of power; if the sluices should break, what inundations may we not expect to behold: Effeminate kingdoms and empires are spread from the sea of Corea to the Atlantic ocean. Every state, by the defeat of its troops, may be turned into a province; every army opposed in the field to-day may be hired tomorrow; and every victory gained, may give the accession of a new military force to the victor.
THE Romans, with inferior arts of communication both by sea and land, maintained their dominion in a considerable part of Europe, Asia, and Africa, over fierce and intractable nations: What may not the fleets and armies of Europe, with the access they have by commerce to every part of the world, and the facility of their conveyance, effect, if that ruinous maxim should prevail, That the grandeur of a nation is to be estimated from the extent of its territory; or, That the interest of any particular people consists in reducing their neighbours to servitude?
SECT. VI.
Of Civil Liberty.
IF war, either for depredation or defence, were the principal object of nations, every tribe would, from its earliest state, aim at the condition of a Tartar horde; and in all its successes would hasten to the grandeur of a Tartar empire. The military leader would supersede the civil magistrate; and preparations to fly with all their possessions, or to pursue with all their forces, would, in every society, make the sum of their public arrangements.
HE who first on the banks of the Wolga, or the Jenisca, had taught the Scythian to mount the horse, to move his cottage on wheels, to harass his enemy alike by his attacks and his flights, to handle at full speed the lance and the bow, and when beat from the field, to leave his arrows in the wind to meet his pursuer; he who had taught his countrymen to use the same animal for every purpose of the dairy, the shambles, and the field; would be esteemed the founder of his nation; or, like Ceres and Bacchus among the Greeks, would be invested with the honours of a god, as the reward of his useful inventions. Amidst such institutions, the names and atchievements of Hercules and Jason might have been transmitted to posterity; but those of Lycurgus or Solon, the heroes of political society, could have gained no reputation, either fabulous or real, in the records of fame.
EVERY tribe of warlike barbarians may entertain among themselves the strongest sentiments of affection and honour, while they carry to the rest of mankind the aspect of banditti and robbers D'Arvieux's Hist. of the Arabs.
. They may be indifferent to interest, and superior to danger; but our sense of humanity, our regard to the rights of nations, our admiration of civil wisdom and justice, even our effeminacy itself, make us turn away with contempt, or with horror, from a scene which exhibits so few of our good qualities, and which serve so much to reproach our weakness.
IT is in conducting the affairs of civil society, that mankind find the exercise of their best talents, as well as the object of their best affections. It is in being grafted on the advantages of civil society, that the art of war is brought to perfection; that the resources of armies, and the complicated springs to be touched in their conduct, are best understood. The most celebrated warriors were also citizens: Opposed to a Roman, or a Greek, the chieftain of Thrace, of Germany, or Gaul, was a novice. The native of Pella learned the principles of his art from Epaminondas and Pelopidas.
IF nations, as hath been observed in the preceding section, must adjust their policy on the prospect of war from abroad, they are equally bound to provide for the attainment of peace at home. But there is no peace in the absence of justice. It may subsist with divisions, disputes, and contrary opinions; but not with the commission of wrongs. The injurious, and the injured, are, as implied in the very meaning of the terms, in a state of hostility.
WHERE men enjoy peace, they owe it either to their mutual regards and affections, or to the restraints of law. Those are the happiest states which procure peace to their members by the first of these methods: But it is sufficiently uncommon to procure it even by the second. The first would with-hold the occasions of war and of competition: The second adjusts the pretensions of men by stipulations and treaties. Sparta taught her citizens not to regard interest: Other free nations secure the interest of their members, and consider this as a principal part of their rights.
LAW is the treaty to which members of the same community have agreed, and under which the magistrate and the subject continue to enjoy their rights, and to maintain the peace of society. The desire of lucre is the great motive to injuries: law therefore has a principal reference to property. It would ascertain the different methods by which property may be acquired, as by prescription, conveyance, and succession; and it makes the necessary provisions for rendering the possession of property secure.
BESIDE avarice, there are other motives from which men are unjust; such are pride, malice, envy, and revenge. The law would eradicate the principles themselves, or at least prevent their effects.
FROM whatever motive wrongs are committed, there are different particulars in which the injured may suffer. He may suffer in his goods, in his person, or in the freedom of his conduct. Nature has made him master of every action which is not injurious to others. The laws of his particular society intitle him perhaps to a determinate station, and bestow on him a certain share in the government of his country. An injury, therefore, which in this respect puts him under any unjust restraint, may be called an infringement of his political rights.
WHERE the citizen is supposed to have rights of property and of station, and is protected in the exercise of them, he is said to be free; and the very restraints by which he is hindered from the commission of crimes, are a part of his liberty. No person is free, where any person is suffered to do wrong with impunity. Even the despotic prince on his throne, is not an exception to this general rule. He himself is a slave, the moment he pretends that force should decide any contest. The disregard he throws on the rights of his people recoils on himself; and in the general uncertainty of all conditions, there is no tenure more precarious than his own.
FROM the different particulars to which men refer, in speaking of liberty, whether to the safety of the person and the goods, the dignity of rank, or the participation of political importance, as well as from the different methods by which their rights are secured, they are led to differ in the interpretation of the term; and every people is apt to imagine, that its signification is to be found only among themselves.
SOME having thought, that the unequal distribution of wealth is unjust, required a new division of property, as the foundation of freedom. This scheme is suited to democratical government; and in such only it has been admitted with any degree of effect.
NEW settlements, like that of the people of Israel, and singular establishments, like those of Sparta and Crete, have furnished examples of its actual execution; but in most other states, even the democratical spirit could attain no more than to prolong the struggle for Agrarian laws; to procure, on occasion, the expunging of debts; and to keep the people in mind, under all the distinctions of fortune, that they still had a claim to equality.
THE citizen at Rome, at Athens, and in many republics, contended for himself, and his order. The Agrarian law was moved and debated for ages: it served to awaken the mind: it nourished the spirit of equality, and furnished a field on which to exert its force; but was never established with any of its other and more formal effects.
MANY of the establishments which serve to defend the weak from oppression, contribute, by securing the possession of property, to favour its unequal division, and to increase the ascendant of those from whom the abuses of power may be feared. Those abuses were felt very early both at Athens and Rome Plutarch in the life of Solon.Livy.
.
IT has been proposed to prevent the excessive accumulation of wealth in particular hands, by limiting the increase of private fortunes, by prohibiting entails, and by with-holding the right of primogeniture in the succession of heirs. It has been proposed to prevent the ruin of moderate estates, and to restrain the use, and consequently the desire, of great ones, by sumptuary laws. These different methods are more or less consistent with the interests of commerce, and may be adopted, in different degrees, by a people whose national object is wealth: and they have their degree of effect, by inspiring moderation, or a sense of equality, and by stifling the passions by which mankind are prompted to mutual wrongs.
IT appears to be, in a particular manner, the object of sumptuary laws, and of the equal division of wealth, to prevent the gratification of vanity, to check the ostentation of superior fortune, and, by this means, to weaken the desire of riches, and to preserve in the breast of the citizen, that moderation and equity which ought to regulate his conduct.
THIS end is never perfectly attained in any state where the unequal division of property is admitted, and where fortune is allowed to bestow distinction and rank. It is indeed difficult, by any methods whatever, to shut up this source of corruption. Of all the nations whose history is known with certainty, the design itself, and the manner of executing it, appear to have been understood in Sparta alone.
THERE property was indeed acknowledged by law; but in consequence of certain regulations and practices, the most effectual, it seems, that mankind have hitherto found out. The manners that prevail among simple nations before the establishment of property, were in some measure preserved See part 2. sect. 2.
; the passion for riches was, during many ages, suppressed; and the citizen was made to consider himself as the property of his country, not as the owner of a private estate.
IT was held ignominious either to buy or to sell the patrimony of a citizen. Slaves were, in every family, intrusted with the care of its effects, and freemen were strangers to lucrative arts; justice was established on a contempt of the ordinary allurement to crimes; and the preservatives of civil liberty applied by the state, were the dispositions that were made to prevail in the hearts of its members.
THE individual was relieved from every solicitude that could arise on the head of his fortune: he was educated, and he was employed for life in the service of the public; he was fed at a place of common resort, to which he could carry no distinction but that of his talents and his virtues; his children were the wards and the pupils of the state; he himself was taught to be a parent, and a director to the youth of his country, not the anxious father of a separate family.
THIS people, we are told, bestowed some care in adorning their persons, and were known from afar by the red or the purple they wore; but could not make their equipage, their buildings, or their furniture, a subject of fancy, or of what we call taste.
The carpenter and the housebuilder were restricted to the use of the axe and the saw: their workmanship must have been simple, and probably, in respect to its form, continued for ages the same. The ingenuity of the artist was employed in cultivating his own nature, not in adorning the habitations of his fellowcitizens.
ON this plan, they had senators, magistrates, leaders of armies, and ministers of state; but no men of fortune. Like the heroes of Homer, they distributed honours by the measure of the cup and the platter. A citizen, who, in his political capacity, was the arbiter of Greece, thought himself honoured by receiving a double portion of plain entertainment at supper. He was active, penetrating, brave, disinterested, and generous; bu his estate, his table, and his furniture, might, our esteem, have marred the lustre of all his virtues. Neighbouring nations, however, applied for commanders to this nursery of statesmen and warriors, as we apply for the practitioners of every art to the countries in which they excel; for cooks to France, and for musicians to Italy.
AFTER all, we are, perhaps, not sufficiently instructed in the nature of the Spartan laws and institutions, to understand in what manner all the ends of this singular state were obtained; but the admiration paid to its people, and the constant reference of contemporary historians to their avowed superiority, will not allow us to question the facts.
When I observed, says Xenophon, that this nation, though not the most populous, was the most powerful state of Greece, I was seized with wonder, and with an earnest desire to know by what arts it attained its preeminence; but when I came to the knowledge of its institutions, my wonder ceased.As one man excels another, and as he who is at pains to cultivate his mind, must surpass the person who neglects it; so the Spartans should excel every nation, being the only state in which virtue is studied as the object of government.'!
THE subjects of property, considered with a view to subsistence, or even to enjoyment, have little effect in corrupting mankind, or in awakening the spirit of competition and of jealousy; but considered with a view to distinction and honour, where fortune constitutes rank, they excite the most vehement passions, and absorb all the sentiments of the human soul: they reconcile avarice and meanness with ambition and vanity; and lead men through the practice of sordid and mercenary arts to the possession of a supposed elevation and dignity.
WHERE this source of corruption, on the contrary, is effectually stopped, the citizen is dutiful, and the magistrate upright; and form of government may be wisely administered; places of trust are likely to be well supplied; and by whatever rule office and power are bestowed, it is likely that all the capacity and force that subsists in the state will come to be employed in its service: for on this supposition, experience and abilities are the only guides and the only titles to public confidence; and if citizens be ranged into separate classes, they become mutual checks by the difference of their opinions, not by the opposition of their interested designs.
WE may easily account for the censures bestowed on the government of Sparta, by those who considered it merely on the side of its forms. It was not calculated to prevent the practice of crimes, by balancing against each other the selfish and partial dispositions of men; but to inspire the virtues of the soul, to procure innocence by the absence of criminal inclinations, and to derive its internal peace from the indifference of its members to the ordinary motives of strife and disorder. It were trifling to seek for its analogy to any other constitution of state, in which its principal characteristic and distinguishing feature is not to be found. The collegiate sovereignty, the senate, and the Ephori, had their counterparts in other republics, and a resemblance has been found in particular to the government of Carthage Aristotle.
: but what affinity of consequence can be found between a state whose sole object was virtue, and another whose principal object was wealth; between a people whose associated kings being lodged in the same cottage, had no fortune but their daily food; and commercial republic, in which a proper estate was required as a necessary qualification for the higher offices of state?
OTHER petty commonwealths expelled kings, when they became jealous of their designs, or after having experienced their tyranny; here the hereditary succession of kings was preserved: other states were afraid of the intrigues and cabals of their members in competition for dignities; here solicitation was required as the only condition upon which a place in the senate was obtained. A supreme inquisitorial power was, in the persons of the ephori, safely committed to a few men, who were drawn by lot, and without distinction, from every order of the people: and if a contrast to this, as well as to many other articles of the Spartan policy, be required, it may be found in the general history of mankind.
BUT Sparta, under every supposed error of its form, prospered for ages, by the integrity of its manners, and by the character of its citizens. When that integrity was broken, this people did not languish in the weakness of nations sunk in effeminacy. They fell into the stream by which other states had been carried in the torrent of violent passions, and in the outrage of barbarous times. They ran the career of other nations, after that of ancient Sparta was finished: They built walls, and began to improve their possessions, after they ceased to improve their people; and on this new plan, in their struggle for political life, they survived the system of states that perished under the Macedonian dominion: They lived to act with another which arose in the Achaean league; and were the last community of Greece that became a village in the empire of Rome.
IF it should be thought we have dwelt too long on the history of this singular people, it may be remembered, in excuse, that they alone, in the language of Xenophon, made virtue an object of state.
WE must be contented to derive our freedom from a different source; to expect justice from the limits which are set to the powers of the magistrate, and to rely for protection on the laws which are made to secure the estate, and the person of the subject. We live in societies, where men must be rich, in order to be great; where pleasure itself is often pursued from vanity; where the desire of a supposed happiness serves to inflame the worst of passions, and is itself the foundation of misery, where public justice, like fetters applied to the body, may, without inspiring the sentiments of candour and equity, prevent the actual commission of crimes.
MANKIND come under this description the moment they are seized with their passions for riches and power. But their description in every instance is mixed: in the best there is an alloy of evil; in the worst a mixture of good. Without any establishments to preserve their manners, besides penal laws, and the restraints of police, they derive, from instinctive feelings, a love of integrity and candour, and, from the very contagion of society itself, an esteem for what is honourable and praise-worthy. They derive, from their union, and joint opposition to foreign enemies, a zeal for their own community, and courage to maintain its rights. If the frequent neglect of virtue as a political object, tend to discredit the understandings of men, its lustre, and its frequency, as a spontaneous offspring of the heart, will restore the honours of our nature.
IN every casual and mixed state of the national manners, the safety of every individual, and his political consequence, depends much on himself, but more on the party to which he is joined. For this reason, all who feel a common interest, are apt to unite in parties; and, as far as that interest requires, mutually support each other.
WHERE the citizens of any free community are of different orders, each order has a peculiar set of claims and pretensions: relatively to the other members of the state, it is a party; relatively to the differences of interest among its own members, it may admit of numberless subdivisions But in every state there are two interests very readily apprehended; that of a prince and his adherents, that of a nobility, or of any temporary faction, opposed to the people, WHERE the sovereign power is reserved by the collective body, it appears unnecessary to think of additional establishments for securing the rights of the citizen. But it is difficult, if not impossible, for the collective body to exercise this power in a manner that supersedes the necessity of every other political caution.
IF popular assemblies assume every function of government; and if, in the same tumultuous manner in which they can, with great propriety, express their feelings, the sense of their rights, and their animosity to foreign or domestic enemies, they pretend to deliberate on points of national conduct, or to decide questions of equity and justice; the public is exposed to manifold inconveniencies; and popular governments would, of all others, be the most subject to errors in administration, and to weakness in the execution of public measures.
TO avoid these disadvantages, the people are always contented to delegate part of their powers. They establish a senate to debate, and to prepare, if not to determine, questions that are brought to the collective body for a final resolution. They commit the executive power to some council of this sort, or to a magistrate who presides in their meetings. Under the use of this necessary and common expedient, even while democratical forms are most carefully guarded, there is one party of the few, another of the many. One attacks, the other defends; and they are both ready to assume in their turns. But though, in reality, a great danger to liberty arises on the part of the people themselves, who, in times of corruption, are easily made the instruments of usurpation and tyranny; yet, in the ordinary aspect of government, the executive carries an air of superiority, and the rights of the people seem always exposed to incroachment.
THOUGH on the day that the Roman people assembled in their tribes, the senators mixed with the croud, and the consul was no more than the servant of the multitude; yet, when this awful meeting was dissolved, the senators met to prescribe business for their sovereign, and the consul went armed with the axe and the rods, to teach every Roman, in his separate capacity, the submission which he owed to the state.
THUS, even where the collective body is sovereign, they are assembled only occasionally: and though on such occasions they determine every question relative to their rights and their interests as a people, and can assert their freedom with irresistible force; yet they do not think themselves, nor are they in reality, safe, without a more constant and more uniform power operating in their favour.
THE multitude is every where strong; but requires, for the safety of its members, when separate as well as when assembled, a head to direct and to employ its strength. For this purpose, the ephori, we are told, were established at Sparta, the council of a hundred at Carthage, and the tribunes at Rome. So prepared, the popular party has, in many instances, been able to cope with its adversaries, and has even trampled on the powers, whether aristocratical or monarchical, with which it would have been otherwise unequally matched. The state, in such cases, commonly suffered by the delays, interruptions, and confusions; which popular leaders, from private envy, or a prevailing jealousy of the great, seldom failed to create in the proceedings of government.
WHERE the people, as in some larger communities, have only a share in the legislature, they cannot overwhelm the collateral powers, who having likewise a share, are in condition to defend themselves: Where they act only by their representatives, their force may be uniformly employed. And they may make part in a constitution of government more lasting than any of those in which the people possessing or pretending to the entire legislature, are, when assembled, the tyrants, and when dispersed, the slaves, of a distempered state. In governments properly mixed, the popular interest, finding a counterpoise in that of the prince or of the nobles, a balance is actually established between them, in which the public freedom and the public order are made to consist.
FROM some such casual arrangement of different interests, all the varieties of mixed government proceed; and on the degree of consideration which every separate interest can procure to itself, depends the equity of the laws they enact, and the necessity they are able to impose, of adhering strictly to the terms of law in its execution. States are accordingly unequally qualified to conduct the business of legislation, and unequally fortunate in the completeness, and regular observance, of their civil code.
IN democratical establishments, citizens, feeling themselves possessed of the sovereignty, are not equally anxious, with the subject of other governments, to have their rights explained, or secured, by actual statute. They trust to personal vigour, to the support of party, and to the sense of the public.
IF the collective body perform the office of judge, as well as of legislator, they seldom think of devising rules for their own direction, and are found still more seldom to follow any determinate rule, after it is made. They dispense, at one time, with what they enacted at another; and in their judicative, perhaps even more than in their legislative, capacity, are guided by passions and partialties that arise from circumstances of the case before them.
BUT under the simplest governments of a different sort, whether aristocracy or monarchy, there is a necessity for law, and there are a variety of interests to be adjusted in framing every statute. The sovereign wishes to give stability and order to administration, by express and promulgated rules. The subject wishes to know the conditions and limits of his duty. He acquiesces, or he revolts, according as the terms on which he is made to live with the sovereign, or with his fellow-subjects, are, or are not, consistent with the sense of his rights.
NEITHER the monarch, nor the council of nobles, where either is possessed of the sovereignty, can pretend to govern, or to judge at discretion. No magistrate, whether temporary or hereditary, can with safety neglect that reputation for justice and equity, from which his authority, and the respect that is paid to his person, are in a great measure derived. Nations, however, have been fortunate in the tenor, and in the execution of their laws, in proportion as they have admitted every order of the people, by representation or otherwise, to an actual share of the legislature. Under establishments of this sort, law is literally a treaty, to which the parties concerned have agreed, and have given their opinion in settling its terms. The interests to be affected by a law, are likewise consulted in making it. Every class propounds an objection, suggests an addition or an amendment of its own. They proceed to adjust, by statute, every subject of controversy: and while they continue to enjoy their freedom, they continue to multiply laws, and to accumulate volumes, as if they could remove every possible ground of dispute, and were secure of their rights, merely by having put them in writing.
ROME and England, under their mixed governments, the one inclining to democracy, the other to monarchy, have proved the great legislators among nations. The first has left the foundation, and great part of the superstructure of its civil code, to the continent of Europe: the other, in its island, has carried the authority and government of law to a point of perfection, which they never before attained in the history of mankind.
UNDER such favourable establishments, known customs, the practice and decisions of courts, as well as positive statutes, acquire the authority of laws; and every proceeding is conducted by some fixed and determinate rule. The best and most effectual precautions are taken for the impartial application of rules to particular cases; and it is remarkable, that, in the two examples we have mentioned, a surprising coincidence is found in the singular methods of their jurisdiction. The people in both reserved in a manner the office of judgement to themselves, and brought the decision of civil rights, or of criminal questions, to the tribunal of peers, who, in judging of their fellowcitizens, prescribed a condition of life for themselves.
IT is not in mere laws, after all, that we are to look for the securities to justice, but in the powers by which those laws have been obtained, and without whose constant support they must fall to disuse. Statutes serve to record the rights of a people, and speak the intention of parties to defend what the letter of the law has expressed: but without the vigour to maintain what is acknowledged as a right, the mere record, or the feeble intention, is of little avail.
A POPULACE roused by oppression, or an order of men possessed of a temporary advantage, have obtained many charters, concessions, and stipulations, in favour of their claims; but where no adequate preparation was made to preserve them, the written articles were often forgotten, together with the occasion on which they were framed.
THE history of England, and of every free country, abounds with the example of statutes enacted when the people or their representatives assembled, but never executed when the crown or the executive was left to itself. The most equitable laws on paper are consistent with the utmost despotism in administration. Even the form of trial by juries in England had its authority in law, while the proceedings of courts were arbitrary and oppressive.
WE must admire, as the key-stone of civil liberty, the statute which forces the secrets of every prison to be revealed, the cause of every commitment to be declared, and the person of the accused to be produced, that he may claim his enlargement, or his trial, within a limited time. No wiser form was ever opposed to the abuses of power. But it requires a fabric no less than the whole political constitution of Great Britain, a spirit no less than the refractory and turbulent zeal of this fortunate people, to secure its effects.
IF even the sasety of the person, and the tenure of property, which may be so well defined in the words of a statute, depend, for their preservation, on the vigour and jealousy of a free people, and on the degree of consideration which every order of the state maintains for itself; it is still more evident, that what we have called the political freedom, or the right of the individual to act in his station for himself and the public, cannot be made to rest on any other foundation. The estate may be saved, and the person released, by the forms of a civil procedure; but the rights of the mind cannot be sustained by any other force but its own.
SECT. VII.
Of the History of Arts.
WE have already observed, that art is natural to man; and that the skill he acquires after many ages of practice, is only the improvement of a talent he possessed at the first. Vitruvius finds the rudiments of architecture in the form of a Scythian cottage. The armourer may find the first productions of his calling in the sling and the bow; and the ship-wright of his in the canoe of the savage. Even the historian and the poet may find the original essays of their arts in the tale, and the song, which celebrate the wars, the loves, and the adventures of men in their rudest condition.
DESTINED to cultivate his own nature, or to mend his situation, man finds a continual subject of attention, ingenuity, and labour. Even where he does not propose any personal improvement, his faculties are strengthened by those very exercises in which he seems to forget himself: his reason and his affections are thus profitably engaged in the affairs of society; his invention and his skill are exercised in procuring his accommodations and his food; his particular pursuits are prescribed to him by circumstances of the age and of the country in which he lives: in one situation he is occupied with wars and political deliberations; in another, with the care of his interest, of his personal ease, or conveniency. He suits his means to the ends he has in view; and, by multiplying contrivances, proceeds, by degrees, to the perfection of his arts. In every step of his progress, if his skill be increased, his desire must likewise have time to extend: and it would be as vain to suggest a contrivance of which he sighted the use, as it would be to tell him of blessings which he could not command.
AGES are generally supposed to have borrowed from those who went before them, and nations to have derived their portion of learning or of art from abroad. The Romans are thought to have learned from the Greeks, and the moderns of Europe from both. In this imagination we frequently proceed so far as to admit of nothing original in the practice or manners of any people. The Greek was a copy of the Egyptian, and even the Egyptian was an imitator, though we have lost sight of the model on which he was formed.
IT is known, that men improve by example and intercourse; but in the case of nations, whose members excite and direct each other, why seek from abroad the origin of arts, of which every society, having the principles in itself, only requires a favourable occasion to bring them to light? When such occasion presents itself to any people, they generally seize it; and while it continues, they improve the inventions to which it gave rise among themselves, or they willingly copy from others; but they never employ their own invention, nor look abroad, for instruction on subjects that do not lie in the way of their common pursuits; they never adopt a refinement of which they have not discovered the use.
INVENTIONS, we frequently observe, are accidental; but it is probable, that an accident which escapes the artist in one age, may be seized by one who succeeds him, and who is better apprised of its use. Where circumstances are favourable, and where a people is intent on the objects of any art, every invention is preserved, by being brought into general practice; every model is studied, and every accident is turned to account. If nations actually borrow from their neighbours, they probably borrow only what they are nearly in a condition to have invented themselves.
ANY singular practice of one country, therefore, is seldom transferred to another, till the way be prepared by the introduction of similiar circumstances. Hence our frequent complaints of the dullness or obstinacy of mankind, and of the dilatory communication of arts, from one place to another. While the Romans adopted the arts of Greece, the Thracians and Illyrians continued to behold them with indifference. Those arts were, during one period, confined to the Greek colonies, and during another, to the Roman. Even where they were spread by a visible intercourse, they were still received by independent nations with the slowness of invention. They made a progress not more rapid at Rome than they had done at Athens; and they passed to the extremities of the Roman empire, only in company with new colonies, and joined to Italian policy.
THE modern race, who came abroad to the possession of cultivated provinces, retained the arts they had practised at home: the new master hunted the boar, or pastured his herds, where he might have raised a plentiful harvest: he built a cottage in the view of a palace: he buried, in one common ruin, the edifices, sculptures, paintings, and libraries, of the former inhabitant: he made a settlement upon a plan of his own, and opened anew the source of inventions, without perceiving from a distance to what length their progress might lead his posterity. The cottage of the present race, like that of the former, by degrees enlarged its dimensions; public buildings acquired a magnificence in a new taste. Even this taste came, in a course of ages, to be exploded, and the people of Europe recurred to the models which their fathers destroyed, and wept over the ruins which they could not restore.
THE literary remains of antiquity were studied and imitated, after the original genius of modern nations had broke forth: the rude efforts of poetry in Italy and Provence, resembled those of the Greeks and the ancient Romans. How far the merit of our works might, without the aid of their models, have risen by successive improvements, or whether we have gained more by imitation than we have lost by quitting our native system of thinking, and our vein of fable, must be left to conjecture. We are certainly indebted to them for the materials, as well as the form, of many of our compositions; and without their example, the strain of our literature, together with that of our manners and policy, would have been different from what they at present are. This much however may be said with assurance, that although the Roman and the modern literature savour alike of the Greek original, yet mankind in either instance would not have drank of this fountain, unless they had been hastening to open springs of their own.
SENTIMENT and fancy, the use of the hand or the head, are not inventions of particular men; and the flourishing of arts that depend on them, are, in the case of any people, a proof rather of political felicity at home, than of any instruction received from abroad, or of any natural superiority in point of industry or talents.
WHEN the attentions of men are turned toward particular subjects, when the acquisitions of one age are left entire to the next, when every individual is protected in his place, and left to pursue the suggestion of his wants, devices accumulate; and it is difficult to find the original of any art. The steps which lead to perfection are many; and we are at a loss on whom to bestow the greatest share of our praise; on the first or on the last who may have bore a part in the progress.
SECT. VIII.
Of the History of Literature.
IF we may rely on the general observations contained in the last section, the literary, as well as mechanical arts, being a natural produce of the human mind, will rise spontaneously where-ever men are happily placed; and in certain nations it is not more necessary to look abroad for the origin of literature, than it is for the suggestion of any of the pleasures or exercises in which mankind, under a state of prosperity and freedom, are sufficiently inclined to indulge themselves.
WE are apt to consider arts as foreign and adventitious to the nature of man: but there is no art that did not find its occasion in human life, and that was not, in some one or other of the situations in which our species is found, suggested as a means for the attainment of some useful end. The mechanic and commercial arts took their rise from the love of property, and were encouraged by the prospects of safety and of gain: the literary and liberal arts took their rise from the understanding, the fancy and the heart. They are mere exercises of the mind in search of its peculiar pleasures and occupations; and are promoted by circumstances that suffer the mind to enjoy itself.
MEN are equally engaged by the past, the present, and the future, and are prepared for every occupation that gives scope to their powers. Productions therefore, whether of narration, fiction, or reasoning, that tend to employ the imagination, or move the heart, continue for ages a subject of attention, and a source of delight. The memory of human transactions being preserved in tradition or writing, is the natural gratification of a passion that consists of curiosity, admiration, and the love of amusement.
BEFORE many books are written, and before science is greatly advanced, the productions of mere genius are sometimes complete: the performer requires not the aid of learning where his description or story relates to near and contiguous objects; where it relates to the conduct and characters of men with whom he himself has acted, and in whose occupations and fortunes he himself has borne a part.
WITH this advantage, the poet is the first to offer the fruits of his genius, and to lead in the career of those arts by which the mind is destined to exhibit its imaginations, and to express its passions. Every tribe of barbarians have their passionate or historic rhymes, which contain the superstition, the enthusiasm, and the admiration of glory, with which the breasts of men, in the earliest state of society, are possessed. They delight in verse-compositions, either because the cadence of numbers is natural to the language of sentiment, or because, not having the advantage of writing, they are obliged to bring the ear in aid of the memory, in order to facilitate the repetition, and insure the preservation of their works.
WHEN we attend to the language which savages employ on any solemn occasion, it appears that man is a poet by nature. Whether at first obliged by the mere defects of his tongue, and the scantiness of proper expressions, or seduced by a pleasure of the fancy in stating the analogy of its objects, he clothes every conception in image and metaphor.
We have planted the tree of peace, says an American orator;
we have buried the axe under its roots: we will henceforth repose under its shade; we will join to brighten the chain that binds our nations together.
Such are the collections of metaphor which those nations employ in their public harangues. They have likewise already adopted those lively figures, and that daring freedom of language, which the learned have afterwards found so well fitted to express the rapid transitions of the imagination, and the ardours of a passionate mind.
IF we are required to explain, how men could be poets, or orators, before they were aided by the learning of the scholar and the critic? we may inquire, in our turn, how bodies could fall by their weight, before the laws of gravitation were recorded in books? Mind, as well as body, has laws, which are exemplified in the practice of men, and which the critic collects only after the example has shewn what they are.
OCCASIONED, probably, by the physical connection we have mentioned, between the emotions of a heated imagination, and the impressions received from music and pathetic sounds, every tale among rude nations is repeated in verse, and is made to take the form of a song. The early history of all nations is uniform in this particular. Priests, statesmen, and philosophers, in the first ages of Greece, delivered their instructions in poetry, and mixed with the dealers in music and heroic fable.
IT is not so surprising, however, that poetry should be the first species of composition in every nation, as it is, that a style apparently so difficult, and so far removed from ordinary use, should be almost as universally the first to attain its maturity. The most admired of all poets lived beyond the reach of history, almost of tradition. The artless song of the savage, the heroic legend of the bard, have sometimes a magnificent beauty, which no change of language can improve, and no refinements of the critic reform.
UNDER the supposed disadvantage of a limited knowledge, and a rude apprehension, the simple poet has impressions that more than compensate the defects of his skill. The best subjects of poetry, the characters of the violent and the brave, the generous and the intrepid, great dangers, trials of fortitude and fidelity, are exhibited within his view, or are delivered in traditions which animate like truth, because they are equally believed. He is not engaged in recalling, like Virgil or Tasso, the sentiments or scenery of an age remote from his own: he needs not be told by the critic See Longinus.
, to recollect what another would have have thought, or in what manner another would have expressed his conception. The simple passions, friendship, resentment, and love, are the movements of his own mind, and he has no occasion to copy. Simple and vehement in his conceptions and feelings, he knows no diversity of thought, or of style, to mislead or to exercise his judgement. He delivers the emotions of the heart, in words suggested by the heart: for he knows no other. And hence it is, that while we admire the judgement and invention of Virgil, and of other later poets, these terms appear misapplied to Homer. Though intelligent, as well as sublime, in his conceptions, we cannot anticipate the lights of his understanding, nor the movements of his heart: he appears to speak from inspiration, not from invention; and to be guided in the choice of his thoughts and expressions by a supernatural instinct, not by reflection.
THE language of early ages, is in one respect, simple and confined; in another, it is varied and free: it allows liberties, which, to the poet of after times, are denied.
IN rude ages men are not separated by distinctions of rank or profession. They live in one manner, and speak one dialect. The bard is not to chuse his expression among the singular accents of different conditions. He has not to guard his language from the peculiar errors of the mechanic, the peasant, the scholar, or the courtier, in order to find that elegant propriety, and just elevation, which is free from the vulgar of one class, the pedantic of the second, or the flippant of the third. The name of every object, and of every sentiment, is fixed; and if his conception has the dignity of nature, his expression will have a purity which does not depend on his choice.
WITH this apparent confinement in the choice of his words, he is at liberty to break through the ordinary modes of construction; and in the form of a language not established by rules, may find for himself a cadence agreeable to the tone of his mind. The liberty he takes, while his meaning is striking, and his language is raised, appears an improvement, not a trespass on grammar. He delivers a style to the ages that follow, and becomes a model from which his posterity judge.
BUT whatever may be the early disposition of mankind to poetry, or the advantages they possess in cultivating this species of literature; whether the early maturity of poetical compositions arise from their being the first studied, or from their having a charm to engage persons of the liveliest genius, who are best qualified to improve the eloquence of their native tongue; it is a remarkable fact, that, not only in countries where every vein of composition was original, and was opened in the order of natural succession; but even at Rome, and in modern Europe, where the learned began early to practise on foreign models, we have poets of every nation, who are perused with pleasure, while the prose writers of the same ages are neglected.
AS Sophocles and Euripides preceded the historians and moralists of Greece, not only Naevius and Ennius, who wrote the Roman history in verse, but Lucilius, Plautus, Terence, and we may add Lucretius, were prior to Cicero, Sallust, or Caesar. Dante and Petrarch went before any good prose writer in Italy; Corneille and Racine brought on the fine age of prose compositions in France; and we had in England, not only Chaucer and Spencer, but Shakespear and Milton, while our attempts in history or science were yet in their infancy; and deserve our attention, only for the sake of the matter they treat.
HILLANICUS, who is reckoned among the first prose writers in Greece, and who immediately preceded, or was the contemporary of Herodotus, set out with declaring his intention to remove from history the wild representations, and extravagant fictions, with which it had been disgraced by the poets Quoted by Demetrius Phalerius.
. The want of records or authorities, relating to any distant transactions, may have hindered him, as it did his immediate successor, from giving truth all the advantage it might have reaped from this transition to prose. There are, however, ages in the progress of society, when such a proposition must be favourably received. When men become occupied on the subjects of policy, or commercial arts, they wish to be informed and instructed, as well as moved. They are interested by what was real in past transactions. They build on this foundation, the reflections and reasonings they apply to present affairs, and wish to receive information on the subject of different pursuits, and of projects in which they begin to be engaged. The manners of men, the practice of ordinary life, and the form of society, furnish their subjects to the moral and political writer. Mere ingenuity, justness of sentiment, and correct representation, though conveyed in ordinary language, are understood to constitute literary merit, and by applying to reason more than to the imagination and passions, meet with a reception that is due to the instruction they bring.
THE talents of men come to be employed in a variety of affairs, and their inquiries directed to different subjects. Knowledge is important in every department of civil society, and requisite to the practice of every art. The science of nature, morals, politics, and history, find their several admirers; and even poetry itself which retains its former station in the region of warm imagination and enthusiastic passion, appears in a growing variety of forms.
MATTERS have proceeded so far, without the aid of foreign examples, or the direction of schools. The cart of Thespia was changed into a theatre, not to gratify the learned, but to please the Athenian populace: and the prize of poetical merit was decided by this populace equally before and after the invention of rules. The Greeks were unacquainted with every language but their own; and if they became learned, it was only by studying what they themselves had produced: the childish mythology, which they are said to have copied from Asia, was equally of little avail in promoting their love of arts, or their success in the practice of them.
WHEN the historian is struck with the events he has witnessed, or heard; when he is excited to relate them by his reflections or his passions; when the statesman, who is required to speak in public, is obliged to prepare for every remarkable appearance in studied harangues; when conversation becomes extensive and refined; and when the social feelings and reflections of men are committed to writing, a system of learning may arise from the bustle of an active life. Society itself is the school, and its lessons are delivered in the practice of real affairs. An author writes from observations he has made on his subject, not from the suggestion of books; and every production carries the mark of his character as a man, not of his mere proficiency as a student or scholar. It may be made a question, whether the trouble of seeking for distant models and of wading for instruction, through dark allusions and languages unknown, might not have quenched his fire, and rendered him a writer of a very inferior class.
IF society may thus be considered as a school for letters, it is probable that its lessons are varied in every separate state, and in every age. For a certain period, the severe applications of the Roman people to policy and war suppressed the literary arts, and appear to have stifled the genius even of the historian and the poet. The institutions of Sparta gave a professed contempt for whatever was not connected with the practical virtues of a vigorous and resolute spirit: the charms of imagination, and the parade of language, were by this people classed with the arts of the cook and the perfumer: their songs in praise of fortitude are mentioned by some writers; and collections of their witty sayings and repartees are still preserved: they indicate the virtues and the abilities of an active people, not their proficiency in science or literary taste. Possessed of what was essential to happiness in the virtues of the heart, they had a discernment of its value, unimbarrassed by the numberless objects on which mankind in general are so much at a loss to adjust their esteem: fixed in their own apprehension, they turned a sharp edge on the follies of mankind.
When will you begin to practise?
was the question of a Spartan to a person, who, in an anvanced age of life, was still occupied with questions on the nature of virtue.
WHILE this people confined their studies to one question, How to improve and to preserve the courage and the disinterested affections of the human heart? their rivals the Athenians gave a scope to refinement on every object of reflection or passion. By the rewards, either of profit or of reputation, which they bestowed on every effort of ingenuity employed in ministering to the pleasure, the decoration, or the conveniency of life; by the variety of conditions in which their citizens were placed; by their inequalities of fortune, and their several pursuits in war, politics, commerce, and lucrative arts, they awakened whatever was either good or bad in the natural dispositions of men. Every road to eminence was opened: eloquence, fortitude, military skill, envy, detraction, faction, and treason, even the muse herself, was courted to bestow importance among a busy, acute, and turbulent people.
FROM this example, we may safely conclude, that although business is sometimes a rival to study, retirement and leisure are not the principal requisites to the improvement, perhaps not even to the exercise, of literary talents. The most striking exertions of imagination and sentiment have a reference to mankind: they are excited by the presence and intercourse of men: they have most vigour when actuated in the mind by the operation of its principal springs, by the emulations, the friendships, and the oppositions, which subsist among a forward and aspiring people. Amidst the great occasions which put a free, and even a licentious, society in motion, its members become capable of every exertion; and the same scenes which gave employment to Themistocles and Thrasybulus, inspired, by contagion, the genius of Sophocles and Plato. The petulant and the ingenuous find an equal scope to their talents; and literary monuments become the repositories of envy and folly, as well as of wisdom and virtue.
GREECE, divided into many little states, and agitated, beyond any spot on the globe, by domestic contentions and foreign wars, set the example in every species of literature. The fire was communicated to Rome; not when the state ceased to be warlike, and had discontinued her political agitations, but when she mixed the love of refinement and of pleasure with her national pursuits, and indulged an inclination to study in the midst of ferments, occasioned by the wars and pretensions of opposite factions. It was revived in modern Europe among the turbulent states of Italy, and spread to the North, together with the spirit which shook the fabric of the Gothic policy; it rose while men were divided into parties, under civil or religious denominations, and when they were at variance on subjects held the most important and sacred.
WE may be satisfied, from the example of many ages, that liberal endowments bestowed on learned societies, and the leisure with which they were furnished for study, are not the likeliest means to excite the exertions of genius: even science itself, the supposed offspring of leisure, pined in the shade of monastic retirement. Men at a distance from the objects of useful knowledge, untouched by the motives that animate an active and a vigorous mind, could produce only the jargon of a technical language, and accumulate the impertinence of accademical forms.
TO speak or to write justly from an observation of nature, it is necessary to have felt the sentiments of nature. He who is penetrating and ardent in the conduct of life, will probably exert a proportional force and ingenuity in the exercise of his literary talents: and although writing may become a trade, and require all the application and study which are bestowed on any other calling; yet the principal requisites in this calling are, the spirit and sensibility of a vigorous mind.
IN one period, the school may take its light and direction from active life; in another, it is true, the remains of an active spirit are greatly supported by literary monuments, and by the history of transactions that preserve the examples and the experience of former and of better times. But in whatever manner men are formed for great efforts of elocution or conduct, it appears the most glaring of all other deceptions, to look for the accomplishments of a human character in the mere attainments of speculation, whilst we neglect the qualities of fortitude and public affection, which are so necessary to render our knowledge an article of happiness or of use.
PART FOURTH.
Of Consequences that result from the Advancement of Civil and Commercial Arts.
SECT. I.
Of the Separation of Arts and Professions.
IT is evident, that, however urged by a sense of necessity, and a desire of convenience, or favoured by any advantages of situation and policy, a people can make no great progress in cultivating the arts of life, until they have separated, and committed to different persons, the several tasks, which require a peculiar skill and attention. The savage, or the barbarian, who must build and plant, and fabricate for himself, prefers in the interval of great alarms and fatigues, the enjoyments of sloth to the improvement of his fortune: he is, perhaps, by the diversity of his wants, discouraged from industry; or, by his divided attention, prevented from acquiring skill in the management of any particular subject.
THE enjoyment of peace, however, and the prospect of being able to exchange one commodity for another, turns by degrees, the hunter and the warrior into a tradesman and a merchant. The accidents which distribute the means of subsistence unequally, inclination, and favourable opportunities, assign the different occupations of men; and a sense of utility leads them, without end, to subdivide their professions.
THE artist finds, that the more he can confine his attention to a particular part of any work, his productions are the more perfect, and grow under his hands in the greater quantities. Every undertaker in manufacture finds, that the more he can subdivide the tasks of his workmen, and the more hands he can employ on separate articles, the more are his expences diminished, and his profits increased. The consumer too requires, in every kind of commodity, a workmanship more perfect than hands employed on a variety of subjects can produce; and the progress of commerce is but a continued subdivision of the mechanical arts.
EVERY craft may ingross the whole of a man's attention, and has a mystery which must be studied or learned by a regular apprenticeship. Nations of tradesmen come to consist of members who, beyond their own particular trade, are ignorant of all human affairs, and who may contribute to the preservation and enlargement of their commonwealth without making its interest an object of their regard or attention. Every individual is distinguished by his calling, and has a place to which he is fitted. The savage who knows no distinction but that of his merit, of his sex, or of his species, and to whom his community is the sovereign object of his affection, is astonished to find, that in a scene of this nature, his being a man does not qualify him for any station whatever: he flies to the woods with amazement, distaste, and aversion.
BY the separation of arts and professions, the sources of wealth are laid open; every species of material is wrought up to the greatest perfection, and every commodity is produced in the greatest abundance. The state may estimate its profits and its revenues by the number of its people. It may procure, by its treasure, that national consideration and power, which the savage maintains at the expence of his blood.
THE advantage gained in the inferior branches of manufacture by the separation of their parts, seem to be equalled by those which arise from a similar device in the higher departments of policy and war. The soldier is relieved from every care but that of his service; statesmen divide the business of civil government into shares; and the servants of the public, in every office, without being skilful in the affairs of state, may succeed, by observing forms which are already established on the experience of others. They are made, like the parts of an engine, to concur to a purpose, without any concert of their own: and, equally blind with the trader to any general combination, they unite with him, in furnishing to the state its resources, its conduct, and its force.
THE artifices of the beaver, the ant, and the bee, are ascribed to the wisdom of nature. Those of polished Nations are ascribed to themselves, and are supposed to indicate a capacity superior to that of rude minds. But the establishments of men, like those of every animal, are suggested by nature, and are the result of instinct, directed by the variety of situations in which mankind are placed. Those establishments arose from successive improvements that were made, without any sense of their general effect; and they bring human affairs to a state of complication, which the greatest reach of capacity with which human nature was ever adorned, could not have projected; nor even when the whole is carried into execution, can it be comprehended in its full extent.
WHO could anticipate, or even enumerate, the separate occupations and professions by which the members of any commercial state are distinguished; the variety of devices which are practised in separate cells, and which the artist, attentive to his own affair, has invented, to abridge or to facilitate his separate task? In coming to this mighty end, every generation, compared to its predecessors, may have appeared to be ingenious; compared to its followers, may have appeared to be dull: and human ingenuity, whatever heights it may have gained in a succession of ages, continues to move with an equal pace, and to creep in making the last as well as the first step of commercial or civil improvement.
IT may even be doubted, whether the measure of national capacity increases with the advancement of arts. Many mechanical arts, indeed, require no capacity; they succeed best under a total suppression of sentiment and reason; and ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand, or the foot, is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most, where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may, without any great effort of imagination, be considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.
THE forest has been felled by the savage without the use of the axe, and weights have been raised without the aid of the mechanical powers. The merit of the inventor, in every branch, probably deserves a preference to that of the performer; and he who invented a tool, or could work without its assistance, deserved the praise of ingenuity in a much higher degree than the mere artist, who, by its assistance, produces a superior work.
BUT if many parts in the practice of every art, and in the detail of every department, require no abilities, or actually tend to contract and to limit the views of the mind, there are others which lead to general reflections, and to enlargement of thought. Even in manufacture, the genius of the master, perhaps, is cultivated, while that of the inferior workman lies waste. The statesman may have a wide comprehension of human affairs, while the tools he employs are ignorant of the system in which they are themselves combined. The general officer may be a great proficient in the knowledge of war, while the soldier is confined to a few motions of the hand and the foot. The former may have gained, what the latter has lost; and being occupied in the conduct of disciplined armies, may practise on a larger scale, all the arts of preservation, of deception, and of stratagem, which the savage exerts in leading a small party, or merely in defending himself.
THE practitioner of every art and profession may afford matter of general speculation to the man of science; and thinking itself, in this age of separations, may become a peculiar craft. In the bustle of civil pursuits and occupations, men appear in a variety of lights, and suggest matter of inquiry and fancy, by which conversation is enlivened, and greatly enlarged. The productions of ingenuity are brought to the market; and men are willing to pay for whatever has a tendency to inform or amuse. By this means the idle, as well as the busy, contribute to forward the progress of arts, and bestow on polished nations that air of superior ingenuity, under which they appear to have gained the ends that were pursued by the savage in his forest, knowledge, order, and wealth.
SECT. II.
Of the Subordination consequent to the Separation of Arts and Professions!
THERE is one ground of subordination in the difference of natural talents and dispositions; a second in the unequal division of property; and a third, not less sensible, in the habits which are acquired by the practice of different arts.
SOME employments are liberal, others mechanic. They require different talents, and inspire different sentiments; and whether or not this be the cause of the preference we actually give, it is certainly reasonable to form our opinion of the rank that is due to men of certain professions and stations, from the influence of their manner of life in cultivating the powers of the mind, or in preserving the sentiments of the heart.
THERE is an elevation natural to man, by which he would be thought, in his rudest state, however urged by necessity, to rise above the consideration of mere subsistence, and the regards of interests: He would appear to act only from the heart, in its engagements of friendship, or opposition; he would shew himself only upon occasions of danger or difficulty, and leave ordinary cares to the weak or the servile.
THE same apprehensions, in every situation, regulate his notions of meanness or of dignity. In that of polished society, his desire to avoid the character of sordid, makes him conceal his regard for what relates merely to his preservation or his livelihood. In his estimation, the beggar, who depends upon charity; the labourer, who toils that he may eat; the mechanic, whose art requires no exertion of genius, are degraded by the object they pursue, and by the means they employ to attain it. Professions requiring more knowledge and study; proceeding on the exercise of fancy, and the love of perfection; leading to applause as well as to profit, place the artist in a superior class, and bring him nearer to that station in which men are supposed to be highest; because in it they are bound to no task; because they are left to follow the disposition of the mind, and to take that part in society, to which they are led by the sentiments of the heart, or by the calls of the public.
THIS last was the station, which, in the distinction betwixt freemen and slaves, the citizens of every ancient republic strove to gain, and to maintain for themselves. Women, or slaves, in the earliest ages, had been set apart for the purposes of domestic care, or bodily labour; and in the progress of lucrative arts, the latter were bred to mechanical professions, and were even intrusted with merchandise for the benefit of their masters. Freemen would be understood to have no object beside those of politics and war. In this manner, the honours of one half of the species were sacrificed to those of the other; as stones from the same quarry are buried in the foundation, to sustain the blocks which happen to be hewn for the superior parts of the pile. In the midst of our encomiums bestowed on the Greeks and the Romans, we are, by this circumstance, made to remember, that no human institution is perfect.
IN many of the Grecian states, the benefits arising to the free from this cruel distinction, were not conferred equally on all the citizens. Wealth being unequally divided, the rich alone were exempted from labour; the poor were reduced to work for their own subsistence: interest was a reigning passion in both, and the possession of slaves, like that of any other lucrative property, became an object of avarice, not an exemption from sordid attentions. The entire effects of the institution were obtained, or continued to be enjoyed for any considerable time, at Sparta alone. We feel its injustice; we suffer for the helot, under the severities and unequal treatment to which he was exposed: but when we think only of the superior order of men in this state; when we attend to that elevation and magnanimity of spirit, for which danger had no terror, interest no means to corrupt; when we consider them as friends, or as citizens, we are apt to forget, like themselves, that slaves have a title to be treated like men.
WE look for elevation of sentiment, and liberality of mind, among those orders of citizens, who, by their condition, and their fortunes, are relieved from sordid cares and attentions. This was the description of a free man at Sparta; and if the lot of a slave among the ancients was really more wretched than that of the indigent labourer and the mechanic among the moderns, it may be doubted, whether the superior orders, who are in possession of consideration and honours, do not proportionally fail in the dignity which befits their condition. If the pretensions to equal justice and freedom should terminate in rendering every class equally servile and mercenary, we make a nation of helots, and have no free citizens.
IN every commercial state, notwithstanding any pretension to equal rights, the exaltation of a few must depress the many. In this arrangement, we think that the extreme meanness of some classes must arise chiefly from the defect of knowledge, and of liberal education; and we refer to such classes, as to an image of what our species must have been in its rude and uncultivated state. But we forget how many circumstances, especially in populous cities, tend to corrupt the lowest orders of men. Ignorance is the least of their failings. An admiration of wealth unpossessed, becoming a principle of envy, or of servility; a habit of acting perpetually with a view to profit, and under a sense of subjection; the crimes to which they are allured, in order to feed their debauch, or to gratify their avarice, are examples, not of ignorance, but of corruption and baseness. If the savage has not received our instructions, he is likewise unacquainted with our vices. He knows no superior, and cannot be servile; he knows no distinctions of fortune, and cannot be envious; he acts from his talents in the highest station which human society can offer, that of the counsellor, and the soldier of his country. Toward forming his sentiments, he knows all that the heart requires to be known; he can distinguish the friend whom he loves, and the public interest which awakens his zeal.
THE principal objections to democratical or popular government, are taken from the inequalities which arise among men in the result of commercial arts. And it must be confessed, that popular assemblies, when composed of men whose dispositions are sordid, and whose ordinary applications are illiberal, however they may be intrusted with the choice of their masters and leaders, are certainly, in their own persons, unfit to command. How can he who has confined his views to his own subsistence or preservation, be intrusted with the conduct of nations? Such men, when admitted to deliberate on matters of state, bring to its councils confusion and tumult, or servility and corruption; and seldom suffer it to repose from ruinous factions, or the effect of resolutions ill formed or ill conducted.
THE Athenians retained their popular government under all these defects. The mechanic was obliged, under a penalty, to appear in the public market-place, and to hear debates on the subjects of war, and of peace. He was tempted by pecuniary rewards, to attend on the trial of civil and criminal causes. But notwithstanding an exercise tending so much to cultivate their talents, the indigent came always with minds intent upon profit, or with the habits of an illiberal calling. Sunk under the sense of their personal disparity and weakness, they were ready to resign themselves entirely to the influence of some popular leader, who flattered their passions, and wrought on their sears; or, actuated by envy, they were ready to banish from the state whomsoever was respectable and eminent in the superior order of citizens: and whether from their neglect of the public at one time, or their male-administration at another, the sovereignty was every moment ready to drop from their hands.
THE people, in this case, are, in fact, frequently governed by one, or a few, who know how to conduct them. Pericles possessed a species of princely authority at Athens; Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, either jointly or successively, possessed for a considerable period the sovereign direction at Rome.
WHETHER in great or in small states, democracy is preserved with difficulty, under the disparities of condition, and the unequal cultivation of the mind, which attend the variety of pursuits, and applications, that separate mankind in the advanced state of commercial arts. In this, however, we do but plead against the form of democracy, after the principle is removed; and see the absurdity of pretensions to equal influence and consideration, after the characters of men have ceased to be similar.
SECT. III.
Of the Manners of Polished and Commercial Nations.
MANKIND, when in their rude state, have a great uniformity of manners; but when civilized, they are engaged in a variety of pursuits; they tread on a larger field, and separate to a greater distance. If they be guided, however, by similar dispositions, and by like suggestions of nature, they will probably, in the end, as well as in the beginning of their progress, continue to agree in many particulars; and while communities admit, in their members, that diversity of ranks and professions which we have already described, as the consequence or the foundation of commerce, they will resemble each other in many effects of this distribution, and of other circumstances in which they nearly concur.
UNDER every form of government, statesmen endeavour to remove the dangers by which they are threatened from abroad, and the disturbances which molest them at home. By this conduct, if successful, they in a few ages gain an ascendant for their country; establish a frontier at a distance from its capital; they find, in the mutual desires of tranquility, which come to possess mankind, and in those public establishments which tend to keep the peace of society, a respite from foreign wars, and a relief from domestic disorders. They learn to decide every contest without tumult, and to secure, by the authority of law, every citizen in the possession of his personal rights.
IN this condition, to which thriving nations aspire, and which they in some measure attain, mankind having laid the basis of safety, proceed to erect a superstructure suitable to their views. The consequence is various in different states; even in different orders of men of the same community; and the effect to every individual corresponds with his station. It enables the statesman and the soldier to settle the forms of their different procedure; it enables the practitioner in every profession to pursue his separate advantage; it affords the man of pleasure a time for refinement, and the speculative, leisure for literary conversation or study.
IN this scene, matters that have little reference to the active pursuits of mankind, are made subjects of enquiry, and the exercise of sentiment and reason itself becomes a profession. The songs of the bard, the harangues of the statesman and the warrior, the tradition and the story of ancient times, are considered as the models, or the earliest production, of so many arts, which it becomes the object of different professions to copy or to improve. The works of fancy, like the subjects of natural history, are distinguished into classes and species; the rules of every particular kind are distinctly collected; and the library is stored, like the warehouse, with the finished manufacture of different arts, who, with the aids of the grammarian and the critic, aspire, each in his particular way, to instruct the head, or to move the heart.
EVERY nation is a motley assemblage of different characters, and contains, under any political form, some examples of that variety, which the humours, tempers, and apprehensions of men, so differently employed, are likely to furnish. Every profession has its point of honour, and its system of manners; the merchant his punctuality and fair dealing; the statesman his capacity and address; the man of society, his good breeding and wit. Every station has a carriage, a dress, a ceremonial, by which it is distinguished, and by which it suppresses the national character under that of the rank, or of the individual.
THIS description may be applied equally to Athens and Rome, to London and Paris. The rude or the simple observer would remark the variety he saw in the dwellings and in the occupations of different men, not in the aspect of different nations. He would find, in the streets of the same city, as great a diversity, as in the territory of a separate people. He could not pierce through the cloud that was gathered before him, nor see how the tradesman, mechanic, or scholar, of one country, should differ from those of another. But the native of every province can distinguish the foreigner; and when he himself travels, is struck with the aspect of a strange country, the moment he passes the bounds of his own. The air of the person, the tone of the voice, the idiom of language, and the strain of conversation, whether pathetic or languid, gay or severe, are no longer the same.
MANY such differences may arise among polished nations, from the effects of climate, or from sources of fashion, that are still more unaccountable and obscure; but the principal distinctions on which we can rest, are derived from the part a people are obliged to act in their national capacity; from the objects placed in their view by the state; or from the constitution of government, which prescribing the terms of society to its subjects, has a great influence in forming their apprehensions and habits.
THE Roman people, destined to acquire wealth by conquest, and by the spoil of provinces; the Carthaginians, intent on the returns of merchandise, and the produce of commercial settlements, must have filled the streets of their several capitals with men of a different disposition and aspect. The Roman laid hold of his sword when he wished to be great, and the state found her armies prepared in the dwellings of her people. The Carthaginian retired to his counter on a similar project; and, when the state was alarmed, or had resolved on a war, lent of his profits to purchase an army abroad.
THE member of a republic, and the subject of a monarchy, must differ; because they have different parts assigned to them by the forms of their country: the one destined to live with his equals, or, by his personal talents and character, to contend for pre-eminence; the other born to a determinate station, where any pretence to equality creates a confusion, and where nought but precedence is studied. Each, when the institutions of his country are mature, may find in the laws a protection to his personal rights; but those rights themselves are differently understood, and with a different set of opinions, give rise to a different temper of mind. The republican must act in the state, to sustain his pretensions; he must join a party, in order to be safe; he must form one, in order to be great. The subject of monarchy refers to his birth for the honour he claims; he waits on a court, to shew his importance; and holds out the ensigns of dependence and favour, to gain him esteem with the public.
IF national institutions, calculated for the preservation of liberty, instead of calling upon the citizen to act for himself, and to maintain his rights, should give a security, requiring, on his part, no personal attention or effort; this seeming perfection of government might weaken the bands of society, and, upon maxims of independence, separate and estrange the different ranks it was meant to reconcile. Neither the parties formed in republics, nor the courtly assemblies which meet in monarchical governments, could take place, where the sense of a mutual dependence should cease to summon their members together. The resorts for commerce might be frequented, and mere amusement might be pursued in the croud, while the private dwelling became a retreat for reserve, averse to the trouble arising from regards, and attentions, which it might be part of the political creed to believe of no consequence, and a point of honour to hold in contempt.
THIS humour is not likely to grow either in republics or monarchies: it belongs more properly to a mixture of both; where the administration of justice may be better secured; where the subject is tempted to look for equality, but where he finds only independence in its place; and where he learns, from a spirit of equality, to hate the very distinctions to which, on account of their real importance, he pays a remarkable deference.
IN either of the separate forms of republic or monarchy, or in acting on the principles of either, men are obliged to court their fellow-citizens, and to employ parts and address to improve their fortunes, or even to be safe. They find in both a school for discernment and penetration; but in the one, are taught to overlook the merits of a private character, for the sake of abilities that have weight with the public; and in the other, to overlook great and respectable talents, for the sake of qualities engaging or pleasant in the scene of entertainment, and private society. They are obliged, in both, to adapt themselves with care to the fashion and manners of their country. They find no place for caprice or singular humours. The republican must be popular, and the courtier polite. The first must think himself well placed in every company; the other must chuse his resorts, and desire to be distinguished only where the society itself is esteemed. With his inferiors, he takes an air of protection; and suffers, in his turn, the same air to be taken with himself. It did not, perhaps, require in a Spartan, who feared nothing but a failure in his duty, who loved nothing but his friend and the state, so constant a guard on himself to support his character, as it frequently does in the subject of a monarchy, to adjust his expence and his fortune to the desires of his vanity, and to appear in a rank as high as his birth, or ambition, can possibly reach.
THERE is no particular, in the mean time, in which we are more frequently unjust, than in applying to the individual the supposed character of his country; or more frequently misled, than in taking our notion of a people from the example of one, or a few of their members. It belonged to the constitution of Athens, to have produced a Cleon, and a Pericles; but all the Athenians were not, therefore, like Cleon, or Pericles. Themistocles and Aristides lived in the same age; the one advised what was profitable; the other told his country what was just.
SECT. IV.
The same subject continued.
THE law of Nature, with respect to nations, is the same that it is with respect to individuals: it gives to the collective body a right to preserve themselves; to employ, undisturbed, the means of life; to retain the fruits of labour; to demand observance of stipulations and contracts. In the case of violence, it condemns the aggressor, and establishes, on the part of the injured, the right of defence, and a claim to retribution. Its applications, however, admit of disputes, and give rise to variety in the apprehension, as well as the practice of mankind.
NATIONS have agreed universally, in distinguishing right from wrong; in exacting the reparation of injuries by consent or by force. They have always reposed, in a certain degree, on the faith of treaties; but have acted as if force were the ultimate arbiter in all their disputes, and the power to defend themselves, the surest pledge of their safety. Guided by these common apprehensions, they have differed from one another, not merely in points of form, but in points of the greatest importance, respecting the usage of war, the effects of captivity, and the rights of conquest and victory.
WHEN a number of independent communities have been frequently involved in wars, and have had their stated alliances and oppositions, they adopt customs which they make the foundation of rules, or of laws, to be observed, or alledged, in all their mutual transactions. Even in war itself, they would follow a system, and plead for the observance of forms in their very operations for mutual destruction.
THE ancient states of Greece and Italy derived their manners in war from the nature of their republican government; those of modern Europe, from the influence of monarchy, which, by its prevalence in this part of the world, has a great effect on nations, even where it is not the form established. Upon the maxims of this government, we apprehend a distinction between the state and its members, as that between the King and the people, which renders war an operation of policy, not of popular animosity. While we strike at the public interest, we would spare the private; and we carry a respect and consideration for individuals, which often stops the issues of blood in the ardour of victory, and procures to the prisoner of war an hospitable reception in the very city which he came to destroy. These practices are so well established, that scarcely any provocation on the part of an enemy, or any exigence of service, can excuse a trespass on the supposed rules of humanity, or save the leader who commits it from becoming an object of detestation and horror.
TO this, the general practice of the Greeks and the Romans was opposite. They endeavoured to wound the state by destroying its members, by desolating its territory, and by ruining the possessions of its subjects. They granted quarter only to inslave, or to bring the prisoner to a more solemn execution; and an enemy, when disarmed, was, for the most part, either sold in the market, or killed, that he might never return to strengthen his party. When this was the issue of war, it was no wonder, that battles were fought with desperation, and that every fortress was defended to the last extremity. The game of human life went upon a high stake, and was played with a proportional zeal.
THE term barbarian, in this state of manners, could not be employed by the Greeks or the Romans in that sense in which we use it; to characterise a people regardless of commercial arts; profuse of their own lives, and of those of others; vehement in their attachment to one society, and implacable in their antipathy to another. This, in a great and shining part of their history, was their own character, as well as that of some other nations, whom, upon this very account, we distinguish by the appellations of barbarous or rude.
IT has been observed, that those celebrated nations are indebted, for a great part of their estimation, not to the matter of their history, but to the manner in which it has been delivered, and to the capacity of their historians, and other writers. Their story has been told by men who knew how to draw our attention on the proceedings of the understanding and of the heart, more than on the detail of fact; and who could exhibit characters to be admired and loved, in the midst of actions which we should now universally hate or condemn. Like Homer, the model of Grecian literature, they could make us forget the horrors of a vindictive, cruel and remorseless proceeding towards an enemy, in behalf of the strenuous conduct, the courage, and vehement affections, with which the hero maintained the cause of his friend and of his country.
OUR manners are so different, and the system upon which we regulate our apprehensions, in many things, so opposite, that no less could make us endure the practice of ancient nations. Were that practice recorded by the mere journalist, who retains only the detail of events, without throwing any light on the character of the actors; who, like the Tartar historian, tells only what blood was spilt in the field, and how many inhabitants were massacred in the city; we should never have distinguished the Greeks from their barbarous neighbours, nor have thought, that the character of civility pertained even to the Romans, till very late in their history, and in the decline of their empire.
IT would, no doubt, be pleasant to see the remarks of such a traveller as we sometimes send abroad to inspect the manners of mankind, left, unassisted by history, to collect the character of the Greeks from the state of their country, or from their practice in war.
This country, he might say, compared to ours, has an air of barrenness and desolation. I saw upon the road troops of labourers, who were employed in the fields; but no where the habitations of the master and the landlord. It was unsafe, I was told, to reside in the country; and the people of every district crouded into towns to find a place of defence. It is indeed impossible, that they can be more civilized, till they have established some regular government, and have courts of justice to hear their complaints. At present, every town, nay, I may say, every village, acts for itself, and the greatest disorders prevail. I was not indeed molested; for you must know, that they call themselves nations, and do all their mischief under the pretence of war.
I do not mean to take any of the liberties of travellers, nor to vie with the celebrated author of the voyage to Lilliput; but cannot help endeavouring to communicate what I felt on hearing them speak of their territory, their armies, their revenue, treaties, and alliances. Only imagine the church-wardens and constables of Highgate or Hampstead turned statesmen and generals, and you will have a tolerable conception of this singular country. I passed through one state, where the best house in the capital would not lodge the meanest of your labourers, and where your very beggars would not chuse to dine with the King; and yet they are thought a great nation, and have no less than two kings. I saw one of them; but such a potentate! he had scarcely cloaths to his back; and for his Majesty's table, he was obliged to go to the eating-house with his subjects. They have not a single farthing of money; and I was obliged to get food at the public expence, there being none to be had in the market. You will imagine, that there must have been a service of plate, and great attendance, to wait upon the illustrious stranger; but my fare was a mess of sorry pottage, brought me by a naked slave, who left me to deal with it as I thought proper: and even this I was in continual danger of having stolen from me by the children, who are as vigilant to seize opportunities, and as dextrous in snatching their food, as any starved greyhound you ever saw. The misery of the whole people, in short, as well as my own, while I staid there, was beyond description. You would think that their whole attention were to torment themselves as much as they can: they are even displeased with one of their kings for being well liked. He had made a present, while I was there, of a cow to one favourite, and of a waistcoat to another Plutarch, in the life of Agesilaus.
; and it was publicly said, that this method of gaining friends was robbing the public. My landlord told me very gravely, that a man should come under no obligation that might weaken the love which he owes to his country; nor form any personal attachment beyond the mere habit of living with his friend, and of doing him a kindness when he can.
I asked him once, Why they did not, for their own sakes, enable their kings to assume a little more state? Because says he, we intend them the happiness of living with men. When I found fault with their houses, and said in particular, that I was surprised they did not build better churches; What would you be then, says he, if you found religion in stone walls? This will suffice for a sample of our conversation; and sententious as it was, you may believe I did not stay long to profit by it.
THE
are not quite so stupid.
large square of a market-place tolerable buildings; and, I am told, have some barks and lighters employed in trade, which they likewise, upon occasion, muster into a fleet, like my Lord Mayor's shew. But what pleases me most, is, that I am likely to get a passage from hence, and bid farewell to this wretched country. I have been at some pains to observe their cercmonies of religion, and to pick up curiosities. I have copied some inscriptions, as you will see when you come to peruse my journal, and will then judge, whether I have met with enough to compensate the fatigues and bad entertainment to which I have submitted. As for the people, you will believe, from the specimen I have given you, that they could not be very engaging company: though poor and dirty, they still pretend to be proud; and a fellow who is not worth a groat, is above working for his livelihood. They come abroad barefooted, and without any cover to the head, wrapt up in the coverlets under which you would imagine they had slept. They throw all off, and appear like so many naked cannibals, when they go to violent sports and exercises: at which they highly value feats of dexterity and strength. Brawny limbs, and muscular arms, the faculty of sleeping out all nights, of fasting long, and of putting up with any kind of food, are thought genteel accomplishments. They have no settled government that I could learn; sometimes the mob, and sometimes the better sort, do what they please: they meet in great crouds in the open air, and seldom agree about any thing. If a fellow has presumption enough, and a loud voice, he can make a great figure. There was a tanner here, some time ago, who, for a while, carried every thing before him. He censured so loudly what others had done, and talked so big of what might be performed, that he was sent out at last to make good his words, and to curry the enemy instead of his leather Thucydides, lib. 4.Aristophanes.
. You will imagine, perhaps, that he was pressed for a recruit; no;he was sent to command the army. They are indeed seldom long of one mind, except in their readiness to harass their neighbours. They go out in bodies, and rob, pillage, and murder where-ever they come.
So far may we suppose our traveller to have written; and upon a recollection of the reputation which those nations have acquired at a distance, he might have added, perhaps, That he could not understand how scholars, fine gentlemen, and even women, should combine to admire a people, who so little resemble themselves.
TO form a judgement of the character from which they acted in the field, and in their competitions with neighbouring nations, we must observe them at home. They were bold and fearless in their civil dissensions; ready to proceed to extremities, and to carry their debates to the decision of force. Individuals stood distinguished by their personal spirit and vigour, not by the valuation of their estates, or the rank of their birth. They had a personal elevation founded on the sense of equality, not of precedence. The general of one campaign was, during the next, a private soldier, and served in the ranks. They were solicitous to acquire bodily strength; because, in the use of their weapons, battles were a trial of the soldier's strength, as well as of the leader's conduct. The remains of their statuary, shews a manly grace, an air of simplicity and ease, which being frequent in nature, were familiar to the artist. The mind, perhaps, borrowed a confidence and force, from the vigour and address of the body; their eloquence and style bore a resemblance to the carriage of the person. The understanding was chiefly cultivated in the practice of affairs. The most respectable personages were obliged to mix with the croud, and derived their degree of ascendency, only from their conduct, their eloquence, and personal vigour. They had no forms of expression, to mark a ceremonious and guarded respect. Invective proceeded to railing, and the grossest terms were often employed by the most admired and accomplished orators. Quarrelling had no rules but the immediate dictates of passion, which ended in words of reproach, in violence and blows. They fortunately went always unarmed; and to wear a sword in times of peace, was among them the mark of a barbarian. When they took arms in the divisions of faction, the prevailing party supported itself by expelling their opponents, by proscriptions, and bloodshed. The usurper endeavoured to maintain his station by the most violent and prompt executions. He was opposed, in his turn by conspiracies and assassinations, in which the most respectable citizens were ready to use the dagger.
SUCH was the character of their spirit, in its occasional ferments at home; and it burst commonly with a suitable violence and force, against their foreign rivals and enemies. The amiable plea of humanity was little regarded by them in the operations of war. Cities were razed, or inslaved; the captive sold, mutilated, or condemned to die.
WHEN viewed on this side, the ancient nations have but a sorry plea for esteem with the inhabitants of modern Europe, who profess to carry the civilities of peace into the practice of war; and who value the praise of indiscriminate lenity at a higher rate than even that of military prowess, or the love of their country. And yet they have in other respects, merited and obtained our praise. Their ardent attachment to their country; their contempt of suffering, and of death, in its cause; their manly apprehensions of personal independence, which rendered every individual, even under tottering establishments, and imperfect laws, the guardian of freedom to his fellowcitizens; their activity of mind; in short, their penetration, the ability of their conduct, and force of their spirit, have gained them the first rank among nations.
IF their animosities were great, their affections were proportionate: they, perhaps, loved, where we only pity; and were stern and inexorable, where we are not merciful, but only irresolute. After all, the merit of a man is determined by his candour and generosity to his associates, by his zeal for national objects, and by his vigour in maintaining political rights; not by moderation alone, which proceeds frequently from indifference to national and public interests, and which serves to relax the nerves on which the force of a private as well as a public character depends.
WHEN under the Macedonian and the Roman monarchies, a nation came to be considered as the estate of a prince, and the inhabitants of a province to be regarded as a lucrative property, the possession of territory, not the destruction of its people, became the object of conquest. The pacific citizen had little concern in the quarrels of sovereigns; the violence of the soldier was restrained by discipline. He fought, because he was taught to carry arms, and to obey: he sometimes shed unnecessary blood in the ardour of victory; but, except in the case of civil wars, had no passions to excite his animosity beyond the field and the day of battle. Leaders judged of the objects of an enterprise, and they arrested the sword when these were obtained.
IN the modern nations of Europe, where extent of territory admits of a distinction between the state and its subjects, we are accustomed to think of the individual with compassion, seldom of the public with zeal. We have improved on the laws of war, and on the lenitives which have been devised to soften its rigours; we have mingled politeness with the use of the sword; we have learned to make war under the stipulations of treaties and cartels, and trust to the faith of an enemy whose ruin we meditate. Glory is more successfully obtained by saving and protecting, than by destroying the vanquished: and the most amiable of all objects is, in appearance, attained; the employing of force, only for the obtaining of justice, and for the preservation of national rights.
THIS is, perhaps, the principal characteristic, on which, among modern nations, we bestow the epithets of civilized or of polished.
But we have seen, that it did not accompany the progress of arts among the Greeks, nor keep pace with the advancement of policy, literature, and philosophy. It did not await the returns of learning and politeness among the moderns; it was found in early periods of our history, and distinguished, perhaps, more than at present, the manners of ages otherwise rude and undisciplined. A King of France, prisoner in the hands of his enemies, was treated, about four hundred years ago, with as much distinction and courtesy, as a crowned head, in the like circumstances, could possibly expect in this age of politeness Hume's History of England.
. The Prince of Conde, defeated and taken in the battle of Dreux, slept at night in the same bed with his enemy the Duke of Guise Davila.
.
IF the moral of popular traditions, and the taste of fabulous legends, which are the production or entertainment of particular ages, are likewise sure indications of their notions and characters, we may presume, that the foundation of what is now held to be the law of war, and of nations, was laid in the manners of Europe, together with the sentiments which are expressed in the tales of chivalry, and of gallantry. Our system of war differs not more from that of the Greeks, than the favourite characters of our early romance differed from those of the Iliad, and of every ancient poem. The hero of the Greek fable, endued with superior force, courage, and address, takes every advantage of an enemy, to kill with safety to himself; and actuated by a desire of spoil, or by a principle of revenge, is never stayed in his progress by interruptions of remorse or compassion. Homer, who, of all poets, knew best how to exhibit the emotions of a vehement affection, seldom attempts to excite commiseration. Hector falls unpitied, and his body is insulted by every Greek.
OUR modern fable, or romance, on the contrary, generally couples an object of pity, weak, oppressed, and defenceless, with an object of admiration, brave, generous, and victorious; or sends the hero abroad in search of mere danger, and of occasions to prove his valour. Charged with the maxims of a refined courtesy, to be observed even towards an enemy; and of a scrupulous honour, which will not suffer him to take any advantages by artifice or surprise; indifferent to spoil, he contends only for renown, and employs his valour to rescue the distressed, and to protect the innocent. If victorious, he is made to rise above nature as much in his generosity and gentleness, as in his military prowess and valour.
IT may be difficult, upon stating this contrast between the system of ancient and modern fable, to assign, among nations equally rude, equally addicted to war, and equally fond of military glory, the origin of apprehensions on the point of honour, so different, and so opposite. The hero of Greek poetry proceeds on the maxims of animosity and hostile passion. His maxims in war are like those which prevail in the woods of America. They require him to be brave, but they allow him to practise against his enemy every sort of deception. The hero of modern romance professes a contempt of stratagem, as well as of danger, and unites in the same person, characters and dispositions seemingly opposite; ferocity with gentleness, and the love of blood with sentiments of tenderness and pity.
THE system of chivalry, when completely formed, proceeded on a marvellous respect and veneration to the fair sex, on forms of combat established, and on a supposed junction of the heroic and sanctified character. The formalities of the duel, and a kind of judicial challenge, were known among the ancient Celtic nations of Europe. The Germans, even in their native forests, paid a kind of devotion to the female sex. The Christian religion injoined meekness and compassion to barbarous ages. These different principles combined together, may have served as the foundation of a system, in which courage was directed by religion and love, and the warlike and gentle were united together. When the characters of the hero and the saint were mixed, the mild spirit of Christianity, though often turned into venom by the bigotry of opposite parties, though it could not always subdue the ferocity of the warrior, nor suppress the admiration of courage and force, may have confirmed the apprehensions of men in what was to be held meritorious and splendid in the conduct of their quarrels.
IN the early and traditionary history of the Greeks and the Romans, rapes were assigned as the most frequent occasions of war; and the sexes were, no doubt, at all times, equally important to each other. The enthusiasm of love is most powerful in the neighbourhood of Asia and Africa; and beauty, as a possession, was probably more valued by the countrymen of Homer, than it was by those of Amadis de Gaul, or by the authors of modern gallantry.
What wonder, says the old Priam, when Helen appeared, that nations should contend for the possession of so much beauty?
This beauty, indeed, was possessed by different lovers; a subject on which the modern hero had many refinements, and seemed to soar in the clouds. He adored at a respectful distance, and employed his valour to captivate the admiration, not to gain the possession of his mistress. A cold and unconquerable chastity was set up, as an idol to be worshipped, in the toils, the sufferings, and the combats of the hero and the lover.
THE feudal establishments, by the high rank to which they elevated certain families, no doubt greatly favoured this romantic system. Not only the lustre of a noble descent, but the stately castle beset with battlements and towers, served to inflame the imagination, and create a veneration for the daughter and the sister of gallant chiefs, whose point of honour it was to be inaccessible and chaste, and who could perceive no merit but that of the high-minded and the brave, nor be approached in any other accents than those of gentleness and respect.
WHAT was originally singular in these apprehensions, was, by the writer of romance, turned to extravagance; and under the title of chivalry was offered as a model of conduct, even in common affairs: the fortunes of nations were directed by gallantry; and human life, on its greatest occasions, became a scene of affectation and folly. Warriors went forth to realize the legends they had studied; princes and leaders of armies dedicated their most serious exploits to a real or to a fancied mistress.
BUT whatever was the origin of notions, often so lofty and so ridiculous, we cannot doubt of their lasting effects on our manners. The point of honour, the prevalence of gallantry in our conversations, and on our theatres, many of the opinions which the vulgar apply even to the conduct of war; their notion, that the leader of an army, being offered battle upon equal terms, is dishonoured by declining it, are undoubtedly remains of this antiquated system: and chivalry, uniting with the genius of our policy, has probably suggested those particularities in the law of nations, by which modern states are distinguished from the ancient. And if our rule in measuring degrees of politeness and civilization is to be taken from hence, or from the advancement of commercial arts, we shall be found to have greatly excelled any of the celebrated nations of antiquity.
PART FIFTH.
Of the Decline of Nations.
SECT. I.
Of supposed National Eminence, and of the Vicissitudes of Human Affairs.
NO nation is so unfortunate as to think itself inferior to the rest of mankind: few are even willing to put up with the claim to equality. The greater part having chosen themselves, as at once, the judges and the models of what is excellent in their kind, are first in their own opinion, and give to others consideration or eminence, so far only as they approach to their own condition. One nation is vain of the personal character, or of the learning, of a few of its members; another, of its policy, its wealth, its tradesmen, its gardens, and its buildings; and they who have nothing to boast, are vain, because they are ignorant. The Russians, before the reign of Peter the Great, thought themselves possessed of every national honour, and held the Nemei, or dumb Nations, (the name which they bestowed on their western neighbours of Europe), in a proportional degree of contempt Strahlenberg.
. The map of the world, in China, was a square plate, the greater part of which was occupied by the provinces of this great empire, leaving on its skirts a few obscure corners, into which the wretched remainder of mankind were supposed to be driven.
If you have not the use of our letters, nor the knowledge of our books, said the learned Chinese to the European missionary, what literature, or what science, can you have Gemelli Carceri.
?
THE term polished, if we may judge from its etymology, originally referred to the state of nations in respect to their laws and government. In its later application, it refers no less to their proficiency in the liberal and mechanical arts, in literature, and in commerce. But whatever may be its applications, it appears, that if there were a name still more respectable than this, every nation, even the most barbarous, or the most corrupted, would assume it; and bestow its reverse where they conceived a dislike, or apprehended a difference. The names of alien, or foreigner, are seldom pronounced without some degree of intended reproach. That of barbarian, in use with one arrogant people, and that of gentil, with another, only served to distinguish the stranger, whose language and pedigree differed from theirs.
EVEN where we pretend to found our opinions on reason, and to justify our preference of one nation to another, we frequently bestow our esteem on circumstances which do not relate to national character, and which have little tendency to promote the welfare of mankind. Conquest, or great extent of territory, however peopled, and great wealth, however distributed or employed, are titles upon which we indulge our own, and the vanity of other nations, as we do that of private men on the score of their fortunes and honours. We even sometimes contend, whose capital is the most overgrown; whose king has the most absolute power: and at whose court the bread of the subject is consumed in the most senseless riot. These indeed are the notions of vulgar minds; but it is impossible to determine, how far the notions of vulgar minds may lead mankind.
THERE have certainly been very few examples of states, who have, by arts or policy, improved the original dispositions of human nature, or endeavoured, by wise and effectual precautions, to prevent its corruption. Affection, and force of mind, which are the band and the strength of communities, were the inspiration of God, and original attributes in the nature of man. The wisest policy of nations, except in a very few instances, has tended, we may suspect, rather to maintain the peace of society, and to repress the external effects of bad passions, than to strengthen the disposition of the heart itself to justice and goodness. It has tended, by introducing a variety of arts, to exercise the ingenuity of men, and by engaging them in a variety of pursuits, inquiries, and studies, to inform, but frequently to corrupt the mind. It has tended to furnish matter of distinction and vanity; and by incumbering the individual with new subjects of personal care, to substitute the anxiety he entertains for himself, instead of the confidence and the affection he should entertain for his fellow-creatures.
WHETHER this suspicion be just or no, we are come to point at circumstances tending to verify, or to disprove it: and if to understand the real felicity of nations be of importance, it is certainly so likewise, to know what are those weaknesses, and those vices, by which men not only mar this felicity, but in one age forfeit all the external advantages they had gained in a former.
THE wealth, the aggrandizement and power of nations, are commonly the effects of virtue; the loss of these advantages, is often a consequence of vice.
WERE we to suppose men to have succeeded in the discovery and application of every art by which states are preserved, and governed; to have attained, by efforts of wisdom and magnanimity, the admired establishments and advantages of a civilized and flourishing people; the subsequent part of their history, containing, according to vulgar apprehension, a full display of those fruits in maturity, of which they had till then carried only the blossom, and the first formation, should, still more than the former, merit our attention, and excite our admiration.
THE event, however, has not corresponded to this expectation. The virtues of men have shone most during their struggles, not after the attainment of their ends. Those ends themselves, though attained by virtue, are frequently the causes of corruption and vice. Mankind, in aspiring to national felicity, have substituted arts which increase their riches, instead of those which improve their nature. They have entertained admiration of themselves, under the titles of civilized and of polished, where they should have been affected with shame; and even where they have for a while acted on maxims tending to raise, to invigorate, and to preserve the national character, they have, sooner or later, been diverted from their object, and fallen a prey to misfortune, or to the neglects which prosperity itself had encouraged.
WAR, which furnishes mankind with a principal occupation of their restless spirit, serves, by the variety of its events, to diversify their fortunes. While it opens to one tribe or society, the way to eminence, and leads to dominion, it brings another to subjection, and closes the scene of their national efforts. The celebrated rivalship of Carthage and Rome was, in both parties, the natural exercise of an ambitious spirit, impatient of opposition, or even of equality. The conduct and the fortune of leaders, held the balance for some time in suspence; but to which ever side it had inclined, a great nation was to fall; a seat of empire, and of policy, was to be removed from its place; and it was then to be determined, whether the Syriac or the Latin should contain the erudition that was, in future ages, to occupy the studies of the learned.
STATES have been thus conquered from abroad, before they gave any signs of internal decay, even in the midst of prosperity, and in the period of their greatest ardour for national objects. Athens, in the height of her ambition, and of her glory, received a fatal wound, in striving to extend her maritime power beyond the Grecian seas. And nations of every description, formidable by their rude ferocity, respected for their discipline and military experience, when advancing, as well as when declining, in their strength, fell a prey, by turns, to the ambition and arrogant spirit of the Romans. Such examples may excite and alarm the jealousy and caution of states; the presence of similar dangers may exercise the talents of politicians and statesmen; but mere reverses of fortune are the common materials of history, and must long since have ceased to create our surprise.
DID we find, that nations advancing from small beginnings, and arrived at the possession of arts which lead to dominion, became secure of their advantages, in proportion as they were qualified to gain them; that they proceeded in a course of uninterrupted felicity, till they were broke by external calamities; and that they retained their force, till a more fortunate or vigorous power arose to depress them; the subject in speculation could not be attended with many difficulties, nor give rise to many reflections. But when we observe among nations a kind of spontaneous return to obscurity and weakness; when, in spite of perpetual admonitions of the danger they run, they suffer themselves to be subdued, in one period, by powers which could not have entered into competition with them in a former, and by forces which they had often baffled and despised; the subject becomes more curious, and its explanation more difficult.
THE fact itself is known in a variety of different examples. The empire of Asia was, more than once, transferred from the greater to the inferior power. The states of Greece, once so warlike, felt a relaxation of their vigour, and yielded the ascendant they had disputed with the monarchs of the east, to the forces of an obscure principality, become formidable in a few years, and raised to eminence under the conduct of a single man. The Roman empire, which stood alone for ages; which had brought every rival under subjection, and saw no power from whom a competition could be feared, sunk at last before an artless and contemptible enemy. Abandoned to inroad, to pillage, and at last to conquest, on her frontier, she decayed in all her extremities, and shrunk on every side. Her territory was dismembered, and whole provinces gave way, like branches fallen down with age, not violently torn by superior force. The spirit with which Marius had baffled and repelled the attacks of barbarians in a former age, the civil and military force with which the consul and his legions had extended this empire, were now no more. The Roman greatness, doomed to sink as it rose, by slow degrees, was impaired in every encounter. It was reduced to its original dimensions, within the compass of a single city; and depending for its preservation on the fortune of a siege, it was extinguished at a blow; and the brand, which had filled the world with its flames, sunk like a taper in the socket.
SUCH appearances have given rise to a general apprehension, that the progress of societies to what we call the heights of national greatness, is not more natural, than their return to weakness and obscurity is necessary and unavoidable. The images of youth, and of old age, are applied to nations; and communities, like single men, are supposed to have a period of life, and a length of thread, which is spun by the fates in one part uniform and strong, in another weakened and shattered by use; to be cut, when the destined aera is come, and to make way for a renewal of the emblem in the case of those who arise in succession. Carthage, being so much older than Rome, had felt her decay, says Polybius, so much the sooner: and the survivor too, he foresaw, carried in her bosom the seeds of mortality.
THE image indeed is apposite, and the history of mankind renders the application familiar. But it must be obvious, that the case of nations, and that of individuals, are very different. The human frame has a general course; it has, in every individual, a frail contexture, and a limited duration; it is worn by exercise, and exhausted by a repetition of its functions: But in a society, whose constituent members are renewed in every generation, where the race seems to enjoy perpetual youth, and accumulating advantages, we cannot, by any parity of reason, expect to find imbecilities connected with mere age and length of days.
THE subject is not new, and reflections will croud upon every reader. The notions, in the mean time, which we entertain, even in speculation, upon a subject so important, cannot be entirely fruitless to mankind; and however little the labours of the speculative may influence the conduct of men, one of the most pardonable errors a writer can commit, is to believe that he is about to do a great deal of good. But leaving the care of effects to others, we proceed to consider the grounds of inconstancy among mankind, the sources of internal decay, and the ruinous corruptions to which nations are liable, in the supposed condition of accomplished civility.
SECT. II.
Of the Temporary Efforts and Relaxations of the National Spirit.
FROM what we have already observed on the general characteristics of human nature, it has appeared, that man is not made for repose. In him, every amiable and respectable quality is an active power, and every subject of commendation an effort. If his errors and his crimes are the movements of an active being, his virtues and his happiness consist likewise in the employment of his mind; and all the lustre which he casts around him, to captivate or engage the attention of his fellow-creatures, like the flame of a meteor, shines only while his motion continues: the moments of rest and of obscurity are the same. We know, that the tasks assigned him frequently may exceed, as well as come short of his powers; that he may be agitated too much, as well as too little; but cannot ascertain a precise medium between the situations in which he would be harassed, and those in which he would fall into languor. We know, that he may be employed on a great variety of subjects, which occupy different passions; and that, in consequence of habit, he becomes reconciled to very different scenes. All we can determine in general is, that whatever be the subjects with which he is engaged, the frame of his nature requires him to be occupied, and his happiness requires him to be just.
WE are now to inquire, why nations cease to be eminent; and why societies which have drawn the attention of mankind by great examples of magnanimity, conduct, and national success, should sink from the height of their honours, and yield, in one age, the palm which they had won in a former. Many reasons will probably occur. One may be taken from the fickleness and inconstancy of mankind, who become tired of their pursuits and exertions, even while the occasions that gave rise to those pursuits, in some measure continue: Another, from the change of situations, and the removal of objects which served to excite their spirit.
THE public safety, and the relative interests of states; political establishments, the pretensions of party, commerce, and arts, are subjects which engage the attention of nations. The advantages gained in some of these particulars, determine the degree of national prosperity. The ardour and vigour with which they are at any one time pursued, is the measure of a national spirit. When those objects cease to animate, nations may be said to languish; when they are during any considerable time neglected, states must decline, and their people degenerate.
IN the most forward, enterprising, inventive, and industrious nations, this spirit is fluctuating; and they who continue longest to gain advantages, or to preserve them, have periods of remissness, as well as of ardour. The desire of public safety, is, at all times, a powerful motive of conduct; but it operates most, when combined with occasional passions, when provocations inflame, when successes encourage, or mortifications exasperate.
A WHOLE people, like the individuals of whom they are composed, act under the influence of temporary humours, sanguine hopes, or vehement animosities. They are disposed, at one time, to enter on national struggles with vehemence; at another, to drop them from mere lassitude and disgust. In their civil debates and contentions at home, they are occasionally ardent or remiss. Epidemical passions arise or subside, on trivial, as well as important, grounds. Parties are ready, at one time, to take their names, and the pretence of their oppositions, from mere caprice or accident; at another time, they suffer the most serious occasions to pass in silence. If a vein of literary genius be casually opened, or a new subject of disquisition be started, real or pretended discoveries suddenly multiply, and every conversation is inquisitive and animated. If a new source of wealth be found, or a prospect of conquest be offered, the imaginations of men are inflamed, and whole quarters of the globe are suddenly engaged in ruinous or in successful adventures.
COULD we recall the spirit that was exerted, or enter into the views that were entertained, by our ancestors, when they burst, like a deluge, from their ancient seats, and poured into the Roman Empire, we should probably, after their first successes, at least, find a ferment in the minds of men, for which no attempt was too arduous, no difficulties insurmountable.
THE subsequent ages of enterprise in Europe, were those in which the alarm of enthusiasm was rung, and the followers of the cross invaded the East, to plunder a country, and to recover a sepulchre; those in which the people in different states contended for freedom, and assaulted the fabric of civil or religious usurpation; that in which having found means to cross the Atlantic, and to double the Cape of Good Hope, the inhabitants of one half the world were let loose on the other, and parties from every quarter, wading in blood, and at the expence of every crime, and of every danger, traversed the earth in search of gold.
EVEN the weak and the remiss are roused to enterprise, by the contagion of such remarkable ages; and states which have not in their form the principles of a continued exertion, either favourable or adverse to the welfare of mankind, may have paroxysms of ardour, and a temporary appearance of national vigour. In the case of such nations, indeed, the returns of moderation are but a relapse to obscurity, and the presumption of one age is turned to dejection in that which succeeds.
BUT in the case of states that are fortunate in their domestic policy, even madness itself may, in the result of violent convulsions, subside into wisdom; and a people return to their ordinary mood, cured of their follies, and wiser by experience: or, with talents improved, in conducting the very scenes which frenzy had opened, they may then appear best qualified to pursue with success the object of nations. Like the ancient republics, immediately after some alarming sedition, or like the kingdom of Great Britain, at the close of its civil wars, they retain the spirit of activity, which was recently awakened, and are equally vigorous in every pursuit, whether of policy, learning, or arts. From having appeared on the brink of ruin, they pass to the greatest prosperity.
MEN engage in pursuits with degrees of ardour not proportioned to the importance of their object. When they are stated in opposition, or joined in confederacy, they only wish for pretences to act. They forget, in the heat of their animosities, the subject of their controversy; or they seek, in their formal reasonings concerning it, only a disguise for their passions. When the heart is inflamed, no consideration can repress its ardour; when its fervour subsides, no reasoning can excite, and no eloquence awaken, its former emotions.
THE continuance of emulation among states, must depend on the degree of equality by which their forces are balanced; or on the incentives by which either party, or all, are urged to continue their struggles. Long intermissions of war, suffer, equally in every period of civil society, the military spirit to languish. The reduction of Athens by Lysander, struck a fatal blow at the institutions of Lycurgus; and the quiet possession of Italy, happily, perhaps, for mankind, had almost put an end to the military progress of the Romans. After some years of repose, Hannibal found Italy unprepared for his onset, and the Romans in a disposition likely to drop, on the banks of the Po, that martial ambition, which, being roused by the sense of a new danger, afterwards carried them to the Euphrates and the Rhine.
STATES even distinguished for military prowess, sometimes lay down their arms from lassitude, and are weary of fruitless contentions: but if they maintain the station of independent communities, they will have frequent occasions to recall, and exert their vigour. Even under popular governments, men sometimes drop the consideration of their political rights, and appear at times remiss or supine; but if they have reserved the power to defend themselves, the intermission of its exercise cannot be of long duration. Political rights, when neglected, are always invaded; and alarms from this quarter must frequently come to renew the attention of parties. The love of learning, and of arts, may change its pursuits, or droop for a season; but while men are possessed of freedom, and while the exercises of ingenuity are not superseded, the public may proceed, at different times, with unequal fervour; but its progress is seldom altogether discontinued, or the advantages gained in one age are seldom entirely lost to the following.
IF we would find the causes of final corruption, we must examine those revolutions of state that remove or with-hold the objects of every ingenious study, or liberal pursuit; that deprive the citizen of occasions to act as the member of a public; that crush his spirit; that debase his sentiments, and disqualify his mind for affairs.
SECT. III.
Of Relaxations in the National Spirit incident to Polished Nations.
IMPROVING nations, in the course of their advancement, have to struggle with foreign enemies, to whom they bear an extreme animosity, and with whom, in many conflicts, they contend for their existence as a people. In certain periods too, they feel in their domestic policy inconveniencies and grievances, which beget an eager impatience; and they apprehend reformations and new establishments, from which they have sanguine hopes of national happiness. In early ages, every art is imperfect, and susceptible of many improvements. The first principles of every science are yet secrets to be discovered, and to be successively published with applause and triumph.
WE may fancy to ourselves, that in ages of progress, the human race, like scouts gone abroad on the discovery of fertile lands, having the world open before them, are presented at every step with the appearance of novelty. They enter on every new ground with expectation and joy: They engage in every enterprise with the ardour of men, who believe they are going to arrive at national felicity, and permanent glory; and forget past disappointments amidst the hopes of future success. From mere ignorance, rude minds are intoxicated with every passion; and partial to their own condition, and to their own pursuits, they think that every scene is inferior to that in which they are placed. Roused alike by success, and by misfortune, they are sanguine, ardent, and precipitant; and leave to the more knowing ages which succeed them, monuments of imperfect skill, and of rude execution in every art; but they leave likewise the marks of a vigorous and ardent spirit, which their successors are not always qualified to sustain, or to imitate.
THIS may be admitted, perhaps, as a fair description of prosperous societies, at least during certain periods of their progress. The spirit with which they advance may be unequal, in different ages, and may have its paroxysms, and intermissions, arising from the inconstancy of human passions, and from the casual appearance or removal of occasions that excite them. But does this spirit, which for a time continues to carry on the project of civil and commercial arts, find a natural pause in the termination of its own pursuits? May the business of civil society be accomplished, and may the occasion of farther exertion be removed? Do continued disappointments reduce sanguine hopes, and familiarity with objects blunt the edge of novelty? Does experience itself cool the ardour of the mind? May the society be again compared to the individual? And may it be suspected, although the vigour of a nation, like that of a natural body, does not waste by a physical decay, that yet it may sicken for want of exercise, and die in the close of its own exertions? May societies, in the completion of all their designs, like men in years, who disregard the amusements, and are insensible to the passions, of youth, become cold and indifferent to objects that used to animate in a ruder age? And may a polished community be compared to a man, who having executed his plan, built his house, and made his settlement; who having, in short, exhausted the charms of every subject, and wasted all his ardour, sinks into languor and listless indifference? If so, we have found at least another simile to our purpose. But it is probable, that here too, the resemblance is imperfect; and the inference that would follow, like that of most arguments drawn from analogy, tends rather to amuse the fancy, than to give any real information on the subject to which it refers.
THE materials of human art are never entirely exhausted, and the applications of industry are never at an end. The national ardour is not, at any particular time, proportioned to the occasion there is for activity; nor curiosity, to the extent of subject that remains to be studied.
THE ignorant and the artless, to whom objects of science are new, and who are worst furnished with the conveniencies of life, instead of being more active, and more curious, are commonly more quiescent, and less inquisitive, than the knowing and the polished. When we compare the particulars which occupy mankind in their rude and in their polished condition, they will be found greatly multiplied and enlarged in the last. The questions we have put, however, deserve to be answered; and if, in the advanced ages of society, we do not find the objects of human pursuit removed, or greatly diminished, we may find them at least changed; and in estimating the national spirit, we may find a negligence in one part, but ill compensated by the growing attention which is paid to another.
IT is true, in general, that in all our pursuits, there is a termination of trouble, and a point of repose to which we aspire. We would remove this inconvenience, or gain that advantage, that our labours may cease. When I have conquered Italy and Sicily, say Pyrrhus, I shall then enjoy my repose. This termination is proposed in our national as well as in our personal exertions; and in spite of frequent experience to the contrary, is considered at a distance as the height of felicity. But nature has wisely, in most particulars, baffled our project; and placed no where within our reach this visionary blessing of absolute ease. The attainment of one end is but the beginning of a new pursuit; and the discovery of one art is but a prolongation of the thread by which we are conducted to further inquiries, and only hope to escape from the labyrinth.
AMONG the occupations that may be enumerated, as tending to exercise the invention, and to cultivate the talents of men, are the pursuits of accommodation and wealth, including all the different contrivances which serve to increase manufactures, and to perfect the mechanical arts. But it must be owned, that as the materials of commerce may continue to be accumulated withou any determinate limit, so the arts which are applied to improve them, may admit of perpetua refinements. No measure of fortune, or degree skill, is found to diminish the supposed necessities of human life; refinement and plenty foster new desires, while they furnish the means, or practise the methods, to gratify them.
IN the result of commercial arts, inequalities of fortune are greatly increased, and the majority of every people are obliged by necessity, or at least strongly incited by ambition and avarice, to employ every talent they possess. After a history of some thousand years employed in manufacture and commerce, the inhabitants of China are still the most laborious and industrious of any people on the surface of the earth.
SOME part of this observation may be extended to the elegant and literary arts. They too have their materials, which cannot be exhausted, and proceed from desires which cannot be satiated. But the respect paid to literary merit is fluctuating, and matter of transient fashion. When learned productions accumulate, the acquisition of knowledge occupies the time that might be bestowed on invention. The object of mere learning is attained with moderate or inferior talents, and the growing list of pretenders diminishes the lustre of the few who are eminent. When we only mean to learn what others have taught, it is probable, that even our knowledge will be less than that of our masters. Great names continue to be repeated with admiration, after we have ceased to examine the foundations of our praise; and new pretenders are rejected, not because they fall short of their predecessors, but because they do not excel them; or because, in reality, we have, without examination, taken for granted the merit of the first, and cannot judge of either.
AFTER libraries are furnished, and every path of ingenuity is occupied, we are, in proportion to our admiration of what is already done, prepossessed against farther attempts. We become students and admirers, instead of rivals; and substitute the knowledge of books, instead of the inquisitive or animated spirit in which they were written.
THE commercial and lucrative arts may continue to prosper, but they gain an ascendant at the expence of other pursuits. The desire of profit stifles the love of perfection. Interest cools the imagination, and hardens the heart; and, recommending employments in proportion as they are lucrative, and certain in their gains, it drives ingenuity, and ambition itself, to the counter and the workshop.
BUT apart from these considerations, the separation of professions, while it seems to promise improvement of skill, and is actually the cause why the productions of every art become more perfect as commerce advances; yet in its termination, and ultimate effects, serves, in some measure, to break the bands of society, to substitute form in place of ingenuity, and to withdraw individuals from the common scene of occupation, on which the sentiments of the heart, and the mind, are most happily employed.
UNDER the distinction of callings, by which the members of polished society are separated from each other, every individual is supposed to possess his species of talent, or his peculiar skill, in which the others are confessedly ignorant; and society is made to consist of parts, of which none is animated with the spirit of society itself.
We see in the same persons, said Pericles, an equal attention to private and to public affairs; and in men who have turned to separate professions, a competent knowledge of what relates to the community; for we alone consider those who are inattentive to the state, as perfectly insignificant.
This encomium on the Athenians, was probably offered under an apprehension, that the contrary was likely to be charged by their enemies, or might soon take place. It happened accordingly, that the business of state, as well as of war, came to be worse administred at Athens, when these, as well as other applications, became the objects of separate professions; and the history of this people abundantly shewed, that men ceased to be citizens, even to be good poets and orators, in proportion as they came to be distinguished by the profession of these, and other separate crafts.
ANIMALS lefs honoured than we, have sagacity enough to procure their food, and to find the means of their solitary pleasures; but it is reserved for man to consult, to persuade, to oppose, to kindle in the society of his fellow-creatures, and to lose the sense of his personal interest or safety, in the ardour of his friendships and his oppositions.
WHEN we are involved in any of the divisions into which mankind are separated, under the denominations of a country, a tribe, or an order of men any way affected by common interests, and guided by communicating passions, the mind recognises its natural station; the sentiments of the heart, and the talents of the understanding, find their natural exercise. Wisdom, vigilance, fidelity, and fortitude, are the characters requisite in such a scene, and the qualities which it tends to improve.
IN simple or barbarous ages, when nations are weak, and beset with enemies, the love of a country, of a party, or a faction, are the same. The public is a knot of friends, and its enemies are the rest of mankind. Death, or slavery, are the ordinary evils which they are concerned to ward off; victory and dominion, the objects to which they aspire. Under the sense of what they may suffer from foreign invasions, it is one object, in every prosperous society, to increase its force, and to extend its limits. In proportion as this object is gained, security increases. They who possess the interior districts, remote from the frontier, are unused to alarms from abroad. They who are placed on the extremities, remote from the seats of government, are unused to hear of political interests; and the public becomes an object perhaps too extensive, for the conceptions of either. They enjoy the protection of its laws, or of its armies; and they boast of its splendor, and its power; but the glowing sentiments of public affection, which, in small states, mingle with the tenderness of the parent and the lover, of the friend and the companion, merely by having their object enlarged, lose great part of their force.
THE manners of rude nations require to be reformed. Their foreign quarrels, and domestic dissensions, are the operations of extreme and sanguinary passions. A state of greater tranquility hath many happy effects. But if nations pursue the plan of enlargement and pacification, till their members can no longer apprehend the common ties of society, nor be engaged by affection in the cause of their country, they must err on the opposite side, and by leaving too little to agitate the spirits of men, bring on ages of languor, if not of decay.
THE members of a community may, in this manner, like the inhabitants of a conquered province, be made to lose the sense of every connection, but that of kindred or neighbourhood; and have no common affairs to transact, but those of trade: Connections, indeed, or transactions, in which probity and friendship may still take place; but in which the national spirit, whose ebbs and flows we are now considering, cannot be exerted.
WHAT we observe, however, on the tendency of enlargement to loosen the bands of political union, cannot be applied to nations who, being originally narrow, never greatly extended their limits, nor to those who, in a rude state, had already the extension of a great kingdom.
IN territories of considerable extent, subject to one government, and possessed of freedom, the national union, in rude ages, is extremely imperfect. Every district forms a separate party; and the descendents of different families are opposed to one another, under the denomination of tribes or of clans:
they are seldom brought to act with a steady concert; their feuds and animosities give more frequently the appearance of so many nations at war, than of a people united by connections of policy. They acquire a spirit, however, in their private divisions, and in the midst of a disorder, otherwise hurtful, of which the force, on many occasions, redounds to the power of the state.
WHATEVER be the national extent, civil order, and regular government, are advantages of the greatest importance; but it does not follow, that every arrangement made to obtain these ends, and which may, in the making, exercise and cultivate the best qualities of men, is therefore of a nature to produce permanent effects, and to secure the preservation of that national spirit from which it arose.
WE have reason to dread the political refinements of ordinary men, when we consider, that repose, or inaction itself, is in a great measure their object; and that they would frequently model their governments, not merely to prevent injustice and error, but to prevent agitation and bustle; and by the barriers they raise against the evil actions of men, would prevent them from acting at all. Every dispute of a free people, in the opinion of such politicians, amounts to disorder, and a breach of the national peace. What heart-burnings? What delay to affairs? What want of secrecy and dispatch? What defect of police? Men of superior genius sometimes seem to imagine, that the vulgar have no title to act, or to think. A great prince is pleased to ridicule the precaution by which judges in a free country are confined to the strict interpretation of law Memoirs of Brandenburg.
.
WE easily learn to contract our opinions of what men may, in consistence with public order, be safely permitted to do. The agitations of a republic, and the licence of its members, strike the subjects of monarchy with aversion and disgust. The freedom with which the European is left to traverse the streets and the fields, would appear to a Chinese a sure prelude to confusion and anarchy.
Can men behold their superior and not tremble? Can they converse without a precise and written ceremonial? What hopes of peace, if the streets are not barricaded at an hour? What wild disorder, if men are permitted in any thing to do what they please?
IF the precautions which men thus take against each other be necessary to repress their crimes, and do not arise from a corrupt ambition, or from cruel jealousy in their rulers, the proceeding itself must be applauded, as the best remedy of which the vices of men will admit. The viper must be held at a distance, and the tyger chained. But if a rigorous policy, applied to enslave, not to restrain from crimes, has an actual tendency to corrupt the manners, and to extinguish the spirit of nations; if its severities be applied to terminate the agitations of a free people, not to remedy their corruptions; if forms be often applauded as salutary, because they tend merely to silence the voice of mankind, or be condemned as pernicious, because they allow this voice to be heard; we may expect that many of the boasted improvements of civil society, will be mere devices to lay the political spirit at rest, and will chain up the active virtues more than the restless disorders of men.
IF to any people it be the avowed object of policy, in all its internal refinements, to secure the person and the property of the subject, without any regard to his political character, the constitution indeed may be free, but its members may likewise become unworthy of the freedom they possess, and unfit to preserve it. The effects of such a constitution may be to immerse all orders of men in their separate pursuits of pleasure, which they may now enjoy with little disturbance; or of gain, which they may preserve without any attention to the commonwealth.
IF this be the end of political struggles, the design, when executed, in securing to the individual his estate, and the means of subsistence, may put an end to the exercise of those very virtues that were required in conducting its execution. A man, who, in concert with his fellow-subjects, contends with usurpation in defence of his estate or his person, may find an exertion of great generosity, and of a vigorous spirit; but he who, under political establishments, supposed to be fully confirmed, betakes him, because he is safe, to the mere enjoyment of fortune, has in fact turned to a source of corruption the very advantages which the virtues of the other procured. Individuals, in certain ages, derive their protection chiefly from the strength of the party to which they adhere; but in times of corruption, they flatter themselves, that they may continue to derive from the public that safety which, in former ages, they must have owed to their own vigilance and spirit, to the warm attachment of their friends, and to the exercise of every talent which could render them respected, feared, or beloved. In one period, therefore, mere circumstances serve to excite the spirit, and to preserve the manners of men; in another, great wisdom and zeal for the good of mankind on the part of their leaders, are required for the same purposes.
ROME, it may be thought, did not die of a lethargy, nor perish by the remission of her political ardours at home. Her distemper appeared of a nature more violent and acute. Yet if the virtues of Cato and of Brutus found an exercise in the dying hour of the republic, the neutrality, and the cautious retirement of Atticus, found its security in the same tempestuous season; and the great body of the people lay undisturbed, below the current of a storm, by which the superior ranks of men were destroyed. In the minds of the people, the sense of a public was defaced; and even the animosity of faction had subsided: they only could share in the commotion, who were the soldiers of a legion, or the partisans of a leader. But this state fell not into obscurity for want of eminent men. If at the time of which we speak, we look only for a few names distinguished in the history of mankind, there is no period at which the list was more numerous. But those names became distingished in the contest for dominion, not in the exercise of equal rights: the people was corrupted; the empire of the known world stood in need of a master.
REPUBLICAN governments, in general, are in hazard of ruin from the ascendant of particular factions, and from the mutinous spirit of a populace, who being corrupted, are no longer fit to share in the administration of state. But under other establishments, where liberty may be more successfully attained if men are corrupted, the national vigour declines from the abuse of that very security which is procured by the supposed perfection of public order.
A distribution of power and office; an execution of law, by which mutual incroachments and molestations are brought to an end; by which the person and the property are, without friends, without cabal, without obligation, perfectly secured to individuals, does honour to the genius of a nation; and could not have been fully established, without those exertions of understanding and integrity, those trials of a resolute and vigorous spirit, which adorn the annals of a people, and leave to future ages a subject of just admiration and applause. But if we suppose that the end is attained, and that men no longer act, in the enjoyment of liberty, from liberal sentiments, or with a view to the preservation of public manners; if individuals think themselves secure without any attention or effort of their own; this boasted advantage may be found only to give them an opportunity of enjoying, at leisure, the conveniencies and necessaries of life; or, in the language of Cato, teach them to value their houses, their villas, their statues, and their pictures, at a higher rate than they do the republic. They may be found to grow tired in secret of a free constitution, of which they never cease to boast in their conversation, and which they always neglect in their conduct.
THE dangers to liberty are not the subject of our present consideration; but they can never be greater from any cause than they are from the supposed remissness of a people, to whose personal vigour every constitution, as it owed its establishment, so must continue to owe its preservation. Nor is this blessing ever less secure than it is in the possession of men who think that they enjoy it in safety, and who therefore consider the public only as it presents to their avarice a number of lucrative employments; for the sake of which they may sacrifice those very rights which render themselves objects of management or consideration.
FROM the tendency of these reflections, then, it should appear, that a national spirit is frequently transient, not on account of any incurable distemper in the nature of mankind, but on account of their voluntary neglects and corruptions. This spirit subsisted solely, perhaps, in the execution of a few projects, entered into for the acquisition of territory or wealth; it comes, like a useless weapon, to be laid aside after its end is attained.
ORDINARY establishments terminate in a relaxation of vigour, and are ineffectual to the preservation of states; because they lead mankind to rely on their arts, instead of their virtues, and to mistake for an improvement of human nature, a mere accession of accommodation, or of riches. Institutions that fortify the mind, inspire courage, and promote national felicity, can never tend to national ruin.
IS it not possible, amidst our admiration of arts, to find some place for these? Let statesmen, who are intrusted with the government of nations, reply for themselves. It is their business to shew, whether they climb into stations of eminence, merely to display a passion for interest, which they had better indulge in obscurity; and whether they have capacity to understand the happiness of a people, the conduct of whose affairs they are so willing to undertake.
SECT. IV.
The same subject continued.
MEN frequently, while they study to improve their fortunes, neglect themselves; and while they reason for their country, forget the considerations that most deserve their attention. Numbers, riches, and the other resources of war, are highly important but nations consist of men and a nation consisting of degenerate and cowardly men, is weak; a nation consisting of vigorous, public-spirited, and resolute men, is strong. The resources of war, where other advantages are equal, may decide a contest; but the resources of war, in hands that cannot employ them, are of no avail.
VIRTUE is a necessary constituent of national strength: capacity, and a vigorous understanding, are no less necessary to sustain the fortune of states. Both are improved by discipline, and by the exercises in which men are engaged. We despise, or we pity, the lot of mankind, while they lived under uncertain establishments, and were obliged to sustain in the same person, the character of the senator, the statesman, and the soldier. Polished nations discover, that any one of these characters is sufficient in one person; and that the ends of each, when disjoined, are more easily accomplished. The first, however, were circumstances under which nations advanced and prospered; the second were those in which the spirit relaxed, and the nation went to decay.
WE may, with good reason, congratulate our species on their having escaped from a state of barbarous disorder and violence, into a state of domestic peace and regular policy; when they have sheathed the dagger, and disarmed the animosities of civil contention; when the weapons with which they contend are the reasonings of the wise, and the tongue of the eloquent. But we cannot, meantime, help to regret, that they should ever proceed, in search of perfection, to place every branch of administration behind the counter, and come to employ, instead of the statesman and warrior, the mere clerk and accountant.
BY carrying this system to its height, men are educated, who could copy for Caesar his military instructions, or even execute a part of his plans; but none who could act in all the different scenes for which the leader himself must be qualified, in the state and in the field, in times of order or of tumult, in times of division or of unanimity; none who could animate the council when deliberating on ordinary occasions, or when alarmed by attacks from abroad.
THE policy of China is the most perfect model of an arrangement, at which the ordinary refinements of government are aimed; and the inhabitants of this empire possess, in the highest degree, those arts on which vulgar minds make the felicity and greatness of nations to depend. The state has acquired, in a measure unequalled in the history of mankind, numbers of men, and the other resources of war. They have done what we are very apt to admire; they have brought national affairs to the level of the meanest pacity; they have broke them into parts, and thrown them into separate departments; they have clothed every proceeding with splendid ceremonies, and majestical forms; and where the reverence of forms cannot repress disorder, a rigorous and severe police, armed with every species of corporal punishment, is applied to the purpose. The whip, and the cudgel, are held up to all orders of men; they are at once employed, and they are dreaded by every magistrate. A mandarine is whipped, for having ordered a pickpocket to receive too few or too many blows.
EVERY department of state is made the object of a separate profession, and every candidate for office must have passed through a regular education; and, as in the graduations of the university, must have obtained by his proficiency, or his standing, the degree to which he aspires. The tribunals of state, of war, and of the revenue, as well as of literature, are conducted by graduates in their different studies; but while learning is the great road to preferment, it terminates, in being able to read, and to write; and the great object of government consists in raising, and in consuming the fruits of the earth. With all these resources, and this learned preparation, which is made to turn these resources to use, the state is in reality weak; has repeatedly given the example which we seek to explain; and among the doctors of war or of policy, among the millions who are set apart for the military profession, can find none of its members who are fit to stand forth in the dangers of their country, or to form a defence against the repeated inroads of an enemy reputed to be artless and mean.
IT is difficult to tell how long the decay of states might be suspended by the cultivation of arts on which their real felicity and strength depend; by cultivating in the higher ranks those talents for the council and the field, which cannot, without great disadvantage, be separated; and in the body of a people, that zeal for their country, and that military character, which enable them to take a share in defending its rights.
TIMES may come, when every proprietor must defend his own possessions, and every free people maintain their own independence. We may imagine, that against such an extremity, an army of hired troops is a sufficient precaution; but their own troops are the very enemy against which a people is sometimes obliged to fight. We may flatter ourselves, that extremities of this sort, in any particular case, are remote; but we cannot, in reasoning on the general fortunes of mankind, avoid putting the case, and referring to the examples in which it has happened. It has happened in every instance where the polished have fallen a prey to the rude, and where the pacific inhabitant has been reduced to subjection by military force.
IF the desence and government of a people be made to depend on a few, who make the conduct of state or of war their profession; whether these be foreigners or natives; whether they be called away of a sudden, like the Roman legion from Britain; whether they turn against their employers, like the army of Carthage, or be overpowered and dispersed by a stroke of fortune, the multitude of a cowardly and undisciplined people must, on such an emergence, receive a foreign or a domestic enemy, as they would a plague or an earthquake, with hopeless amazement and terror, and by their numbers, only swell the triumphs, and enrich the spoil of a conqueror.
STATESMEN and leaders of armies, accustomed to the mere observance of forms, are disconcerted by a suspension of customary rules; and on slight grounds despair of their country. They were qualified only to go the rounds of a particular track; and when forced from their stations, are in reality unable to act with men. They only took part in formalities, of which they understood not the tendency; and together with the modes of procedure, even the very state itself, in their apprehension, has ceased to exist. The numbers, possessions, and resources of a great people, only serve, in their view, to constitute a scene of hopeless confusion and terror.
IN rude ages, under the appellations of a community, a people, or a nation, was understood a number of men; and the state, while its members remained, was accounted entire. The Scythians, while they fled before Darius, mocked at his childish attempt; Athens survived the devastations of Xerxes; and Rome, in its rude state, those of the Gauls. With polished and mercantile states, the case is sometimes reversed. The nation is a territory, cultivated and improved by its owners; destroy the possession, even while the master remains, the state is undone.
THAT weakness and effeminacy of which polished nations are sometimes accused, has it place probably in the mind alone. The strength of animals, and that of man in particular, depends on his feeding, and the kind of labour to which he is used. Wholesome food, and hard labour, the portion of many in every polished and commercial nation, secure to the public a number of men endued with bodily strength, and inured to hardship and toil.
EVEN delicate living, and good accommodation, are not found to enervate the body. The armies of Europe have been obliged to make the experiment; and the children of opulent families, bred in effeminacy, or nursed with tender care, have been made to contend with the savage. By imitating his arts, they have learned, like him, to traverse the forest; and, in every season, to subsist in the desert. They have, perhaps, recovered a lesson, which it has cost civilized nations many ages to unlearn, That the fortune of a man is entire while he remains possessed of himself.
IT may be thought, however, that few of the celebrated nations of antiquity, whose fate has given rise to so much reflection on the vicissitudes of human affairs, had made any great progress in those enervating arts we have mentioned; or made those arrangements from which the danger in question could be supposed to arise. The Greeks, in particular, at the time of their fall under the Macedonian yoke, had certainly not carried the commercial arts to so great a height as is common with the most flourishing and prosperous nations of Europe. They had still retained the form of independent republics; the people were generally admitted to a share in the government; and not being able to hire armies, they were obliged, by necessity, to bear a part in the defence of their country. By their frequent wars and domestic commotions, they were accustomed to danger, and were familiar with alarming situations: they were accordingly still accounted the best soldiers and the best statesmen of the known world. The younger Cyrus promised himself the empire of Asia by means of their aid; and after his fall, a body of ten thousand, although bereft of their leaders, baffled, in their retreat, all the military force of the Persian empire. The victor of Asia did not think himself prepared for that conquest, till he had formed an army from the subdued republics of Greece.
IT is, however, true, that in the age of Philip, the military and political spirit of those nations appears to have been considerably impaired, and to have suffered, perhaps, from the variety of interests and pursuits, as well as of pleasures, with which their members came to be occupied: they even made a kind of separation between the civil and military character. Phocion, we are told by Plutarch, having observed that the leading men of his time followed different courses, that some applied themselves to civil, others to military affairs, determined rather to follow the examples of Themistocles, Aristides, and Pericles, the leaders of a former age, who were equally prepared for either.
WE find in the orations of Demosthenes, a perpetual reference to this state of manners. We find him exhorting the Athenians, not only to declare war, but to arm themselves for the execution of their own military plans. We find that there was an order of military men, who easily passed from the service of one state to that of another; and who, when they were neglected at home, turned away to enterprises on their own account. There were not, perhaps, better warriors in any former age; but those warriors were not attached to any state; and the settled inhabitants of every city thought themselves disqualified for military service. The discipline of armies was perhaps improved; but the vigour of nations was gone to decay. When Philip, or Alexander, defeated the Grecian armies, which were chiefly composed of soldiers of fortune, they found an easy conquest with the other inhabitants: and when the latter, afterwards supported by those soldiers, invaded the Persian empire, he seems to have left little martial spirit behind him; and by removing the military men, to have taken precaution enough, in his absence, to secure his dominion over this mutinous and refractory people.
THE subdivision of arts and professions, in certain examples, tends to improve the practice of them, and to promote their ends. By having separated the arts of the clothier and the tanner, we are the better supplied with shoes and with cloth. But to separate the arts which form the citizen and the statesman, the arts of policy and war, is an attempt to dismember the human character, and to destroy those very arts we mean to improve. By this separation, we in effect deprive a free people of what is necessary to their safety; or we prepare a defence against invasions from abroad, which gives a prospect of usurpation, and threatens the establishment of military government at home.
WE may be surprised to find the beginning of certain military instructions at Rome, referred to a time no earlier than that of the Cimbric war. It was then, we are told by Valerius Maximus, that Roman soldiers were made to learn from gladiators the use of a sword: and the antagonists of Phyrrhus and of Hannibal were, by the account of this writer, still in need of instruction in the first rudiments of their trade. They had already, by the order and choice of their incampments, impressed the Grecian invader with awe and respect; they had already, not by their victories, but by their national vigour and firmness, under repeated defeats, induced him to sue for peace. But the haughty Roman, perhaps, knew the advantage of order and of union, without having been broke to the inferior arts of the mercenary soldier; and had the courage to face the enemies of his country, without having practised the use of his weapon under the fear of being whipped. He could ill be persuaded, that a time might come, when refined and intelligent nations would make the art of war to consist in a few technical forms; that citizens and soldiers might come to be distinguished as much as women and men; that the citizen would become possessed of a property which he would not be able, or required, to defend; that the soldier would be appointed to keep for another what he would be taught to desire, and what he would be enabled to seize for himself; that, in short, one set of men were to have an interest in the preservation of civil establishments, without the power to defend them; that the other were to have this power, without either the inclination or the interest.
THIS people, however, by degrees came to put their military force on the very footing to which this description alludes. Marius made a capital change in the manner of levying soldiers at Rome: He filled his legions with the mean and the indigent, who depended on military pay for subsistence; he created a force which rested on mere discipline alone, and the skill of the gladiator; he taught his troops to employ their swords against the constitution of their country, and set the example of a practice which was soon adopted and improved by his successors.
THE Romans only meant by their armies to incroach on the freedom of other nations, while they preserved their own. They forgot, that in assembling soldiers of fortune, and in suffering any leader to be master of a disciplined army, they actually resigned their political rights, and suffered a master to arise for the state. This people, in short, whose ruling passion was depredation and conquest, perished by the recoil of an engine which they themselves had erected against mankind.
THE boasted refinements, then, of the polished age, are not divested of danger. They open a door, perhaps, to disaster, as wide and accessible as any of those they have shut. If they build walls and ramparts, they enervate the minds of those who are placed to defend them; if they form disciplined armies, they reduce the military spirit of entire nations; and by placing the sword where they have given a distaste to civil establishments, they prepare for mankind the government of force.
IT is happy for the nations of Europe, that the disparity between the soldier and the pacific citizen can never be so great as it became among the Greeks and the Romans. In the use of modern arms, the novice is made to learn, and to practise with ease, all that the veteran knows; and if to teach him were a matter of real difficulty, happy are they who are not deterred by such difficulties, and who can discover the arts which tend to fortify and preserve, not to enervate and ruin their country.
SECT. V.
Of National Waste.
THE strength of nations consists in the wealth, the numbers, and the character, of their people. The history of their progress from a state of rudeness, is, for the most part, a detail of the struggles they have maintained, and of the arts they have practised, to strengthen, or to secure themselves. Their conquests, their population, and their commerce, their civil and military arrangements, their skill in the construction of weapons, and in the methods of attack and defence; the very distribution of tasks, whether in private business or in public affairs, either tend to bestow, or promise to employ with advantage, the constituents of a national force, and the resources of war.
IF we suppose, that together with these advantages, the military character of a people remains, or is improved, it must follow, that what is gained in civilization, is a real increase of strength; and that the ruin of nations could never take its rise from themselves. Where states have stopped short in their progress, or have actually gone to decay, we may suspect, that however disposed to advance, they have found a limit, beyond which they could not proceed; or from a remission of the national spirit, and a weakness of character, were unable to make the most of their resources, and natural advantages. On this supposition, from being stationary, they may begin to relapse, and by a retrograde motion, in a succession of ages, arrive at a state of greater weakness, than that which they quitted in the beginning of their progress; and with the appearance of better arts, and superior conduct, expose themselves to become a prey to barbarians, whom, in the attainment, or the height of their glory, they had easily baffled or despised.
WHATEVER may be the natural wealth of a people, or whatever may be the limits beyond which they cannot improve on their stock, it is probable, that no nation has ever reached those limits, or has been able to postpone its misfortunes, and effects of misconduct, until its fund of materials, and the fertility of its soil, were exhausted, or the numbers of its people were greatly reduced. The same errors in policy, and weakness of manners, which prevent the proper use of resources, likewise check their increase, or improvement.
THE wealth of the state consists in the sortune of its members. The actual revenue of the state is that share of every private fortune, which the public has been accustomed to demand for national purposes. This revenue cannot be always proportioned to what may be supposed redundant in the private estate, but to what is, in some measure, thought so by the owner; and to what he may be made to spare, without intrenching on his manner of living, and without suspending his projects of expence, or of commerce. It should appear, therefore, that any immoderate increase of private expence is a prelude to national weakness: government, even while each of its subjects consumes a princely estate, may be straitened in point of revenue, and the paradox be explained by example, That the public is poor, while its members are rich.
WE are frequently led into error by mistaking money for riches; we think that a people cannot be impoverished by a waste of Money which is spent among themselves. The fact is, that men are impoverished, only in two ways; either by having their gains suspended, or by having their substance consumed; and money expended at home, being circulated, and not consumed, cannot, any more than the exchange of a tally, or a counter, among a certain number of hands, tend to diminish the wealth of the company among whom it is handed about. But while money circulates at home, the necessaries of life, which are the real constituents of wealth, may be idly consumed; the industry which might be employed to increase the stock of a people, may be suspended, or turned to abuse.
GREAT armies, maintained either at home or abroad, without any national object, are so many mouths unnecessarily opened to waste the stores of the public, and so many hands with-held from the arts by which its profits are made. Unsuccessful enterprises are so many ventures thrown away, and losses sustained, proportioned to the capital employed in the service. The Helvetii in order to invade the Roman province of Gaul, burnt their habitations, dropt their instruments of husbandry, and consumed, in one year, the savings of many. The enterprise failed of success, and the nation was undone.
STATES have endeavoured, in some instances, by pawning their credit, instead of employing their capital, to disguise the hazards they ran. They have found, in the loans they raised, a casual resource, which encouraged their enterprises. They have seemed, by their manner of erecting transferrable funds, to leave the capital for purposes of trade, in the hands of the subject, while it is actually expended by the government. They have, by these means proceeded to the execution of great national projects, without suspending private industry, and have left future ages to answer, in part, for debts contracted with a view to future emolument. So far the expedient is plausible, and appears to be just. The growing burden too, is thus gradually laid; and if a nation be to sink in some future age, every minister hopes it may still keep afloat in his own. But the measure, for this very reason, is, with all its advantages, extremely dangerous, in the hands of a precipitant and ambitious administration, regarding only the present occasion, and imagining a state to be inexhaustible, while a capital can be borrowed, and the interest be paid.
WE are told of a nation, who, during a certain period, rivalled the glories of the ancient world, threw off the dominion of a master armed against them with the powers of a great kingdom, broke the yoke with which they had been oppressed, and almost within the course of a century, raised, by their industry and national vigour, a new and formidable power, which struck the former potentates of Europe with awe and suspense, and turned the badges of poverty with which they set out, into the ensigns of war and dominion. This end was attained by the great efforts of a spirit awaked by oppression, by a successful pursuit of national wealth, and by a rapid anticipation of future revenue. But this illustrious state is supposed, not only in the language of a former section, to have preoccupied the business; they have sequestered the inheritance of many ages to come.
GREAT national expence, however, does not imply the necessity of any national suffering. While revenue is applied with success, to obtain some valuable end; the profits of every adventure, being more than sufficient to repay its costs, the public should gain, and its resources should continue to multiply. But an expence, whether sustained at home or abroad, whether a waste of the present, or an anticipation of future, revenue, if it bring no proper return, is to be reckoned among the causes of national ruin.
PART SIXTH.
Of Corruption and Political Slavery.
SECT. I.
Of Corruption in general.
IF the fortune of nations, and their tendency to aggrandisement, or to ruin, were to be estimated by merely balancing, on the principles of last section, articles of profit and loss, every argument in politics would rest on a comparison of national expence with national gain; on a comparison of the numbers who consume, with those who produce or amass the necessaries of life. The columns of the industrious, and the idle, would include all order of men; and the state itself, being allowed as many magistrates, politicians, and warriors, as were barely sufficient for its defence and its government, should place, on the side of its loss, every name that is supernumerary on the civil or the military list; all those orders of men, who, by the possession of fortune, subsist on the gains of others, and by the nicety of their choice, require a great expence of time and of labour, to supply their consumption; all those who are idly employed in the train of persons of rank; all those who are engaged in the professions of law, physic, or divinity, together with all the learned, who do not, by their studies, promote or improve the practice of some lucrative trade. The value of every person, in short, should be computed from his labour; and that of labour itself, from its tendency to procure and amass the means of subsistence. The arts employed on mere superfluities should be prohibited, except when their produce could be exchanged with foreign nations, for commodities that might be employed to maintain useful men for the public.
THESE appear to be the rules by which a miser would examine the state of his own affairs, or those of his country; but schemes of perfect corruption are at least as impracticable as schemes of perfect virtue. Men are not universally misers; they will not be satisfied with the pleasure of hoarding; they must be suffered to enjoy their wealth, in order that they may take the trouble of becoming rich. Property, in the common course of human affairs, is unequally divided: we are therefore obliged to suffer the wealthy to squander, that the poor may subsist; we are obliged to tolerate certain orders of men, who are above the necessity of labour, in order that, in their condition, there may be an object of ambition, and a rank to which the busy aspire. We are not only obliged to admit numbers, who, in strict oeconomy, may be reckoned superfluous, on the civil, the military, and the political list; but because we are men, and prefer the occupation, improvement, and felicity of our nature, to its mere existence, we must even wish, that as many members as possible, of every community, may be admitted to a share of its defence and its government.
MEN, in fact, while they pursue in society different objects, or separate views, procure a wide distribution of power, and by a species of chance, arrive at a posture for civil engagements, more favourable to human nature than what human wisdom could ever calmly devise.
IF the strength of a nation, in the mean time, consists in the men on whom it may rely, and who are fortunately or wisely combined for its preservation, it follows, that manners are as important as either numbers or wealth; and that corruption is to be accounted a principal cause of national declension and ruin.
WHOEVER perceives what are the qualities of man in his excellence, may easily, by that standard, distinguish his defects or corruptions. If an intelligent, a courageous, and an affectionate mind, constitutes the perfection of his nature, remarkable failings in any of those particulars, must proportionally sink or debase his character.
WE have observed, that it is the happiness of the individual to make a right choice of his conduct; that this choice will lead him to lose in society the sense of a personal interest; and, in the consideration of what is due to the whole, to stifie those anxieties which relate to himself as a part.
THE natural disposition of man to humanity, and the warmth of his temper, may raise his character to this fortunate pitch. His elevation, in a great measure depends on the form of his society; but he can, without incurring the charge of corruption, accommodate himself to great variations in the constitutions of government. The same integrity, and vigorous spirit, which, in democratical states renders him tenacious of his equality, may, under aristocracy or monarchy, lead him to maintain the subordinations established. He may entertain, towards the different ranks of men with whom he is yoked in the state, maxims of respect and of candour: he may, in the choice of his actions, follow a principle of justice, and of honour, which the considerations of safety, preferment, or profit, cannot efface.
FROM our complaints of national depravity, it should, notwithstanding, appear, that whole bodies of men are sometimes infected with an epidemical weakness of the head, or corruption of heart, by which they become unfit for the stations they occupy, and threaten the states they compose, however flourishing, with a prospect of decay, and of ruin.
A CHANGE of national manners for the worse, may arise from a discontinuance of the scenes in which the talents of men were happily cultivated, and brought into exercise; or from a change in the prevailing opinions relating to the constituents of honour or of happiness. When mere riches, or court-favour, are supposed to constitute rank; the mind is misled from the consideration of qualities on which it ought to rely. Magnanimity, courage, and the love of mankind, are sacrificed to avarice and vanity, or suppressed under a sense of dependence. The individual considers his community so far only as it can be rendered subservient to his personal advancement or profit: he states himself in competition with his fellow-creatures; and, urged by the passions of emulation, of fear and jealousy, of envy and malice, he follows the maxims of an animal destined to preserve his separate existence, and to indulge his caprice or his appetite, at the expence of his species.
ON this corrupt foundation, men become either rapacious, deceitful, and violent, ready to trespass on the rights of others; or servile, mercenary, and base, prepared to relinquish their own. Talents, capacity, and force of mind, possessed by a person of the first description, serve to plunge him the deeper in misery, and to sharpen the agony of cruel passions; which lead him to wreak on his fellow-creatures the torments that prey on himself. To a person of the second, imagination, and reason itself, only serve to point out false objects of fear, or desire, and to multiply the subjects of disappointment, and of momentary joy. In either case, and whether we suppose that corrupt men are urged by covetousness, or betrayed by fear, and without specifying the crimes which from either disposition they are prepared to commit, we may safely affirm, with Socrates, That every master should pray he may not meet with such a slave; and every such person, being unfit for liberty, should implore that he may meet with a merciful master.
MAN, under this measure of corruption, although he may be bought for a slave by those who know how to turn his faculties and his labour to profit; and although, when kept under proper restraints, his neighbourhood may be convenient or useful; yet is certainly unfit to act on the footing of a liberal combination or concert with his fellow-creatures: his mind is not addicted to friendship or confidence; he is not willing to act for the preservation of others, nor deserves that any other should hazard his own safety for his.
THE actual character of mankind, mean-time, in the worst, as well as the best condition, is undoubtedly mixed: and nations of the best description are greatly obliged for their preservation, not only to the good disposition of their members, but likewise to those political institutions, by which the violent are restrained from the commission of crimes, and the cowardly, or the selfish, are made to contribute their part to the public defence or prosperity. By means of such institutions, and the wise precautions of government, nations are enabled to subsist, and even to prosper, under very different degrees of corruption, or of public integrity.
SO long as the majority of a people is supposed to act on maxims of probity, the example of the good, and even the caution of the bad, give a general appearance of integrity and of innocence Where men are to one another objects of affection and of confidence, where they are generally disposed not to offend, government may be remiss; and every person may be treated as innocent, till he is found to be guilty. As the subject in this case does not hear of the crimes, so he need not be told of the punishments inflicted on persons of a different character. But where the manners of a people are considerably changed for the worse, every subject must stand on his guard, and government itself must act on suitable maxims of fear and distrust. The individual, no longer fit to be indulged in his pretensions to personal consideration, independence, or freedom, each of which he would turn to abuse, must be taught, by external force, and from motives of fear, to counterfeit those effects of innocence, and of duty, to which he is not disposed: he must be reserred to the whip, or the gibbet, for arguments in support of a caution, which the state now requires him to assume, on a supposition that he is insensible to the motives which recommend the practice of virtue.
THE rules of despotism are made for the government of corrupted men. They were indeed followed on some remarkable occasions, even under the Roman common-wealth; and the bloody axe, to terrify the citizen from his crimes, and to repel the casual and temporary irruptions of vice, was repeatedly committed to the arbitrary will of the dictator. They were finally established on the ruins of the republic itself when either the people became too corrupted for freedom, or when the magistrate became too corrupted to resign his dictatorial power. This species of government comes naturally in the termination of a continued and growing corruption; but has no doubt, in some instances, come too soon, and has sacrificed remains of virtue, that deserved a better fate, to the jealousy of tyrants, who were in haste to augment their power. This method of government cannot, in such cases, fail to introduce that measure of corruption, against whose external effects it is desired as a remedy. When fear is suggested as the only motive to duty, every heart becomes rapacious or base. And this medicine, if applied to a healthy body, is sure to create the distemper it is destined to cure.
THIS is the manner of government into which the covetous, and the arrogant, to satiate their unhappy desires, would hurry their fellow-creatures: it is a manner of government to which the timorous and the servile submit at discretion; and when these characters of the rapacious and the timid divide mankind, even the virtues of Antoninus or Trajan, can do no more than apply, with candour and with vigour, the whip and the sword; and endeavour, by the hopes of reward, or the fear of punishment, to find a speedy and a temporary cure for the crimes, or the imbecilities of men.
OTHER states may be more or less corrupted: this has corruption for its basis. Here justice may sometimes direct the arm of the despotical sovereign; but the name of justice is most commonly employed to signify the interest, or the caprice, of a reigning power. Human society, susceptible of such a variety of forms, here finds the simplest of all. The toils and possessions of many are destined to asswage the passions of one or a few; and the only parties that remain among mankind, are the oppressor who demands, and the oppressed who dare not refuse.
NATIONS, while they were intitled to a milder fate, as in the case of the Greeks, repeatedly conquered, have been reduced to this condition by military force. They have reached it too in the maturity of their own depravations; when, like the Romans, returned from the conquest, and loaded with the spoils, of the world, they gave loose to saction, and to crimes too bold and too frequent for the correction of ordinary government; and when the sword of justice, dropping with blood, and perpetually required to suppress accumulating disorders on every side, could no longer await the delays and precautions of an administration fettered by laws.
IT is, however, well known from the history of mankind, that corruption of this, or of any other degree, is not peculiar to nations in their decline, or in the result of signal prosperity, and great advances in the arts of commerce. The bands of society, indeed, in small and infant establishments, are generally strong; and their subjects, either by an ardent devotion to their own tribe, or a vehement animosity against enemies, and by a vigorous courage founded on both, are well qualified to urge, or to sustain, the fortune of a growing community. But the savage, and the barbarian, have given, notwithstanding, in the case of entire nations, some examples of a weak and timorous character The barbarous nations of Siberia, in general, are servile and timid.
. They have in more instances, fallen into that species of corruption which we have already described in treating of barbarous nations; they have made rapine their trade, not merely as a species of warfare, or with a view to enrich their community, but to possess, in property, what they learned to prefer even to the ties of affection or of blood.
IN the lowest state of commercial arts, the passions for wealth, and for dominion, have exhibited scenes of oppression, or servility, which the most finished corruption of the arrogant, the cowardly, and the mercenary, founded on the desire of procuring, or the fear of losing, a fortune, could not exceed. In such cases, the vices of men, unrestrained by forms, and unawed by police, are suffered to riot at large, and to produce their entire effects. Parties accordingly unite, or separate, on the maxims of a gang of robbers; they sacrifice to interest the tenderest affections of human nature. The parent supplies the market for slaves, even by the sale of his own children; the cottage ceases to be a sanctuary for the weak and the defenceless stranger; and rites of hospitality, often so sacred among nations in their primitive state, come to be violated, like every other tie of humanity, without fear or remorse Chardin's travel's through Mingrelia into Persia.
.
NATIONS, which in later periods of their history became eminent for civil wisdom and justice, had, perhaps, in a former age, paroxysms of lawless disorder, to which this description might in part be applied. The very policy by which they arrived at their degree of national felicity, was devised as a remedy for outrageous abuse. The establishment of order was dated from the commission of rapes and murders; indignation, and private revenge, were the principles on which nations proceeded to the expulsion of tyrants, to the emancipation of mankind, and the full explanation of their political rights.
DEFECTS of government, and of law, may be in some cases considered as a symptom of innocence and of virtue. But where power is already established, where the strong are unwilling to suffer restraint, or the weak unable to find a protection, the defects of law are marks of the most perfect corruption.
AMONG rude nations, government is often defective; both because men are not yet acquainted with all the evils for which polished nations have endeavoured to find a redress; and because, even where evils of the most flagrant nature have long afflicted the peace of society, they have not yet been able to apply the cure. In the progress of civilization, new distempers break forth, and new remedies are applied: but the remedy is not always applied the moment the distemper appears: and laws, though suggested by the commission of crimes, are not the symptom of a recent corruption, but of a desire to find a remedy that may cure, perhaps, some inveterate evil which has long afflicted the state.
THERE are corruptions, however, under which men still possess the vigour and the resolution to correct themselves. Such are the violence and the outrage which accompany the collision of fierce and daring spirits, occupied in the struggles which sometimes precede the dawn of civil and commercial improvements In such cases, men have frequently discovered a remedy for evils, of which their own misguided impetuosity, and superior force of mind, were the principal causes. But if to a depraved disposition, we suppose to be joined a weakness of spirit; if to an admiration, and desire of riches, be joined an aversion to danger or business; if those orders of men whose valour is required by the public, cease to be brave; if the members of society, in general, have not those personal qualities which are required to fill the stations of equality, or of honour, to which they are invited by the forms of the state; they must sink to a depth from which their imbecility, even more than their depraved inclinations, may prevent their rise.
SECT II.
Of Luxury.
WE are far from being agreed on the application of the term luxury, or on that degree of its meaning which is consistent with national prosperity, or with the moral rectitude of our nature. It is sometimes employed to signify a manner of life which we think necessary to civilization, and even to happiness. It is, in our panegyric of polished ages, the parent of arts, the support of commerce, and the minister of national greatness, and of opulence. It is, in our censure of degenerate manners, the source of corruption, and the presage of national declension and ruin. It is admired, and it is blamed; it is treated as ornamental and useful; and it is proscribed as a vice.
WITH all this diversity in our judgements, we are generally uniform in employing the term to signify that complicated apparatus which mankind devise for the ease and convenience of life. Their buildings, furniture, equipage, cloathing, train of domestics, refinement of the table, and, in general, all that assemblage which is rather intended to please the fancy, than to obviate real wants, and which is rather ornamental than useful.
WHEN we are disposed, therefore, under the appellation of luxury, to rank the enjoyment of of these things among the vices, we either tacitly refer to the habits of sensuality, debauchery, prodigality, vanity, and arrogance, with which the possession of high fortune is sometimes attended; or we apprehend a certain measure of what is necessary to human life, beyond which all enjoyments are supposed to be excessive and vicious. When, on the contrary, luxury is made an article of national lustre and felicity, we only think of it as an innocent consequence of the unequal distribution of wealth, and as a method by which different ranks are rendered mutually dependent, and mutually useful. The poor are made to practise arts, and the rich to reward them. The public itself is made a gainer by what seems to waste its stock, and it receives a perpetual increase of wealth, from the influence of those growing appetites, and delicate tastes, which seem to menace consumption and ruin.
IT is certain, that we must either, together with the commercial arts, suffer their fruits to be enjoyed, and even, in some measure, admired; or, like the Spartans, prohibit the art itself, while we are afraid of its consequences, or while we think that the conveniencies it brings exceed what nature requires.
WE may propose to stop the advancement of arts at any stage of their progress, and still incur the censure of luxury from those who have not advanced so far. The house-builder and the carpenter at Sparta were limited to the use of the axe and the saw; but a Spartan cottage might have passed for a palace in Thrace: and if the dispute were to turn on the knowledge of what is physically necessary to the preservation of human life, as the standard of what is morally lawful, the faculties of physic, as well as of morality, would probably divide on the subject, and leave every individual, as at present, to find some rule for himself. The casuist, for the most part, considers the practice of his own age and condition, as a standard for mankind. If in one age or condition, he condemn the use of a coach, in another he would have no less censured the wearing of shoes; and the very person who exclaims against the first, would probably not have spared the second, if it had not been already familiar in ages before his own. A censor born in a cottage, and accustomed to sleep upon straw, does not propose that men should return to the woods and the caves for shelter; he admits the reasonableness and the utility of what is already famil r; and apprehends an excess and corruption, only in the newest refinement of the rising generation.
THE clergy of Europe have preached successively against every new fashion, and every innovation in dress. The modes of youth are the subject of censure to the old; and modes of the last age, in their turn, are matter of ridicule to the flippant, and the young. Of this there is not always a better account to be given, than that the old are disposed to be severe, and the young to be merry.
THE argument against many of the conveniencies of life, drawn from the mere consideration of their not being necessary, was equally proper in the mouth of the savage, who dissuaded from the first applications of industry, as it is in that of the moralist, who insists on the vanity of the last.
Our ancestors, he might say, found their dwelling under this rock; they gathered their food in the forest; they allayed their thirst from the fountain; and they were clothed in the spoils of the beast they had slain. Why should we indulge a false delicacy, or require from the earth fruits which she is not accustomed to yield? The bow of our fathers is already too strong for our arms; and the wild beast begins to lord it in the woods.
THUS the moralist may have found, in the proceedings of every age, those topics of blame, from which he is so much disposed to arraign the manners of his own; and our embarrassment on the subject, is, perhaps, but a part of that general perplexity which we undergo, in trying to define moral characters by external circumstances, which may, or may not, be attended with faults in the mind and the heart. One man finds a vice in the wearing of linen; another does not, unless the fabric be fine; and if, mean-time, it be true, that a person may be dressed in manufacture, either course or fine; that he may sleep in the fields, or lodge in a palace; tread upon carpet, or plant his foot on the ground; while the mind either retains, or has lost, its penetration, and its vigour, and the heart its affection to mankind, it is vain, under any such circumstance, to seek for the distinctions of virtue and vice, or to tax the polished citizen with weakness for any part of his equipage, or for his wearing a sur, perhaps, in which some savage was dressed before him. Vanity is not distinguished by any peculiar species of dress. It is betrayed by the Indian in the phantastic assortments of his plumes, his shells, his party-coloured furs, and in the time he bestows at the glass and the toilet. Its projects in the woods and in the town are the same: in the one, it seeks, with the visage bedaubed, and with teeth artificially stained, for that admiration, which it courts in the other with a gilded equipage, and liveries of state.
POLISHED nations, in their progress, often come to surpass the rude in moderation, and severity of manners.
The Greek, says Thucydides, not long ago, like barbarians, wore golden spangles in the hair, and went armed in times of peace.
Simplicity of dress in this people, became a mark of politeness: and the mere materials with which the body is nourished or clothed, are probably of little consequence to any people. We must look for the characters of men in the qualities of the mind, not in the species of their food, or in the mode of their apparel. What are now the ornaments of the grave, and severe; what is owned to be a real conveniency, were once the sopperies of youth, or were devised to please the effeminate. The new fashion, indeed, is often the mark of the coxcomb; but we frequently change our fashions, without increasing the measures of our vanity or folly.
ARE the apprehensions of the severe, therefore, in every age, equally groundless and unreasonable Are we never to dread any error in the article of a refinement bestowed on the means of subsistence, or the conveniencies of life? The fact is, that men are perpetually exposed to the commission of error in this article, not merely where they are accustomed to high measures of accommodation, or to any particular species of food, but where-ever these objects, in general, may come to be preferred to friends, to a country, or to mankind; they actually commit such error, whereever they admire paultry distinctions or frivolous advantages; where-ever they shrink from small inconveniencies, and are incapable of discharging their duty with vigour. The use of morality on this subject, is not to limit men to any particular species of lodging, diet, or cloaths; but to prevent their considering these conveniencies as the principal objects of human life. And if we are asked, Where the pursuit of trifling accommodations should stop, in order that a man may devote himself entirely to the higher engagements of life? we may answer, That it should stop where it is. This was the rule followed at Sparta: The object of the rule was, to preserve the heart entire for the public, and to occupy men in cultivating their own nature, not in accumulating wealth, and external conveniencies. It was not expected otherwise, that the axe or the saw should be attended with greater political advantage, than the plane and the chisel. When Cato walked the streets of Rome without his robe, and without shoes, he did so, most probably, in contempt of what his countrymen were so prone to admire; not in hopes of finding a virtue in one species of dress, or a vice in another.
LUXURY, therefore, considered as a predilection in favour of the objects of vanity, and the costly materials of pleasure, is ruinous to the human character; considered as the mere use of accommodations and conveniencies which the age has procured, rather depends on the progress which the mechanical arts have made, and on the degree in which the fortunes of men are unequally parcelled, than on the dispositions of particular men either to vice or to virtue.
DIFFERENT measures of luxury are, however, variously suited to different constitutions of government. The advancement of arts supposes an unequal distribution of fortune; and the means of distinction they bring, serve to render the separation of ranks more sensible. Luxury is, upon this account, apart from all its moral effects, adverse to the form of democratical government; and in any state of society, can be safely admitted in that degree only in which the members of the community are supposed of unequal rank, and constitute public order by means of a regular subordination. High degrees of it appear salutary, and even necessary, in monarchical and mixed governments; where, besides the encouragement to arts and commerce, it serves to give lustre to those hereditary or constitutional dignities which have a place of importance in the political system. Whether even here luxury leads to abuse peculiar to ages of high refinement and opulence, we shall proceed to consider in the following sections.
SECT. III.
Of the Corruption incident to Polished Nations.
LUXURY and corruption are frequently coupled together, and even pass for synonymous terms. But in order to avoid any dispute about words, by the first we may understand that accumulation of wealth, and that refinement on the ways of enjoying it, which are the objects of industry, or the fruits of mechanic and commercial arts: And by the second a real weakness, or depravity of the human character, which may accompany any state of those arts, and be found under any external circumstances or condition whatsoever. It remains to inquire, What are the corruptions incident to polished nations, arrived at certain measures of luxury, and possessed of certain advantages, in which they are generally supposed to excel?
WE need not have recourse to a parallel between the manners of entire nations, in the extremes of civilization and rudeness, in order to be satisfied, that the vices of men are not proportioned to their fortunes; or that the habits of avarice, or of sensuality, are not founded on any certain measures of wealth, or determinate kind of enjoyment. Where the situations of particular men are varied as much by their personal stations, as they can be by the state of national refinements, the same passions for interest, or pleasure, prevail in every condition. They arise from temperament, or an acquired admiration of property; not from any particular manner of life in which the parties are engaged, nor from any particular species of property, which may have occupied their cares and their wishes.
TEMPERANCE and moderation are, at least. as frequent among those whom we call the superior, as they are among the lower classes of men; and however we may affix the character of sobriety to mere cheapness of diet, and other accommodations with which any particular age, or rank of men, appear to be contented, it is well known, that costly materials are not necessary to constitute a debauch, nor profligacy less frequent under the thatched roof, than under the lofty ceiling. Men grow equally familiar with different conditions, receive equal pleasure, and are equally allured to sensuality, in the palace, and in the cave. Their acquiring in either habits of intemperance or sloth, depends on the remission of other pursuits, and on the distaste of the mind to other engagements. If the affections of the heart be awake, and the passions of love, admiration, or anger, be kindled, the costly furniture of the palace, as well as the homely accommodations of the cottage, are neglected: and men, when roused, reject their repose; or, when wearied, embrace it alike on the silken bed, or on the couch of straw.
WE are not, however, from hence to conclude, that luxury, with all its concomitant circumstances, which either serve to favour its increase, or which, in the arrangements of civil society, follow it as consequences, can have no effect to the disadvantage of national manners. If that respite from public dangers and troubles which gives a leisure for the practice of commercial arts, be continued, or increased, into a disuse of national efforts; if the individual, not called to unite with his country, be left to pursue his private advantage; we may find him become effeminate, mercenary, and sensual; not because pleasures and profits are become more alluring, but because he has fewer calls to attend to other objects; and because he has more encouragement to study his personal advantages, and pursue his separate interests.
IF the disparities of rank and fortune which are necessary to the pursuit or enjoyment of luxury, introduce false grounds of precedency and estimation; if, on the mere considerations of being rich or poor, one order of men are, in their own apprehension, elevated, another debased; if one be criminally proud, another meanly dejected; and every rank in its place, like the tyrant, who thinks that nations are made for himself, be disposed to assume on the rights of mankind: although, upon the comparison, the higher order may be least corrupted; or from education, and a sense of personal dignity, have most good qualitles remaining; yet the one becoming mercenary and servile; the other imperious and arrogant; both regardless of justice, and of merit; the whole mass is corrupted, and the manners of a society changed for the worse, in proportion as its members cease to act on principles of equality, independence, or freedom.
UPON this view, and considering the merits of men in the abstract, a mere change from the habits of a republic to those of a monarchy; from the love of equality, to the sense of a subordination founded on birth, titles, and fortune, is a species of corruption to mankind. But this degree of corruption is still consistent with the safety and prosperity of some nations; it admits of a vigorous courage, by which the rights of individuals, and of kingdoms, may be long preserved.
UNDER the form of monarchy, while yet in its vigour, superior fortune is, indeed, one mark by which the different orders of men are distinguished; but there are some other ingredients, without which wealth is not admitted as a foundation of precedency, and in favour of which it is often despised, and lavished away. Such are birth and titles, the reputation of courage, courtly manners, and a certain elevation of mind. If we suppose, that these distinctions are forgotten, and nobility itself only to be known by the sumptuous retinue which money alone may procure; and by a lavish expence, which the more recent fortunes can generally best sustain; luxury must then be allowed to corrupt the monarchical as much as the republican state, and to introduce a fatal dissolution of manners, under which men of every condition, although they are eager to acquire, or to display their wealth, have no remains of real ambition. They have neither the elevation of nobles, nor the fidelity of subjects; they have changed into effeminate vanity, that sense of honour which gave rules to the personal courage; and into a servile baseness, that loyalty, which bound each in his place, to his immediate superior, and the whole to the throne.
NATIONS are most exposed to corruption from this quarter, when the mechanical arts, being greatly advanced, furnish numberless articles, to be applied in ornament to the person, in furniture, entertainment, or equipage; when such articles as the rich alone can procure are admired; and when consideration, precedence, and rank, are accordingly made to depend on fortune.
IN a more rude state of the arts, although wealth be unequally divided, the opulent can amass only the simple means of subsistence: They can only fill the granary, and furnish the stall; reap from more extended fields, and drive their herds over a larger pasture. To enjoy their magnificence they must live in a croud; and to secure their possessions, they must be surrounded with friends that espouse their quarrels. Their honours, as well as their safety, consist in the numbers who attend them; and their personal distinctions are taken from their liberality, and supposed elevation of mind. In this manner, the possession of riches serves only to make the owner assume a character of magnanimity, to become the guardian of numbers, rr the public object of respect and affection. But when the bulky constituents of wealth, and of rustic magnificence, can be exchanged for refinements; and when the produce of the soil may be turned into equipage, and mere decoration; when the combination of many is no longer required for personal safety; the master may become the sole consumer of his own estate: he may refer the use of every subject to himself; he may employ the materials of generosity to feed a personal vanity, or to indulge a sickly and effeminate fancy, which has learned to enumerate the trappings of weakness or folly among the necessaries of life.
THE Persian satrape, we are told, when he saw the King of Sparta at the place of their conference, stretched on the grass with his soldiers, blushed at the provision he had made for the accommodation of his own person: he ordered the furs and the carpets to be withdrawn; he felt his own inferiority; and recollected, that he was to treat with a man, not to vie with a pageant in costly attire and magnificence.
WHEN, amidst circumstances that make no trial of the virtues or talents of men, we have been accustomed to the air of superiority, which people of fortune derive from their retinue, we are apt to lose every sense of distinction arising from merit, or even from abilities. We rate our fellow-citizens by the figure they are able to make; by their buildings, their dress, their equipage, and the train of their followers. All these circumstances make a part in our estimate of what is excellent; and if the master himself is known to be a pageant in the midst of his fortune, we nevertheless pay our court to his station, and look up with an envious, servile, or dejected mind, to what is, in itself, scarcely fit to amuse children; though, when it is worn as a badge of distinction, it inflames the ambition of those we call the great, and strikes the multitude with awe and respect.
WE judge of entire nations by the productions of a few mechanical arts, and think we are talking of men, while we are boasting of their estates, their dress, and their palaces. The sense in which we apply the terms, great, and noble, high rank, and high life, shew, that we have, on such occasions, transferred the idea of perfection from the character to the equipage; and that excellence itself is, in our esteem, a mere pageant, adorned at a great expence, by the labours of many workmen.
TO those who overlook the subtile transitions of the imagination, it might appear, since wealth can do no more than furnish the means of subsistence, and purchase animal pleasures, that covetousness, and venality itself, should keep pace with our fears of want, or with our appetite for sensual enjoyments; and that where the appetite is satiated, and the fear of want is removed, the mind should be at ease on the subject of fortune. But they are not the mere pleasures that riches procure, nor the choice of viands which cover the board of the wealthy, that inflame the passions of the covetous and the mercenary. Nature is easily satisfied in all her enjoyments. It is an opinion of eminence, connected with fortune; it is a sense of debasement attending on poverty, which renders us blind to every advantage, but that of the rich; and insensible to every disgrace, but that of the poor. It is this unhappy apprehension, that occasionally prepares us for the desertion of every duty, for a submission to every indignity, and for the commission of every crime that can be accomplished in safety.
AURENGZEBE was not more renowned for sobriety in his private station, and in the conduct of a supposed dissimulation, by which he aspired to sovereign power, than he continued to be, even on the throne of Indostan. Simple, abstinent, and severe in his diet, and other pleasures, he still led the life of a hermit, and occupied his time with a seemingly painful application to the affairs of a great empire Gemelli Carceri.
. He quitted a station in which, if pleasure had been his object, he might have indulged his sensuality without reserve; he made his way to a scene of disquietude and care; he aimed at the summit of human greatness, in the possession of imperial fortune, not at the gratifications of animal appetite, or the enjoyment of ease. Superior to sensual pleasure, as well as to the feelings of nature, he dethroned his father, and he murdered his brothers, that he might roll on a carriage incrusted with diamond and pearl; that his elephants, his camels, and his horses, on the march, might form a line extending many leagues; might present a glittering harness to the sun; and loaded with treasure, usher to the view of an abject and admiring croud, that awful majesty, in whose presence they were to strike the forehead on the ground, and be overwhelmed with the sense of his greatness, and with that of their own debasement.
AS these are the objects which prompt the desire of dominion, and excite the ambitious to aim at the mastery of their fellow-creatures; so they inspire the ordinary race of men with a sense of infirmity and meanness, that prepares them to suffer indignities, and to become the property of persons, whom they consider as of a rank and a nature so much superior to their own.
THE chains of perpetual slavery, accordingly, appear to be rivetted in the East, no less by the pageantry which is made to accompany the possession of power, than they are by the fears of the sword, and the terrors of a military execution. In the West, as well as the East, we are willing to bow to the splendid equipage, and stand at an awful distance from the pomp of a princely estate. We too, may be terrified by the frowns, or won by the smiles, of those whose favour is riches and honour, and whose displeasure is poverty and neglect. We too may overlook the honours of the human soul, from an admiration of the pageantries that accompany fortune. The procession of elephants harnessed with gold might dazzle into slaves, the people who derive corruption and weakness from the effect of their own arts and contrivances, as well as those who inherit servility from their ancestors, and are enfeebled by their natural temperament, and the enervating charms of their soil, and their climate.
IT appears, therefore, that although the mere use of mateeials which constitute luxury, may be distinguished from actual vice; yet nations under a high state of the commercial arts, are exposed to corruption, by their admitting wealth, unsupported by personal elevation and virtue, as the great foundation of distinction, and by having their attention turned on the side of interest, as the road to consideration and honour.
WITH this effect, luxury may serve to corrupt democratical states, by introducing a species of monarchical subordination, without that sense of high birth and hereditary honours which render the boundaries of rank fixed and determinate, and which teach men to act in their stations with force and propriety. It may prove the occasion of political corruption, even in monarchical governments, by drawing respect towards mere wealth; by casting a shade on the lustre of personal qualities, or family-distinctions; and by infecting all orders of men, with equal venality, servility, and cowardice.
SECT. IV.
The same subject continued.
THE increasing regard with which men appear, in the progress of commercial arts, to study their profit, or the delicacy with which they refine on their pleasures; even industry itself, or the habit of application to a tedious employment, in which no honours are won, may, perhaps, be considered as indications of a growing attention to interest, or of effeminacy, contracted in the enjoyment of ease and conveniency. Every successive art, by which the individual is taught to improve on his fortune, is, in reality, an addition to his private engagements, and a new avocation of his mind from the public.
CORRUPTION, however, does not arise from the abuse of commercial arts alone; it requires the aid of political situation; and is not produced by the objects that occupy a sordid and a mercenary spirit, without the aid of circumstances that enable men to indulge in safety any mean disposition they have acquired.
PROVIDENCE has fitted mankind for the higher engagements which they are sometimes obliged to fulfil; and it is in the midst of such engagements that they are most likely to acquire or to preserve their virtues. The habits of a vigorous mind are formed in contending with difficulties, not in enjoying the repose of a pacific station; penetration and wisdom are the fruits of experience, not the lessons of retirement and leisure; ardour and generosity are the qualities of a mind roused and animated in the conduct of scenes that engage the heart, not the gifts of reflection or knowledge. The mere intermission of national and political efforts is, notwithstanding, sometimes mistaken for public good; and there is no mistake more likely to foster the vices, or to flatter the weakness, of feeble and interested men.
IF the ordinary arts of policy, or rather, if a growing indifference to objects of a public nature, should prevail, and, under any free constitution, put an end to those disputes of party, and silence that noise of dissension, which generally accompany the exercise of freedom, we may venture to prognosticate corruption to the national manners, as well as remissness to the national spirit. The period is come, when, no engagement remaining on the part of the public, private interest, and animal pleasure, become the sovereign objects of care. When men, being relieved from the pressure of great occasions, bestow their attention on trifles; and having carried what they are pleased to call sensibility and delicacy, on the subject of ease or molestation, as far as real weakness or folly can go, have recourse to affectation, in order to enhance the pretended demands, and accumulate the anxieties, of a sickly fancy, and enfeebled mind.
IN this condition, mankind generally flatter their own imbecility under the name of politeness.
They are persuaded, that the celebrated ardour, generosity, and fortitude, of former ages, bordered on frenzy, or were the mere effects of necessity, on men who had not the means of enjoying their ease, or their pleasure. They congratulate themselves on having escaped the storm which required the exercise of such arduous virtues; and with that vanity which accompanies the human race in their meanest condition, they boast of a scene of affectation, of languor, or of folly, as the standard of human felicity, and as furnishing the properest exercise of a rational nature.
IT is none of the least menacing symptoms of an age prone to degeneracy, that the minds of men become perplexed in the discernment of merit, as much as the spirit becomes enfeebled in conduct, and the heart misled in the choice of its objects. The care of mere fortune is supposed to constitute wisdom; retirement from public affairs, and real indifference to mankind, receive the applauses of moderation and virtue.
GREAT fortitude, and elevation of mind, have not always, indeed, been employed in the attainment of valuable ends; but they are always respectable, and they are always necessary when we would act for the good of mankind, in any of the more arduous stations of life. While, therefore we blame their misapplication, we should beware of depreciating their value. Men of a severe and sententious morality have not always sufficiently observed this caution; nor have they been duly aware of the corruptions they flattered, by the satire they employed against what is aspiring and prominent in the character of the human soul.
IT might have been expected, that in an age of hopeless debasement Juvenal's 10th satire.
, the talents of Demosthenes and Tully, even the ill-governed magnanimity of a Macedonian, or the daring enterprise of a Carthaginian leader, might have escaped the acrimony of a satirist, who had so many objects of correction in his view, and who possessed the arts of declamation in so high a degree:
I, demens, et saevos curre per Alpes, Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias, is part of the illiberal censure which is thrown by this poet on the person and action of a leader, who by his courage and conduct, in the very service to which the satire referred, had well nigh saved his country from the ruin with which it was at last overwhelmed.
Heroes are much the same, the point's agreed, From Macedonia's madman to the Swede, is a distich, in which another poet of beautiful talents, has attempted to depreciate a name, to which, probably, few of his readers are found to aspire.
IF men must go wrong, there is a choice of their very errors, as well as of their virtues. Ambition, the love of personal eminence, and the desire of fame, although they sometimes lead to the commission of crimes, yet always engage men in pursuits that require to be supported by some of the greatest qualities of the human soul; and if eminence is the principal object of pursuit, there is, at least, a probability, that those qualities may be studied on which a real elevation of mind is raised. But when public alarms have ceased, and contempt of glory is recommended as an article of wisdom, the sordid habits, and mercenary dispositions, to which, under a general indifference to national objects, the members of a polished or commerical state are exposed, must prove at once the most effectual suppression of every liberal sentiment, and the most fatal reverse of all those principles from which communities derive their hopes of preservation, and their strength.
IT is noble to possess happiness and independence, either in retirement, or in public life. The Characteristic of the happy, is to acquit themselves well in every condition; in the court, or in the village; in the senate, or in the private retreat. But if they affect any particular station, it is surely that in which their actions may be rendered most extensively useful. Our considering mere retirement, therefore, as a symptom of moderation, and of virtue, is either a remnant of that system, under which monks and anchorets, in former ages, have been canonized; or proceeds from a habit of thinking, which appears equally fraught with moral corruption, from our considering public life as a scene for the gratification of mere vanity, avarice, and ambition; never as furnishing the best opportunity for a just and a happy engagement of the mind and the heart.
EMULATION, and the desire of power, are but sorry motives to public conduct; but if they have been, in any case, the principal inducements from which men have taken part in the service of their country, any diminution of their prevalence or force is a real corruption of national manners; and the pretended moderation assumed by the higher orders of men, has a fatal effect in the state. The disinterested love of the public, is a principle without which some constitutions of government cannot subsist: but when we consider how seldom this has appeared a reigning passion, we have little reason to impute the prosperity or preservation of nations, in every case, to its influence.
IT is sufficient, perhaps, under one form of government, that men should be fond of their independence; that they should be ready to oppose usurpation, and to repel personal indignities: under another, it is sufficient that they should be tenacious of their rank, and of their honours; and instead of a zeal for the public, entertain a vigilant jealousy of the rights which pertain to themselves. When numbers of men retain a certain degree of elevation and fortitude, they are qualified to give a mutual check to their several errors, and are able to act in that variety of situations which the different constitutions of government have prepared for their members: but, under the disadvantages of a feeble spirit, however directed, and however informed, no national constitution is safe; nor can any degree of enlargement to which a state has arrived, secure its political welfare.
IN states where property, distinction, and pleasure, are thrown out as baits to the imagination, and incentives to passion, the public seems to rely for the preservation of its political life, on the degree of emulation and jealousy with which parties mutually oppose and restrain each other. The desires of preferment and profit in the breast of the citizen, are the motives from which he is excited to enter on public affairs, and are the considerations which direct his political conduct. The suppression, therefore, of ambition, of party-animosity, and of public envy, is probably, in every such case, not a reformation, but a symptom of weakness, and a prelude to more sordid pursuits, and ruinous amusements.
ON the eve of such a revolution in manners, the higher ranks, in every mixed or monarchical government, have need to take care of themselves. Men of business, and of industry, in the inferior stations of life, retain their occupations, and are secured, by a kind of necessity, in the possession of those habits on which they rely for their quiet, and for the moderate enjoyments of life. But the higher orders of men, if they relinquish the state, if they cease to possess that courage and elevation of mind, and to exercise those talents which are employed in its defence, and its government, are, in reality, by the seeming advantages of their station, become the refuse of that society of which they once were the ornament; and from being the most respectable, and the most happy, of its members, are become the most wretched and corrupt. In their approach to this condition, and in the absence of every manly occupation, they feel a dissatisfaction and languor which they cannot explain: They pine in the midst of apparent enjoyments; or, by the variety and caprice of their different pursuits and amusements, exhibit a state of agitation, which, like the disquiet of sickness, is not a proof of enjoyment or pleasure, but of suffering and pain. The care of his buildings, his equipage, or his table, is chosen by one; literary amusement, or some frivolous study, by another. The sports of the country, and the diversions of the town; the gaming-table These different occupations differ from each other, in respect to their dignity, and their innocence; but none of them are the schools from which men are brought to sustain the tottering fortune of nations; they are equally avocations from what ought to be the principal pursuit of man, the good of mankind.
, dogs, horses, and wine, are employed to fill up the blank of a listless and unprofitable life. They speak of human pursuits, as if the whole difficulty were to find something to do: They fix on some frivolous occupation, as if there was nothing that deserved to be done: They consider what tends to the good of their fellow-creatures, as a disadvantage to themselves: They fly from every scene, in which any efforts of vigour are required, or in which they might be allured to perform any service to their country. We misapply our compassion in pitying the poor; it were much more justly applied to the rich, who become the first victims of that wretched insignificance, into which the members of every corrupted state, by the tendency of their weaknesses, and their vices, are in haste to plunge themselves.
IT is in this condition, that the sensual invent all those refinements on pleasure, and devise those incentives to a satiated appetite, which tend to foster the corruptions of a dissolute age. The effects of brutal appetite, and the mere debauch, are more flagrant, and more violent, perhaps, in rude ages, than they are in the later periods of commerce and luxury: but that perpetual habit of searching for animal pleasure where it is not to be found, in the gratifications of an appetite that is cloyed, and among the ruins of an animal constitution, is not more fatal to the virtues of the soul, than it is even to the enjoyment of sloth, or of pleasure; it is not a more certain avocation from public affairs, or a surer prelude to national decay, than it is a disappointment to our hopes of private felicity.
IN these reflections, it has been the object, not to ascertain a precise measure to which corruption has risen in any of the nations that have attained to eminence, or that have gone to decay; but to describe that remissness of spirit, that weakness of soul, that state of national debility, which is likely to end in political slavery; an evil which remains to be considered as the last object of caution, and beyond which there is no subject of disquisition in the perishing fortunes of nations.
SECT. V.
Of Corruption, as it tends to Political Slavery.
LIBERTY, in one sense, appears to be the portion of polished nations alone. The savage is personally free, because he lives unrestrained, and acts with the members of his tribe on terms of equality, The barbarian is frequently independent from a continuance of the same circumstances, or because he has courage and a sword. But good policy alone can provide for the regular administration of justice, or constitute a force in the state, which is ready on every occasion to defend the rights of its members.
IT has been found, that, except in a few singular cases, the commercial and political arts have advanced together. These arts have been in modern Europe so interwoven, that we cannot determine which were prior in the order of time, or derived most advantage from the mutual influences with which they act and re-act upon one another. It has been observed, that in some nations the spirit of commerce, intent on securing its profits, has led the way to political wisdom. A people, possessed of wealth, and become jealous of their properties, have formed the project of emancipation, and have proceeded, under favour of an importance recently gained, still farther to enlarge their pretensions, and to dispute the prerogatives which their sovereign had been in use to employ. But it is in vain that we expect in one age, from the possession of wealth, the fruit which it is said to have borne in a former. Great accessions of fortune, when recent, when accompanied with frugality, and a sense of independence, may render the owner confident in his strength, and ready to spurn at oppression. The purse which is open, not to personal expence, or to the indulgence of vanity, but to support the interests of a faction, to gratify the higher passions of party, render the wealthy citizen formidable to those who pretend to dominion; but it does not follow, that in a time of corruption, equal, or greater, measures of wealth should operate to the same effect.
ON the contrary, when wealth is accumulated only in the hands of the miser, and runs to waste from those of the prodigal; when heirs of family find themselves straitened and poor, in the midst of affluence; when the cravings of luxury silence even the voice of party and faction; when the hopes of meriting the rewards of compliance, or the fear of losing what is held at discretion, keep men in a state of suspense and anxiety; when fortune, in short, instead of being considered as the instrument of a vigorous spirit, becomes the idol of a covetous or a profuse, of a rapacious or a timorous mind; the foundation on which freedom was built, may serve to support a tyranny; and what, in one age, raised the pretensions, and fostered the confidence of the subject, may, in another, incline him to servility, and furnish the price to be paid for his prostitutions. Even those, who, in a vigorous age, gave the example of wealth, in the hands of the people, becoming an occasion of freedom, may, in times of degeneracy, verify likewise the maxim of Tacitus, That the admiration of riches leads to despotical government Est apud illos et opibus honos; eoque unus imperitat, &c Tacitus de mor. Ger. c. 44.
.
MEN who have tasted of freedom, and who have felt their personal rights, are not easily taught to bear with incroachments on either, and cannot, without some preparation, come to submit to oppression. They may receive this unhappy preparation, under different forms of government, from different hands, and arrive at the same end by different ways They follow one direction in republics, another in monarchies, and in mixed governments. But where-ever the state has, by means that do not preserve the virtue of the subject, effectually guarded his safety; remissness, and neglect of the public, are likely to follow; and polished nations of every description, appear to encounter a danger, on this quarter, proportioned to the degree in which they have, during any continuance, enjoyed the uninterrupted possession of peace and prosperity.
LIBERTY results, we say, from the government of laws; and we are apt to consider statutes, not merely as the resolutions and maxims of a people determined to be free, not as the writings by which their rights are kept on record,; but as a power erected to guard them, and as a barrier which the caprice of man cannot transgress.
WHEN a Basha, in Asia, pretends to decide every controversy by the rules of natural equity, we allow that he is possessed of discretionary powers. When a judge in Europe is left to decide, according to his own interpretation of written laws, is he in any sense more restrained than the former? Have the multiplied words of a statute an influence over the conscience, and the heart, more powerful than that of reason and nature? Does the party, in any judicial proceeding, enjoy a less degree of safety, when his rights are discussed, on the foundation of a rule that is open to the understandings of mankind, than when they are referred to an intricate system, which it has become the object of a separate profession to study and to explain?
IF forms of proceeding, written statutes, or other constituents of law, cease to be enforced by the very spirit from which they arose; they serve only to cover, not to restrain, the iniquities of power: they are possibly respected even by the corrupt magistrate, when they favour his purpose; but they are contemned or evaded, when they stand in his way: And the influence of laws, where they have any real effect in the preservation of liberty, is not any magic power descending from shelves that are loaded with books, but is, in reality, the influence of men resolved to be free; of men, who, having adjusted in writing the terms on which they are to live with the state, and with their fellow-subjects, are determined, by their vigilance and spirit, to make these terms be observed.
WE are taught, under every form of government, to apprehend usurpations, from the abuse, or from the extension of the executive power. In pure monarchies, this power is commonly hereditary, and made to descend in a determinate line. In elective monarchies, it is held for life. In republics, it is exercised during a limited time. Where men, or families, are called by election to the possession of temporary dignities, it is more the object of ambition to perpetuate, than to extend their powers. In hereditary monarchies, the sovereignty is already perpetual; and the aim of every ambitious prince, is to enlarge his prerogative. Rebublics, and, in times of commotion, communities of every form, are exposed to hazard, not from those only who are formally raised to places of trust, but from every person whatever, who is incited by ambition, and who is supported by faction.
IT is no advantage to a prince, or other magistrate, to enjoy more power than is consistent with the good of mankind; nor is it of any benefit to a man to be unjust: but these maxims are a feeble security against the passions and follies of men. Those who are intrusted with any measures of influence, are disposed, from a mere aversion to constraint, to remove opposition. Not only the monarch who wears a hereditary crown, but the magistrate who holds his office for a limited time, grows fond of his dignity. The very minister, who depends for his place on the momentary will of his prince, and whose personal interests are, in every respect, those of a subject, still has the weakness to take an interest in the growth of prerogative, and to reckon as gain to himself the incroachments he has made on the rights of a people, with whom he himself and his family are soon to be numbered.
EVEN with the best intentions towards mankind, we are inclined to think, that their welfare depends, not on the felicity of their own inclinations, or the happy employment of their own talents, but on their ready compliance with what we have devised for their good. Accordingly, the greatest virtue of which any sovereign has hitherto shown an example, is not a desire of cherishing in his people the spirit of freedom and independence; but what is in itself-sufficiently rare, and highly meritorious, a steady regard to the distribution of justice in matters of property, a disposition to protect and to oblige, to redress the grievances, and to promote the interest of his subjects. It was from a reference to these objects, that Titus computed the value of his time, and judged of its application. But the sword, which in this beneficent hand was drawn to protect the subject, and to procure a speedy and effectual distribution of justice, was likewise sufficient in the hands of a tyrant, to shed the blood of the innocent, and to cancel the rights of men. The temporary proceedings of humanity, though they suspended the exercise of oppression, did not break the national chains: the prince was even the better enabled to procure that species of good which he studied; because there was no freedom remaining, and because there was no where a force to dispute his decrees, or to interrupt their execution.
WAS it in vain, that Antoninus became acquainted with the characters of Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion, and Brutus? Was it in vain, that he learned to understand the form of a free community, raised on the basis of equality and justice; or of a monarchy, under which the liberties of the subject were held the most sacred object of administration M. Antoninus, lib. 1.
? Did he mistake the means of procuring to mankind what he points out as a blessing? Or did the absolute power with which he was furnished, in a mighty empire, only disable him from executing what his mind had perceived as a national good? In such a case, it were vain to flatter the monarch or his people. The first cannot bestow liberty, without raising a spirit, which may, on occasion, stand in opposition to his own designs; nor the latter receive this blessing, while they own that it is in the right of a master to give or to with-hold it. The claim of justice is firm and peremptory. We receive favours with a sense of obligation and kindness; but we would inforce our rights, and the spirit of freedom in this exertion cannot take the tone of supplication, or of thankfulness, without betraying itself.
You have intreated Octavius, says Brutus to Cicero, that he would spare those who stand foremost among the citizens of Rome. What if he will not? Must we perish? Yes; rather than owe our safety to him.
LIBERTY is a right which every individual must be ready to vindicate for himself, and which he who pretends to bestow as a favour, has by that very act in reality denied. Even political establishments, though they appear to be independent of the will and arbitration of men, cannot be relied on for the preservation of freedom; they may nourish, but should not supersede that firm and resolute spirit, with which the liberal mind is always prepared to resist indignities, and to refer its safety to itself.
WERE a nation, therefore, given to be moulded by a sovereign, as the clay is put into the hands of the potter, this project of bestowing liberty on a people who are actually servile, is, perpaps, of all others, the most difficult, and requires most to be executed in silence, and with the deepest reserve. Men are qualified to receive this blessing, only in proportion as they are made to apprehend their own rights; and are made to respect the just pretensions of mankind; in proportion as they are willing to sustain, in their own persons, the burden of government, and of national defence; and are willing to prefer the engagements of a liberal mind, to the enjoyments of sloth, or the delusive hopes of a safety purchased by submission and fear.
I SPEAK with respect, and, if I may be allowed the expression, even with indulgence, to those who are intrusted with high prerogatives in the political system of nations. It is, indeed, seldom their fault that states are inslaved. What should be expected from them, but that being actuated by human desires, they should be averse to disappointment, or even to delay; and in the ardour with which they pursue their object, that they should break through the barriers that would stop their career? If millions recede before single men, and senates are passive, as if composed of members who had no opinion or sense of their own; on whose side have the defences of freedom given way, or to whom shall we impute their fall? to the subject, who has deserted his station; or to the sovereign, who has only remained in his own; and who, if the collateral or subordinate members of government shall cease to question his power, must continue to govern without any restraint?
IT is well known, that constitutions framed for the preservation of liberty, must consist of many parts; and that senates, popular assemblies, courts of justice, magistrates of different orders, must combine to balance each other, while they exercise, sustain, or check the executive power. If any part is struck out, the fabric must totter, or fall; if any member is remiss, the others must incroach. In assemblies constituted by men of different talents, habits, and apprehensions, it were something more than human that could make them agree in every point of importance; having different opinions and views, it were want of integrity to abstain from disputes: our very praise of unanimity, therefore, is to be considered as a danger to liberty. We wish for it, at the hazard of taking in its place, the remissness of men grown indifferent to the public; the venality of those who have sold the rights of their country; or the servility of others, who give implicit obedience to a leader by whom their minds are subdued. The love of the public, and respect to its laws, are the points in which mankind are bound to agree; but if, in matters of controversy, the sense of any individual or party is invariably pursued, the cause of freedom is already betrayed.
HE whose office it is to govern a supine or an abject people, cannot, for a moment, cease to extend his powers. Every execution of law, every movement of the state, every civil and military operation, in which his power is exerted, must serve to confirm his authority, and present him to the view of the public, as the sole object of consideration, fear, and respect. Those very establishments which were devised, in one age, to limit, or to direct the exercise of an executive power, will serve, in another, to settle its foundations, and to give it stability; they will point out the channels in which it may run, without giving offence, or without exciting alarms, and the very councils which were instituted to check its incroachments, will, in time of corruption, furnish an aid to its usurpations.
THE passion for independence, and the love of dominion, frequently arise from a common source: There is, in both, an aversion to controul; and he, who, in one situation, cannot brook a superior, must, in another, dislike to be joined with an equal.
WHAT the prince, under a pure or limited monarchy, is, by the constitution of his country, the leader of a faction would willingly become in republican governments. If he attains to this envied condition, his own inclination, or the tendency of human affairs, seem to open before him the career of a royal ambition: but the circumstances in which he is destined to act, are very different from those of a king. He encounters with men who are unused to disparity; he is obliged, for his own security, to hold the dagger continually unsheathed. When he hopes to be safe, possibly means to be just; but is hurried, from the first moment of his usurpation, into every exercise of despotical power. The heir of a crown has no such quarrel to maintain with his subjects: his situation is flattering; and the heart must be uncommonly bad, that does not glow with affection to a people, who are, at once, his admirers, his support, and the ornaments of his reign. In him, perhaps, there is no explicit design of trespassing on the rights of his subjects; but the forms intended to preserve their freedom, are not, on this account, always safe in his hands.
SLAVERY has been imposed upon mankind in the wantonness of a depraved ambition, and tyrannical cruelties have been committed in the gloomy hours of jealousy and terror: yet these demons are not necessary to the creation, or to the support of an arbitrary power. Although no policy was ever more successful than that of the Roman republic in maintaining a national fortune; yet subjects, as well as their princes, frequently imagine that freedom is a clog on the proceedings of government: they imagine, that despotical power is best fitted to procure dispatch and secrecy in the execution of public councils; to maintain what they are pleased to call political order Our notion of order in civil society is frequently false: it is taken from the analogy of subjects inanimate and dead; we consider commotion and action as contrary to its nature; we think it consistent only with obedience, secrecy, and the silent passing of affairs through the hands of a few. The good order of stones in a wall, is their being properly fixed in the places for which they are hewn; were they to stir the building must fall: but the good order of men in society, is their being placed where they are properly qualified to act. The first is a fabric made of dead and inanimate parts, the second is made of living and active members. When we seek in society for the order of mere inaction and tranquility, we forget the nature of our subject, and find the order of slaves, not that of free men.
, and to give a speedy redress of complaints. They even sometimes acknowledge, that if a succession of good princes could be found, despotical government is best calculated for the happiness of mankind. While they reason thus, they cannot blame a sovereign, who, in the confidence that he is to employ his power for good purposes, endeavours to extend its limits, and, in his own apprehension, strives only to shake off the restraints which stand in the way of reason, and which prevent the effect of his friendly intentions.
THUS prepared for usurpation, let him, at the head of a free state, employ the force with which he is armed, to crush the seeds of apparent disorder in every corner of his dominions; let him effectually curb the spirit of dissension and variance among his people; let him remove the interruptions to government, arising from the refractory humours and the private interests of his subjects; let him collect the force of the state against its enemies, by availing himself of all it can furnish in the way of taxation and personal service: it is extremely probable, that, even under the direction of wishes for the good of mankind, he may break through every barrier of liberty, and establish a despotism, while he flatters himself, that he only follows the dictates of sense and propriety.
WHEN we suppose government to have bestowed a degree of tranquility which we sometimes hope to reap from it, as the best of its fruits, and public affairs to proceed, in the several departments of legislation and execution, with the least possible interruption to commerce and lucrative arts; such a state, like that of China, by throwing affairs into separate offices, where conduct consists in detail, and in the observance of forms, by superseding all the exertions of a great or a liberal mind, is more akin to despotism than we are apt to imagine.
WHETHER oppression, injustice, and cruelty, are the only evils which attend on despotical government, may be considered apart. In the mean time it is sufficient to observe, that liberty is never in greater danger than it is when we measure national felicity by the blessings which a prince may bestow, or by the mere tranquility which may attend on equitable administration. The sovereign may dazzle with his heroic qualities; he may protect his subjects in the enjoyment of every animal advantage or pleasure: but the benefits arising from liberty are of a different sort; they are not the fruits of a virtue, and of a goodness, which operate in the breast of one man, but the communication of virtue itself to many; and such a distribution of functions in civil society, as gives to numbers the exercises and occupations which pertain to their nature.
THE best constitutions of government are attended with inconvenience; and the exercise of liberty may, on many occasions, give rise to complains. When we are intent on reforming abuses, the abuses of freedom may lead us to incroach on the subject from which they are supposed to arise. Despotism itself has certain advantages, or at least, in times of civility and moderation, may proceed with so little offence, as to give no public alarm. These circumstances may lead mankind, in the very spirit of reformation, or by mere inattention, to apply or to admit of dangerous innovations in the state of their policy.
SLAVERY, however, is not always introduced by mere mistake; it is sometimes imposed in the spirit of violence and rapine. Princes become corrupt as well as their people; and whatever may have been the origin of despotical government, its pretensions, when fully explained, give rise to a contest between the sovereign and his subjects, which force alone can decide. These pretensions have a dangerous aspect to the person, the property, or the life of every subject; they alarm every passion in the human breast; they disturb the supine; they deprive the venal of his hire; they declare war on the corrupt as well as the virtuous; they are tamely admitted only by the coward; but even to him must be supported by a force that can work on his fears. This force the conqueror brings from abroad; and the domestic usurper endeavours to find in his faction at home.
WHEN a people is accustomed to arms, it is difficult for a part to subdue the whole; or before the establishment of disciplined armies, it is difficult for any usurper to govern the many by the help of a few. These difficulties, however, the policy of civilized and commercial nations has sometimes removed; and by forming a distinction between civil and military professions, by committing the keeping and the enjoyment of liberty to different hands, has prepared the way for the dangerous alliance of faction with military power, in opposition to mere political forms, and the rights of mankind.
A PEOPLE who are disarmed in compliance with this fatal refinement, have rested their safety on the pleadings of reason and justice at the tribunal of ambition and of sorce. In such an extremity, laws are quoted, and senates are assembled, in vain. They who compose a legislature, or who occupy the civil departments of state, may deliberate on the messages they receive from the camp or the court; but if the bearer, like the centurion who brought the petition of Octavius to the Roman senate, shew the hilt of his sword Sueton.
, they find that petitions are become commands, and that they themselves are become the pageants, not the repositories of sovereign power.
THE reflections of this section may be unequally applied to nations of unequal extent. Small communities, however corrupted, are not prepared for despotical government: their members crouded together, and contiguous to the seats of power, never forget their relation to the public; they pry, with habits of familiarity and freedom, into the pretensions of those who would rule; and where the love of equality, and the sense of justice, have failed, they act on motives of faction, emulation, and envy. The exiled Tarquin had his adherents at Rome; but if by their means he had recovered his station, it is probable, that in the exercise of his royalty, he must have entered on a new scene of contention with the very party that restored him to power.
IN proportion as territory is extended, its parts lose their relative importance to the whole. Its inhabitants cease to perceive their connection with the state, and are seldom united in the execution of any national, or even of any factious, designs. Distance from the seats of administration, and indifference to the persons who contend for preferment, teach the majority to consider themselves as the subjects of a sovereignty, not as the members of a political body. It is even remarkable, that enlargement of territory, by rendering the individual of less consequence to the public, and less able to intrude with his counsel, actually tends to reduce national affairs within a narrower compass, as well as to diminish the numbers who are consulted in legislation, or in other matters of government.
THE disorders to which a great empire is exposed, require speedy prevention, vigilance, and quick execution. Distant provinces must be kept in subjection by military force; and the dictatorial powers, which, in free states, are sometimes raised to quell insurrections, or to oppose other occasional evils, appear, under a certain extent of dominion, at all times equally necessary to suspend the dissolution of a body, whose parts were assembled, and must be cemented, by measures forcible, deci and secret. Among the circumstances, therefore, which in the event of national prosperity, and in the result of commercial arts, lead to the establishment of despotism, there is none, perhaps, that arrives at this termination, with so sure an aim, as the perpetual enlargement of territory. In every state, the freedom of its members depends on the balance and adjustment of its interior parts; and the existence of any such freedom among mankind, depends on the balance of nations. In the progress of conquest, those who are subdued are said to have lost their liberties; but from the history of mankind, to conquer, or to be conquered, has appeared, in effect, the same.
SECT. VI.
Of the Progress and Termination of Despotism.
MANKIND, when they degenerate, and tend to their ruin, as well as when they improve, and gain real advantages, frequently proceed by slow, and almost insensible, steps. If, during ages of activity and vigour, they fill up the measure of national greatness to a height which no human wisdom could at a distance foresee; they actually incur, in ages of relaxation and weakness, many evils which their fears did not suggest, and which, perhaps, they had thought far removed by the tide of success and prosperity.
WE have already observed, that where men are remiss or corrupted, the virtue of their leaders, or the good intention of their magistrates, will not always secure them in the possession of political freedom. Implicit submission to any leader, or the uncontrouled exercise of any power, even when it is intended to operate for the good of mankind, may frequently end in the subversion of legal establishments. This fatal revolution, by whatever means it is accomplished, terminates in military government; and this, though the simplest of all governments, is rendered complete by degrees. In the first period of its exercise over men who have acted as members of a free community, it can have only laid the foundation, not completed the fabric, of a despotical policy. The usurper, who has possessed with an army, the centre of a great empire, sees around him, perhaps, the shattered remains of a former constitution; he may hear the murmurs of a reluctant and unwilling submission; he may even see danger in the aspect of many, from whose hands he may have wrested the sword, but whose minds he has not subdued, nor reconciled to his power.
THE sense of personal rights, or the pretension to privilege and honours, which remain among certain orders of men, are so many bars in the way of a recent usurpation. If they are not suffered to decay with age, and to wear away in the progress of a growing corruption, they must be broken with violence, and the entrance to every new accession of power must be stained with blood. The effect, even in this case, is frequently tardy. The Roman spirit, we know, was not entirely extinguished under a succession of masters, and under a repeated application of bloodshed and poison. The noble and respectable family still aspired to its original honours: the history of the republic, the writings of former times, the monuments of illustrious men, and the lessons of a philosophy fraught with heroic conceptions, continued to nourish the soul in retirement, and formed those eminent characters, whose elevation, and whose fate, are, perhaps, the most affecting subjects of human story. Though unable to oppose the general bent to servility, they became, on account of their supposed inclinations, objects of distrust and aversion; and were made to pay with their blood, the price of a sentiment which they fostered in silence, and which glowed only in the heart.
WHILE despotism proceeds in its progress, by what principle is the sovereign conducted in the choice of measures that tend to establish his government? By a mistaken apprehension of his own good, sometimes even of that of his people, and by the desire which he feels on every particular occasion, to remove the obstructions which impede the execution of his will. When he has fixed a resolution, whoever reasons or demonstrates against it is an enemy; when his mind is elated, whoever pretends to erninence, and is disposed to act for himself, is a rival. He would leave no dignity in the state, but what is dependent on himself; no active power, but what carries the expression of his momentary pleasure. Guided by a perception as unerring as that of instinct, he never fails to select the proper objects of his antipathy or of his favour. The aspect of independence repels him; that of servility attracts. The tendency of his administration is to quiet every restless spirit, and to assume every function of government to himself It is ridiculous to hear men of a restless ambition, who would be the only actors in every scene, sometimes complain of a refractory spirit in mankind; as if the same disposition from which they desire to usurp every office, did not incline every other person to reason and to act at least for himself.
. When the power is adequate to the end, it operates as much in the hands of those who do not perceive the termination as it does in the hands of others by whom it is best understood: the mandates of either, when just, should not be disputed; when erroneous or wrong, they are supported by force.
YOU must die, was the answer of Octavius to every suit, from a people that implored his mercy. It was the sentence which some of his successors pronounced against every citizen that was eminent for his birth or his virtues. But are the evils of despotism confined to the cruel and sanguinary methods, by which a recent dominion over a refractory and a turbulent people is established or maintained? And is death the greatest calamity which can afflict mankind under an establishment by which they are divested of all their rights? They are, indeed, frequently suffered to live; but distrust, and jealousy, the sense of personal meanness, and the anxieties which arise from the care of a wretched interest, are made to possess the soul; every citizen is reduced to a slave; and every charm by which the community engaged its members, has ceased to exist. Obedience is the only duty that remains, and this is exacted by force. If under such an establishment, it be necessary to witness scenes of debasement and horror, at the hazard of catching the infection, death becomes a relief; and the libation which Thrasea was made to pour from his arteries, is to be considered as a proper sacrifice of gratitude to Jove the Deliverer.
Porrectisque utriusque brachii venis, postquam cruorem effudit, humum super spargens, proprius vocato Quaestore, Libemus, inquit, Jovi Liberatori.
Specta juvenis; et omen quidem Dii prohibeant; ceterum in ea tempora natus es, quibus firmare animum deceat constantibus exemplis.
Tacit. Ann. lib. 16.
.
OPPRESSION and cruelty are not always necessary to despotical government; and even when present, are but a part of its evils. It is founded on corruption, and on the suppression of all the civil and the political virtues; it requires its subjects to act from motives of fear; it would asswage the passions of a few men at the expence of mankind; and would erect the peace of society itself on the ruins of that freedom and confidence from which alone the enjoyment, the force, and the elevation of the human mind, are found to arise.
DURING the existence of any free constitution, and whilst every individual possessed his rank and his privilege, or had his apprehension of personal rights, the members of every community were to one another objects of consideration and of respect; every point to be carried in civil society, required the exercise of talents, of wisdom, persuasion, and vigour, as well as of power. But it is the highest refinement of a despotical government, to rule by simple commands, and to exclude every art but that of compulsion. Under the influence of this policy, therefore, the occasions which employed and cultivated the understandings of men, which awakened their sentiments, and kindled their imaginations, are gradually removed; and the progress by which mankind attained to the honours of their nature, in being engaged to act in society upon a liberal footing, was not more uniform, or less interrupted, than that by which they degenerate in this unhappy condition.
WHEN we hear of the silence which reigns in the seraglio, we are made to believe, that speech itself is become unnecessary; and that the signs of the mute are sufficient to carry the most important mandates of government. No arts, indeed, are required to maintain an ascendant where terror alone is opposed to force, where the powers of the sovereign are delegated entire to every subordinate officer: nor can any station bestow a liberality of mind in a scene of silence and dejection, where every breast is possessed with jealousy and caution, and where no object, but animal pleasure, remains to balance the sufferings of the sovereign himself, or those of his subjects.
IN other states, the talents of men are sometimes improved by the exercises which belong to an eminent station: but here the master himself is probably the rudest and least cultivated animal of the herd; he is inferior to the slave whom he raises from a servile office to the first places of trust or of dignity in his court. The primitive simplicity which formed ties of familiarity and affection betwixt the sovereign and the keeper of his herds See Odyssey.
, appears, in the absence of all affections, to be restored, or to be counterfeited amidst the ignorance and brutality which equally characterise all orders of men, or rather which level the ranks, and destroy the distinction of persons in a despotical court.
CAPRICE and passion are the rules of government with the prince. Every delegate of power is left to act by the same direction; to strike when he is provoked; to favour when he is pleased. In what relates to revenue, jurisdiction, or police, every governor of a province acts like a leader in an enemy's country; comes armed with the terrors of fire and sword; and instead of a tax, levies a contribution by force: he ruins or spares as either may serve his purpose. When the clamours of the oppressed, or the reputation of a treasure amassed at the expence of a province, have reached the ears of the sovereign, the extortioner is indeed made to purchase impunity by imparting a share, or by forfeiting the whole of his spoil; but no reparation is made to the injured; nay, the crimes of the minister are first employed to plunder the people, and afterwards punished to fill the coffers of the sovereign.
IN this total discontinuance of every art that relates to just government and national policy, it is remarkable, that even the trade of the soldier is itself greatly neglected. Distrust and jealousy on the part of the prince, come in aid of his ignorance and incapacity; and these causes operating together, serve to destroy the very foundation on which his power is established. Any undisciplined rout of armed men passes for an army, whilst a weak, dispersed, and unarmed people, are sacrificed to military disorder, or exposed to depredation on the frontier from an enemy, whom the desire of spoil, or the hopes of conquest, may have drawn to their neighbourhood.
THE Romans extended their empire till they left no polished nation to be subdued, and found a frontier which was every where surrounded by fierce and barbarous tribes; they even pierced through uncultivated deserts, in order to remove to a greater distance the molestation of such troublesome neighbours, and in order to possess the avenues through which they feared their attacks. But this policy put the finishing hand to the internal corruption of the state. A few years of tranquility were sufficient to make even the government forget its danger; and in the cultivated province, prepared for the enemy, a tempting prize and an easy victory.
WHEN by the conquest and annexation of every rich and cultivated province, the measure of empire is full, two parties are sufficient to comprehend mankind; that of the pacific and the wealthy, who dwell within the pale of empire; and that of the poor, the rapacious, and the fierce, who are inured to depredation and war. The last bear to the first nearly the same relation which the wolf and the lion bear to the fold; and they are naturally engaged in a state of hostility.
WERE despotic empire, mean-time, to continue for ever unmolested from abroad, while it retains that corruption on which it was founded, it appears to have in itself no principle of new life, and presents no hope of restoration to freedom and political vigour. That which the despotical master has sown, cannot quicken unless it die ; it must languish and expire by the effect of its own abuse, before the human spirit can spring up anew, or bear those fruits which constitute the honour and the felicity of human nature. In times of the greatest debasement, indeed, commotions are felt; but very unlike the agitations of a free people: they are either the agonies of nature, under the sufferings to which men are exposed; or mere tumults, confined to a few who stand in arms about the prince, and who, by their conspiracies, assassinations, and murders, serve only to plunge the pacific inhabitant still deeper in the horrors of fear or despair. Scattered in the provinces, unarmed, unacquainted with the sentiments of union and confederacy, restricted by habit to a wretched oeconomy, and dragging a precarious life on those possessions which the extortions of government have left; the people can no where, under these circumstances, assume the spirit of a community, nor form any liberal combination for their own defence. The injured may complain; and while he cannot obtain the mercy of government, he may implore the commiseration of his fellow-subject. But that fellow-subject is comforted, that the hand of oppression has not seized on himself: he studies his interest, or snatches his pleasure, under that degree of safety which obscurity and concealment bestow.
THE commercial arts, which seem to require no foundation in the minds of men, but the regard to interest; no encouragement, but the hopes of gain, and the secure possession of property, must perish under the precarious tenure of slavery, and under the apprehension of danger arising from the reputation of wealth. National poverty, however, and the suppression of commerce, are the means by which despotism comes to accomplish its own destruction. Where there are no longer any profits to corrupt, or fears to deter, the charm of dominion is broken, and the naked slave, as awake from a dream, is astonished to find he is free. When the fence is destroyed, the wilds are open, and the herd breaks loose. The pasture of the cultivated field is no longer preferred to that of the desert. The sufferer willingly flies where the extortions of government cannot overtake him; where even the timid and the servile may recollect they are men; where the tyrant may threaten, but where he is known to be no more than a fellow-creature; where he can take nothing but life, and even this at the hazard of his own.
AGREEABLY to this description, the vexations of tyranny have overcome, in many parts of the East, the desire of settlement. The inhabitants of a village quit their habitations, and infest the public ways; those of the valleys fly to the mountains, and, equipt for flight, or possessed of a strong hold, subsist by depredation, and by the war they make on their former masters.
THESE disorders conspire with the impositions of government to render the remaining settlements still less secure: but while devastation and ruin appear on every side, mankind are forced anew upon those confederacies, acquire again that personal confidence and vigour, that social attachment, that use of arms, which, in former times, rendered a small tribe the seed of a great nation; and which may again enable the emancipated slave to begin the career of civil and commercial arts. When human nature appears in the utmost state of corruption, it has actually begun to reform.
IN this manner, the scenes of human life have been frequently shifted. Security and presumption forfeit the advantages of prosperity; resolution and conduct retrieve the ills of adversity; and mankind, while they have nothing on which to rely but their virtue, are prepared to gain every advantage; and when they confide most in their fortune, are most exposed to feel its reverse: We are apt to draw these observations into rule; and when we are no longer willing to act for our country, we plead in excuse of our own weakness or folly, a supposed fatality in human affairs.
THE institutions of men are, indeed, likely to have their end as well as their beginning: but their duration is not fixed to any limited period; and no nation ever suffered internal decay but from the vice of its members. We are sometimes willing to acknowledge this vice in our countrymen; but who was ever willing to acknowledge it in himself? It may be suspected, however, that we do more than acknowledge it, when we cease to oppose its effects, and when we plead a fatality, which at least, in the breast of every individual, is dependent on himself. Men of real fortitude, integrity, and ability, are well placed in every scene; they reap, in every condition, the principal enjoyments of their nature; they are the happy instruments of providence employed for the good of mankind; or, if we must change this language, they show, that while they are destined to live, the states they compose are likewise doomed by the sates to survive, and to prosper.
THE END.
Analysis of pneumatics and moral philosophy. For the use of students in the College of Edinburgh 
cS a PART L Of HUMAN NATURE.
CHAPTER I. The Hi/iory of tihe SPECIES.
I. AN KIND have some qualities itn common with the other animals; some that diftinguill them; and others by which they arc themselves diverfiied.
2. Like the other animals, they are generated and nourithed, they h:ave their period of life, and are fuhject to difiblution.
3-
Half the numbers that are born die, .IccoIrding to some observations, before the seventh ycar is expired ; according to others, before the third.
Long life conlifts of between seventy andi one hundred years 
It appears fiom the annual register ofdctths, where the numbers of people arc known, that one of thirty-two dies in cach year.
The intfncy of man, or his fRate of dependence on the parent, continues longer, and his i:;flindts are more fillliblc than they are in the young of any other fpccies.
When adult, he supplies many apparent defets frolll invention.
llis ingenuity enables himl to ful)filt in a variety of (ituations amn clilates.
Ite i a;n animal of pr'" ; aflbci.iting '.,nd politic.l ; and has a fupir)iority o'er evccr utlihr liicies.
Ue is qualitied to difciolu'fc, and.
Co1n1-
Ito ] conimunicates his meaning by a variety of fixced :.nd rblitrary signs.
lie diitinguifhes charatters by epithets of praise or blame. He loves or hates, he admires or contemns.
The species separates into bands and companies; but the individual, leldom from choice, is found to fubilt alone.
Varieties in human nature are either such as diitinguill diiierent races of men, different ages of the fame race, or individuals of the fame race and age.
Races are difltilguified by their seatures, ft;:ture, CcImpl1ciun, dii)Uitions, andi f!cultics.
They ;irc rte(hlcil)le to fix: Tlic Eluriipc 7, ti/iw , :2,iic(l, t/it t 9 ri-titr, tI/c l h liti;z 1te Al/ t:Iro') and t/ec ^iijc ricn i .
* Some dlivcmfitics of tlhe race ;p; to be eoliincL~cd wihll situatuioIn and cliLteic.


Different ages of the fame race are diflinguifhed by the unequal possession of commercial, literary, and political arts.
Ages are said to be savage, barbarous, or polithed.
During the first, men live on terms of equality, without property or government.
During the second, they are ditlinguilled by inequalities of birth and fortune, associate in tribes, and follow their leaders.
During the third, they find additional grounds of diitinction, in a divcrfity of education, profellion, and manner of life. They are governed by nwagiItrates, hereditary or elective, under the diredtion of laws and ettablilled forms.
6. Individuals of the fame race are diftinguilhed by a difference of asped, capacity, disposition, and force.
These varieties qualify members of the fame society for different tiations, and render subordination confiitent with natural equality.
7. Every slate in which man can employ his talents, and follow his difpofitions, is a state of nature.

CHAP. II. Of the Hif/oly of the INDIVIDUAL.
SECTION I. Of the UNDERSTANDING. -T IIE Individual is conscious of his 
personal identity, in the performance of many funtions, either merely animal, intellectu:l, or mixed.
Consciousness is a principal attribute of mind ; and is that by which it may be Iaid to cxiit for itself.
Merely animal functions are those in which bodily organs and mere animal powers are exerted ; as, dli:cltiuoi, circulation, &'c.
IntelleCtual fiin(tions are such as cannot be referred to any bo)lilv organ ; as thought, juJldeincllt, andl tcfire.

Mixed funclions are the proceedings of mindl referred to bodily organs ; as, fen!clion, and appetite.
2. The mixed or intellecial fundtions of this alcive being, however otherwise dilinguillied, terminate in either of two ends ; the discovery of Lrutb, or the attainment of good.
Truth is the relation of our belief or opinion to the reality of things.
Good is a quality of sentiment, and can exiit only in a feiitient nature.
Truth is the obljct of underitanding. Good is the obiett of will.
tndcr-flianling; i lcluedcs obfcrvati on, nieil v. ill,,tilltit)ll, rt''angc lllt andl i ,rcligllt.
(l>l'r :.,' i,,n is ttl.t proceeding of the liId I \\' hi(ch we\ collect ladts.

 Fads relate to the existing qualities and operations of different natures.
Obfervatiori terminates inl history, or the knowledge of particulars in detail.
Iliftory is eithcr dcfcriptivc or narrativ e.
Dcfcriptive history is tlhc detail of co-cxiitcnt circunmftances and qu. li tics.
Narrative hiiitory is tlh detail of lucceflve events.
\Ve arc determined by a law of of;; nature to believe facts to whicih e c ourselves are witneflns, or to w\licl wve have the credible tettiinuly of others.
4Memory is that proceediing of mind in vwhich tiOljcets palt are r(.illcdl.
Its operations are either tal'itl ,,r intentional.
Mcmory is caflil wlhen oljc'ts fllggest each other in fomne order tihe' h ,Id, inldellpndc nt of choice or ilntention.

 Memory is intentional when the mind from design recollects any object.
S. imagination is tle stating objects as present under a sense of their absence, or as real under a sense of tleir being fidtitious.
l)efign, invcntion, description, andl plifion, or desire, depend on imagination.
6. Arrangemen t is the disposing of f.its agreealbly to the connection or relation they have in nature.
The princip.l articles of relation are tholc of fimilitutle, contiguity, caule anil cftlct.
l;'ro the rel.tion of rimilitude, objccts in defcriptiee history arc clali('d into gi'uera andtl /fecis.
]'ronl tliht of contiguity of tinle or l;,:,c tlLy ;sare ranged in narration.

 From that of cause and effect they are connected in theory.
Theory is the arrangement of feparate appearances under fmne commion principle.
Syttem is the combination of theories for mutual illulir-.tion and fuipport.
Science conlifts in just theory and fyittcm.
7. Foresight is the faculty of conjel.turilg \whatt is to followv fronm Lh p.it or thle I',rcint.
It requires penetration and figaciry; plelltiration to c )lnrcienid tle (i,'(illt;lilces (of ally p.irticUtlia c ill, ai.! sagacity to iperceive \\l ilt is likltto ftllow fronm tholte circuiftailc's.
I'c'nect~ ti; n ;nl a .lnii;ci ty are tlis I'L:Ida.tionl of art and Ikiil.

SEC T. II. Of the WV I L L. T i E will includes Sentiment, Ilclination, an l Volition.
I. Sentiment is the perception and the cnijo)mcnt of Good, or the perceptcion andl the fufelering of Ill.
The object of Sentiment is that to which it is referred as to its (,ufie.
'I bus Il rovocation is the object of An:l;r, and D;nger of Fear. bjec-s lare siid to be gond or evi! on account oi their connection with Sentiniient.
Ihis connection is inl a Iret mcaliiCre ',i' it l::I'rv.
(: ce perlon is calm 1111unci' .a p';ii ,;t ilio by \\hich ;iother is . !","'Ced ; i.s l':,rl',l_ s in I;;':i::' 'v; \\ 'l jcl :',.t.)l 'Lr . tc:: i~i., I.
 There are foul kinds of enjoyment or furlcring; viz.
i. Sensations of Pleasure or Pain. 2. Approbation or Dillike. 3. AffeCion or Hatred. 4. Exercise or Languor. The irfit pertains to our Animal and Sensitive beiii;.
The otlhers to our Intelledtual and Adive nature.
Sentations are pleasant or painful apart fIrom our knowledge of their cause ; as in the cafe of flavours, odours, c.
Juitlgen;enits of approbation or diflike are plcalint or painful fioml a klInco)letldg and dlifceirnicnit of their ,lcjcl; as in difliiguihil g what is lturtitiil or ldcfoIrnld, girc'at or ine.an.
A.:lc ion i' pICleatinit iby the dclidil: L ,)! )',r\s lio'rol' tile \ cli;i('c or g)ool (o ,i (;l[.i.; o~as in irienljflil) and Love.
l.;t(rcd is the rcvcrfc. l2'.,clrciles ;rc l.-cllint or Iaiifiil, in : :;:'1.1 dilI' tofitionll 
'.
lnclination is a disposition of our nature to at.
Every inclination may be confidered, either in refpeEl to itself, to its end, or to its objedt.
In rcfpeat to itself, Inclination is of three kinds.
i. A propenlity; 2. A desire; or, 3. A mixture of both.
A Propensity is an origin.l or acquired difpictionl of our nature, op':rating inepl' ilt:;n: *i'i' lfi.:ion or dcltin.
D)ciive is tle i;ntlcniona.l aC of the minil, dir-ecle. by the apprehenlion of a fin 'oleid good.
Natu re andl halbit give propensities; info-i;-mation or fancy lmay excite dcfire.
Propentities, a.ftcr experience of their gratification, part:ikc in the n:lure of Dcfire; and lDeiircs, by haLit, partake in the nature of !'i-openlitics.
The fuljedt of Inclination is the cnd or fiplpofcd good to which it refter;
;Is,
as, when we delire Animal Enjoyments, Intelledtual Talents, or MIoral zualities.
The object of Inclination is tile person to whose enjoyment tlhe supposed good is referred ; as in the cafe of advantages desired for ourselves or others.
In this refpeL't inclinations are felfifl or benevolent.
The mint is differently affedled by pafTion as the fubjct of inclination is differently situated.
Paflions are of four principal kinds : Joy and Grief; Hope and Fc;!r. A good obtained is matter ns Joy ; miffed, is a fubjdct of Grit f. A tfa ourable prof)ect is the fuundtltion of Hope ; the reverie is the tounllation of Fear.
Pallion is greltly divcrfileed in the cale of diflerent fubjedts andl objcts.
Tlhe joy or holpe of the inteiefted and fclfifli tend to Insolence or Vanity; his grief andn fear to Dl)jcetion and 
Cowardice ;
 Cowardice; and in cafe of competition with his fellowv-creatures, to Envy, Malice, and Jealousy.
The joy and hope of the benevolent are candid and jufit; his grief or fear are mixed with satisfaCtion, or lose their effect in the ardour of his principal disposition.
A right te of the tinderfl/anding, and good intentions, being always equally in our reach, Moral Qualities may be ftldied without any variety of passion. But they who commit themselves to the diredtion of casual opinions are subjed to a variety of passion on this subject. Their joys and hopes are Self-approbation and Confidence; their griefs and fears are Shame, lndig,ation, and Renlorfe. Volition is the determination of the mind to follow an Inclination.
\'olitin founded on fentilent and inclination conflitiutes an Action.
Every 
Every Action has a motive. Every Voluntary Adion is siee. Every Free Acion is an indication of'character.
It is a privilege of tnle mind to contemplate itself; to chufe among its inclinations and sentiments; to suppress what is evil, and cultivate what is good.
C II A P. III. GENERAL INFERENCES.
I. AI'ACITY and parts refer to the Underflinding ; ardour ;ind lforce to the hlart ; both united conllitutc a natuir:l 1 ilperinroity o(f cliaracter.
Vclemcnt inclin ltions are the foiuce of activity iand fte.atincts ; but extrelme piaflion of hope or fiar,l j ,y or rlicf, interrupt or nmilguide our conduct.
t 24 1
2. The properties of mind have no analogy to those of matter.
They present exiltences of a different and opposite nature.
Divisibility is implied in every conception of matter:
Indivisibility in every sense mind has of itself.
What are called faculties of mind accordingly are not distinct parts of a complicated nature, but separate names given to different a&s of the fame being.
3Annihilation is unknown in the order of nature; and mind, not being fulbjcct to a dilfflution of parts, is phyfically immortal.
PART
PART II. Of the BEING and ATTRIBUTES
of GOD.
CHAP. I. Of ite E.xJ-cnce of C 0 D. tW' E believe thle cxilicnce of mind,,
as we do that of mlatter, in 'colnfcquence of certain appearances wvith which that belief is conne.'tej in the frame of our nture.
To form an a rgument in proof of the cxiftence'ot miind, is to colle't such appearances.
'Ihe apip c'ralnces, lhen knlo',vn or obli.'rvci., !I-re ; \.iys connlected l vith \ bel]if.
TieLo acti)lns anll. c, ,Iilut of ilcrt lnlalke l:ni,\n their intcntiions an 1 chai.icters.
The orderl' n 1 I |1I)(iccc.!'1 ;t Ii: t'urc make known the exiittence a :1Ii attriiI1'tcs of God.

C II A P. II. Of the A2ttributes and Goveirnm2?zent 
o(' GOD. T IIF l attributes of God( may be ce:-
pre'cd in the terms, Power, \\ if.d!ou, Goodness, .anl Jufticc.
Iy liis power 1ll ciTects arc produced ; by his hiifon, is ;goodhnef;, and his justice, tlcy arc infaliibly direcCtld to thc bcft ends.
T'le belief of the e.iftence of G(.d is foiIndcd on tlhe al pparc.n l;l of provillence, ;1nd implies the belief of l',; I)V c'cm;illcnlt.
As the Mrtaterial \\'old is governled by t1he iitc;rv\ntion of pihf1i;Ll infltuncllt.s, to \\hidcli we give tile 1 ::lnles of C'rniI'ita.l'.' ,, C.i,I;i.ni, EI,/llcity, &c. 'The lnticlletut.ll \VWlorl is governc d by Ii(or;1 ind occ'nents , feniltini.s of p;c.:furc' Ir,;( l):' in. "i d;I ;cintc s , ?l'-i-(Patis ; : o(r A.iiikc, ;C*'.czluiius l\ ('1'c r olf hatred.
 C II A P. III. G, iNERA.L I N 1: R F.N CE'S.
I. M4T A N bciln iicilcled to admirle to 
lovc ;iln oJbey proper o1jects, t foill \\hs tlit -t'li'_ionl ii i.tltur;il.
Tiic cz:p!'cli,):is of i'cligion arie si i.cl or .ib! trary.
Its fixed exprefiions are tllofe adtions Iwhich concur \with the prosidcence fit God iln promotilng the good of his crc ;tures.
Its arlitrary expreifions are the ti('fercnt cerellonics, and inllitution i; oblfervances, by lwhich like (lillt C:: , of venlration may be exprelicd i;i i;fCClret a,,'cs or coluntries.
Men arc chlarged only \\wiit the care ( C.I lliutilg * h it is gocld, i;lit ol di n! \ l iL.it is ri;,lut.
Evcentl ;,ire rcf.' vv,.1 to, Gy t !.
The beneficence and the juft;cc of God appearing in the order of his preient government, lead us to believe a future slate of rewards und punish-ments.
MORAL
,M 0 R A L P H-1 I L 0 S 0 P H-Y..
1 iNTR O D U C T I ON. M OR AL P~H ILOS OPHsY ti*CdtS O1
Good and icvil.
Any gencral exptcsion of ls iti.('JOt1 is 'i ldwV Ill Iitv 1 L1
cCn] liti,)11 alld A\;d .iV1(Jri. I~l~'xCo;11si1ls of t\v()
*~1Ii* iis'ti-ls~A~;to tile 1nuni '1nd1 Vlt scc()11(l L) 11i'~ ( \tIC ni COlldfl o. ii) or~( to therelatislil anki dtlutis 0t Inco Ill mi i jilL,.
C P A Ri'
PART I. Of the MIND and HAPPINESS of 
MAN.
C A P. I. Of P L E A SU R E. GO OOD, relatively to the hunian 
nmind, is expressed in a variety of termS ; filch as, PleJafire, Virtue,
Plicalure is good, physically confidered, vithout any reference to its kinil, lelilctre(, (1r coIwparative importance.
Tlic f;llohwing are physical laws of our naiure, rclative to pleasure and Fpaiin.
C 3x ]
I. The use of things filutniry and requifite to ani.mal prefervati on, is :,leasant; what is pernicious, is paiilful.
2. The sense of any perfetlion is pleasant ; of any defed, is painful.
3AffcTion is pleasant ; Iatred is painful.
4. Hope and Joy :,rc pleafintt; Grief and Fear a;rc I.inful. But these npaffins, grl.ftd l ( lilll i( , or l;aricd, p;art;lke greatly ill tie nature of the dilpolitii l froni \vllichI tlice arifC.
5-.
3 ;2 J 5. Exercise of thc mind or body is pic&ian11t.
6. Ilabit, in sonie instances, can changie the fourcc of our pleasures or pains.
C 1I A P. IL, Of' V1 R T U F.
1. IRTULR iF B 10od, conlldercd as sliej cxccllcnce ol nan's nll~l u'C , mi.hat 11cnr huni tile Objcct (oi Cftccii .i11iI of p~C
JM'avi is by wlit urC tbe mcnicr (of a C.ommnIIIIty. Ilis l\c: o tliLit C\)illnIlullity ndcrikiel-s hilli a good mcii t\iheclr of it) and1, iiltltlcS~ hil t.
\'ViltulC is that.(th!.t u ot ' s,
s which fits the individual to procure thi good of mankind.
The requisites to virtue are, Difpolition, Skill, Application, and Force.
lence Virtue has been divided into four branches, corresponding to the number of these requisites; viz.
Juflice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude. Jultice is a disposition of the mind favourable to the rights and welfare of mankind.
Prudence is the skill and f1igacity wvith which men chufe their ends, and the proper means to obtain them.
Temperance is the power to abilain from the pursuit of enjoyments that rccal from the more important engagemeents of human life.
Fortitudte is the powvcr to withfland opposition, dilliculty, and danger.
2. Virtue is apprlovedl of from a principle of regard to mankind ; or from 
;i'
 an orioginal disposition of our naturc, leadin;g us to place our excellence ini qu.,lifications proper to a social and active being.
This principle Ils, by nIC of fpetu;ition, been differently nam;el, and (liilercntly classed, \iwli tlic proceedings iftLhe iuniierfitaildling-, or with tnlofc of tle lic.irt. In common language ijL is termed R'iIJb;,) or Cor/iilr.ce.
C H A P. iT. Of H} A P PI N E S S. H A PPINSS, whet lier dle noiinaated 
by tle names of PlcrJitre, or of Firtue, is to every sentient being Iis ftalc of. lealt luficring and greateftt enjoy1 ient.
Of nIccclins thle lft is to 1): chci( ll; :and of ilncolmpa:tible picaflre, tie greactef:.
Continutal fear is a greater pain tlh;i 
airV*
 Any misfortune. Courage therefore is a principal requiiite to happiness.
The plealiures of sense arc mean and tranficnt, compared to those of assection an(i of conduct.
It is happincfs to be fi-re from fear an;d diflitft, f rom envy and jcaloulv; to entlertaill Lli bcft aflec'tions, Ilumian;ity, 'ricndii(hip, and Love; that is, to he cni;ecd iln thi pur 1uit otf tle best uIjcoCt, tlle ;(co)0 Of Ilnnkini.
The exccllenc of n1;:I), 1;is g1.C.; cf 'li'tfure, al.[l his lx!lp)i cC'Il, are tlhe itlllic.
'Ile clioice of n,.'ncs, f li,)',vcvcr little a'pparent ctflct in l)hi);ihy, !eads l:oicti:iLes to t!e mlolft iniportnt t o1,i(rc(cnclc.e 
The feels tlit exprc'fld lh:iplpic>l; l .1.'' thle nalne fit' iL', i l'ji-', \\ c e led t. pre !'''1 eca :;iniiill L cn .11'. I1111CI, .111(1 11cttll.
'I hely \( hocalprclcld it b1 the n:,illmc (,of i.tc,:, rcs. il'ed ;acKivt\ , C(toira0;c, ;1dl the clishCr Cl)jo) nli'.l of t le 
TlIe 
The enjoyments of the voluptuous terminate in sensuality, because attention to mere pleasure, if not defeated by temper, precludes admiration, asfedtion, and e:ertion of mind.
Sensuality terminates in languor and sloth.
W\here pleasures of the minl and the heart are molf sensibly felt, the external nairks of enjoyment are, Activity, Beneiicence, and Courage.
PA R T II. Of the laws of Morality relative-
ly to EXTERNAL CONDITIONS and CONDUCT.
GENERAL DIVISION.' XT ERNAL condition and condue, E have a reference to individuals, or ro colledive bodies.
The condition and conduct of iindividuals are the fiihsjets of Ethics.
The condition and condudt of colledtive bodies are the fubje(ts of Politics.
C I1 A P. I. Of E T H I C S. TlyI c s consist of two parts; Cafutiffry, and Jurifprudcic. .
D SEC'r.
 SE CT. I. Of CASUISTRY.
1. C.ASUISTRY treats of the stations, :nanners, and duties of men.
2. Under the head of station are included fortune and rank.
Fortune i.mplies property; and resers to the unequal measure of things, tending to animal enjoyment and fafetv.
The ules of fortune are subsistence ..nd bcneticence. Unequal fortune mlay be eqtally well or ill employed ; and is connected with happiness or milcry!, to lar as it gives octalion to conlducl, and is the fubijedl of op*inion ,1ttltl fi.ncy.
a:iik is the station of the individual relatively to other men.
A rank is constituted by fortune, hrirtlh and chalrater.
Vortune 
Fortune derives rank from tlc opinion anid dependence of others.
Birth derives rank fron the luctre of anceltors.
C!i;radter is the grounid of eflimation, and may raise ur link men to tlhe rardk in whic they are qualificd to at.
Good conJluit anid happinels are not peculiar to any itation.
3' Manners are the external exprcffiol of a charadter that fuiblits in the mind ;and the heart.
Like other cxternal signs of difipolition and lleaninlg, mnlanners have cithlcr an arbitrary or a natural connection with the diliofition fignitieLl.
Manners of tihc lh-lt kinl dlepend mer-ely onl ctltolm ; 1andl luc'tuatc, like language, -or any other arbitrary iiititution.
Mlanners of tlie ficonll kindl ;I-e such ajIpearances .1id CondItllc ils mlen1I f CC'rtain ldilfpolitions lnatiurally aflllIc.
1) 2 Man--
 Manners founded in nature are trmetimes varied by cuftolm, insomuch that different nations or ages require a different aspec, carriage, and conduct, in expression of the fame disposition.
A condluc tending to the good of mankind is invariably right, indepefdent of opinion or cultom.
E.ven in cafe of arbitrary manners, we are bound, when the good of mankind will permit, to observe those of our country, as we 1ieak its language, or wear its dress.
4* Duties may be confidered as terminating either in the person adting, and are decent or proper; or as having influence on others, and are beneficent or innocent.
Decency of conduct is its agreeablencfs to tlhe opinion of others.
Propriety of condudt is its ifitablencfs to our nature, ilation, and for-
n1-
Innocelice is the confiflency of our colndut wxith the welfare of others.
Beneficence is its tendency to promote that welfare.
The eitablilhment of general rules relating to duties is a principal obiect of cafuiltry. But the belt directorl' in human life is the difpoiition from which thole duties proceed.
SECT. II. Of JURISPRUDENCE.
1. JURISPRUDENCE treats of tilc conduct of men in its reference to the rights of others.
it conilits of two parts. The firfl: rcl.tcs to the imaiinner in whvich the rights of men are conltituted.
The fccond, to the ,llanlcr iln \vlicli tlofe rights may be vindicated.
The apprehension of right is foun.led in thc delirL: of every iclilitive being o) prlferve anJ to defend li liilft.
 The rights of men are conffituted either in the person or in things, and are said to be personal or real.
Personal rights include safety, freedonm, and the use of talents.
Real rights include commnonty, poffeflion, property, and service.
Rights are conftitutcdt by the original appointment of nature, or the subsequent proceedings of len ; and are original or adventitious.
Safety, freedom, the use of talents, ofifion, a comonty,ncomon are original rights.
Property and service are adventitious.
.5' Property is an exclusive right to the life of tilings.
Of tlings, some are not fuljedls of I1pro(perty ; others pertain to communlities ; and others to individuals.
4. Service is a right to the aid and attendance of others.
S. Adventitious rights arise from contradt, occupancy, labour, or forfeiture.
Contracts are constituted by promise and acceptance.
Contratts are binding, because to raise and to frufirate an expcecationl is an injury.
They do not bind in flivour of a party that has failed on his part, or in cale of a condition tlhat has not taken place.
They are rendered void by the exceptions of force, frauld, or inijuflice.
Occupancy confits in the prior and continued ule of a fubljet.
1-olfeiture refers to a right acquired in reparation of a damage t'uftaineld.
6. Propelrt y y lbe ;ac(llire(d by occulpancy and labour. It nl,,v be transferred by conltralc or ftorfeitirc.
Tlec will of a dtccc;!led Inlorri( tor does not convey a right of property.
A
A right to service is acquired by contract or forlfeture.
No right to service can amount to property in the person of the servant : slavery therefore has no foundation in juitice.
7. The rights of 'en may be maintained by persuasion, lliatageml, or f.,rce.
Parties may acd either as principals or auxiliaries in maint.iining a right.
Stratagem iand force are la\ ful: jfl, \\ here parties have not Itipulared, as in civil society, to submit their diflerences.
2dly, \\ here an aid ft ipulated cannot be obtained.
3d/y, \VWler c mlilder mletliods actually have tfiled, or are not likely to succeed.
8. The condition in which parties are 
1rdl uccd 
reduced to the use of firatagem and force, is the slate of war.
The laws of wrar are, I. A wrong apprehended may be prevented by stratagem or force.
2. An aflTult may he repelled. 3. A damage sustained gives a right to reparation.
4. Reparation is in justice proportioned to the damage luftained.
CHAP. I. Of Po LI T I C S. GENERAL DIVISION. P OLITrcs treat of nations and col-
leO'ive bodies. A nation is any company or society of mlen acting l!y concert, or under a colmmon direction.
The united force and direction of numbers is termed ite State.
States 
States may be confidered with a view to their resources, or to their form.
The first is the fubjedt of public ccconomly.
The second, of government.
SE C T. I. Of PUBLIC OECONO.MY.
I. PUB LC OEcoNOnrY refers to national wealth and revenue.
Nat;,ns are rich by pofrelfing in abundance the me:ins of fubfittcnce, or what may be exchanged for such means.
Riches depend on the possession of lanls, materials, indultry, skill, and numbers of people.
2. Nations acquire land or territory by cnnlquelt, casual coalitions, or colonies.
3. They discover materials by continued observation and trials.
4. They become indultrious by a haibit g!;astcd on the lense of utility and lAlferv.
5. They beconie skilful by continued ;)pl)licatioi, , and by 1fubdividingi arts and pirofellions.
Commnerc beeing the excliihane of comimodities, is neceli-ry to tlie fuLbdii,vision ol arts.
Colmmnercc consists of barter, or of puchIlfe alnd ftilc.
l'urcliafe and file requires a Ilmode of valu;ation, and the ulcs of money.
Monlley is a commiodity of uLi ivcl'.-ll demand,li taken in exclange for ;any other cuilnlodity.
1Money 
Money in coin is this commodity divided into parts of a fixed quantity, and received in tale on the faith of a stamp applied by the public.
The most convenient commodities for the purposes of coin are the precious metals.
Bills are obligations to pay a specified value in money.
Commerce may redound to the profit of all parties concerned, by enabling each to improve his peculiar material, or to purlue his peculiar art.
That party gains most by commerce who receives the more useful commodity, and who, to carry on his trade, is employed in the more healthy and least corrupting occupations.
6. Nations become populous in proportion to the means of I'tlliitence they *oter and secure to their people.
7.
W\calth in the pofTnfiion of individuals is a national or public refourcc.
That' part of tlic wcaltl of indi;iduals which is exadctd flor national p1ruposes is the public revenue.
Revenue imav be proportioned to the numbers, wcalth, alnd frugality, aof a people. It is levied by taxe;.
.xc's arc ofl our kil .I. Cipf)itatlio: l(,'']i :t, Ct/iO;]',;, ':!m Ex.cif.
C(,pitation is a tax imlporofc o:n evcry illdiidLIul, and falls equally on the poo' ;]iidl the rich.
Afl'flincnts are l)roportionedll to the {Lu)l:)oc'd (tlock in 1,lind, lionly, or g'oods.
Cultomls are a tax oln ,,)ils ia E'\CAlC is a tax o)n Cofi. 11|t llin. (,lt)ilnis mn ' 1'j ,} l.'v' .'.. , i \ * reCt or to lilulil . ,i"h..'i'' :'.

 Lxcife lias a tendency to limit confumption, and affects either the quantity or the quality of goods consumed.
8. National force is proportioned to the rcfources, discipline, and charadter of a peoplc.
SEC T. II. Of GOVERNMENT.
I. GOVERNMENT is founded on subordination.
Suhrdi.lini;ltion is the relation in h\\hich nicn actillg is a bdtly are placed to each ,'tiicr 
It is eitiler caloiil or iniutcllional.
2.
 Casual subordination is the mere dilf tribution of rank, founded on Fortune, Character, and Birth.
3. Institutional subordination is the acuual diftiibution of power.
Pover is any part of the force of thei state, committed to tle directioln o; certain person;, frl the p2rformnII;IIcc ol some public function.
Persons iiitrufied with public fillctions arc termed Ii Tani//rateis.
\Vhocvcr is inlllrtlcd to p'ertoll, or to delegate every Iflilltiil of tlhc il;atc, is thle loverci?'l , or1 u li )ric I:lagi 'rate.
1lulil c ltllc iilIIs ;irc t t, tl e'c J ilils. Ii, ///i/ti/l , y , ii/jilici io, ;111.d .\C (c:LCcill:ition is the c'lprlcnll ll (' of til' v ill ols tle (l.t,, or tlhe flitlure tliul'clinll ol its mI'lC ebers.

Laws are either adopted fiom cuflom, or enaded by statute.
Thicy refer either to the mode of libo dtination, to civil rightos, or to the fuipprlliion of crimes; ald are said to be "o/iticil, Ci'iti, or C-ri;a.u:d.
Political 1 \s define the rel.tive righits of Inagiitrate and itubject.
Civil laws define the relative rilhts of private palrties.
Criminal laws direct the proceedings of the magiltrate in fupprefling crimes.
5. Jurifldilion is the interpretation of tlhe will of tile itate, and its application to particular cafes.
6. Execution is the actial application of the public force, to defend the Ift;te, or give e!eccL to its laws.
Execution, relatively to the first object, Iliould be dircdted by the I;:x of 
lnations ;
nations; relatively to the second, by the municipal law of the country.
7. The result of wife legilation, jurifdliction, and execution, is Public Liberty.
Liberty is the security of rights. A contcituLion is lai.i to be free, whlI-n its f)ornls are callculL.ted to prcfcrv the rights ojf the fibjecI.
Subjets ;re' lIid to be r-ec, when tlhey actually enjoy thole Irg:its.
8. The form of government is confliturted ly the nmalner in wL ,.-il tin foverI'-i;iity is excicfibd, by ;'inc, ! ! FIleCt ni.i l)crs, or' b.; tic \'c l1;)ily.
I'll' title ol a Ju\\ . t1 to) ', !c is Itounlcd cithl ill c . t, O)r iln ..ltt rigil \vhiLch li al p-ti ..vc ( i c) ,,ood to the utlullOt exiteni t: LIteir powe\r.
9. Governments are either Simple or Mixed.
Simple governments are those under which sovereignty is exercised by or in the name of some single power.
They are of three kinds; Republic, Monarchy, and Dfplotfiin.
In republics the sovereign power is exercised by numbers.
IJ/, By the collective body, as in (emocrl -y. Icre men ac't on m;xims of equality, and the flute is fluiported by the diiintcrcitl.d /.cal of its men bers.
2/6'y, 13V a pai-ticular order, or f1 tlccf numlber, as in arif(ocralcy: Men are (diiinguiillcid into t\wo cl;Ale's, ;:nd tile fiitce is Itlpporrted by tile tte;l.linclf andt ilni'l'r;lion ol)t the Luplpiur order.
!<,nricl y is tlhat in w lili cha linl.e pcrl l;,n c':clcitcs tlie l ,vcrc-i:lny :(.acc!iiig to lixt laws and inlfitulion:;.
hiere is a continuted g1i adtiom (l !a lks; and the itate is fuiplortcd ly 
t!,c 
 the regard of individuals for the maxims and honours of their ltation.
Defpotifin is that in which a single person governs by force, wvithout any law or limitation. SubjeCts are held to be equal, except so far as the sovereign is pleased to diftinguilh them by his temporary will. The slate is supported by the fear of punifllment.
10. Mixed governments are those in which the sovereignty is exercised in parts by a plurality of collateral powers, as King, Nobles, and People.
Men are fcparated into different orders andl clales ; and the Itate is (u)pported by the balance of oppolite interefts and principles.
F I N I S.
OF PERFECTION AND HAPPINESS 

When different Terms have Place in Language it may be Supposed that they stand for different or at least the same thing under different Aspects.
Happiness refers to Ease or enjoyment. Perfection to Excellence or matter of Estimation & merit.
So far they may coincide in the same thing under different Aspects, and as they are  severally Supreme Objects of desire it is consonant to the order of Nature to suppo them perfectly consistent if not one & the same thing.
Happiness is appropriate to Sensitive if not mly to intelligent B.
Perfection is a kind of Figure applyed even to inanimate or merely material Forms when they bear the marks of Intelligen design or are Subservient to any valuable purpose of Intelligent .
Thus a Building is perfect when it exhibits an Admira Plan and Sufficient Workmanship, but in both it is the excellence of mind that appears in the construction of the work.
Mind or Intelligenc is perfect or imperfect in itself: but mere Corporeal Forms as they cary indications of perfect or imperfect Intelligence.
Happiness in Created Being is the State of highest Enjoyment and least Suffering applied to Being in its whole exte. 
Present Enjoyment that bring an over-ballance of Suffering here after are not happiness & Sufferings that bring an over-ballance of Enjoyment are not misery.
 These observations have no reference to that Happiness which is Eternal and umixed. But in the mixed State of Created progressive Being are highly important.
To the Happy Man The past is matter of agreeable recollection not of regret.
The present is not matter of Suffering but of Satisfaction & Joy.
The future is not matter of Fear but Confidence & Hope.
When past umerit Suffering as well as Innocence and Beneficence are ma of agreeable recollection. Insomuch that is happy to have been excellent  deserving or Perfect in the past.
In the present not Animal pleasu without measure or distinction:
but Health & its preservatives or functions are at once the preferable Enjoyments as well as perfection of animal Life.
Exemption from Malice or Fear in every Form or degree & the Contrary Sentiment of Benevolence & Fortitude. The occupations of a Well employed mind constitute the state of best enjoyment, least Suffering and greate Perfection or Merit.
Conscious Safety is the great constituent of  Happiness respecting the Future; But he who owes all to his own Resolution and determined mind is therefore Safe.
These are at once the Perfections of Human Nature its highest and most Secure enjoyments.
Thus the votaries of Pleasure Virtue Elevation and Happiness although They Appear to divert and diverge for a time actually converge and meet in a point at Least. 
And the Creator in laying a Scheme of Progression for man towards the Perfection of his Intellectual  Being has at the Same time projected his Happiness As the end of Creation.
The Animal System is beautyfully formd in respect to man in particular.
Besides the organization of his Body, his Instincts and Sensations bear the marks of Divine Wisdom and obvious even to himself. They tend to his preservation & wellbeing but not so unerring as the Instincts and Sensations of the Other Animals do in respect to them. Man having more Intelligence  is left to his own Government. His Happiness or Misery is in part derivd from this Source: but not in the degree in which he enjoys or suffers as an animal: but in the degree in which he acquits himself properly of his charge as an Intellectual and Moral Agent.
The Wise & courageous does  sink under animal sufferings nor forget himself in the midst of Animal enjoyments. His happiness requires that he should be superior to either and his Perfection is evidently placed upon a higher Scale: The Contemplation The Affections The occupations of a Powerful and  Intelligent Being. The animal instints and pleasures direct or allure him to the Animal Funons of Life & Safety.
Pursued beyond this purpose they tend to disgust or disease.
Pain has a Similar correspondence with respect to the ills to be removed from animal Life.
Happiness or Misery depends on the good or ill us of a life that is preserved in the result of its Instincts or Senses; Mind is enlargd and gratifyed in its discoveries & Contemplations. The Order of Nature as it is displayed in the Ends and means  of Eternal Wisdom is Supremely gratifying as matter of contemplation merely as well as a pledge of Benefice in that Power on whom we depend for Existence. 
Benevolent and Candid affections constitute the Specific perfection & Felicity of designing and Intelligent Natures in all respects the reverse of Malice, Envy or Jealousy.
The human mind being in its progress is yet incapable of uninterrupted Enjoyment: but ingenuous & beneficent occupation is the most continued Satisfaction  of which it is Susceptible.
From these considerations also we repeat our conclusion.
That the perfection and happi of mankind  same. 0
A mere Animal may have all the happiness of which he is susceptible in a continued exemption from pain & in a succession of pleasing sensations:
But an Intelligent Being to be happy must be conscious of his State how constituted & how secured. With him it is a principal consideration what he himself is not merely what he feels. If he  knows himself to be mean or unworthy the Sense of pleasure sickens & gives way to self abasement Shame or Remorse.
A series of pleasures that would Suspend all the faculties of the mind would change Man into a Brute & terminate in misery.
Such a State with a seeming indifference to Right or Wrong Honour or dishonour appears to be projected in the term of Indiscriminate Pleasure for the Chief good or Ultima Object or pursuit. When however in descending to particulars the term is limited to pleasure Safe & Worthy of the Mind The Votaries of Pleasure seem to differ from  of Virtue only in Words. And if Words were of no Consequence, Such Sectaries would not differ at all. But Words are often Ambiguous untill they are explained, and few take the trouble to explain them & give way to their first impressions.
In the Judgement of Hercules, Virtu that is to say Worthy Attainment of Wisdom & Goodness Temperance Constancy & Fortitude Are figured on the Summit of a  Hill where real pleasure is also placed:
but there are such pleasures at the bottom that the Person who deliberates below is in danger of remaining where he is instead of attempting the Ascent to come at what he may with less trouble.
   a man must Sweat to have the pleasure of Virtue.
But sloth assumes the Aspect of Relaxation & Ease.
Observe then the mixed Scene of human . The more frequent occasions which are given to Active exertion than to passive Enjoyment the Sufferings  and inconveniences which are to be avoided and confess that even in those Instances and even more than in any Other the Goodness of God towards Man is conspicuous.
In Many Cases indeed present Enjoyment or Ease is Sacrificed to future Attainment And the Pupil of Nature like the School boy on his form labours that he may lay the foundation of manly attainments & become qualified for his part in human Life.
If Labour & pain are not to be endured for the  Sake of mental or intellectual accomplishments why does the tender Parent instead of sending his Child where he may be indulged where he may be pampered with Sweets sends him into Confinement & Restraint where under the lash of a Demagogue he is forced to forgo his Pleasures or look for them only after having finished his task. 
Few Parents are so Supine as to shrink from policy in the treatment of their Children yet the Analogous Policy of Nature is admitted as an objection  to the Doctrine of Divine Goodness or Wisdom and The happiness of the Creature we are sometimes told is not the End of Creation.
But it is manifest even to human Reason that there can be no end but the diffusion of Good to the Energies of Eternal Power unchangeably Perfect & Happy. 
And the present mixed Scheme of human Life as it Suits our best conception of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author: So it bears the Aspect of a Scheme but now  begun & likely to continue indefinitely.
The progress from Infancy to Age is sum of where Men in general are destined to make in this Life if a Few exhibit much greater Attainments than Manhood alone implys their Example but shows that the human Capacity is far from being exhausted in the present Scene.
This Nature in its lowest Specimens may yet extricate itself And in the highest may have made out a step towards somewhat higher. And the sudden break in  a progress so fairly begun & yet so far short of the point to which it is directed tho in any scheme defect in the presumption that the break is merely Apparent & but a transition from one period to another or more in which the Scheme of progression will be continued to its consummation or end.
In thus sounding the depths of Futurity we no doubt may soon get beyond the length of our Life  but in a Being  whom The maker has Manifested himself in the order of his works who can look so far beyond his own position as to measure the very Globe on the Surface of which he is but an attom number the Planets of which this Globe is but one delineate their Courses round a fountain of Light & of heat so essential to the Living worlds arround him himself so abundant and So great as far to exceed in dimension the sum of all the Planets that  perform their movements in orbits prescribed and as held by a line at distances which they vary but within limits which they can neither contract to exceed: a Being to whose imagination every fixed Star is a Sun And The Galaxy but the faint gleam of numberless Suns planted in that direction through infinite Space & made Sensible by a tinge of united light tho not individually perceived. In such a Being The  future may be thrown open to conjecture as the present is to his Investigation and measurement.
To the Herd which looks not beyond the Field on  they pasture the duration of Being may not exceed that of the frame which their organs Serve to compose but to a Being whose field of Contemplation is the universe itself The Tenure of Existence may extend like that of the Universe itself. While he rests every hope or conjecture On The Assumed Justice Wisdom & Goodness of Almighty God he cannot Err or mistake the present Course  it becomes old.
The very darkness of Futurity is to him an intimation that his bussiness is now before him and can receive no direction from a futurity of which his information is yet so imperfect.
To be happy now he must be Wise Intrepid Benevolent & Temperate.
And till his Essence change from Intelligence to some other form these are the Constituents of Happiness of Excellence Perfection and Beauty. The Period of Being is not his own.  To be in the next impending moment is as much at the Will of his Maker As the first Act of Respiration that took possession of the life he was to lead on his dismission from the Parents Womb.
If when this Respiration ceases he be worthy of Admission to an higher Scene if his Nature be Susceptible of farther Existence he may hope & rejoice in the prospect: but if it cannot be who can repine that the order of nature is observed in his case as well as in that of every other Being.
 If a voluntary Sacrifice were required to the order of such a System who that perceives that order could be reluctant in performing it.
Or what can be a more real occasion of Joy on any Event than to know that it comes from the destination of Supreme Wisdom Goodness & Almighty Power.
Under Such Government it is joyous to live & it is a Triumph to Die.

II. WHAT MAY BE AFFIRMED OR APPREHENDED OF THE SUPREME CREATIVE BEING 

1st That he Acts from Design & means to obtain an End.
This the Organic Form of Nascent Being to begin continue and preserve itself is irresistible Evidence.
2d As this order of things bears the Stamp of Intelligence: are there not other Characters on the Face of Created things that lead to the apprehension of Corresponding attributes in the Creative Powers?
Does the Indefinite Variety of Created Being argue a diversity & Multiplicity of Creative Powers? 
Or is this apprehension Sufficiently Checked & the Identity of the Creative Power throughout the Whole sufficiently evinced by the Identity of multiplied Forms and by the Analogy presented in things the most different.
If so is Diversification to be apprehended as a primary Object or End of Creative Design.
In our minds no end appears worthy of Creative design but Happiness and this the most Perfect of which Created Nature is susceptible and this would exclude Variety as a primary object. For Perfect Happiness though it may be realized in multiplied Instances must be a repetition of the same Identical Form and this Form  Consciousness  or Intellectual Power in the high measure to which Creation is competent.
To perfect Happiness mere Enjoyment even Conscious Enjoyment does not appear sufficient. Consciousness of Power also to be and to remain in possession appears Necessary to Consummate Happiness.
The Supreme Being is of himself & by his own Power Supremely Perfect & happy.
Created Perfection & happiness requires as much of this security as can be infused into Created Being.
He must apprehend a Cause of that Existence of which he is conscious and therefore depending for Continuance upon that Cause: but while he exists he may be Conscious of having distinguished And preferred the Good of which he is possessed & therefor may be conscious of it as his own and as secure as the will to chuse the Good in preference to Evil. A Security which if the Choice is exempt from Error never can be shaken.
Man cannot be the Conscious Author of his own Existence. But conscious of this Existence he may be the Conscious Author of what he acquires by Experience Observation and the diligent use of his Faculties.
 He may be conscious of having entertained and of having discoverd & corrected an Error of having found how delightful it is to know and comprehend the Works of God to live with his fellow Creatures in habits or affections of Good Will & Candour he may be conscious of a Will fixed in the Choice of Happiness because he has discernd it.
May nothing then open our Eyes and give sight of the final Cause in that Progressive Form of Being assigned to man and from continued by continued by Analogy every other living form  this terrestrial Scene.
And is not Progression the most perfect Form of  Created Being is susceptible. Tho to us who measure all by Time seemingly late & tardy in Attainments yet to the Eternal Now simultaneous & at once Compleat. In every passing  deriving Excellence & Beauty from its Destiny if not from what it is.
So much is implyed in the Character of free Agency in the Blame which accompanys miscariage And in the merit which is acknowledged  in worthy attainments and just performances and in the relaxation of mere Instinct by which Animals are precisely Conducted. There is no climate to which he is exclusively attached No Species of Food whether Animal or Vegetable Substance of which he is not free to Avail himself. He is a trader in all commodities And an Artist in the Use of all Materials. Nature has presented the occasions And opportunitys of Action of Inquiry research & discovery but left him to find his Way & take his Measures.
The Scene is in every department wonderfully fitted to him. The steddy form of Nature and its invariable Laws assuring the observer of what he may expect & rely on in every Instance.
The means by which Events may be obtained The Indefinite Variety of Still Material of Organised Nature Furnishing Subject of Contemplation Comparison Analogy & Variety so well Suited as provision for the Nascent search  Imagination and Arrangement constituting method & Comprehension in  this first Period extending Knowledge.
The Indefinite Variety of Created Being seems to exhibit Variety at first Sight as a Primary Object of Creative Power. But as Variety merely as such does not constitute Happiness it cannot be supposed in itself an ultimate or primary end of Creation. But as Being without Intelligence or Life is merely subservient to the Living & Intelligent we may look for the final Cause of Variety among the rest in this Subserviency to the use of mind.
Aristotle had great merit in tracing the mode of human knowledge to the Form & Distribution of things in which he is concerned as designing and Active Power. In this Capacity his Bussiness with Individuals: But his Knowledge of Order Classes Genera and Species prepares him to encounter the Already known to him all to any peculiarity or accidents which it behoves him to Observe.
And as I apprehend that material or mere passive Being have no other Value than as they are Subservient to the Being and Progress of Mind I think  this variety displayed to man is not itself an Ultimate End of Creative Power or Invention but a mere School of Intelligen and mental Exercise to Man to whose beginning  Progress this Scene is Subservient: and in this point of View the Final Cause of the Systematick Variety of Things is discernible by us in the same manner as the Final Cause is discovered in the Construction of the Eye & Ear or the distribution of the Joints & Muscles. 
If the System of Terrestrial Nature be thus Accommodated to favour & Urge the progressive Nature of Man What shall we say of that which is to him the most important of Arrangements relating to him That he has not every where to tread among his Inferior of in a still greater Department of his affairs to cooperate or Contend with his Equals. This indeed is the Scene in which if not his greatest honours are won his progressive Nature receives the greatest impulse.
How Earth came to be  peopled The People cannot tell: For the first man knew less than the last who has Parish Record for his Birth.
The Earth is now a System what it was before its Parts assembled who can tell. Man begins an Infant on his Parents Breast and here for him the System terminates. He has no wish to widen it But the Family press arround he is himself but one but much concerned for all. The Neighbours too The Town the State itself become concerns of his. Tis well if he overlooks farther. The stranger may move his Wonder or his Pity. But thus Humanity begins to bud beyond the seedling leaf. This living scene may not be too much for him to grasp in its Prospective order. Perhaps he may hereafter be entrustd with the Conduct of a Planet. When master of that Jack a Solar System might not be too much. The Zodiac in the sequel with all the Spheres of Night are but his Path to that Great scene the Universe And this but leads him to  behold the Source of Being in respect of which all he had seen is but slight Emanation or a taper lost to Vision in the Blaze of Day.
It is common to man with the other Orders of Being in this Scene of his Nascent Existence to make Part in a System to the End or object of which his Powers & Energies contribute but it is peculiar to him in this Terrestrial System to be conscious of his Part to Embrace it with a Willing mind & even to carry his Views beyond it to a Source of Order & Beneficence to the Extent of which he can apprehend no bounds or limits. So much is implyd in that Distinction peculiar to man That while Other Animals perceive their Lot in Being he alone attempts to trace from whence it comes.
In this direction his efforts may be Feeble & of small success. But Ignorance perceived is the beginning of Knowledge and the Collision of Errors may point to the Truth and the progress of Knowledge extending far beyond the limits of a Present or any Actual scene may correspond to the Infinity of its objects.
May we not thus  consider the first Germ of Region in the human Soul as a pledge of its duration beyond the Limits assigned to mere Animal Life?

III. OF HISTORY AND ITS APPROPRIATE STILE 

Literature serves to record Speech and address it to the World at Large.
Its Uses are Information or Exercise of Mind & Enjoyment. And from these uses are derived the Disstinctions of Literary Compositions & their value.
On the Principle of Information are Formed History Descriptive or Narrative Theory or Science and Method or Practice of Art.
On the Principle of mental Exercise & Enjoyment are formed all works of Poetry or Invention whether in verse or Prose.
There are works which professedly operate on both these Principles,
Such as Moral Dissertation in Single Discourse or Dialogue & Rhetorical Harangue for Perswasion or Pathos. But this mixed or compound  Form of Speech will be best understood after the other two are separately considered.
Of Informative Discourse History is the Primary Form. Descriptive History is the Statement of Coexistent Particulars as in the Description of Minerals Plants & Animals.
Narrative History is the statement in detail of successive Events as in the origin Progress & termination of Past Transactions.
Descriptive History extends The Field of Knowledge which personal Observation opened.
Narrative History extends indefinitely the field of Experience and Teaches to Anticipate or conjecture the Event of Transactions from their origin and progress.
For this purpose the past should be recorded with the most Rigorous regard to Reality. So that nothing of Moment be overlooked nothing false be inserted or nothing Idle or impertinent tho true be retained.
We may thus conceive the object of Narrative History  to be the detail of what has actually past: so that the Reader may be as nearly as possible in the Condition of an Intelligent Eye & Ear witness of what has passed & be made to know all that he could have perceived understood seen or heard if he had been present & let into every passage as it opened in the course of the transaction.
This however is to be understood of circumstances material to the origin progress & Event of the Transaction. In this chiefly the parts or Capacity of the Historian is tried. If he fail in it be his talent for composition other wise what they may his work is impertinent and worse than useless because it missleads the mind of his Reader.
In all Literary compositions there is admitted an Effort of the author to exhibit  & distinguish himself.
Tis needless here to observe how this may be done in works of Imagination or mental Exercise and Enjoyment without affecting the Essential Qualities of the Work.
In works of information the case is different. The Author is distinguished in some measure by concealing himself. The Essence of his Work is the display of its Subject. This is to stand forward on every occasion and in this to the discerning Reader the Person and merit of the Author is most Apparent or Conspicuous.
This merit however is not the most obvious to the Reader in general & therefore not the most Aimed at by Authors in general. They endeavour to exhibit themselves in the brilliancy of their Language their Sentiments Reflection Penetration and Judgement. So that a Reader who commits himself to the guidance  of his Author comes off with a deep impression of his Abilities and his Party his opinions or Judgements but scarcely any memory of the Subject farther than as it served to furnish matter to the Authors Genius and ability.
This is the most dangerous abuse of which pretended compositions are susceptible because it may impose upon Readers capable of real Information when presented to them: but intercepts it by presenting somewhat plausible but Illusive in its stead.
This Effect is obtained in part by the brilliancy of figurative expression.
Metaphor & Rhetorical Turns and accomplished Periods in which the Subject is rather alluded to as matter of the authors Estimation than as matter of Information to the Reader. The Information  indeed if any is thought to be of mean & Vulgar Consideration Compared to the Blaze of Genius Dissplayed by the Author. He foresees the Event from the very beginning.
He distinguishes the Wisdom of every Action that is to succeed. The folly of every attempt or Enterprise that is to miscarry. The Actors are in his hands he extols or decries at Pleasure. He states himself as Master of the show And with the Trumpet in his hands consigns to Fame or Infamy Persons to whom he is himself no way comparable in Ranks of Estimation or Power. 
History we say is instructive but we do not Specify the respect in which it is properly & peculiarly so.
It is a narrative of past transactions, and by informing us of what has been in particular instances tends to reveal the actual course of things in which  we are engaged and which we may lay our account with in the future as in the past, and so to become prudent in guarding against one event and in taking measures to obtain another.
Is this all? Does it not also instruck us in the Disstinction of Virtue & Vice and lead us by examples to Embrace the one and avoid the other.
If it be allowed that example instrucks, such instruction is not peculiar to History. It may be obtained in Poetry, Novel and Fable of any sort in which the Good is contrasted with the bad & lights chosen the most effectual to conduct the Readers choice and if the approbation or reprobation of the Author is of moment this may be obtaind no less & more properly in moral Dissertion and Estimate of manners.
Altho this is not the specific Object of History yet as it is confessed to be of great moment, it is not to be neglected even in History so far as it may be  obtained without marring its Effect in what is peculiar to it & what is not to be obtained in any other Branch of Literature.
Here no doubt some caution is required. It is known that the Zeal of Party may warp the Narrative of History and so may Zeal of any kind: but that Zeal which is peculiar to History. The Zeal of correct & genuine statement of Fact That truth and Reality in comparison to which nothing else is of any Value in History.
To Instruck by Example is a plausible object: but to corrupt by Example is no less to be dreaded than the other is to be hoped. If the example of Cato is powerful with some that of Caesar is no less so with others. And as the Examples of fashiona Vice are as frequent as those of Virtue Example we may doubt is of Ambiguous Tendency whether in relation of the past or exhibition of present manners. On this Account even  History has been reprobated by some Moralists who think that Knowledge should be sacrificed to Virtue and men kept in Ignorance rather than expose them to the Seduction of Vice.
Here is not the place to discuss this Question: But the Object of History it must be confessed is a fair statement of the passed And this it is probable on the whole will be favourable to the choice of what is best in human Life call it what you will Wisdom and Virtue or folly & vice. 
A Man is not qualified to make a choice unless he knows both sides of a Question And the object of nature does not seem to terminate in that sort of Virtue which consists in the Ignorance of anything else.
When the Historian states a Fact it is not always necessary he should either applaud or condemn, if he state it fully & fairly: it is but an ill compliment to his reader to suppose he must be told also what to think of it. 
In this however Historians seem to place their merit and display their Eloquence which is indeed more conspicuous in Satire or Panegyric than in mere Statement of Fact And language or Stile not so much in the use of simple and appropriate terms. As in metaphor that Amplify or extenuate the matter according as the Author is himself Affected & would Affect his Readers.
This however is certainly an Abuse in History. Metaphors amuse the Imagination by presenting analogies novel & Surprising or any way pleasing in their Effect. But in matter of Information  are either of no Effect or are apt to mislead. To be of any Effect the Reader ought to know both the Subject from which the metaphor is Borrowed & that to which it is transferred. When a ship  is said to plow the Waters the metaphor will mislead a mere Ploughman. Or if a Plough is said to sail over its Field it will no less mislead a mere Seaman. To a person who is acquainted with both the Analogy so far as it takes place is amusing but contains no information And is therefore very improper where information is the Object. 
In this we may be supposed to exclude from History not only an officious display of Sentiment, but even all the ornaments of Speech which consist not merely in propriety of Expression and Perspicuity but in figure Metaphor & Picturesque Language. What do we leave him then by which to please his Reader or merit the distinction of literary Excellence. Must Livy strip himself of his Eloquence to write like a mere Journalist or Recorder of events.
 To Estimate the merits of History We must distinguish the genuine State & Course of things from all the Colouring and decorations they may receive from the Partial Favour or dislike of the Eloquent.
The first is of the greatest consequence as constituting Information of what Men are have been and may be again. The Colours of Rhetoric laid upon a Subject tend to inform us of an Authors talents compared to the Other or actual Course of human Affairs surely of very little importance. An Authors opinion may Mislead & is of little Authority compared to Nature & reality itself the object of History.
If an Author is ambitious of Praise he must be contented with that which pertains to the work in which he is engaged.
He must not expect the Praise of Eloquence in a work which Eloquence would Marr & disfigure or rather if it be Eloquence to treat of every Subject in the best manner he must  be powerful in that Eloquence which appropriate to History. Proper terms that neither amplify nor extenuate stating every Circumstance of moment to the origin Progress or result of the transaction he would relate suffering nothing idle to intrude or nothing of moment to be omitted so that the Intelligent Reader may have no question or explanation to Ask. If an Author could appreciate the Value of this Praise, he would Prefer it to any other or at least while  professed History would he covet the Praise of Figurative amplification or diminution.
Livy is justly placed in the first Class of writers or Artist bent on the decoration not the mere exact Delineation of their Subject but he ought to have entitled his word the Panegyric not the History of the Romans.
The Romans from the first were accomplished Statesmen. Their opponents Barbarians they were always in the Right their Ennemies in the wrong Submission to them  was Reason & Justice opposition mere folly or Caprice. When an Ennemy decline fighting it was Cowardice when the Romans protracted the War It was Ability and Good Conduct. Every Roman spoke like an orator & has a speech composed for him in the most Accomplished Form. 
Even in this perhaps it may  thought there is Merit, That merit which Consts in Partiality to our Country. This however is best shown in Actions & scarcely can be admitted in professed narration of Truth for the Information of mankind. It is not the ground on which Livy deserves to be Commended.
His Eloquence is invaluable to those who think this the highest Talent which man can Arrive. In him it is so abundant as to Cloy and Fatigue his Readers and tho this may be called a redundance of Ornament it is certainly an Error or defect in writing. That he was a man of Probity and a  free Spirit appears in the genrre of his narrations. Tho a relative in the family of Livia there are expressions or fragments of his lost History remaining in which he breaths a Republican and Extols the Majesty of Cato in Particular above all his contemporarys:
The loss of so great a Part of his voluminous & almost miraculous Performance is irreparable.
With all gloss many Particulars of the greatest importance now unknown must have been learned from him. But whoever aims at the Praise of History must not Copy from him or think that the Eloquence of History Poetry or Novel or Pleading Pathetic or Perswasion are the same. The Historians may give Delight & excite Emotion of Every kind: but it is the Effect of his subject not of his manner unless Simplicity & propriety of terms be accounted Rhetoric which indeed in all works of mere  Information it certainly is and of the best kind and of the most powerful in Poetry as well as pleading and Attempts to persuade.
It is certainly requisite in History to Study the most proper interesting Satisfactory forms of Narration. The Reader should no doubt be prepared for every Successive step he is to make not by Anticipating Events but by such previous lights as enable him to comprehend what passes. Though in order to fix his attention it is the Charm of Narration to keep him in suspense to the last. There are Narratives in which the Authors Vanity and ostentation of Foresight knowing before he begins to write what was the Event leads him to talk of measures with an Affectation of penetration little short of an Absolute prediction of what is to happen. And the Reader is left to admire & enjoy the authors depth & forsight in lieu of that Suspense and Gratification which a Well Conducted Narrative affords! But as I believe both Author & Reader are dissappointed.
An Ingenuous Author will be desirous to make the best  moral Impressions on his Reader no less than Supply the requisite communication of Political And Military Transaction.
This however is to be done not so much by expression of the Authors own Sentiment as by the Features or indications of Characters Intentions and Effects as bring the Rights & wrongs the Merits Benefits or Sufferings of Person into view & strike the reader with Sentiments of Esteem Admiration & Love or contempt & Hatred towards the guilty Actor or Congratulation & joy towards the meritorious & Innocent or Commiseration & Sympathy with the Innocent. In this Tacitus is a Powerful Master of his Readers Heart. In his Stile in general he resembles more the Painters who work by repeatd masterly stroke that touch the leading points of Character than by full and finished expression of every Part. Voltair has somewhere called him a Bel Esprit Malin Because he has touched the points that sting his Reader with Hatred or Contempt of Certain Emperors & the Tools of their Odious Government. But to have Spared Tiberius or Nero could not be quoted as an Evidence of Love to Mankind.
An Able Historian may no doubt Benefit his Reader by giving his opinion in terms direct & in his own Person but this is not the Specific of Historical Instruction And the Author is under the strictest obligation not to Substitute opinion of any particular for the proper Statement of such Particular nor to suffer his opinion to byass him in the Detail of his Narration.
These Faults turn Pretended History into mere Dissertation & partial Argumentation which may have its own merit but not the merit of History.
Perfection in History is no more to be expected in human Life than Perfection in any department of human Art.
If it be the Perfection of History to place its Readers in the  Condition of Persons present to every Transaction so far as to every Circumstance of moment respecting the origin progress & result of such transaction, it is evident that no one is qualified to execute such a wrong without he himself was present Observant Intelligent Impartiall & perspicuous in communicating what he knows. Statesmen & Warriours actually Employed are the most likely to be so accomplished but even they labour under certain dissadvantages.
They are of a Side & may not be impartial. There  circumstances which time alone brings into & of which they may not have been apprised tho material to the origin & progress of Affairs.
As the Person who is to record a transaction should know & distinguish what  important in each. It follows that Statesmen are the fittest to record matters of State and warriours to record operations of War. Yet even they are apt to fail in the Informations required to the general Reader. Professional Men are apt to pass in Silence all matters of Course as too well known to require being mentioned which nevertheless are required to the  Information of General Readers.
Caesar no where mentions the depth of his line in Battle and but once this Circumstance in the dissposition of his Ennemys saying that Pompeys line at Pharsalia was ten Deep in the Files though his own to equalize his Front must have been much less & must have varried on different occasions as the extent of Front to be presented required. This however now is a desidertum in the Military department of Roman History.
For these Reasons perhaps not the Person present & Concerned nor the Professional Man: but a Person observant of human affairs Intelligent & impartial collecting from the memoirs of those who were present from the Skillful & intelligent in their respective Professions what is peculiarly important in each account of the informations required to the general Reader & collecting his own informations at Periods when all important Materials have come into public View & before any of them have been lost are upon the whole best  qualified to compose informations of past to future Ages.
In all works of Information whether History of Science The Language required is simple naming the Subject and its attributes in proper terms without any aim on the part of the Author to display his Talent for any other Embellishment of Stile or Composition. What should we think of a Waiter who being called on for a Glass of Water in stead of bringing it should set himself to Gesticulate & cut capers to exhibit the Graces of his Person or who should bring it with the Air of a Dancer handing the Lady in a Minuet. The most accomplished Master of all the Graces so performing the duty of a waiter tho he might be admird on any other occasion would be laughed at on this. The accomplished master indeed is so far Master of his Art as to be as tenacious of simplicity on some occasions as he might be of Art & Concerted Grace on any other.
 Among the Ornaments of Stile Metaphor is the most frequent.
In this Figure of Speech terms appropriate to one Subject are transferred to another And this practice is so much in Favour with some Speakers or Writers that they treat of every subject not in its appropriate terms but in terms appropriate to some other Subject. Mind is treated of in Terms appropriate to Matter & Mechanism and in return matter & Mechanism receive the Appellations of mental affection & Will. The mind receives & retains impressions of weight & Forces Bodies have their affections of Gravitation Cohaesion or aversion & repulsion. This in the progress of Language was often an aid to expression and what was a convenience at first is still retained as an ornament.
When the orator would Amplify a Subject he borrows the Language of one that is  greater. When he would lessen or depreciate a Subject he takes Reverse. Pericles Thundered in the Assemblies at Athens. Thersites Schreched in the Assembly of Grecian Chiefs. Even when neither of these Ends is in View we are delighted with the Analogy of subjects that mutually throw light upon one Another and Metaphors that point out such Analogies are pleasant. They become so frequent in use sometimes as not to be distinguished from proper terms. They are as well understood in their Application to the Subject to which they are borrow as on those from which they are derivd. Impression on Mind is as well understood as impression on Wax altho the meanings are as different as mind & Body. They tend to confound our Notions of things & make the Theorist think he can explain the  Phaenomena of one Subject by the Substitution of another.
Types & Pictures are made to explain knowledge or the Apprehension of Things. This is another abuse of Analogy & Metaphor to be avoided in Speculation on Theory of any sort otherwise than as mere illustration or play of Fancy.
Metaphors have their place in Rhetorical Compositions on account of their Rhetorical Effects of Elevating or depressing its Subjects.
But in History would on this Account be reckoned a deceit altogether contrary to the very Essence of History itself. History is truth & its Effect is neither Elevation nor depression.
Metaphor as expression or means of Information in History is of very doubtful Effect. If both the subject from which the Metaphor is taken & that to which it is applied are known to the Reader the Metaphor may illustrate and please: But if either is unknown it can only mislead by Suggesting Identity in place of unknown Analogy. When a Countryman who never saw a Ship on her Way is told that she Ploughs the Waters. He is apt to conceive a Team or draught a Furrow broke up Land raised on Edge or turned over. What else is to plough. The information to a Seaman who never saw a Plough would be equally imperfect or deceitful to any Person who never saw either Plough or Ship it would be altogether meaningless or Blank.
In every Point of View the metaphoric Stile is altogether improper in History.
According to Swifts definition of a Good Stile Proper words in proper Places History may excell in Stile no less than any other denomination of Writing or Composition.
Its perfection is truth compleat & well Selected Detail. The preceeding a preparation for the understanding of What is to follow but the future not to be anticipated without Necessity. The  matter to be so stated as to have its proper Effect on the Readers mind without any express prescription from the Author of what he should think or feel. It is not necessary that the Author should be forever out of sight or never address the Reader in his own Person But the less Frequent occasions of this sort occur the more near to the Perfection of History.
Authors are Sometimes to be known by their Stile through all the variety of Subjects of which they treat and on all occasions. This however is rather the symptom of a Rotine or habit acquired than of Genuine Power to acquit themselves as the occasion requires.
Genuine Intelligence & Sensibility is equally prepared for every Subject of which it has the proper Cognizance. As the name of every Subject is different so are the expressions in which it is to be unfolded. As the mind is differently affected by various subjects and on Various Occasions so is the very Tone of a speaker or the Stile of a Writer And it is no praise to a speaker or  writer to say that he is the same on all Subjects and on all occasions.
That he talks of the small in the same Tone with the Great or that he is always Elevated & solemn or always depressed & familiar.
It should probably be said of a powerful speaker or Writer that he ascends or Descends with his Subject Simple or Figurative according as he employed to inform or Agitate his Audience or his Readers. Always Simple in History sometimes even in pleading a Cause: but when he would carry a Point or make an impression proportionally Armed with all the weapons of Rhetorick or declamation. Such a Person is not to be known his Stile otherwise than as the Powerful is known by the effect of his performances.

IV. OF STATESMEN AND WARRIOURS 

As the Soul or Intelligent Principle in Mans Nature presides amidst the Sensations Perceptions opinions and affections as Elements constituent of his Form & mode of Existence: So there are Individual men fit to preside in the assemblage of Numbers however diversifyd in Condition disposition or Power. These are termed Statesmen and Warriors.
The number amid whom they preside consist of Persons of whom each can do and does for himself what is Essential to his own being & State.
 The Statesman presides among Citizens. The Warrior among Soldiers.
The Citizen subsists by Labour opinion consent or Law.
The Soldier is the Bearer of Force which he may Employ when just & necessary.
Their functions are intimately Connected being to Act on the same Materials and with the Same Instruments tho to different Ends. 
The statesman is to act with men at Peace. The Warrior with Men at War.
The first is defective if he neglect the resources of War. The other if he is not provided for the Reverse yet their peculiar Functions may be separately considered.
The first preserves to men & with the assistance the order of Pacific Society.
The other  would prepare Men for the Use of Force such as may repell or redress contingent Wrongs.
Both require the Knowledge of Human Nature its dispositions and means of working upon it to protect & encourage what is Right to restrain or discourage what is wrong.
To omit for the present any further consideration of State affairs.
The Warrior being to conduct Men in the use of Arms through danger & hardship to Victory over their Enemies must cultivate skill and habit in the use of Arms and the forms of array or Tactics requird to enable numbers to act successfully together.
For these Ends Maual Excercise and order whether of Movement or Rest are required.
By excercise and discipline Armies may be presented under the most formidable appearance of Energie & Force.
But such presentments being made without Any circumstance of Danger or hardship do not contain any Assurance of fitness for Service against a resisting Enemy.
To have such assurance it is not Sufficient that men know their place & handle their Arms well. A certain Vigour of mind consisting of Intrepidity competence And Ardour to meet or Steddiness to resist an Enemy are the great & Essential Requisites.
It is not sufficient that these should be found in officers or commanders they are required in every Rank.
 It is the Bussiness of a General to Review his Battalions. The Cloathing the Fierce Cokked hat the Steddy Rank The Arms well handled Signalize The Corps and do honour to the officers. Armies so composed merit the Confidence of Generals and are fit to Awe an Enemy.
Let the ground be well chosen on which to receive an Enemy or movements well devised with which to frustrate any Advantage an Enemy endeavours to avail himself. Let officers be men of Honour.
This & no more is requisite to qualify An Army & its Leader for the Service to be performed on  every Topic of that Theme. The Reasoning Soldier is prepard to give opinion and account for most Events in War.
He has considered how to give a Corps its proper Discipline and Aspect.
But how to Inspire an officer Jealousy of Honour And how to Spread Stedely Vigour and Ardent Courage through his Ranks is not a common Problem in conversations on this subject. The Subject is discussed in every point but this the most important of all. Tis vain to choose a Post if men will not defend it or to plan an Attack if men will not perform it. What will make the Rank & File retain its post  unmovd or Scar an Enemy with impetuous Force?
Armies are not always Equal in these Respects and the Superiour has a great Advantage may Act on the offensive and even Shun his Enemy on equal Ground. The Inferior is put on the defensive & must not hazard Action without some favourable Circumstance or Signal Advantage. Such were the Campaigns of Julius Caesar in all his wars. And such the Campaigns of Napoleon on the modern Continent of Europe. For the confidence of their troops those  Warriors no doubt were much indebted To their first and Continued Successs. And it is no doubt on this Account as well on every other Account An Object of Importance to the Warrior to set out successfully. For this purpose he may expose himself & seek for opportunitys to show his Men their Enemies Back though otherwise of little moment and when his Repution is fixed Danger may be left to others. His troops will be pleased that he is Safe. In this respect however success which Implys ability does but continue its Effects And it may appear nugatory to tell an officer to beat  his Enemy that he may continue Still to Vanquish him yet the point deserves our Notice when Armies flushed with Victory are to be opposed.
Men enured to Success Advance to An Enemy with a Confidence which is often Sufficient to Obtain the Victory.
Men are individually distinguished by unequal measures of Fortitude & personal Vigour: but of this either in respect to its origin or Effect. The Discipline of Armys does not treat having to do chiefly with those measures of Fortitude which may be made to pervade at once numerous Bodies of Men and inspire the Rank and File of an Army to the Lowest Condition.
This is  sometimes the Effect of National Estimation well or ill founded on truth. It is needless to observe that genuine Patriotism is a Powerful motive to Valour in its Cause And it Scarcely can fail to operate where the community is an honour and Protection to its members as it is in free Constitutions of Government where no rank is depressed so low as not to feel its participation in the General Wellfare. 
Hence the Valour of Freemen Armed in defence of their Country is akin to that of the Parent in defence of her Young The Effect of an Ardent affection approaching to Enthusiasm which stifles the Sense of Difficulty or danger. This Principle which is so powerful  in Free States may be further cultivated by Proper Application to promote its Effect on the minds of Military men. The Spartans And Even the Romans were eminently Distinguished in the use of this Policy. The Whole Discipline of Sparta was directed to inspire The Reality not the appearance of Fortitude and military Valour And it was the more Successful in the Reality that it checked the Ostentation. The Romans to promote the general Tendency of their Policy to this effect had a Multiplicity of Specific Honours to be bestowd on particular Acts of Valour & Military Merit Such as saving a fellow Citizen overawing an Enemy in single combat Being the first to scale an Enemies Wall &c &c  And these honorary Rewards being attainable by the Legionary Soldier as well as the Officer pervaded the Ranks and formed a Mass of owerpowering and irresistable strength. 
National Estimation is a known Principle of Valour. Hence the Superiority of a Greek to an Asiatic and of one Nation to another in many well known Instances.
This Principle is often mere ill-formed Prejudice and absurd but should not be eradicated nor in any degree rashly discouraged. It is well to concur in it & even to express the Confidence it tends to inspire.
It is a merit in the Warriour whatever advantage he may have from the Character Reputation of prejudice of his country to devise every means of improving it or Supplying its defect in the form & construction of his Ranks in the course of Preferments and in the distribution of honours occasional .
In States where the Civil Distinction of Ranks is extream and Indelible as in most Nations of Europe. The same extream distinction is Observed in the Army. The officer is Noble & he only is intitled to preferment. The Low Born is a mass of Vulgar important only by their Number & implicit obedience. There is nothing to inspire them with Zeal for the object on which they are employd there are no hopes of advancement in distinguishing themselves. Enurd to Privation & Hardship they witness the superior Accommodation of their officers. In this Description there is a Signal source of  Inferiority to others in which contrary Circumstances take place where the Condition of a Soldier is nearer that of his Offi where they not only partake in the same dangers but in the same privations and hardships. Where the Low may hope to rise by his Merit & Where Nothing is dreaded so much as disgrace. In the Roman Legion the Pay of a Centurion was but double that of a Legionary Soldier and in great straits or difficulties they lived Pell mell together. 
The French Revolution has enabled the Warrior to procure all these advantages in the Form of his Army. And he studies to improve them by Artificial Means.
He can promote the private Soldier if  he deserve it through every Rank to the highest. He has devised a gradation of Honours under the Title of a Legion by which he has a Reward prepard for every indual in his Rank & which serves as a Badge of his Title to farther Preferments. That his Army conducted by himself should prevail in the contest with that of other Nations in the Continent of Europe is not to be wondered at.
That the Event is different in his Contest with Britons whether by sea or Land is owing more to the Spirit of a Free Nation than to any Superiority of Discipline or concerted Policy of those to whom the Department of War is entrusted.
 It had been observd in a company of which I had the honour to be one That the Vigour of mind which breathed in the Ranks or the means of improving seldom or never made a part in the Subject of discussion in the Conversations of Military Men. That it is nevertheless one of the most important considerations in the Form or Conduct of Armies. That by which Greeks prevailed in their contest with Persians. Caesar with his Antagonists and Napoleon in his Wars in the Continent of Europe.
Whoever has the upper hand in this particular may dispense with Numbers & keep his Enemy on the defensive & unwilling to hazard Engagement without some manifest advantage & therefore ever  ready to give way when the Ground is to be disputed on equal terms.
Men are carefully taught to handle their Arms and move in their Ranks:
why not also to receive an Enemy who attacks with Steddiness or rush upon him with Ardour & Confidence of Valour.
The national Character the Love of a Leader & Confidence in his conduct with Zeal for a Cause are principal Constituents in this mighty Advantage. But whatever it be defects may be supplied and the case improved.
Promotion laid open to all who distinguish themselves in the Ranks Military honours for Singular Services, The Valour & example of officers who Suffer or act nearly on a level  with the Ranks they command are expedients that may be resorted to by able Warriours in Every Instance however wanting in Nation. 
All Measures of this sort may be thought Superfluous in the Constitution of British Armies already Superior to every Enemy in the Vigour & National Spirit of their Ranks. If so let it be rewarded and honoured and everything be done to confirm & perpetuate so great a National Blessing & Security.
It appears to me that Something may be done for the Rank and File including the non Commissioned Officers. For the Battalion: and for the General officers, tending to confirm the Spirit  of Inferiour, draw into the superior order more of the National Genius And enlarge the field from amidst which Government may choose to be employed in the Conduct of Particular services.
The Road to Preferment from the Rank of Private to that of commissiond officer is very much obstructed in most nations of Europe by the supposed indelible Distinction of birth And tho less so in Brittain than any where else except Revolutionary France is still considerably so by the difference of manners & Education So that it is difficult to raise a Man from the Rank & File into the Society of Commissioned Officer. This tho difficult is not to be  entirely set aside.
It is of Consequence that it should be known in the Rank that distinguish merit will raise the Soldier to any height in his Profession and for this purpose the opportunity of Promotion should be seized as often as proper Instances of occur. The inconvenience is a trifle & the good consequence to the Service incalculable.
But in whatever degree this practice may take place a certain gradation of preferment may be introduced from the Rank of Private up to that of Quarter master and Adjutant to which the objection is Proposed Desire of Promotion is the ruling Passion of mere Military Men. This if they have no Other motive is sufficient to  Conduct them through all the Forms and difficulties of their Profession And is an incitement to great Actions. And this Prospect should not be shut against them in any Case whatever.
In regular Battalions it may be presented even in the lowest Rank without extending so far as to carry the Private at once into the Line of Commissioned Officers. A Line of Preferment may be drawn from the mere Centinel through a number of successive steps sufficient to present the Soldier with a prospect of bettering himself by Sobriety order & regular Conduct if not by brilliant Action and thus engage him in his duty by a Motive far superior  to the fear of Punishment or the Actual Infliction of those degrading Punishments which tend to dispirit any class of men that feel themselves exposed to them. 
There may be a Step of Preferment to the mere Recruit from the Rear to the Front Rank From the Battalion to the Flank Companies From the mere Centinel to the Corporal thence to the Sergeant, To the Sergeant Major To the Ajutant or Quartermaster &c. These steps may be marked by a small increase of Pay & some visible badge of Dress. This may require in the Military Establishment a small Addition of Expense but the advantage of trust would be cheaply purchased.
 The Neglect of Officers to cultivate the Spirit And respect the Character of Men under their command as well the show of their Ranks at a Review is part of that Pride which Gentlemen Indulge in comparing themselves with the mass of the People. Officers are furnished in Europe from the Noblesse or Gentlemen who derived Indelible Priviledge from their Birth. 
These were considered as the Soul & Spirit of Armies. The line of Battle was Supposed a mere mass to be torpid or Active as they should incline.
In this State the Revolution found the Armies of France in particular & when open war  made for the line to emerge from this state of Relation between officers & Men it soon Appeard that Noblesse was an empty Name and the great Body of men with Arms in their hands & Conscious of their own importance Subverted the Monarchy and laid it with all its priviledged orders in the Dust. Men raised their Rank on a presumption or Experience of merit Living & Suffering with their men in all times of Privation hardship or danger. And men from the Ranks looking up for preferment due to their Action have trampled on all the former Military Establishments of the Continent of Europe & make a General knowing how to conduct them, Ascend from a State of Europe to the unprecedented Dominion of Nations formerly Supposed invincible and not to be shaken by  any attack to be feared from abroad.
The Pride of a Genuine Warrior rests on the spirit and Vigour of those he has the honour to command and on the Ardour with which they join with him in every hardship Privation & Danger to which the Service may be exposed. But if in this we would moderate the distinction between officers & Men it should be by bettering that of the men not by lowering or impairing the Condition of Officers.
In all that has been Said however no more than one Department in the Service of Armies has been touched That of the Instrument which is to be employed in War. The hand of an artist who is to employ that Instrument yet remains to be Considered.
In the Ancient times of Greece & Italy The Departments of  State & War to the Manifest Advantage of those employed in them were generally United. The Statesmen cannot be ignorant of war without great inconvenience nor the Warrior of all Matters of State. They are each equally concerned to know mankind to know what men can do & how they may be made to do it.
The Statesman in some degree is paramount & must judge the occasions of War and Consequences of War. Short of this he is no more than a Clerk in office & a Bable in Council. The Warriour as at Rome may occasi only change his Gown for the Sagum but without knowing how to graft his Services on those of the State is a mere prize fighter & Bully, whose only  form of proceeding is mere Violence or Force. 
These Departments are nevertheless for the most part, distinguished in Modern Europe. And the Consequence that the accomplishments severally fitting for Departments are Supposed to consist in some trivial or even Mechanical practices separately required in one or the other. Writing & Speaking are the Qualities of Statesmen.
The forms of Parade & Review those of the Warrior. An Officer who has been drilled & drilling all his Life is a reputed Master of his Trade. A
Tongue in debate and hand for the Pen in office is a man of Bussiness in the State. That knowledge and Respect for Mankind which ability & Wisdom & which lead the Multitude of men in the Council or the Field are  seldom to be found or sought for in the account of either. Hence it is that Nations are so much at the mercy of such whenever they are found united.
We sometimes boast the Superiority of modern to Ancient times in Science. But all we are entitled to say is that we have applied to different Branches of Study. The Greeks & Romans applied to that Branch which concerned them most. Men manners the Forms of State and the Conduct of men whether in Peace or in war. We have ransacked nature the Earth & the Heavens for Geographical Physical and Astronomical Science. Man himself is forgotten or considered only as a Party in Trade and a Dealer in Manufactures & Money. I  doubt we shall never be able to unite the Sagacity of a Spartan in the Field with the Skill of a Chymist in his laboratory. But if this be too much people who are at leisure may learn to compare & distinguish such Characters.
Under every high name transmitted in the History of Italy we have at once a Statesman and a Warriour. 
The function  War may have been for youth that of the State for Mature Age. But the genius & Accomplishments were not to be distinguished. At Rome in particular even this difference was not attended to.
The Civil Magistrate & Military Commander was chosen a the same time and in the same Person. In consequence of this union of Characters all the Genus of the People was directed into these Channel and the publick might look for both in every Person who aspired to distinction and publick Honours.
Where these departments are separated the case is otherwise according as either prevails the Genus of the People is drawn into that Channel and Mutilated Statesmen or Mutilated Warriours is all that the state can produce.
The State as including all is no doubt to be preferred to the Army which is but a part. And if the Honours are as they ought to be at the disposal of the former The State may be at a loss to find any person worthy of great military trust.
When the principal Honours of the State are as in Great Britain made the Prize of civil or Political Merits  Genius is directed chiefly into this Channel And men come into publick View with the Single Talent of Speech-making as Sufficient to ensure their Fortunes.
In Families of Rank The quick are destined for Parliament The Slow will do for the Army. By the Influence of this apprehension a choice is made already prejudical to the Military Department & by limiting from high Military command to those who have been bred to the Service and passed through all the Steps of Preferment The choice of Military commanders comes to be limited to Persons already far advanced in Life and who in the Detail of Battalion forms have lost all Sense of what is necessary to meet an Enemy of Genius and in the of Genius in the Fields where address & enterprise are required instead of show and the Forms of Parade.
 It were therefore a real Improvent of the Military Establishment in such case if any thing could be done to direct the Genius of the Country more into that department And to extend the List from which the sovereign may Select those most worthy of high Military Trust.
The first may be done by holding out to the Ambitions at an Early Period of Life the prospect of great & honourable distinction in this Line and prospect may result in some degree by the Course which may be taken to widen the Circle from which Commanders may be Selected.
At present when the King is to nominate a Staff for any Military Province or Enterprise He is limited in his Choice to those who have the Rank of General officers in direct Subordination to the Chief & in  Gradation to one another. To loossen the fetters which The King by his Commission has imposed on himself: may all such Commissions of Rank be withheld untill it shall appear what assortment of Abilities may be requird for the Particular Services in View. And the King appoints a Court of Oyer & Terminer for Tryals in a particular Case so he may nominate a Staff with determinate Ranks for that particular Province or Service only And beyond such Particular occasion there should be no permanent Rank of Generals.
In the meantime as every Battalion Regiment or Corps is an occasion of permanent Service there must be a Suitable gradation of Ranks from the Subaltern up to the Colonel or Commandant.
 But when he is to Employ two or more Regiments together he makes his generals for the occasion from any part of his Military List.
How is then is this Military List to be made up and of whom is it to consist? I answer That as none could be chosen to command at Rome That is to be a Magistrate who had not Served ten years in the Legions, So none should be placed on the Military List in Britain till after he had served ten years in a Regiment, in order to be acquainted with its Forms & Details. 
But as this advantage may be gained in any Rank as Volunteer or Subaltern a Person of high Views in the Service may Serve his Time in any such Rank without competing with his fellow Soldiers  for Emolument or Battalion Rank.
What is to become then of those who have rose gradually to the Rank of Colonels of Regiments. I answer They may as at present retain the Emoluments of Colonels And being on the General List may be appointed as at present to the Government of Fortified distant settlements or put upon Staff for stationary or Occasional service as The King shall appoint And as the mere Rank of General at present brings no Emolument: the only change proposed in the condition is that they shall not bear the Title of General or Marechal untill it brings proportion & Profit along with it.
This is my project and I flatter myself that it would bring many Persons of Genius and high Views on the Military List who are now excluded from it.

VI. OF HAPPINESS AND MERIT 

Are these different Objects or The same Object in different points of View?
To many they are different objects. But when well understood they are the same And ought not to be distinguished under different points of view.
In vulgar language it is not uncommon to say That a Person is not so happy as he deserves to be or that he is more so than he deserves. Such language implys a distinction of the enjoyments which constitute Happiness and the Qualities which constitute Merit And tends to sett human Nature in a State of Warfare & Contention with itself. For who can be indifferent to Happiness or who can be happy if he is oppressed with a Sense of deserving to be otherwise?
Of this Warfare indeed in human Nature there are Strong Features or Appearances. Enjoyment is what Men desire and Suffering is what  they avoid. The reverse however is not uncommon. Enjoyments are in some Instances of so mean degree as to imply meanness in the Person Addicted to them and the converse is true of Sufferings. Ne quid Nimis seems on many occasions to sett the Judgement at War with Enjoyment or Appetite.
This Species of War however is but one  the difficulties which Nature has laid in our Way to exercise that Faculty of Reason which we are born to inherit which Waxes in being exerted and acquires Power in being obliged to employ it.
Experience is Information and The Habit of Action an Accession of Power. Folly under the disguise of Enjoyment cannot mislead nor Wisdom under the appearance of Suffering deter. And the War of Competition among the Objects of attachment or pursuit may end. But this which in thinking is but a Single Step may be the work of Ages in the progress of Sensitive mind. Here Experience must be repeated before it gains the Ascendant of opinion. Even after one false conception is Exploded another may  Succeed and thus mistakes may be repeated before truth alone is left to occupy the mind. Habit keeps possession even after mistakes are acknowledged. And time indefinite may be required  run the Course of Successive Practice and the habits which may occupy the mind and yet it should appear that Periods unlimited & unconfined Reality Truth & Wisdom must prevail And occupy an Empire of the Soul of whose Right there can be no detection by which it can be overthrown or no preferable Habit or Practice to Supplant the best of which the title to be preferred is experience already obtained  what it is compared with every Other choice of mind.
What may be the Issue or result of indefinite Progression even to created mind is probably too much for us to Anticipate. Philosophers of old supposed it to be an Assumption into the Essence of God from which it emerged: But whatever may be  result of a Progress at once to Perfection & to Happiness we cannot doubt that those Ends may not only meet:
but are in  reality the same. They are alike the Objects of a Wise Ambition which if the ends were separate tho consistent might be frustrated in the attainment of one or the Other.
This in fact happens under the mistaken apprehension of Men in this Period of Animal Life.
Men are thought to be happy in consequence of events or in possessing the gifts of Fortune: but frequently to have merit in despising those Gifts.
Even those who would reason themselves into a different opinion are seldom fully Successful in the attempt. It is nevertheless a piteous State of the Mind When we rail at the World when Merit as we express it is not rewarded with Fortune. But none are more disposed to adopt this complaint than those who affect the greatest Zeal for morality. They would be thought Zealous for Merit but are possibly no more than Envious of Fortune. The Subject is of all others the most important and just conception of it the most valuable attainment of human Reason in its Preparation for higher advances in the Scale of Intelligent  Being.
We may in some degree indulge our hopes of immortality in proportion as we are qualified now to perceive the Superiority of mental Attainments to all the conditions of mere Animal Life.
The Horse probably prefers nothing to the Riches of his Pasture & that Swiftness of his foot. But Man while he enjoys the Accommodations of Animal Life Adores the Wisdom & Goodness with which they are Supplied. He inhabits a Corner but his Thoughts extend to the Universe of Space & the Eternity of Duration. These are among the Stamina by which he is qualified and on which he may continue to build the hopes of a Future & indefinite Progression.
In short: when all the sources of Folly are exhausted; unless Intelligence itself be not suppressed; Wisdom must Succeed & take the firmer hold that no Imposture remains untried.
Even here or in this period of Intellectual Progression it were Idle to make choice of Prosperity in preference to adversity for neither is at our Option And we must take our Part in either as it comes. In prosperity Temperance Frugality & the use of what Fortune Supplys without being absorbed in attention to it or affecting to despise it is at once a Constituent of Happiness & Merit. In Adversity Fortitude whether active or passive as occasion requires is precisely in the same predicament as the real Constituent of Happiness & Merit.
What is Benevolence? Surely The most undeniable proof of a mind in itself agreeably affected and Estimable or acceptable to others. Thus uniting the Supreme Characters of Happiness & Merit As its reverse or Malice unites those of Wretchedness and detestation.
Benevolence unitd with Wisdom and Almighty Power are the attributes of God: or in other Words the Supreme Felicity & Perfection of Intelligent being.
The Wisdom of Man but enables him to distinguish between Good Evil without Mistake in the detail of Choice or in the means of carrying it into Effect.
 This Character as in respect to Happiness it carries with it every pursuit the Assurance of Safety Gratification & Success it is the Specific Excellence of Intellectual Nature and as such highly Esteemed or Constituent of Merit.
Fortitude also or the Power under to encounter difficulties. Threats or adverse Events so Appropriate to the Lot of Man is at once the Measure his Force or Power & best antidote to unavoidable Suffering. And is Surely as much required to support him in his own Esteem as in that of others.
Happiness Therefore & Merit are Perfection  mind & Character are but different Names for the same Condition. Whence is it then that men so often hate those who they think happy And pity or lament those who they think meritorious? Surely because they mistake both those Characters.
Such we cannot doubt is the Result when we would  infer what is best for mankind in the form or condition of their Being: Or in Other Words when we would Specify what is to them Constituent of Happiness And Merit. In these terms we would express the Ultimate Objects of living or Intelligent Nature That for which Life itself is of any value either of Estimation or Enjoyment. And yet these terms are so loosely employed that their meaning seems scarcely to admit of a Serious Consideration. A Person is said to be happy as often as he finds anything to please himself and to have merit as often as he does anything to please Others. And in this use of words The Coxcomb is happy And the Impostor has Merit. When we awake from these mistakes and call the Coxcomb a Fool & the Impostor a Knave Still Happiness is one thing and Merit another. A Person  may have merit in what he has done but be happy or unhappy in his Circumstances And a person is Sometimes Said to be happy tho he is insensible of it.
If we would correct these follies it seems necessary to begin with an attempt to fix the object in View under the Terms we employ. And by way of Postulatum require that Happiness Should Stand for the most Perfect State of Enjoyment And merit for the sum of most Estimable Qualities. And with general precaution we would discend to Particulars: The Identity of Happiness & Merit as in the preceeding Argument may be fully Established.
After all & notwithstanding the Identity of matter alluded to in the Terms Happiness & Merit: There is a distinctive Propriety in the  use of these Terms corresponding to the different respects in which the Subject is considered. Wisdom Benevolence Fortitude and Temperance considered in Respect to Enjoyment is properly termed Happiness or the State of greatest Enjoyment & least suffering. In respect to the Excellence of Character or the Esteem in which they are held by others  are properly distinguishd in the Appellation of Merit: But Happy at once and Meritorious is he whose Selfish or care of his own Wellfare or Happiness has merit in the View of those who are proper Judges of Merit & whose Vanity or desire of Applause leads him only to Affect what is really Constituent of Happiness to himself.
On these Conditions we shall blame the Selfish nor despise the Vain. The one will  be attentive to himself: but the Quality of which is most tenacious to himself is benevolence to others And Virtue tho supposed to be dissinterested by those who mistake their own Interest is nevertheless the Interest of Man or his most valuable & secure Possession. Selfishness in Vulgar Estimation because it is Supposed to exclude its best & most valuable Personal Concern And Benevolence is supposed to be of no Value to the owner because it is a Concern for the Wellfare of others or the order of Beings susceptible of Happiness.
The missapplication of Words is a mistake of things And mistake. The Permanence of ill Habits of thinking & Acting the Slow acquisition of New habits which in their Turn are perhaps to  be removed by slow Alteration or Change untill every Mistake or ill habit has been tryed is that which makes the Progress of Mans Intellectual Germ to Wisdom So Slow & so little in Appearance Advanced in the Periods through which we see it carried:
but which in its Attainments will be the More Secure & to the mind which has made the Attainments more his own.

VII. DISTINCTION OF VALUE AND ITS SOURCE IN EXISTENCE

1st Distinction Good & Evil. Where neither is applicable Existence is altogether Indifferent.
2d Distinction. Happiness and Misery. Happiness is the possession of Good Misery the accumulation of Evil. The Sentient & Conscious alone are Susceptable of Happiness or Misery. The Intelligent most of all.
3d Distinction Mind & matter. All Existence of Happiness or Misery come under the appellation of Mind. All other existence is Matter.
Matter has no Value But in its Relation to Mind. If there be an Eternal Principle of Existence in Creative Power It must be a Principle of Selection choosing that which is made in contradistinction to what is Otherwise. But there is no ground of Selection but Good & Evil Happiness or Misery or tendency whether near or remote to one or the other.
It follows that mind alone  or what is related to mind can Present object to induce the Exertions of Intelligent & Selective Creatures. And that Existence is limited to mind & the matter any fitted to form an Allotment for mind as a Scene or Material of Action & of Art & Accommodation and all matter exists but for the Sake of Mind. 
For this all Suns & Planets be their numbers & Magnitude what they may are Valuable only in their Relation to Mind As the Work of Eternal Mind And the Lot of those for whom they are Created.
This Planet Earth in all its Constituent Parts its Still its Organised & Living orders its permanent and Active & Variable Forms Its Laws and their Phenomena whether of Mechanics in Chymistry Vegetation Animal Life or Intelligence is the Lot of Man Intelligent Conscious or active Whenever such Planets exist it is Natural to Suppose  Analogous Relation of Mind & Matter; And in the Solar System man in some degree partakes with Other minds And by a Stretch of Conjecture also with all minds of which universe itself is the allotment.
Of the Good or Evil to be apprehended in the Creative mind His works alone are indications. Contingencies may come from Other minds Creation from Him alone. In this He is revealed and nother Mind but his. Language Spoken or Written may bear the meanings of Men Creation alone the meaning of Almighty God.
Here his meaning is to be collected from the Lot & as all is made for man his Lot alone can furnish Information of the Creators Will & meaning.
In the prosecution of an  Argument in which we are to question the fitness of a Person to his place or of the place to him: it appears proper first to Characterise The Person His Form dispositions And Powers. Next the circumstances provided for his Accommodation and gratification or promotion towards the End or destination of his Existence.
In this or in the first Aspect of Nature throughout Indefinite Variety is a Primary Feature. It meets the Observer in every Compartment In the assemblage of Still materials that compose the Globe. In all the Forms organised or participant in any Species of Life whether Vegetative or Sensitive acting by Will As in the Animal forms of being. Of the Latter Class Man himself appears at first no more than a Variety distinguished from the general train of animals by Circumstances & by no means to his Advantage.
Born to an Infancy more weak, &  dependent & of longer Continuance than that of the young in many other Upon the Tardy Appearance of his Instincts or Native propensities he appears no way better directed than Other Species on the contrary in this part of his Nature he appears less correct or guarded against dangerous abuse than any Other Animal persisting frequently to mislead into hurtful Excesses of which the other Animals are by Nature incapable. With these Appearances to his dissadvantage he opens the Career of a Progressive Being Agreeably to the General Character of Creation in all its organised or living Forms known to us. In every The Analogy of Birth Infancy Puerility youth manhood & Age are exhibited throughout and these are the Stages through which this Singular Animal is known to Pass. And if he is observed to set out with some dissadvantages in what is termed his Infancy: he proceeds in a manner  different from the Other Animals And tho at first less correct yet soon appearing likely to carry him through a Range of Attainment & Action far Superior to theirs.
With less precise direction to a Specific Object he is qualified to Observe to conceive and chuse An Object for himself. He acts accordingly from Opinion rather than Instinct. And as opinion may vary Indefinitely and thousands may be wrong for one that  hence Mistake Error Caprice and Folly are more frequent in these first Periods of his History than Wisdom or a just Apprehension of things. In Mistake or Error having Occasion to experience its falsehood he cannot persist for ever.
From the indefinite Variety incident to opinion or habits of thinking we derive the varieties by which Men differ from one Another. And the same Man differs from himself at different times.
The Apprehensions of certain distinctions under the Titles of Good & Evil of Excellence or Perfection &  Defect of Right & Wrong as well as Pleasure & Pain obtained or incurred in the Gratification or dissappoint of Propensities or in the quality of Mere Sensations as Particulars happen to be ranged under these Titles they are coveted or Shuned and the Actor is not only Spontaneous but likewise Conscious knows what he does & for what Reason.
In this he is said to be intelligent & accountable for his Actions. Of the Past he is conscious of the Future he projects intends & Contrives. His Powers are Derived from the great Source of Existence & of Power but his Exertions & Attainments are his own & in this alone probably consists any Analogy to that Personality & Intelligence of which the order of Nature gives a Perception in the Being of its Self Existing Author.
If the Consciousness of what he had done of what he had attained or lost were wanting in the human Mind he must be degraded from the Rank of Intelligent Being & have  no Germ from  to originate a Progression towards the Completion of those attainments of Which the Germ of Intelligence is susceptible. As he now is We see only the outset of a Progress of which the Issue is probably hid beyond the Limits of his Animal Life. As an Animal he waxes in Stature & Muscular Power As intelligent he waxes in Knowledge Sagacity Judgement Invention & Contrivance for his Purpose.
His Faculties like those of the Living & Active in most Instances do not waste but Wax in their Exertions. As the human mind is essentially Active Certain Modes of Activity constitute its most Perfect and Happiest State The Contemplation of Nature The Discovery of its Physical Laws & the Comprehension of its interesting Phaenomena Benevolence & its Exertions in the System of Intelligent Beings. Wisdom, with its unerring Selection of Good in every Instance Fortitude with its Exemption from Fear or Distrust and Jealousy the Surmounting of Difficulties and passage through Dangers are the Supreme  Enjoyments of this Active or Ambitious Being. In this Form we may conceive him to be advancing towards what is at once the Felicity and Perfection of his Nature however lowness may apprehend the yet actual attainments of the Species.
Under the Titles of Happiness & Perfection or Excellence The Nascent mind yet ignorant of all begins with applying those names to some Contingent Circumstances such as catch the unexperienced Attention whether Sensation Fortune or Estimation. They engage in the pursuit of Such Objects practise the Arts or become dependent on the Aids by which they hope to procure them. Ambition or the desire of Elevation or Perfection is certainly among the Strongest or the most powerful  the human Breast.
When we consider the Sacrifices of Ease Pleasure & Safety which are made or the Labour Suffering & Dangers incurred in the pursuits of Glory mistaken for Excellence & Elevation of Character we may be tempted to Suppose that the Love of  Perfection from which its Misapplication originate is in reality the most powerful of any Principle in its Sway over the Actions and dispositions of the human Mind And is Sufficient to Suspend the Consideration of even of Happiness without which Intelligence Itself has no favourable disstinction and Existence to Curse. But when we consider also the Obstructions given to this Aspiring dissposition of mind by Indolence or the Allurements of degrading of frivolous Pleasure more frequent than not so Conspicuous as the Aberrations of Vain Glory & supposed Exaltation of Character the Counter Effects. Effects of mistaken Pleasure may appear no less Powerful than those of its opposite And the two contending Divinities under the Judgement of Hercules will appear Equally realized in human life as in the Celebrated Apologue of Prodicus. 
The one seems Negligent of Happiness & the Other of  Estimation or Dignity the first and highest Object of Consideration among the Pretensions of human Nature. Happiness and Exaltation of Character are thus too often considered as Varieties in the Pursuits of Men and even at Variance with one Another and this Error is perhaps the most important that occurs to be Corrected towards the Advancement of this progressive Intelligence with which man is endowed.
The great Disstinction of Intelligent Being and by it is a fit Subject of Creative Power is That it is susceptible of a Gradual Advancement in a Direction towards the Measure of Created Excellence & Felicity. To Suppose that these are in their Nature, either inconsistent or even distinct and separable is an Absurdity & contradiction in the Very Nature of Intelligent Being.
We conceive the Almighty to be Supremely Happy because He is Supremely Perfect.  His Wisdom & Goodness Are at once the Security the Possession And the Emanation of Excellence & Felicity in their Several Gradations to all that Exist. What Quality in Human Nature could be denominated Happy if it were withal contemptible or Odious or what could be esteemed or Respected if withal the Possion of it were Misery. Perfection of Nature And Happiness are in fact different Denominations of the same thing thought of only under different Aspects. The One of its Enjoyment, the Other of its Estimation & place in the Gradations of Being. And to Arrive at this Point of discernment and the habits of Wisdom resulting from it is the Summit of that Eminence to which Man is directed And which he is enabled after all Aberrations by the Experience and Exercise of his Intellectual Faculties of which the occasion at least begins to be furnished in his Present Scene & which is probable farther continued in the Subsequent Scenes.
The Present Scene it has been Said is projected for the Advancement of Man in his Intellectual Progress and  We proceed to verify that Observation by a reference to the Particulars from which it may  Collected.
As such in their order we may recur to some particulars that have been mentioned as apparent defects in the Animal of Man compared to that of other Species in the Animal Kingdom. Of this kind are the Low & the prolonged State of Infancy The Naked The unarmed and the comparatively feeble State of the Species in its Contest with Other Animals too weak for Battle and too Slow to Escape by flight And more scantily Supplied with the very necessaries of Life than most of the Animal Tribes being obliged to Labour & Toil for what his associates in this living Order find spontaneously produced on the Earths Surface.
In all these particulars however The fact is that man has more than full compensation for all those dissadvantages under which he seems to be placed. The Comparative defects of Infancy are more than Compensated by the Superior faculty & tender  Care of the Intelligent Parent whose instinctive Propensity to watch over her Ofspring is but the Germ of a Social Affection destined to operate for Ages through all the Gradations of Kindred into a principle of Union & Cooperation for common Support & Safety. What the Parent can do for her Child he need not  be qualified to do for himself. And in this we read what is frequent in the System of Nature The manifest Signs of Intention and of a Reason for what  done or ommitted not Supply in one Form what is otherwise provided for in a Superiour manner or degree. The Compensation however we are not to Consider as the Sole End of Creative Economy. If this were all the method pursued with Other Animals were perhaps the most direct & the best.
But the case is here altered And Nature has to provide not merely for Subsistence And Accommodation of an animal: but for the exertion and Exercise of Faculties destined to Spring from a sense of  necessity & want. The Beast of the Field in fully Supplied without any device or Invention of his own. Man to find an Equivalent for the Fur of the Quadruped His pasture in the Field his Lodgement in the Cave or Cover of the Wood is obliged to become a Manufacturer a Builder & a Husbandman.
Tho qualified to Subsist alike in any Climat he no where finds in any Situation or from Any Soil Spontaneous Subsistence fit to Subsist the Species in any Numbers without Culture Labour & Industry of their own. Tho Qualified to feed on great Variety whether Animal or Vegetable The Species of Plant which supply him with his best or almost necessary  are to be carefully Cultivated or will Cease to grow and the Soil is ever to be prepard for them by eradica Weeds or the ever renewed Growth of Noxious or unprofitable Herbage that force their way Spontaneously and choak the Vegetation of those that Supply the  Necessities. The Limited or Scanty measure in which those Necessities are provided for The Method of Labour and Skill by which they are Obtained Suggest the Necessity of Securing the Surplus of the present for future Use And Persons conscious of having obtaind them by the Use of their own Faculties Suggest & Support the Claims of Property and this Right is gradually extended to every Subject that may be fairly occupied & Secured for future as well as present occasion.
Hence the Foundation & mighty Superstructure of Law & Social Policy To define the Solemn and interesting Distinction of Justice of Right & Wrong & to direct their applications to cases of indefinite Variety And such Intricacy as require the exercise of Judgements which is not to be acquired without Study or professional Labour exempt from any other care or pursuit.
Under the Titles of Necessaries Accommodations or Luxurys the Subjects of Property are  multiplied indefinitely and are unequally distributed as to introduce the distinction of Rich & Poor so that one is [in a] condition to buy the Labour of another & that other is necessitated to sell his own Subordination ensues & from the Variety of Surplus or Want of different Persons Climate Arts & Possessions Commerce or the Exchange of Commodities ensue. The means of Conveyance the Medium of Trafic or Exchange form such a System of Policy Oeconomy and it would have been impossible to forrsee that it should Arise from the mere defect of Food Raiment & Lodging under which Man compard to the other animals is made to Labour. And like the Science of Law itself constitute a Subject of profound Study as well as Intricate practice.
Has Nature in all this no other object than that of Supplying Man with Food Clothing & Lodging. If so the Model of mere animal Life as exhibited in the fowls  of the Air & Beasts of the Field is greatly preferable.
But this is not the Sole nor the Principal Object of Nature in this Case.
There is a Germ of Intelligence to be made to Spring up and Advance through a Gradual progress to indefinite hights of Elevation and Power. A
progress of which we probably see but a part in the present Scene & Order of things.
The Necessity of procuring Subsistence &c. leads to Mental Pursuits with which it does not appear to have any affinity. The Laws of Nature must be Studyd in order to discover how we may Influence Nature to our Purpose. The first lights of Knowledge show the way to More & What Curiosity to penetrate every Cloud that spreads in the Way. Contemplation & Science become Necessaries of Life to many And the first principle of Want which Caused the Germ of Intelligence to Spring is comparatively overlooked &  forgotten.
As in Hunting Health is acquird without being the immediate object proposed So in this Train of affairs. The Earth is ransacked much knowledge acquired Arts introduced & Faculties improved merely to accumulate wealth while the mind continues or becomes inattentive to itself or attainments are valued chiefly for their Utility in Trade. A good man is understood merely to be Solvent or to have that by which the Law may force him to fullfil his engagements even if he should be unwilling to do so.
The Moralist may therefore not be inclined not very highly to value the Progress so made in the Mental or Intelligent Nature of Man.
Man thus committed to the circumstances of his Lot for direction in the line he is to follow in the Progress of his Intelligent Being has been likened to Clay in the Hands of a Potter by whom materials tho the same received different Forms and are at the discretion of the Artist destined to Honour or disshonour. But the Emblem so far fails in its application to him. That being  himself the Artist the Form he at any time bears is that which he has himself voluntarily Assumed and no longer retains than Circumstances seem to require. Whatever may be the Effect of Physical Causes his Passions and Affections are occupied chiefly by the Occasions which result from his Relation to Other Men And the Society in which he is placed is in reality the Principal part of that Lot the Propensity & fitness of which to forward the Progress of his moral and intelligent Being we are now considering.
Men form themselves into Society and the Society reacts upon its members to an Effect that contributes more than any other Circumstance to the Form which its members Assume and the Rank they bear in the System of Created Intelligence or the Approach to that which is at once the Perfection and Happiness united in the final Result of this progressive Nature Progress of which our Condition enables us to perceive this Specimen tho but in part & within the limits of a Short Period  but representative. We may guess of what is going on throughout the System of the Universe where the Multiplication of Intelligent Being its Progress & The fitness of Scenery for its indefinite Advancement is the Object Worthy of that Power whose Felicity & Perfection is in Itself and in all its Energies Eternal and Unalterable. Such Are Ideas to which we indulge our Apprehension Under the Notion That Wisdom & Goodness are the Sole Ends of Creation in all the Stages of Existence or reality: Is it so here or does The History of Man confirm it? Is human Society a School of Wisdom & Goodness, and is the tenour of mixed & precarious life announce the prospect or completion of a happy Nature? If indeed its tendency is such and final result however distant we have a right to consider this as its Character however short of the End that part which falls under our Observation may be. The Series of Events may be various & Long but Time has no bounds to terminate The progress before its  arrival at the Point to which it is directed. Created Intelligence begins in Ignorance but Knowledge proceeds by Observation & may accumulate without End. Mistake is corrected by Experience & if Still succeeded by Error may by Experience still receive its Correction and no opinion on the Result be left But that of Truth at last to be entertaind. It is thus that Intelligence if it continue to Exist must continue to advance or to Perfect itself.
If we should be disposed to Under value the ordinary attainments of men & think them below the just Pretensions of Intelligent Nature Such as Sense of the Condition from which we have to emerge is the reverse of a Symptom that man is destined not to surmount this Level: it even Evinces a Stimulus to Efforts of a better Effect. The Courier is urged in his Speed no less by the fear of being distanced than by the Ardour with which he pants for the Goal.
In human Society, there is yet more powerful incitements to Active Exertion more Signal occasions  of calling every human Faculty into in the Cooperations or opposition of Parties or even Individuals more to be learned from mutual communications & the records of ages and the disscussion of Legal National & Political Concern than could have resulted from the whole Physical System in which this Being involved.
In this Principal School of the Intelligent Facultys man is not only and Advancement in the Powers of deliberation Judgment & Execution but has also presented to his View and Choice distinctions that Apply to his own Personal Character & Form tho not so Obvious to his reflection as they are in the Visible & interesting Examples which are presented and felt by lively Experience in human Life. There he may Compare the Attainments to which he ought to Aspire in the Examples of Aurelius Titus & Trajan with others which ought to shun in the wretched Debasements of Heliogabalus Commodus & Nero. He is no longer limited to the Attainments of Faculty in mere exercise of occasional Pursuits. The Supreme and Primary End of all pursuit is laid open to him in the Good of which his own Nature is Susceptible or in guarding Against The Evil to which it is exposed. In his own mind he has the Conscious Experience Esteem Affection & Confidence the great source of Serenity Peace & Enjoyment Contrastd with the opposite Evils Jealousy Envy Malice & Fear and Dependence of mind not on its Resolution and Condition but on chance or Contingent Event.
This being the Character of Man and his Allottment of Place & Circumstance as an Actor in the Scenes that are opend before him we cannot doubt The Object of his Maker respecting to be gradual Form of Progression in the line of his Intelligent Being towards the Perfection or Happiness to which he is destined.
This Law of Progression is agreeable to the Course in every Instance of living or organized Form within our Observation and in this of Created Intelligence it appears  to be the Essential or Necessary Form of Existence. That it is the Special Destination of Man cannot be doubted from many original & Charistick Provisions Qualifing to Avail himself of it & improve his Advantages.
Interested as he is by the wants and Necessities of Animal Nature to controul or regulate & obtain Effects to his Purpose. The Powers with which Nature has furnished And the Form in what Nature is Subjected to his Controul furnish a Striking  of Design deliberate provision for his Accommodation. Not impowered to Create he can only Place Conjoin & Mix Matters and Materials Together. Nature at the same time acting by fixed Laws & exhibiting Effects different in different circumstances and therefore under Contrivance of the Confessedly productive effects such as his occasion requires. The Law of Gravitation by which every thing loose must descend to the Ground with his direction the Plummit & Center of Arches enables to fabricks of heavy Materials to indefinite heights The more Solid and Firm the more they press to the Ground whether in the Wall the Column or the Archs, Affections of Attractions & Repulsion in different Instances are his Powers of Command Mixtures change or improve the Composition of Substances to his Purpose Motion & Heat are occasionally employed in his Service And indefinitely vary their Effects to his Pleasure. The Soil undergoes the most important change for him And Plants & Animals of every kind are in his Power to be propagated or extirpated at his Pleasure. In the order of Nature every Plant has its Seed And every Seed in Proper Soil Springs up into its Plant. We naturally suppose that this order must have had a beginning & the Creative Power must have been adequate to produce either Plant or Seed and must we conceive be so adequate for ever where Woods are wanted The Creative Power we cannot Doubt may have Cloathed every mountain with full grown Trees. Why this slow method of rearing from the Seed? To accommodate we may say Intelligent Man This favourite Tennant of the Earth who observing The Law of Propagation Established in Nature can by conforming himself to it & with a Small  of Seed in his hand can have a Forrest where he  chuses & in a little time transplant Forrests of America to Europe or the Converse And by Analogous Process command every Species of Corn or Fruit and every  of his Flock or his Herds. Who can doubt that man was intended to be a Husbandman & Proprietor  the Earth.
While the Powers of man as entrusted with a Controul over the Physical System for his own Supply and accommodation are provided for in the very Laws and apparently fixed Condition of things His Dominion projected over the Forms of his own Species and the operations which take place on himself As the Material on which they work is also provided for in particulars Significant of Design & Goodness on the part of his Maker. His Instinctive Formation into Groups & Societies of Indefinite Extent at once give rise to an Artist of Power and a Subject in continual need of his care or attention. Such is the Political Scene exhibited throughout the Various Devisions & their Respective Forms throughout the Political World constituted by the human Race. The Combinations  of Numbers that take place in States and Political Compartments may Oblige us to look back on the relations Subsisting in detail among Individuals forming their connections and The Influences & Ties by which they are enabled to Act in such Bodies.
Mere Intelligence implys no more than that every such Form of Existence is Conscious of itself & its Continued Identity throughout the Period of its existence. In Society Separate Persons so Constituted are supposed to be mutually apprised of their Respective minds and Conditions and every Individual has a part to act respecting what passes in the thoughts and Intentions of another as an Evidence that Society is Intentional & projected for the Human Species in a much higher form than that of the mere herding animals.
Among the Animals Language is the gift of Nature to Man Alone. The use of Language tho specific to man does not appear to result from any Signal advance of the Intellectual faculties. It is almost the earliest of his Specific acquisitions.  The Horse the moment he drops on the Ground betakes him to Walk and turns on his Dam to grope for the Dug: but man after months and even years are passed has Language before he can change his Place & has learned to Speak while  is yet but attempting to walk.
His looks & Gestures are by Nature Significant and mediately understood And  this foundation the Species has founded a Multiplicity of Arbitrary Signs consisting chiefly of Articulate Sounds varied indefinitely in every Separate Hord or Assemblage of Men: But agreeing the origins of Speech by which they are pronounced the organ of hearing through which they press to be interpreted It may appear Strange a Subject so Common and familiar at all noticed: but it is neverless of all Natural Phenomena the most remarkable & important and being without question Instinctive the most powerful Evidence of a Design in Nature & preparative of all the Effects that result from human society to forward the Progress of mans Intellectual Existence.
Hence all the Effects of  communication Information Instruction and the very Existence of Consent deliberation or Council and the very Fabric of Society itself in all its parts. When we thus find the Great resulting from what is comparatively Small there can be no doubt of the Design And that the Less has been meditating for the Sake of the Greater.
Without dwelling any longer then on what  Evident The Advantages which the Progressive Nature of Man derives from the Scene in which his Germ of Intelligence is made to Spring and to Wax in what we must End  inclined to call this first Stage of its progress. We may ask from what Topick we are to tell the Character of that Power which has laid the foundation of this order of things in which we partake.
Are we to consider every Instance of Misfortune or Pain strewed over the Lot of Man as exceptions derogating from the general Evidence of benevolent so manifest in the order of Nature or in the Construction of Living and organised Existence? This were surely very erroneous as in the  distribution of Pleasure and Pain throughout the Animal Kingdom if not the Intellectual Pain is an Evidence or Effect of Beneficent Design no less than Pleasure. As Pleasure for the most part invites to what is Salutary or required for Preservation Pain deters from what is adverse or hurtful,
equally evincing in every Case That the Design is beneficent & Wise.
If this Law is not so Strictly observed in the case of man as in that of the other animals It is undoubtedly because man is more left to his own Government And place is given to the Exercise of those Faculties And of that Freedom which form the Distinction of Intelligent Being. In this Race it is a Saying of great Authority that he who spareth the Rod Hateth the Child and the Parent in chusing a School for his offspring does not pitch upon that in which they will be most pampered with Sweet and exempted from Labour but where they will be kept to their Exercises and advanced in those attainments which Constitute merit & Felicity of their Characters. Adversity is known to be the Reformer of Pride Usurpation & Vanity and a Life of Frequent Tryal in Difficulty  Danger & Hardship The best school for Ability Fortitude and Wisdom. It is even probable if not certain that such is a life of more Enjoyment or Satisfaction than what is commonly Supposed a Life of more Ease or Leisure from Business or those Active Engagements which are said to be Trouble. The French Ennuis is known to be Worse than And that to avoid any sort of occupation is preferred And the Sense of Mankind on this Subject may be Collected from the Nature of Amusements or Sports they devise to occupy their time with Pleasure. In these we ever have a portion of Difficulty Danger And Contest to be Sustained or Avoided.
In contending for an Exemption from pain or trouble as the condition in which the Evidence of Divine goodness  Wisdom can be admitted The Atheist Mistakes the Nature of Man his Choice and the Real object of Creation in respect to him which can be no other than that of opening  for him a Way by which he may Arrive at the Specific Excellence And Felicity of his Nature The Way of Observation Experience & continued Progression. The form in which Creation Proceeds in every Instance known to us is analogous to this And is Beneficial & Wisely provided in the mixed Scene of Prosperity & Adversity through which Life is destined to pass. In a continued  of Ease or pleasure unremitted the faculties of mind must have Languished or have been totally Suppressed.
Agreeably to the general Tenet That mere matter is of no value apart from its Relation to mind as a Material of art & accommodation We may venture to assume that Terrestrial Sphere is made for man as its sole Intelligent Possessor. For him it is presented so the Suns Influence with a Surface of Land & Water Justly proportioned to one Another with an atmosphere to bear the Evaporation of water to the Land Inequalities of Hill & Dale on which to return the surplus of Water again to the Sea with Vegetation Animal Life & Physical Law presenting An Order Variety Analogy and Mutual Subservience fitted to supply the animal Exigencies of Man & mutual subservience fitted to supply the Animal Exogenus of man and  awake his mind to observation comprehension and the Perception of Wisdom of Ends & Mean giving a Place to his own Exertions & furnishing mean for his success with a Continual for the use & Advancement of his Faculties.
In this view of the Terrestrial System to which our observation of Nature is in a great measure limited & reduced as we conceive it to have as the Parts of which it is composed That is of Man in his destination to Emerge from a mere Germ of Intelligence wrapt up in an Animal into the Order of Superiour Natures whose Happiness consists in Wisdom & Goodness in the one Part and on the Other a Physical & moral Arrangement made for his Reception and affording the proper Exercise and Scope of his Powers for the Progress & attainment of their End. And This Statement not as a Part But the whole Creation relative to him we are to pronounce on the Character of that Design which is Apparent & Obvious to our search. On this Ground the Argument must rest. If the mixed Scene of Human Life is well adjusted to a Nature requiring Action for  his Advancement to that point at which his perfection & happiness are placed then is the Scheme Beneficently And Wisely laid. If otherwise we must remain at least in doubt on the Subject.
But here also Is God, And the Storms which in moments of Superficial thinking may incline us to Doubt Proclaim Him more loudly than does any provision that is made for Indulgence or Safety in the lower Forms of Life.

VIII. OF THE COMPARTIVE FORMS OF BEING 

The material World being such as we perceive it from afar as well near Indefinitely Various & Great: what are we to think of the Intellectual or World of minds?
Mere Corporeal Substance however Great is Still & Lifeless in itself destit of Value: but as it is Subservient to the Cause of living Natures or of Mind That is: as it is cause of Sensation and The Object of Perception as it may be organised & become the aliment of Life the Material of Art. The Object of Contemplation of Ratiocination. The medium of Expression or Communication from mind to mind And above all from God to his Observant Creatures. In any or in all of these Respects This Terrestrial  is fitted to the Lot of Man A Scene in which he may enjoy The Supply of all his Wants & the exercise of all his Powers so destined to expand themselves & make him Lord of all this Stage on which he treads.
Even here however when the World of Intelligence begins to show itself in man. The merely material Scene is apt to preoccupy our thoughts or fix them on the Spacious Dwelling instead of the Inhabitant for whose accommodation Solely they are built.
If thus the Scale of Estimation be disturbed on Earth where the human Soul is so perspicuous; no wonder we are Ravished with the magnitude and order of a firmament now discovered by the Sagacity of Men to present many such worlds as we inhabit while the Essence of a Superiour Form of Being for whose use such magnitude of Scenery is made has yet if at all but faintly or by conjecture dawned upon our Sight.
To a general observer the first Aspect of Nature is Indefinite Variety with continued analogy through Forms unlike Mere Matter whether Fixed or Fluid Hard or Soft Ductile or Friable has Gravitation throughout with affinities that coagulate in kinds into Mass. Even the atmosphere whose component Atoms repel one Another is collected by Gravity into the form of a Globe.
On this Ground we may erect some Rule for Conjecture when existence only is known but its form to be guessed. From the  Magnitude &c of Planets They were guessed to be Worlds like this Earth and from their Motions This Earth was guessed to be a Planet like them. Of this there is now no doubt but when we would go farther and guess they are inhabited we must admit the probability of great Variety as well as Analogy in the Forms of Existence in Comparison with that we experience.
It is thus that, without rejecting the Characteristick diversity of Forms in Nature we apprehend in every Planet by which our Sun is Surrounded a living World Analogous to that of which we ourselves make a Part on this terrestrial Sphere. And in every fixed Star a Sun like our own environed also with Planets revolving in Orbits such as we have learned with so much accuracy in all their Anomaly Vibrations and mutual disturbances. Nor do we find a limit to this Assumption of Worlds not to be limited merely by our defect of Sight which does not extend beyond a mere Corner of Universal  existence that has no bounds but those of Number & Space if to such there be any limits.
So great so numerous are the forms of material Existence to what effect or for what purpose?
This Question forever occurs on our observation of Nature And where it cannot be solved we are slow of belief in the Fact so manifest commonly is the end in all forms or operations of Nature.
Mere Body is perceived by mind & is the cause of Sensation to Sensitive Beings. It becomes by mere means a medium of communication or intercourse in a plurality of minds. It is matter of accommodation for Sensitive Beings. It is an Object of Search and of Study it is a Material of Art & Subject of Property and in all these or other Respects constituent of a Scene for the Occupation and Action of Mind. Although therefore in itself it is neither Good nor Evil Susceptible neither of  Happiness nor Misery yet in Relation to mind it has a place in Existence and a Call for all the Varieties of Consistence Magnitude & Figure which it is found to possess or exhibit.
Is the Universe of Body then formd for the sake of mind alone? 
To us there appears no Other End or Purpose for which it is made. If so great the Corporeal Department of Nature What are we to think of the Mental for whose Sake those departments are so formd and dispersed throughout the immensity of Space.
Upon these grounds we Shrink not from the Thought that follows nor dread to apprehend an Universe of minds proportioned to the mighty Scenery of unnumbered Worlds prepared for their reception And may be tempted even to think that Worlds of matter are but Sensations and Perceptions in the Midst of which the Living Spirit dwells.
To us indeed the World of minds is notifyed in man his conscious Reason or Intelligence & Will. His Works declare it in absence of that  Workman. The Cultivated the Choice Plantation The humble Cottage The Village Tenements the Gaudy Mansion the Gorgeous Palace & the Solemn Temple even in their Ruins evince where he has been and in their preservation pronounce him Still remaining in his Place. Yet far beyond what he performs or can attempt Nature bears the marks of Workmanship which at a Single Step leads up the uninstructed Mind of Man to God. The Essence and the Source of Being unaware how many intermediate Forms of mind may intervene beneath the Highest .
In the human Race we may observe the Germ of Intelligence Spring from the Soil of mere Animal life. In the Multitude it is little more than the use or the Practise of Art for Subsistence & accommodation. Even in the Distinguished it is little more than the Trick of a Mischievous Boy as in Alexander or Caesar to set one part of the Species against another. Yet in others in Cato  Epictetus & Aurelius we are taught how happy the Human Soul may become or in Copernicus & Newton how far its Views may reach. If in the many we are apprised of the tardy Progress of Mind In others we are forbid to despair and encouraged to look forward to future Scenes of Being for the continuance & Accomplishment of a Progress of  the outset & the Capacity are now to be seen.
If the Source of Nascent Intelligence be perennial and the Swarms continue to multiply thoug no more than in this Instance of accumulating Numbers The Universe of minds we may Conceive to keep Pace with the extent of a Material Creation prepared for its Reception. How much more must every thought be led to repose on the Magnificence of Being where the Material Scene however Great is fully provided with Actors. That we may  perceive the vanity to number in this Instance be it remembered That the Human Species of any one Generation has been reckoned at one thousand millions; if but one hundred Generations are supposed to have passed one hundred Thousand millions of Souls have already flown from Terrestrial Source And if every Planet in the Solar System has been equally productive The Sum will amount to Seven hundred thousand Millions.
And if every fixed Star supposed to be two thousand is but the Sign Post of a System Similar to ours let imagination try to accompany in thought the Thousands Millions of Millions which figures may in Vain be used to express And let the vanquished Conception acknowledge that the Material World however great is Still Subordinate  and even upon such data as the Material World itself can Supply must Shrink in Magnitude as well as in Estimation before the World of living and Conscious Existence whose Essence is Power and Destination Felicity.
In such Forms there is proper Object for Creative omnipotence And for the Sake of this there may be reason why mere matter in any or all its Forms should be Allowed to exist.
Our knowledge does not extend to the Origin of things. The Changes exhibited around us are no more than Sensations or Mixtures. Yet even in this Conjecture is not prohibited if we do not mistake it for knowledge nor entertain it in contradiction to what we do know or what we are still more likely to suffer allow ourselves to be misled by Metaphor or the transfer of Words from one Subject  another.
Thus some Philosophers of Old adventured to say that the human Soul was a Spark emitted from the eternal Source of  Intelligence and after some Periods of Progression returns into the Source again.
We cannot indeed be too proud of our Origin nor entertain too Noble an object of Hope if it Stimulate just Efforts of Ambition of which the most feeble Effects may be better than None.
When the Aspiring mind recalls the Millions of Millions and hundred thousands of Millions of Millions with whom he may now have to contend for distinction he may possibly shrink in Despair. But if he judge aright the Object of a just Ambition is not comparative but of an Absolute Value.
That in which the Value of Existence itself consists is the Capacity of Happiness and the Happy Mind is of the highest Value whatever be the number that partakes in the same Distinction.
If you perform what in the present moment what you are called upon to do with Benignity Diligence and Resolution you are happy. 
To this it may be Subjoined that the Multitude of Competitors in the same pursuit will not impede: but promote the Success.

IX . REPUTED PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION 

These Pleasures are distinguished from Sensation as resulting from Conception or Apprehension of an Agreeable Object & therefore a Characteristic Lot of mind or Intelligence.
The Objects of Conception from which These Pleasures result are Said to be Novelty Beauty & Grandeur.
Beauty is conceived for the most part in Visible Forms and in the loose application of Terms is applied to any Form of which the sight or Remembrance is agreeable whether from mere Sensation as in a Single Tint of Colour or Note in Music or from any association of Agreeable circumstance which may be merely Accidental like the Association of Joy with the place in which Glad Tidings were Received or the association of Rank with the Dress in Fashion an Association frequently Shifting and as often varying the Forms of Beauty in manners & Dress. This application of the Term is a mere abuse if Beauty is to be considered as  fixed distinction in Nature.
The only fixed Distinction I  can find in mere Corporeal Form is a Material of Art or a production of Art or in some way an accommodation to mind in its capacity of Felicity or Excellence. Beyond the Range of Being so Qualified or its appurtenances There is neither Good nor Evil Excellence or Defect. Infinite Space Replete with Diamond and Gold or Nectar and Ambrosia would be of no more Value than Sand Stone or Mud.
Mind of itself is Happy or Wretchd And a source of Happiness or Misery to Collateral Beings or Minds as Far as far I repeat there is no other form of Existence distinguishable as either Good or Evil.
What then is the distinction of Excellence in Mind? It is the discernment And the Power of Commanding what is Good Omniscience And Omnipotence.
The Possession & the Communication of Happiness or the Emanation of such qualities in some Finite Degree.
This in the Eternal is Perfection Infinite in the Created Being is Excellence And Merit and felicity.
If there is not any Distinction  of Good or Evil in any other form of Being but in that of Mind alone whence is it that we Ascribe Beauty to mere corporeal Form Whence the Beauty of the Sun & Planets of the Land and Sea of the Atmosphere, of the Plant that covers of the Ground of the Forest And Woods of their living Stock of the Organised Forms in so many Instances of Men and all the forms they produce for the Accommodation?
The Specimens referred to will I doubt not Suggest the Answer. These are the Works in part of feeble Man: but more Conspicuously of Supreme Beneficence  Power.
Beauty then in mere Corporeal Forms is the Evidence there given of Wisdom Goodness & Power.
If this be the genuine account of Beauty as exhibited in material Forms it is justly entitled a Pleasure of imagination for the Effect is admiration or Esteem Sentiments highly agreeable of ever meeting the conception or Imagination of Goodness & Wisdom however presented to the feeling Mind  And however disjoined from any other concomitant recommendation whatever.
Here then we may ask has Novelty or Grandeur the same title to be reckoned among these Pleasures.
Novelty or Greatness whether in measure or degree it is said draw crowds of Spectators & fix the Attention by what charm if not by the Pleasure with which they are beheld or contemplated.
But does not pain fix the attention perhaps still more than Pleasure and do not crowds assemble to behold sights of Horror as well as Pleasure Executions Dissasters Murders Tortures which with the Vulgar are principal allurements of Tragic Muse and all they require in return for expense of Money and Time at the Theater.
Hence indeed it is  concluded that Sights of Distress are pleasant And that a Person who looking from the  on a Ship that is perishing at Sea Enjoys himself in his own Safety. The Assumption of Pleasures in such cases and thus explanation of it is founded in the general Principle so well known to be false: That there must be pleasure wherever there are crouds of Attentive & gaping Spectators.
Things new & Strange bring People together from Curiosity to know what they are and when the passion of Curiosity is gratifyed there is pleasure which comes when Novelty no longer exists. The Figure of a man with the Head of a Toad would draw Crowds of Spectators but with an Effect we may believe the Reverse of Pleasure which even the gratification of Curiosity would not Appease.
Things that surprise come with Augmented Effect which abates with familiarity or  continued Acquaintance whether Pleasant or Painful.
Beauty unexpected is enhanced by Surprise: but repeated looses much of its Effect.
Unexpected ugliness is the more shocking for being New and there cannot be a more convincing Proof that Novelty as such is not productive of Pleasure.
This Title therefore is surely to be dismissed from the Enumeration of the Pleasures of Imagination notwithstanding the Authority of Addison and Akenside to the Contrary. These Gentlemen present no other Effect of Novelty but that of Surprise which if pleasant in some instances is equally painful in Others. And the Affectation of Novelty which their Doctrine has encouraged among the Votaries of Distinction & Eminence has opened a Road by which the meanest Capacity may hope to succeed with the world.
For what more easy than to produce what never entered before into  the mind of any Rational Creature. Those who would benefit Mankind in the Practice of any Art Whether of Information or Convenience should endeavour to improve the known Resources of human Nature of which for the most part the most Notorious are sometimes the most neglected as well as the most important: but these Are left to the dull & incapable because men of Genius must have something new and must distinguish themselves by demolishing the Fabrick of Human Wisdom rather than by Cultivating The Strength of a Burden of which every one Knows the importance.
Newton made new dis in the Heavens for he traced the Power of Gravitation. Thither Socrates & Zeno made discoveries of human Nature to itself yet the Doctrines  Kepler Copernicus and Newton are better known than those of Socrates or Zeno. The multitude are still gaping for something new without knowing that the Cultivation of Genuine Wisdom is one  the newest  things that mankind ever found.
Mr Bourke in his Treatise on the Beautiful and Sublime for the latter requires greatness still in Measure or Degree and in the Painful and horrid may be Sublime as well as the Pleasant or Agreeable And in illustration cites the Sublime of an enormous Stench. On this Principle however mere Grandeur or great is improper reckoned among the Pleasures of Imagination. If a great Beauty is the cause of Great Pleasure & Great Deformity must be the Reverse. Mere Greatness indeed like Novelty may excite curiosity & this may be gratifyed. The crouds that Assemble to behold it may be disgusted or terrifyd as much or as well as pleased And we must never forget that attention is fixed by Pain as well  Pleasure And we may account for the Crouds that repair to Sights of Distress without supposing them pleasant.
Compassion or pity tho constituent of Pain or Suffering as we express it for a Felow Creature is very different from the Suffering of Anger Fear Resentment or hatred. It is even acknowledged to be in its Nature Agreeable or to reconcile the mind to its State of Suffering  and reject any means of relief but that of the Party for whom we Suffer. This may account in Part for the Charms of Tragedy. And joined with the Charms of Fortitude Magnanimity And the Sympathies of Love and of which The Tragick Muse above all others avail herself render her Exhibitions the occasion of most real Enjoyment altho to account for the Crowded assemblage at her Theater Pain alone would be Sufficient and even the prospect of pleasure unnecessary. Women & Children croud to every application of Torture altho they know that Pain alone is  be expected. Setting aside the Beauties of Poetic Stile in his Tragedy of Oedipus, What other Charm has Sophocles employd to bind an Audience to that Tyrant of the Athenean stage.

X . COGNITUTEM WITH THE OF WISDOM 

Metaphysics set out with Existence itself & so from Universal to Generals would come at las to Individuals or particulars of which the proper discernment & Choice is the Essence of Wisdom.
In every Conjuncture the Subjects in view are particular & must be particularly known to be properly treated.
Wisdom therefore begins with particulars but mixing comprehension with Practice perceives the concourse of many under general Names And learns to talk of many under a few General Names.
This is termed Generasation and is the distinction of Science when compared with common sense.
The boast of Science is to investigate the Law that prevails in the Course of things and to trace singulars to the Law from which they are derived.
This is Satisfactory it is a Form of Advance or promotion of which Human Intelligence is Susceptible and is accordingly a deduction in which its progress is carried ard on.
If Generalisation is thus successfull & Correct it is no  doubt perfective of that Nature to which it is appropriate.
But to render happy in its Course as well as in the termination or End some incidental Errors Mistakes should be carefully avoided.
Of these I shall at present point out only one by which under the pretence of Generalisation we affect to confound matters together in the separation or disstinction of which the happiness and consequently the Wisdom of Mankind is much more concerned than it can be in any Supposed assemblage or Combination.
In every such case it is wise to distinguish  and maybe at least Dangerous to Assemble.
For example of this sort we may trace Mans Happiness & Misery to the most opposite things in Nature to one common denomination of a Condition of Sensitive or Conscious Being.
It is even sometimes material to Consider them in this point of View when there is any danger of Considering or mistaking some Collateral Circumstance as Constituent of the thing itself.
Another Instance is when Happiness is traced up to the General Term Pleasure And this made the general denominatio  of all that is Good to be Selected agreeably to the Taste and Actuall Experience of the Person to be gratifyed for whatever other Rule can be admitted in the choice of Pleasure What is food to one we say is poison to Another and so Taste seems.
After having in this term of Pleasure levelld all matters of choice we may endeavour to distinguish the act licit or Illicit dignifyd or mean but we shal never perhaps be able to repair the breach made in the Wall of Separation between them. After having admitted under the general Term of Pleasure the  Intoxication of the Drunkard with the Consciousness of Integrity Beneficence & Magnanimity of the Wise. The Scratching of the Itch or Conceited folly of the Vain with tranquillity of Health or the Serenity of the Candid or Innocent.
One of the first Inferences to be drawn is that pleasures are to be Estimated by their Measure & no their Nature or Quality.
To those who enumerate Pleasures in order to ascertain the measure of Good in the Form or condition of any Living or  Conscious Being it must be admitted as a self evident Maxim that nothing is Good but in proportion as it is matter of Enjoyment now or hereafter.
That Happiness to be perfect must be a State of the greatest Enjoyment and least Suffering of which the Being is question is Susceptible.
And supposing Existence indefinite The Future is to be admitted to consideration as well as the present. That the Future may indeed overballance the present.
Upon these grounds it seems to be admitted That in Estimating The Good or Evil  in any particular Case or matter of deliberation The measure or degree of pleasure or Pain now or hereafter alone is to be Considered.
That all Supposed distinctions of any Other distinction of Right or Wrong of Perfection or defect of high or low honourable or Vile & Mean are to be rejected as vulgar impositions or Words without meaning. That the Praise bestowed on Suffering Fortitude without any prospect of Retribution is the Praise of Folly and fitted only to mislead the Vainglorious.
That in short is the Object of Wisdom in every case to Estimate the present & the Future so as to do what upon the Whole may or  does amount to the greatest sum of pleasure and least Pain. 
If this be a difficult Task from inabily to Estimate perhaps untryed or unforeseen Pleasure or Pain: it is nevertheless the Sole Directory of which human Understanding is Susceptible And to say that it is either limited or difficult is no more than to own That in the mind of Man the attainments of Wisdom are limited and in their application difficult.
This indeed must be acknowledged on every Supposition and it is not so wonderful in cases of Prudential Concern to see Men in doubt &  indecision & irresolution as on the contrary to see them prompt & determind almost in any Case whatever having so much to look for in future prospects as well as present Condition or matter of actual discernment.
Upon the least pretensions to Wisdom human Action could scarcely proceed, And nothing Short of temerity Ignorance & presumption could bring human Council to a full & ultimate Decision.
What we see to the contrary must occasion some pause and a return to the premises from which it is supposd that there is no immediate principle of decision in  the human mind besides the measure or degree of Pleasure without regard to any Other distinction whatever.
It is no doubt true that in every Act of the human Will there is some propensity to be gratified And as Gratification is but another name for Pleasure, this in every Instance is to be pronounced the Object of Will in every instance. But are Propensities in every Instance independent of one Another. May it not be the Object of one Propensity to decline that to which another inclines. Love or hatred may incline to Action Indolence may incline to repose And the Scale may  preponderate only by the Surplus of its Weight.
In short may there not be propensities whose Object or tendency it is to regulate and controul The tendency of some Others As Modesty or Shame controuls the Intercourse of the Sexes and regulates or forbids it in time and Place Excess in all the Animal Appetites is restrained by a propensity to moderation and the preservation of Reason which excuses tend to dissorder or Suppress.
And when it was Said of a Sow wallowing in the Mire That Tastes must not be questiond This was not true of human Nature for such tastes are continually censured as degrading and Vile and without any consideration of the Comparative Strength of Propensities one is condemned as degrading The Other as becoming our Nature So that the Voluptuary cannot plead for lust to his Excesses by the Consideration of an equality of Consideration due to all the Actual propensities for it is the province of Some to controul the Others And if both are to be indulged some one is to be limited or contrould The desire of Spirituous Liquours by the Love of sobriety. /
 In this manner The Human Resolution is not without a Guide that is ever Prompt and ready to decide on the first Presentment of many an Important Question. And Justice or Injustice Honour or dishonour decide without Hesitation without entering into Calculation of Consequence or future effects.
Nor is this censured as Temerity & presumption by those who have studied most intensely what is constituent of most Enjoyment & least Suffering in human Nature. If you perform with Benignity & Diligence what in the present moment you are called upon to do, Says Antoninus: you will be Happy.
 The Foundation for These Reflections has been laid in a question of mere Arrangement or Generalisation; but in a department of Nature where the Detriment of misnomer & oversight in particular difference is greater than any extension of Views or Comprehension can repair.
The substitution of Pleasure & Pain for Good & Evil seems to clear the Way to a discernment of Particulars: but in the application endangers the oversight of differences the most important in this application of Words.
Marcus Aurelius & Epictetus were no less men of Pleasure than Sardanapalus or Heliogabalus. And Men  are taught to indulge in Pleasure without being told of What Sort. If Good is Nothing but Pleasure let every one choose for himself he who is pleased cannot be in the Wrong.
This was the Mistake which made almost the sole difference between The Philosophy of Socrates & Aristippus of Zeno & Epicurus And men undervalue the difference by supposing it to Consist in Words Alone: but Words are so Connected with their meaning that in using the one we cannot stand clear of the other. The Pleasure of Epicurus led to retirement & Ease without any Cares of Family or of State. 
 The Virtue of Aurelius led him to perform with benignity & Diligence what in the present moment he was called upon to do whether in the Cares of Family or of Empire. And yet he too was pleasd in a higher measure or degree than the Votary of a different Philosophy whose outset was a professed pursuit of Pleasure but the names of Pleasure & of Virtue lead the first steps into different Ways And opposite directions.

XI. OF THE CATEGORIES OR CONSTITUENTS OF DISCOURSE AND FABRIC OF THOUGHT

In reciting those of Aristotle I think we mistake in translating  into Substance.
Every thing Substantial in our conception has dimension and occupies place.
 is a Being or thing & in the list of Categories is properly Translatd. 
A Subject and the other Categories maybe its Quality its Quantity its Number its Relations its Action or Passion, its Time & Place.
These to me seem to compleat the whole nothing enters into any statement or discourse that may not be comprehended in one or Other of These Nine and hence the Parts of Speech are the noun Subjective or Adjective The Verb and the Date, &c.
What was the Quality &c of one Discourse may be the Subject of another.
And Quality or Power may exist without Dimension & may be itself the Thing ousia or Subject Qualifyd or impowered.  The Primary order of Being is Power absolute & unlimited Like Space & Time immeasureable unlimited unplaced undated And can have no beginning and no End. Tis Cause not Effect. Tis one. If we should conceive a Number they must be at one & can have no difference.
The Secondary Form of Being is Power derivd Specific & limited. Its Possible & real Varieties are Indefinite. Tis both effect & Cause.
If it be progressive as beginning Intelligence is. It may advance Indefinitely & tend to be at one with the Primary form of Being, but never Reach it.
The Third or last order of Being is Effect not Power or Cause.
This order of Being is the Material and Scenery of Power.
Man is a Power Intelligent combined with Animal Life &c.
The Power Intelligent may be considered in two Separate points of View.
1 That of a Power Cognitive.
2 That of a Power Selective.
 So viewed it may  divided into two capital Branches of Science.
Logic and Ethic.
Logic is the History & Conduct of the Power Cognitive.
Ethic is the History & Conduct of the Power Selective.
The first recounts the sources of Knowledge The Evidence of Truth of Generalisation and Arrangement of Physical Law comprehension & Order,
And Concludes with the Canons of Investigation and Argument or Syllogism.
It is of much Consequence in the pursuits of Science to Anticipate our End in just definitions. If I were beginning my Studies I would take above definitions of Logic & think I could not go wrong or mistake my Way.
Dr Reid should help me in one part. Lord Bacon And the Naturalists in a Second and Aristotle in the last.
This Branch of Science however important as it is but the Avenue to a Mansion in  which The Intelligent Being is to fix his Habitation and his Throne: To Command his Perfections & his Enjoyment. To correct his Defects and avoid his Sufferings.
Such is the End of the Power Selective whose the History and Conduct is to man in a Special degree the Knowledge of himself & his Way to Improvement felicity & Safety.
Armed with this Definition I think that no source of Enjoyment or Suffering should Escape my Notice. Perfection & defects should be justly Estimated. Enjoyments that mislead should be detected & Sufferings that promote to conduct to Superior Enjoyment should be Acknowledged & chearfully endured. And that Institution & manners in human Life could be justly Estimated and turned to Advantage. I should then not only know but be master of myself & Arbiter of all my Fortunes. I am now four & five alass how much time I have lost. 
 Of Language.
This even in the Dialect Tone Accent & Gesture of Rude Nation has attaind to a Power beyond what is gained in any other department of human Life. Yet being the Creature of Practice & the Slave of Custom, it fails the Philosopher when he would open the Sources of Elevation & felicity to Mankind beyond the limits of ordinary thought. If he employ words uncommon or new, he is not understood. If he employ words that are common, they are so spoilt & contaminated in Vulgar use that the effect  to common readers is far short of his Object.
The Term Pleasure with which a Philosopher of some note would express the Enjoyment of a Peaceful & liberal mind, was understood by the Vulgar to mean eating & drinking or other animal gratifications.
The Term Virtue which another would employ to express the attainments of Magnanimity in Goodness Wisdom & Fortitude is mistaken by the ordinary Reader for Some habits of Moderation or decency in common Life & external practice.
Good either in its Abstract or Applicate Sense which he would employ to designate the supreme object of Choice in  every Instace is multiplied in every Carriers Waggon & in every dealers Store house. It is to be had in every Market. And money is the great procurer of all Goods to those who want them & the great Reward of Industry to those who Supply them to Mankind.
If the Philosopher in search of a term in which to express the great Principle of Progression and incitement of a Mind that Aspires to Excellence and perfection in every Work or Attainment of the Mind And if he should employ the term Ambition in this Sense he will be understood to speak of Vanity or the desire of Fame of Promotion or Power.
 If he employ the term Honour to mark the dignifyed Sentiment of Integrity and Justice he will be understood to mean a certain Punctilious requisition of the forms in which Gentlemen are Supposed to treat one another.
If he speak of Religion or the Elevation of the human Soul to the Conception of God & the order of his Works he will be understood to Speak of Arbitrary Institutions of arbitrary Rites the observation of Days and distinguishing Forms of Speech which in the distinction of Sects are term Doctrines & indispensable Articles of Faith.
The Philosopher may possibly do better for his Reader in employing misterious &  figurative expressions that sett the Ingenuous a thinking what he means and by that means employ him to find out a just meaning for himself than he would by aiming at Simple direct and Appropriate terms which fine persons understand in any other than Vulgar & mean acceptation.
If any one pass the first Words of Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix Rapport qui derive de la Nature des Choses with any thought it probable he will not learn much from that Author.
These are figurative And mysterious terms in the  interpretation of which every Reader may please himself and profit more in the attempt than he could by any communications in more appropriate terms.
If any one attempt to Illustrate any general Notice by example or particular Reference This author would turn away with disgust. Comment peut-on dire tout sans un Mortel Ennui. 
To this Ennui however We must Submit in addressing the Publick,
whilst the mere incitements of thought in The Few are left as the prov of Genius to Superior minds.
To which the world is most indebted is a question which I shall not attempt  to decide.
In most branches of science there is little to be gained by attempting perspicuity even to the ignorant. And the profit of every reader is proportioned to the thought he employs rather than the information he receives, and if a reader is to emerge from the study of Aurelius or Epictetus a partner in the felicity which they describe, he must owe it to himself however he may be disposed to ascribe it to them.

XII. OF THE DISTINCTIONS WHICH MANKIND EXPERIENCE OR APPREHEND IN THE NATURE OF THINGS TO DIRECT THEM IN WHAT THEY PURSUE OR AVOID 

These Distinctions may be comprised in general Titles of which the first & most comprehensive are Good & Evil And in Specifying the Constituents of Each of these general Titles we may reckon under that of Good Pleasure Excellence or Dignity Rectitude or Virtue. With their opposites Pain defect or meanness Vice or Guilt. 
In general the  distinction of Good & Evil is apprehended in whatever we desire or shun And it differs in common use from the distinction of Happiness & Misery in respect to the Aspect under which the Subject is considered.
Good refers to the Thing as it is supposd to be in itself.
Happiness refers to the Enjoyment of it. A Quality is Good But the Person who enjoys it is happy.
In the careless use of Terms a man is said to be happy in being Gratifyd tho in a matter perhaps in the result destructive or Hurtful.
In Science we would Ascertain What is on the Whole most beneficial & safe or productive of  most Enjoyment & least Suffering. A man is said to Enjoy when he is conscious of any agreeable to him & to suffer on the Contrary when he incurs or is Conscious of any thing Dissagreeable to him.
In descending from these first & most general titles of Good & Evil Happiness & Misery to their Particular applications. The first is Pleasure & Pain.
Here the use of Language is loose careless & ambiguous. At one time Pleasure is but another Name for Enjoyment of what is agreeable without any regard to its Species or result.  And in this sense it cannot be denyed that the object of every Pursuit is Pleasure & Pleasure itself the Measure of Happiness.
But in Language no less common Pleasure is contradistinguished to Bussiness and the Man of Pleasure is Distinguishd from the Man of Bussiness and the Man of Virtue. While it is confessed that Bussiness is often Pleasant and Virtuous Habits always so.
To account for this seeming contradiction we may observe that Enjoyments are very justly distinguishd into transient  and permanent Hurtful & Safe Dignifyed & Mean As well as intense And Slight.
The Person who is carryd off by every immediate call of Pleasure without sufficient Regard to these distinctions is said to be a man of Pleasure for mere pleasure as such is supposed to be his only Guide.
Another attends to these distinctions & Selects the Best tho on the first appearance rather a Pain or a Privation than a Pleasure Such as the affairs which constitute  Bussiness. And the Habits of Beneficence Frugality & Temperance which Constitute Virtue. 
In the promiscuous & indistinguishing use of the Term Pleasure Epictetus was no less a Man of Pleasure than Aristippus and Marcus Aurelius than Heliogabalus. 
If however the Votaries of Pleasure are so different in their Characters It is certainly a great Error to Slur over the distinction of Enjoyments by always affecting the use of one Common Name for all leaving the  party concerned at the hazard of putting up with the first that presents itself tho the least Eligible or worst. This Error the Epicureans Committed and many of them fell a Prey to mere Animal or Brutal Enjoyments.
Men of Bussiness reject Pleasure for Profit And the Virtuous reject it in the discharge of Their Duty or in the Pursuits of Friendship Publick Spirit And Proprieties of Manner.
This it may be said is no more than preferring one Pleasure to another & rejecting the nearest Pleasure for one supposed greater in Prospect.
 Thus returning to the Play of Words And directly in the face of the distinction commonly made between Men of Bussiness and Men of Pleasure And the Fact that is so familiar. That Some to Bussiness some to pleasure sake &c.
It is sometimes however stated with an Air of Superiour penetration And Discovery that every pursuit has Pleasure for its Object And the wise man must try all before he can decide And as there are Pleasures of  Malice as well as of Benevolence. The Instinctive Preference of moral Esteem is no more than a Taste for which or against which there is no ground of Preference but a fair Comparison of the Pleasure it Brings with that it rejects. And the maxim that Tastes are not to be disputed. 
It is impossible to derive any Advantage from this Practice of Confounding under one General  denomination of Pleasure things so different as the Object of The high minded with the mean The Object of the Liberal with that of the Miser The Object of a Friend with that of an Enemy or of the Benevolent in general with that of the Malicious.
The Magnanimous no doubt would be Satisfied as well as the Mean or pusillanimous. But the Satisfaction of the one leads to great Energy and advancement of Intellectual Power The other to its Degradation  or Suppression.
Heliogabalus no doubt woud be Satisfied or pleasd no less than Marcus Aurelius: But Heliogabalus would be satisfied to domineer among Cooks Buffoons and Prostitutes to have his Stomach replete his Head intoxicated And his Members laid in Sloth & Stupor.
Marcus severe to himself but lenient and mild to others would not be satisfied without an effort to resemble the most high in Goodness & Justice And employ in his Station all the energies of Intelligence & Wisdom.
Does it contribute in any degree to the ends of Science to Slur over this difference of Character by the application to both of one Common appellation of Pursuits of Pleasure?
And the course of human Nature from the progress of Intelligent Being to its Stop or retrogradation unless we admit that independent of Weight in the Scale of Pleasure the Distinction of Right & Wrong of Perfection & Defect are allowed to cast the Pleasure.
We are told and it is probably true that an infallible Rule of human Conduct would be to Do what upon the Whole would Ensure the highest measure  Enjoyment & least Suffering.  But Nature does not enable us to carry our View so far into the results of Consequences of any present action to Supply this defect. We are competent to discern on the face of Every transaction what is Right or Wrong And in this we have the Security of Nature itself that Good upon the Whole will result from what we do from this paramount & overruling Consideration.
Good & Evil are peculiarly incident to Sentient and Intellectual Power.
In any other Order of Being if any such there  be there is no such Distinction & with it the distinction of Happiness & Misery Perfection & defect is peculiar to them also.
The merely Sentient may be preferred to the Rank of Intelligence & the merely Intelligent to the Wise & Good. We do not know of any Excellence in Kind Superiour to this vested with adequate Power & Effect. This Therefore is at once the Perfection and the happiness. The Supreme Object of Creative Will and Proceeding in the case of man tho apparently with much Deviation from the direct Road of what is Right to correction and attainment which is founded on the experience of Partial Evil as well as Good.
Such is the School of Wisdom and of Goodness also in Man is destined to be as befits Intelligent Power in himself the Source of Advancement Excellence & Felicity.
The Power is given by the Author of his Being but the Attainment is learned or Acquired not given.
The Object of moral Study & Science is to  treat of the distinction on which we are of the Effects of each And of the best and Secure on which  can proceed.
The Distinction of Profit and Loss refers chiefly to the increase or diminution of Stock or Possession. If any one were to Act solely on this Disstinction he would of Course be Sordid illiberal & unconscionable in his Disposition & in every Act of his Life. But as the means of Self Preservation come under this Title it must be admitted for part in  the deliberations of every Wise or Prudent man.
The means of Subsistence being Necessary to Life they are of the same Value as Life itself that is to say may be the occasion either of happiness or Misery. In the Proper Use they are occasions or materials of Prudence Justice and Beneficence of Art Diligence Frugality & good Conduct in many respects Constituent of Wisdom Goodness & Independence The very Essence of human Perfection & Felicity. But in the  abuse they may be the occasion & materials of eve opposite Evil Folly Injustice Intemperance Dissease Prodigality Beggary and Slavish Dependence. The Prayer of the Wise therefore is not for Profit but for the proper use of what he has.
The distinction of Right & Wrong relates to the dispositions intentions And actions of Men.
With the Conscientious it is never forgotten & directs if not Their Ends in every pursuit at least the means by which to Obtain . The Result is integrity Probity & Candour. The consciousness of Innocence Purity exemption from Blame Remorse Shame Fear and every degrading & torturing Passion.
Prosperity And Adversity are akin to profit & Loss depending for their Value on the proper use which is another name for Virtue.
Prosperity abused is Pride Vanity and Insolence the Worst of Vices In its proper use may be the Occasion of many Virtues.
The Mean Spirited Sink under  Adversity and are degraded. The Strenuous contend with it & surmount it. To Men in general it is a School of Fellow feeling of Charity of Considerate Caution in Judging of Others.
Perfection & Defect. They who act chiefly on this Disstinctions tend to Magnitude in every Pursuit In vices or where they mistake the Application of Excellence they everywhere tend to Excess Pride or Contempt of Others Extravagance in Shew Emulation Ambition of Rank and Fame &c.
When  Excellence is well Understood the Highminded Excel in Modesty Benevolence Candour As well as Magnanimity.
Upon the Whole there is nothing unalterably Good But Wisdom and Benevolence. Even Power itself may be abused and is no where absolutely Safe: but where the Goodness & wisdom are also Eternal And Infinite.


XIII. OF CAUSE AND EFFECT/ ENDS AND MEANS/ORDER COMBINATION AND/ DESIGN 

The first Element of Importance in Existence or Being is Power. Without Power Existence is Altogether Indifferent if real.
Power is known only by its Exertion and this in many cases only by its result.
Power in Exertion is termed a Cause. The Result of its Exertion is termed an Effect.
Causality or Power exerted consists in means Effect is the result of means.
To know the Existence of such Relation as Cause and Effect is to perceive the Exertion and tendency of Power together with Means accomplishing the Result.
These Elements are matter of  of pure Intelligence and may be exemplified in Every Mathematical Problem as in the first of Euclid while we describe an Equilaral Triangle on a given Base We are conscious of the Power of the means & of the intended Result or Effect. Here then our knowledge and we proceed in action and in contemplation with this known Relation of Cause & Effect in our Thoughts. Will is exerted and Muscular motion Succeeds we are conscious of the Will of Intention to move and in that intention the relation of the Cause to the Effect is anticipated before the Result Ensues. Here we doubt not the Causality altho The means are unknown. In command or communications of Will to other Persons The Will Intention and Effect and to a certain  The Causality or means are also known as when a person depending on Another for his Preservation or Welfare conforms to his Will. When in the System of Nature things come presented together & when this  Fact alone is Observed the Elements required to constitute the Relation of Cause & Effect are wanting and no Such Relation would be apprehended. When two or more persons appear or pass one after another in the Street from this Circumstance it never occurs to any one that they are Cause & Effect. Spring follows Winter and so on in the Succession of Seasons but no one conceives them as Cause & Effect. Nor can it be Supposed that mere Contiguity would Suggest to a Person previously unapprised of this Relation would have ever Suggested it. Yet it has been alledged that the Contiguity of things in the course of Nature is the only Source of this apprehension but as in the case of mere Physical Events the means or Causality is unknown they contend the Apprehension is altogether imaginary & void of Reality.
It is Strange that Men of speculation should overlook their own Modes  Existence to search for the Origins of their conceptions in Sources less known or where the presentment of Relation is much less perfect or Compleat  Being Apprised of Power and its exertion in ourselves & of Ends or Intentions and means with their Results & Effects. We are ready to apprehend the same relations existing in Cases when any Appearance may lead to such associations; but this we seldom do on account of mere Contiguity without some Other Circumstance such as we previously Apprehend to be necessary in the Relation of Cause & Effect.
Having experienced the reality of this relation in our own intentional active exertions and their results we are qualified in our Intelligence to pursue the fact to Consequences & improve upon Experience. The cause we say must be adequate to the effect they must be inseparable and keep pace in Just Proportion. Each must be known prior to their alledged connection & upon these maxim not founded in Experience but inferred from the Nature of Things Modern Science has advanced to its present attainments.
Nay we say more. That what is necessary must always have been & never can be Otherwise And that whatever  has or has had a beginning must have a previous Cause. This is not learned from Experience for many and the greatest part of Events are not preceded by Causes known to us but we admit that  must have had their Causes and that those causes must have been preceded by others and so on Indefinitely. Yet if we attempt to figure a past Eternity of such Succession Intelligence revolts And we say that there must have been a first Self Existent otherwise that nothing could have been. It would be Absurd to say that this is learned from Experience And it has the most powerful of all Evidence viz. that it cannot be doubted.
From the first Cause all is derived Even those causes whose Effects are perceived by us And the System of Nature consists of a Series of Causes and their  or in Other Words of Means and Ends.
As we are Conscious of Powers & Intentions The Effect intended is termed the End. Mere Events tho considered as Effects do not necessarily appear as Ends that is as  Effects intended except where The Cause is known or conceived to be Mind or Intelligent Power.
In the acquisition of Knowledge The first Steps are Consciousness and Perception. The following may be termed Inference including even Testimony. Where Cause & Effect are Known the Existence of either is inferred from the Other. From the Effect most Commonly we infer the Cause as from the Appearance of Smoked sooty Walls & Remnants of Chared Wood we infer the Action of Combustion or Fire. This may have been intended & destruction the End, But the mere Effect does not lead to any such Apprehension. Intending Power or Intelligence is a Power to obtain or to communicate Happiness it will not admit of Suffering but in the defect of Power to remove it. This is Evil The contrary is Good. The Specific End of Intelligence then is Good adverse to Evil. Whatever Evidence may be that a Mind is Misguided to intend Evil It is only when Good is apparent that the interposition of Mind or  Intention can be inferred from the mere Effect. Goodness of Effect however is in a considerable degree evidence of Choice or Intention in the Cause. If to this be joined a combination of means appearing to have no other connection than their joint cooperation in producing a Good Effect The Evidence of mind or Intention is as compleat As Reality in the case presented could have furnished. The Case is an actual presentment of Ends & Means the results of Intention Design Invention choice Contrivance and Power of Intelligence.
The System of Nature then consisting not merely of Cause & Effect but of Ends & means bears in every Department The Indications of Intelligence of Wisdom & Goodness in the first Cause.
The completion of this Topic must be left to the Physiologist and Natural Historian in treating of organised Matter in Plants & Animals & the Mechanical System of the Earth and the Heavens but there is no one so blind as not to see the footsteps of Intelligence in the tracts nearest to himself.
As Small Specimens of Art obtain the Praise of Ingenuity & skill amongst  men; This Mighty Frame & Order of Nature must carry to the Mind of every observation the Evidence not merely of Design & beneficent Intention but of a Power so directed And in Measure Magnificent beyond the possible reach of any such conception as ours. Such we would express is the first Cause Necessarily & Essentially Existent of Course Eternal unlimited to place Infinite or Compleat in every Perfection which being Necessary cannot have Degrees or Limits.
Even under this Power the Cause of all The Order of Nature seems to be conducted in a Succession of Events of which Nature appears to contain The Causes in itself. The Seasons keep pace with apparent movements of the Sun. Forrests Spring up from the apparent Effects of Moisture & Heat and so furth in Numberless Instances.
How are we to Conceive this Matter In the use of means or what we call secondary Causes Necessary to the Almighty.
Could not that Power  which gave Being to the means accomplish the End without any mean?
This question it is not possible to answer in the Negative And to obtain some Consistency of Thought on the Subject we must follow where it leads.
The Eternal is Intelligent and the order of being to be multiplied by his Power is of this Class. Still or lifeless matter is made for them not for itself.
It is but a provision for fancy Imagination And communication And Art.
They are made for themselves and coming into Existence with a Power to be happy must owe the Event to themselves to what they learn to what they attain & to what they become. What is chiefly wanting to them is a Scene on which to perform their part & on which to acquire and exert their Strength.
On this Scene they have their Ends And to these means are requisite.
If the Almighty were to operate merely by Acts of Will without the intervention of Secondary means The Intelligent Creature would have no resources but that of  Prayer to the Almighty for Interposition in Obtaining the end or purpose in View. If he wanted a Tree he must pray to have it full grown in his land and if Prayer is the only Support to his faculties on this Earth.
The order of Nature made up of parts as it is indefinitely Various is still in a high degree analogous in the Assortment Frame & Conduct of each well fitted accommodated & placed in a Course Salutary To each & mutually subservient or Consistent. In the Mineral & unorganised parts there is an assortment of Materials for the Support Subsistence and occupation of the Living & Active or Organised of the inferiour Class. In the living Sensitive And Intelligent The Organisation however Various is Still Systematic & Compleat Still fitted to the Element & Manner of Life. In the course things Salutary to the Individual preservative & to the Species in the Succession of Generations renovating and continual: yet in all this so exquisitely Contrived and so kindly conducted including the Condition and Fortunes of Man with that of other animals there is occasional Interruption of order defect Misfortune & distress. To him the soil is frequently Barren or infested with Weeds The Season inclement & what he is tempted to use for Food poisonous or hurtful. His accommodations are to be found like that of other Animals in the course of things but Nature Appears to do less for him than for most of the other Animals And to have her work in some degree defective for him to Supply.
But is not this the very Circumstance which fits the Scene in a peculiar degree for him? In lieu of a provision without defect She has given him a Power to devise and provide for himself. But is not this unnecessarily harsh Why not save him the Suffering of so much labour and toil? Because occupation is to him a principal Source of Enjoyment. Because his Specific happiness is in prospect in the termination of that Progress of Intelligence and Wisdom in which he is engaged And his present felicity is to be measured by the fitness of the Course he runs to his arrival at that termination.
The Scene is fitted to him in a peculiar degree by calling forth the exercise of faculties that profit by exertion and Habit by affording occasions of research And experience that extend his information and correct his Errors And the circumstances that promote this progress and contribute to these are perhaps in nothing more Eminent  than in this That the Author of Nature though himself omnipotent acts in Every Department by the Intervention of Secondary Causes. Which his Intelligent Creatures destined for Active Life may Observe And Availing themselves of these Secondary Causes are enabled to a certain degree to Controul or direct the course of Nature itself. By the use of Menstrua they can dissolve Salts & Minerals By the use of Seeds they can propagate Plants change the productions of Nature or cover the Barren Hills with Wood & remove the Wild Beast to make Way for profitable Herds & Flocks.
The Secondary Cause is an Instrument in the hand of Man by which to effect his Purpose in many Instances and the Materials strewed on the Earth or hid in its bosom are Subjects of his Art And the usefulness of the Cause And the Material is a continual Spur to research and Inquiry in his way to accessions of Science & Intelligence. Is there not here enough to Silence Atheistical Cavils that would represent the Wise & beneficent Arrangement of a Scene so well fitted to promote the Progress in which it is  the felicity of Man to advance or an Argument  the Goodness of his Maker. Is it not rather a Striking Instance of that Goodness and Wisdom which the Atheists would bring to refute.
As man is the principal object on this Terrestrial Scene Beautiful as it is in every other Department The Test of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author is to be collected from the Arrangements of Nature relating to him. In him Life originates in mere Embryo as in the Case of other Animals. But at his birth more dependent than the young of any other Species Long unable to do any thing for himself how is  then provided. His Food is prepared and ready to Spring from the Breast of his Parent And what is Still more Important an affection is inspired into the Mind of that Parent which no trouble no disgust no toil can bar in the most tender and unremitted care of his Safety & Supply of every thing necessary to his Wellbeing.
He is weak an can do nothing but every is done for him by the Society of Intelligent beings amongst whom he is born. The Germ of Intelligence in him springs up and expands by degree for a certain Period more Aided by what is done for him than by any thing done by himself.
The time however must come in which he is to be an Actor and exhibit the Carreer of Life  which  is born. How is he then treated: With every Appearance of Neglect & Severity. The Scene so benign to every Other Animal is harsh to him. Wants of every kind assail him in his attempt to supply them inconvenience difficulty & Danger are encountered at every Step. 
Has Nature that was so kind to him in his Infancy now deserted him & turned her Love into hatred? No! The Milk that was made to Spring up in the breast of the Parent to nourish an animal Frame is now changed into occasions of Thought of Invention of Ingenuity And of Action to Nourish not an Animal Frame but the Faculties and Virtues of an Intelligent Mind and to give its direction to a Progress which continues for ever after the occasions of an Animal may cease to Exist. In Manhood the mixed scenes of Human Life The Difficulties to be surmounted The Sufferings to be endured The Dangers to be braved And the advantages to be gained by Labour & Ingenuity are Necessary to the Intelligent Being as the Supplys of Subsistence and accomodation are to the Animals.
What does he gain then in this Life. Individuals & whole Races of men no doubt gain unequally. The Man indeed is every where Superiour to the Infant And this may be all that is required in the present Scene to prepare for the Future and if more be required that Future may be destined only for those who deserve it. The Idea of Merit and Demerit is coeval with Intelligence. This Form of Being is formed for itself. It is a Power to be happy if it learn and resolve to become so. Other Beings are made what they are. This Being is furnished with Power to find what he is good for in himself.
 As happiness or Misery may result from the Good or ill use of this Power so may even existence itself may Continue or cease as the Specific constituents of Life are by such Agents cultivated or Suffer to decay. The man who leads no more than the Life of an Animal may be expected to die as mere Animals And future scenes of Existence be prepard only for those who bear the faculties & Virtues of Intelligent Being in a State to pursue their further Careers.
However this be Progression is the Lot of Man And beyond any other terrestrial form of Being Characteristic of his Species Continued at times from Age to Age through many generations. And that what is thus done may be again repeated. There is a Vicissitude and fluctuation of Events corresponding to the Varieties which Nature exhibits in the Coexistent description of organized & living Forms.
Here then we pause to Estimate our Lot and avail ourselves of our Condition. What is it thus to know That to be  gaining Wisdom Benevolence and Love of Order is to be gaining Happiness That these are the Principles on which the Universe is formed and Nature is made to run its Course Still holding out to the Intelligent Those blessed Fruits of Excellence to which he may Aspire. What if it should be Error. It were happy to be so deceived And if Mind like the mere Organization of Separable parts should cease and be no more Tis sweet to Meditate of Order now And to those who cease to be no dissappointment can ensue.
But now to Speak in more humble terms yet not so ill Suited to a Son of Earth. To know of God and of His Government what simple unaffected Reason may collect from Fact and fair Appearances is to Man An Estate more precious than Fortune can bestow. In the Inheritance of Man of which Fortune cannot impair which brings him admiration confidence and Safety And the Centinel in Garrison or on Board of ship Still calls aloud that all is Well. Among the greatest Crimes that poor deluded Man Commits is the Attempt to rob a Neighbour of his fair Possession. Here the Criminal has nought to gain, nor can any Motive but Wanton Levity or the affectation of Superiority to other men. The attempt indeed to disprove the Existence of Order or the Evidence of Wisdom & Goodness in Nature is Criminal and a Cruel offence the less pardonable that it is committed without any probable Motive such as tempt the Indigent to steal or the Violent to break the Peace. And upon the Principle of Defence or compulsory Law the People are no doubt entitled to measures of Safety in the use of forcible Restraints & the application of Penal Law: But in this Instance we find an Occasion clearly to distinguish the Policy of Penal Jurisdiction from the Interpretation of Injury & Wrong.
The Law is Strict and Peremptory That the Injurious may be restrained by Force. But when & how to punish is a question not of Strict Laws but of Expedience & prudential Concern and it will probably appear in the case of Atheism or Attempt to violate  the Peace of Mind which rests on the Confidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness is an Instance on which The Penal Law must be Silent and the offence Left to the Chastisement of the general Indignation and Horror with which it is commonly received.
Religion Source of powerful Energies and best assurance of Mans high Rank in Nature is like the Happiness to which it leads Subject  Mistake and great abuse.
The Priesthoods Usurpation The degrading Fears of mean Superstition The Antipathy of different Sects the Zealots Fury and the Court which Baseness would pay to Heaven by vengeance on its Reputed Ennemies of God who cannot have an Ennemy in Being are Evils to be dreaded from its abuse And render human Judicature the least unfit for Tryal of Atheism or impiety. In Questions on this Subject no discretion can be safely left to Judge or jury and the definition of the overt Acts to which Conviction may be Attacked is Singularly difficult. Experience Shows that Courts established for such Tryal degenerate into mere Inquisition adopting Forms that prove  a Snare to Innocence and are only then Supposed Successful when they multiply Victims to the fury of Zealots and the Usurping Arrogance and Interest of Priests. Such are the Evils which would attend the Prosecution of Atheism itself as a Crime and object of Penal Law.
The most real Evils would be incurred to meet a Shadow which can scarcely have a Being or Effect beyond the folly whence it flows. Let the owner take its fruits. In society it canot prevail: for its Effect would be to overthrow Society and Order. What order can Exist with Man if in the Universe itself there is no Order and Natures Laws are but desultory Facts without Design or Wisdom to ensure their Permanence.
Corolary.
From the Reflections and Argument terminated as above it may appear to the Satisfaction of fair Raison: That Objections brought to invalidate the Evidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness operating the Frame of Nature are in Reality the most Convincing Proofs of that Truth.
The admirable mechanism of the Earth & Heavens with the Organisation of living Forms are acknowledged but the conclusion that mind alone can be the Cause we are told is too hasty. It is possible  there may be in Existence a principle of order different from Mind or Intelligence fully adequate to this Effect And the Ends being obtained not by Will but by the Intervention of Physical means is a presumption of the reality of such.
If the Order where most acknowledged and admired proceeded from mind and a beneficent choice of the end. It would have failed precisely in the Departments most interesting to Mind And in the distribution of Enjoyments and Suffering the only matter in  Goodness or Wisdom Can be Brought to the Test.
Here might follow a long & piteous account of the Sufferings to which animals are exposed. The Neglect of Man in articles in which other animals are carefully provided for. Naked Feeble & unarmd too weak for Battle with many of his rivals on Earth too  for Flight. The Soil tho fertile to the Cow & the Stag is barren to him overrun by poisonous or unprofitable Weeds. He is to himself the worst Enemy by his Errors dissorders and folly bringing upon himself all the Evils to which he is exposed in mind or body &c. &c. Yet we are told the World is made for him & bears evidence of the Wisdom & Goodness of his Maker.
 The lot of man it is confessed is deficient in things in which Other animals are more fully are fully provided by Nature. But his frame & destination are also different. Tho an animal he is endowed with a Germ of Intelligence destined to know himself & his Place in Nature Qualified to Observe to remember to comprehend to Obtain Dominions to exercise it in every Department of Mechanism Vegetation and Animal Life to distinguish what is Excellent in Existence to Aim at it and in his Sphere to Obtain to be himself that Good thing which he chuses to possess to be in short the Artificer of his own Condition & Character by the Information he Obtains be the Exercise of his faculties by the Experience and Correction of his errors & ultimate choice of What is Good. Thither his Intelligent Being tends and the Fin is not better fitted to the Water or the Wing to the Air, than Mans Principle of Intelligence to the Diversifyed & Mixed Nature of the Scene in what he is placed. The exercise so necessary to the Advancement of his Faculties  continully furnished by the wants he is left to supply  for himself the Inconveniences he is left to remove the difficulties he has to overcome the Dangers to Brave And the Advantages tho within his reach are nevertheless to be won by diligence & Strenuous Effort.
From these considerations it appears that the Appointment of a Scene for Mans Active and progressive Nature mixed or presenting defects to be supplied Good to be Obtained and Ills to be avoided is no less an Evidence of Goodness in the Design and Order of Nature than the Organisation exhibited in Living Natures And the Accomodations provided for each. And we have in this mixed Scene of Nature an Evidence of Goodness & Intelligent Power not an Objection to invalidate the Proof on which it is founded.
And in this The Final Cause or Object of Nature in this Terrestrial Scene being the Progress and Advancement of Human Intelligence. The Work would remain incompleat unless man to whom the occasions of Action are thus provided were not likewise supplied with Power or means so to influence or direct the Course of Nature as the Exigencies of his Case may to him seem to require.
 On the Question relating to  operation of Intellectual Power in Nature it is alledged that Events are seen to result from Physical Causes that do not admit the immediate interposition of mere Will or Design. If the Earth is Covered with Plants or crouded with animals or Men They are propagated from Seeds nourished by Warmth & Moisture Subsisted by food and preserved by Successive Generation. If the Principle of Existence be Intelligent & Conscious of Omnipotence why not Act in every Instance by his Will without the intervention of means which to him cannot be necessary? It is true Omnipotence excludes the necessity of Means in Obtaining its End. But the accommodation of Created Intelligences for whose sake all Creation is effected requires that Events in which they are to interpose should proceed from Means or as they are termed Secondary Causes which the Intelligent may Observe and Employ to its own purpose.
Hence the Incitement to the Study of Science and hence all the foundations of Art. Minerals have their Solvents. Events are varyd Indefinitely by Mixture of Fluids. Prometheus is said to have Stolen the Fire from Heaven And Ceres to have furnished the husbandman with his Seed and all the Fables of old are but forms in which to express the Design & Wisdom of Eternal Power with the Means of that Dominion he is destined to excercise for his own accommodation and the Advancement of his Intelligent Being. And here again the Evasion offered to Elude our Conclusion of Design in Nature serves strongly to fix and confirm it.
Lawyers admit that a Case is strong when it is Supported even by the Evidence which the antagonist adduces against. Such is the Case of Design & Wisdom manifest in the order of Nature And they who Contend that this order may have a Cause different from Mind must confess That the Cause may be Mind or Intelligence And of these equal supposed Possibilities The most probable is to be admitted without any doubt derived from a Mere possibility of the matter being otherwise.
Why should he hesitate to Believe That the Eternal Being is Supreme in that order of Being with the Reality of which alone we are acquainted.


XIV. OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION WITH ITS ACTUAL AND STILL IMPENDING CONSEQUENCES IN EUROPE 

There perhaps never was a monarchy more favourably Situated than France in Respect to Limits Climate & Neighbourhood. Sufficient in itself yet open to every Supply its Neighbours could give in Merchandise Science or Literature.
Whatever be the Causes which distinguish one Race of Men from another, The French exhibited their effects in a very high degree. The Thoughtless were lively and Gay. The Thoughtful were inventive and even profound with a prevalent propensity to Vanity or Ambition over all.
Whoever led the Fashion whether The Court or The City and in whatever it consisted whether Dress manner or opinion Fashion still carried the Multitude along as Wind carries the Dust in Summer and the leaves in Autumn.
 Birth was the great distinction sanctioned by Legal Priviledge as well as Custom & Manners. Birth required no Aids of Character or personal Accomplishments to raise the possessor above the mass of the People however Accomplished.
The King tho accounted the Fountain of Honour and tho in the Practice of conferring Letters of Nobless yet with little Effect. How Absurd says the Presiden Haynault to pretend by Letters to make the ofspring of Parents unknown to come of Parents known as far back as any record or memory of Ages remain: for such is the Definition of Nobless Titles Renown or Rank of Service even the Crown itself might give Lustre but not Nobless. And there were Families in France who affected Superiority to the Royal Family itself in this Respect.
This Distinction gave its Cast to the manners of the  People & its Genius to the Government itself. The King himself could not advance or receive the Low-Born without giving Offence which was too much for him to encounter. What Horror it was said to see such Persons brought forward.
Men of doubtful Birth were Sometimes Necessary for their Talents: but tho in the highest Offices of State & vested with all the Patronage of the Crown yet thought themselves honoured by Notice from the Slightest Coxcomb of a Noble man & honourd even by Acceptance of their Services And sometimes had recourse to fabricated Briefs of Noblesse from Abroad where their Names had never been heard of.
The French Nobless though not equally Jealous of Forreigns in the Forreign Troops of their Service would not  allow any low born French man to hold any Rank in the National Troops of France to hold any rank above that of a Corporal or Sergeant And in this they placed their Security That the French Army would be always of their Side. 
There were Circumstances that reconciled the Government to this State of Things. Nobless of Fortune took Regiment & held them at a great Expence from a Species of Vanity. They kept a Table for the Officers who accordingly Served upon very small Pay. The Privates were Scarcely above Beggary And the National Troops of France were kept  a Smaller Expence than those of any other Nation in Europe. A French Soldier was thought to be disgraced by the touch of money or a money Reward for any Service whatever.
This precaution of the Noblesse to exclude the Low Born from any Rank or Command in the Army as a Security for themselves had as is not uncommon An Effect contrary to what was intended.
The distinction itself had a tendency to corrupt one order by making them secure of their Eminence on the foot of Birth alone & to animate the Other with Ambition to compensate their dissadvantage.
The Noblesse had sensibly declined and an admiration of Wit & Literature gave the People in general an open to consideration. The Philosophy in fashion was Atheism & Anarchy.  Nature there were not any Ends or Means but things were so because they could not be otherwise. In Society the Sovereignty was vested in the whole not in a Part: And This misterious Sovereign who never c Act precluded the Right of every pretender to Power.
The Court as usual intent upon Pleasure only was become Weak & Profligate beyond any other part of the Community. A great Revenue being let to Farmers who Oppressed the People & fed the Court with money enabled them to Anticipate the Revenue  and expend the Income of Years in Advance. Imbecillities & difficulties were felt in every Department. The King was advised to throw himself upon the Generosity of His People to call the Assembly of the States or a representation of all the different orders Nobles Clergy And People or Commons. The form of their meeting was in great measure at the Discretion of the King. It was not fixed whether three Estates were to meet in one Assembly or in three separate Assembly but the Representatives of the Commons in number equalled the other two And they of Course insisted on the formation of a Single Assembly. Being by far the Strongest both within Doors and without they prevailed & proceeded to execute a Tyranny more bloody & terrible than any that is known in the history of Mankind. The King was thought to be Secure at the head of his Army but alass the Army consisted of Noblesse Officers. The Rank &  File were low born who were now taught to consider their exclusion from preferment as Injurious & who were told by the National Assembly that their pay would be augmented & their Wrongs redressed.
They left or drove awa their Noblesse officers & every where joined the Popular Party.
There was none more bussy in the mobs at Paris than those who bore the Uniform of the Kings Guard.
It used to be a Standing reproach to the English in France that they cut off the Head of their King. This Example was become matter of Emulation and carried into Effect.
All Europe Stood aghast at this enormous Scene & not knowing how fruitless or dangerous it is to meddle with a People that is roused to any great act of Revolution in the prospect of some glorious change in favour of the People. In such Paroxisms they operate with irresistible Effect wherever they move in a Body: but left to themselves they generally break into Divisions & waste their Strength against one Another. This was too profound a Secret for German Heads. The King of Prussia protested against the Dissorders that prevailed in France passed the Rhine & Advanced into Champagne to repress them. His Invasion united the Jarring Spirits of Revolutionary France. His Stop & his subsequent Retreat excited Contempt & taught those whom he attempted to frighten to despise such Ennemies as he was. They saw how expedient it was for them to have Wars abroad. They formed Armies they took officers from the Ranks & from the lowest Station wherever genius or Ability could be found. Their neighbours taking men as they happend to be in the Way were unfit to compete with this Sudden Spring up of Genius without restraint from former Institutions and the meanest Soldier in the Ranks felt the Revolution & relyd on preferment if he could but distinguish himself.
Dumurier led them to  Victory in two or three Instances And when fortune turned against him on the Side of the Revolution he proposed to dispose of his Army & join the Austrians in Restoring the King: but even he did not understand what had happened or that the Army were Sensible of what they had gained by having preferment laid open to all Ranks and Spurned the Idea of a King And his Noblesse pretending to monopolize all preferments and Honours. The people were now Sovereign & the Army belonged to the People. When Dumurier met a Column on the March and Asked by whose Orders they Moved. He was Answered by the Question What are you & was fain to leap a Ditch to get out of Their Way & was followed by a Volley of Shot which he escaped to meditate on the effects of a Revolution which he hoped to Conduct. 
 It now became manifest that the National Troops of France were Sensible of their Share in the projected Revolution And had lost that Zeal for Royalty with which they were Supposed to be Animated more than any other Troops in Europe.
Of their concern  the Revolution they had been early admonished by a Resolution passed  the National Assembly that the Pay of the National Troops should be Augmented And the Uniform of the Kings Guard was seen to mix in the riotous mobs in the Streets of Paris, that Huzzad for Liberty & the Subversion of Monarchy. It was given out that the Continuance of these dissorders & the Sitting of the popular Assembly were owing to the forbearance of the King who abhorred the Shedding of Blood and declined the Offer that  made of dissolving the Assembly by Force.
It was however well known at Court that this was no longer matter of choice. The Noblesse officers driven from Quarters by Some of  the Regiments or deserted there by Others were repairing to Court in numbers to declare their Willingness & inability to Serve His Majesty any longer. In this the Revolution consisted or by this alone it was effected. If the Army had adhered to the King the popular Assembly would have been dismissed And a Military Government had been Established in the House of Bourbon Innocent indeed Compared to that which has since taken place in the House of Buonaparte.
Neighbouring Nations reproved the proceedings of France And the Rulers of France knew it was their interest to be at War with all the World.
They sent Armies in every direction made Conquests & extended their frontier on every Side without regard to former possession or Right. Savoy Lombardy the Banks of the Rhine & the Low Countries were occupyed as Appendages of France. The Long Boasted Ballance of Power  was sett at Nought. 
The French Arms were becomeing irresistible: For when troops in the Ordinary State of men quiescent & no way Affected  what was passing could resist a Multitude roused by expectation of a rising Sun of Glory to their Country & unlimited Elevation to preferments & honours excited in the breast of every Individual & conducted by Leaders who had gained their Stations by the sole proof or Appearance of Genius & Superior Ability.
Their first successes qualified & prepared them for more. Even defeats did not damp or disspirit them. They returned to the Charge Again & Again untill Fortune turned in their favours And then by one effectual Effort they repaired or recovered what the Misfortunes of a Campaign or even of preceding Years seemed to have lost. A General discomfited in Egypt returned to take the whole conduct of  France upon himself and that State of Things Sollicited Peace with his Neighbours.
But the Powers to whom he applied had not yet taken into Consideration the Effects of a National Spirit roused to uncommon exertion by revolutionary prospects of Elevation & Glory. They had not yet considerd that a Moment of dejection if it take place in Such a Party is the fittest moment possible for Negotiation with an Ennemy of this Description. They rejected the Overtures of Negotiation with expressions of Contempt for the Party from whom they came And forced that Party already too well known for Superiour Ability to make trial of that Force with which he was entrusted & at a Single Blow to recover what whole unsuccessful Campaigns had Lost & to resume at once that formidable Aspect by which Europe had been so  much allarmed.
This Allarm was serious & well founded. The Great Nations of Europe Great Britain Austria & Russia con together And entered into League to oppose it. Each saw its own Safety at Stake and the Power of France ready to effect their Ruin. With this they could not be too deeply impressed. They were mistaken as to the means of counteracting it.
France is become dangerous. This was true: But the Inference that followed let us make War upon her was inconsiderate and false. Or The way to make successful War on Such a Power an Irish Blunderer Observed is to be at peace with her.
The Times were not yet passed in which the French Nation if left to themselves might not have broke to pieces gone to War among themselves & saved their Neighbours the trouble of reducing their too formidable greatness: But the sound of Allarm from Abroad was in reality an admonition to Suspend this dissensions and Waste their dangerous powers on the Frontier.
The Assembling of Armies from Austria & Russia at one time & that of Russia and Prussia at another time operated merely as so many Calls on the Military Leader of France so Superiour to every one that was likely to be opposed to him to come and possess himself of Germany & Poland quite to the Frontiers of Russia. Of these another Battle might possibly have given him possession & left no one to dispute his Empire from the Attlantick to the American Straits to the North of Kamchatka. 
It may be Asked then what are Nations to do in the neighbourhood of such a Power? Certainly not to provoke a War because his Force preponderates & ensures  him Success. If attacked the weak must defend himself for the most unequal chances of War may be preferable to Concessions, that amount to Subjugation or lead to that extreme at the discretion of the person to whom they are made.
Confederacy is no doubt the first resource of numbers against an overbearing Power which no one can Singly resist; and if they are so stupid or untractable as to act more from former Jealousies than from any Sense of common Interest; The case is desperate & they must Singly or Successively perish.
At one time the Prussians with a Secret Joy Saw the Austrians reduced & the Austrians in their turn enjoyed the down fall of Prussia And the Conqueror Whatever advantage he took of either Still left Silesia the Subject of their jealousies still as he found it. 
 And what could be expected from Parties who having Rights or Properties of their own to mantain accepted as a Gift from the Robber one the unoffending Republick and Territory of Venice. The Other a like gift of Hanover and then provoked a War with the Donor because he presumed to intrigue for confederacy with some of the Powers in their Neighbourhood.
Great Britain from her insular Situation & Naval defences may long sett the Powers of the Continent at defiance. And untill it please God to Inspire some mind with faculties fit to Contend for the Independence of Continental Nations it were vain to rely on any Confederacy to be formed of Such Parties. They must be sensible that if the Ruler of France were as powerful at Sea as he is by Land, No state or Province  could be safe from California to Japan And yet under Awe of this power they now cooperate with him in the Reduction of this Island Although they must know that whatever indulgence they now enjoy is owing merely to the limit which this Island yet setts to his Empire And that if it ever should be compleat their Properties & Persons will be at his discretion.Altho they obey him in shutting their Ports against the English he knows their dissaffection & heart and every where Stations troops of his own to ensure the effect.
The Partizans of Buonaparte say he has given peace to the continent of Europe. What Peace Subjugation! and Arraign the British Councils for refusing Peace. The meaning is obvious and it is Evident that any Peace tending to reduce the defences of Britain either at Sea or by Land would be ruinous not only  to her but to every Nation wh the Mandates of this European Sovereign could reach. His Vessels might be met with on the Ocean fetching his Contributions at once from Mexico & Japan.
What a Triumph for France may not some Vainglorious Frenchman say?
Such a Triumph as the Reduction and Spoil of distant Provinces were to Italy; The means of pampering corrupting & Alluring its rulers to every enormity of profligacy Cruelty & Vice most oppressive tremendous & ruinous to those who  nearest at hand & most immediately Subject to its hatred or Caprice. They were not the Heads of Daerans or Armenians which Nero wished to have sett upon neck to be struck off at a Blow: but those of the Romans inhabiting the Seven hills of Rome. And Tiberius whose Jealousy did not extend to the Provinces never ceased with his Informers and  Spies never ceased to Avenge the miseries of his own Mind on the most respectable Citizens of Rome & when remote from them on the very Instruments of his Vile & execrable Pleasures at Caprae. 
Is there then on the Continent of Europe or most Especially in France a Person so stupid as to wish for more Power in the Hands that already have so much.

XV. OF THE SEPARATION OF DEPARTMENTS PROFESSIONS AND TASKS RESULTING FROM THE PROGRESS OF ARTS IN SOCIETY 

Every man in the outset of Arts must do all for himself find at once his Subsistence his Shelter & his Rayment.
How much his State has been improved by the recourse of different Men to different employments and the Mutual Exchange or Commerce of their several productions need not be stated.
Every accommodation will be more Compleat & every Supply more plentyful as this Expedient advances its height: but like every thing else in human Life it has its limits.
A Pin we are told furnishes a separate Task to no less than twenty different Workmen & the implement is better & more cheaply furnished than it could be by fewer Workmen. Yet there are limits to this separation of Labour. The pointing  of a Pin may be compleated by one Person to divide that Task and pass it from one to another for the completion of it would be loss of time & risk of defect in the work by the attempt to join effects not justly fitted to one another.
Similar limits might be pointed  in the performance of every Mechanical Task. And even if we should admit that the improvement of Workmanship might be advanced indefinitely by this means: yet there are other considerations to make us pause in the pursuit of it. The comparative importance of the improvement gained gradually diminishes And ceases at last to be of sufficient value to compensate the trouble of farther Arrangement. Parts ceased to be equally well performd by separate hands as they would by the same hand. In Masonry for instance suppose the Stone to be placed by one Person and the Mortar placed by another The work probably would be inferiour to that which one tradesman  could produce: besides that they would probably interfere & interrupt one Another.
There is still a farther consideration of Consequence in this bussiness.
This Separation of Tasks is intended for the better Performance of each & for the Benefit of Mankind in general. If it should ever mar the performance or become prejudicial to human Nature; in either Case no doubt it ought to be stopped.
If in Painting for Instance The different Shades Lights & Colours were to  laid by different hands the work it is probable might Suffer And the Artists Fancy impaired by his being restrained from the Scope of his Conception which subsists not in parts but in the Unity of a Whole.
The Work of man may be important: but the Artist himself is still more so. It is true no doubt that altho Society is intended for the Good of its Members; yet the individual on Occasion must be sacrificed to the Whole.
Amidst the Departments of Bussiness and Profession there is great inequality of Effect in the Cultivation of Intellectual Faculty & Moral Habits and Some are of so mean a tendency in these Respects as to be matter of general Regret yet to be necessary for the general Accommodation And it may be difficult to fix the extent to which this may be endured & where it must be absolutely stopped. It may with confidence be said that Slavery is a point to which it should never Extend And yet there are voluntary Stations and occupations in human Society more debasing than Slavery necessarily or even Generally is. All we can say is that the less that there is of this Sort the better, And that Subordination however valuable is too dearly bought by the debasement of any order or Class of the  People.
There is a Principle of Subordination in the difference of Natural Talents in the distribution of Property Power & Dependence. 
The Poor must labour in order to subsist. The Rich may hire the Labour of Others but still find occasion on which to labour for themselves.
There is nothing debasing in either Condition but the Vices to which both are Obnoxious Envy & Rapacity on the part of The Poor Arrogance & Licentiousness on the part of the Rich. 
These Vices are found in the extremes & in all the intermediate orders of a People. The worst possible condition in which man can be conceived is that in which all Labour were precluded or in which all Power is vested in one and all Dependence imposed upon another. The nearest approach to this Condition is that of Master & Slave  however constituted whether as a Civil relation of Proprietor & Property or Sovereign & Subject.
Of These The Political Servitude is debasing in the greatest de & to the greatest Extent. The Courtiers of Tiberius or Nero even the Senators of Neros time were debased to a degree far beyond that of the Slave to an Ordinary Master.
Such abuses however it may be said are not necessary and unavoidable in the Subdivision of Labour or the Subordination of Ranks. Here indeed it is necessary that the human faculties should be unequally cultivated in proportion as the task assigned to each tends to exercise And improve them. In a Person whose task is a mere movement of the hand or the Foot as is The Case in the distribution of Labour which is made in some branches of manufacture may be supposed to remain in some measure of Torpor while that of a Master who directs the Whole or that of an Artist who has many things to combine  many Incidents to guard against and a choice to be made amidst a Variety of Expedients which different occasions require is still in the very state which Nature has devised for her Intelligent order of Being tending at once to exercise and Cultivate their faculties.
The Subdivision of Tasks tends in some Instances to mar the effects of this Destination & to improve them in Others. The mind of a Tradesman in many Instances is less practised in thought than that of a Savage While in more liberal Stations of Life the mind Profits by exemption from Inferiour Cares & Anxieties & the effect of more extensive Views And the more Arduous combinations of Thought.
Men are carryed along in the Progress of Establishments and of Arts as Vessels afloat in the Water are carryed along by the Torrents to which it is Subject. And it is uncertain how far information respecting the direction of their  movements may enable them in any degree to change that direction or modify the result.
Men certainly Act from opinion as well as Instinct or Habit and Correct opinion is desireable in itself whatever be the measure of its Influence in the general Affairs of Men.
It has been Observed that by the Separation of Tasks & Professions The work is improved and Obtained at a Smaller Cost. The Artist also is sometimes improved in his designation of Intelligence & Manhood: But if neither is always the Case; it is no doubt of Moment to distinguish the Instances in which the Separation of Arts & Profession is unfavourable in the Result whether in respect to the Character of the Artist or the Value of his Work.
In the Mass of the People it is not required of a Tradesman that he be knowing in any Branch but his own nor does any collateral Skill enable him the better to execute his peculiar Work  except where different works proceed upon some Common Principle of Science.
For those who are termed Gentlemen or persons dissengaged from peculiar pursuits or applications there is no peculiarity of Skill required. Of them it is requird that they be Happy That is to say Wise Benevolent Courageous and Temperate and the less they possess any habit to the exclusion of Others equally valuable so much the Better.
In Actual Profession or Publick Station the Case is different. Scholars & Men of Science And publick Functionaries of any denomination have their Tasks Assigned them and must devote themselves in a peculiar manner to some Particular Branch. It is so in mere Science as well as in the learned Professions of Medicine or Law.
To Obtain what may be Obtaind in any Branch of Science it is necessary that it be made the Object of peculiar Study: but yet to know one Branch & nothing more is to be a Tradesman not a  Scholar. The Sciences are more  less connected and give mutual lights to one Another. To possess them all is to know the Order of Nature And the Person whose knowledge is limited to a particular Branch must know even that the less Perfectly that he is ignorant of its place & connection in the general Order of Nature. To be a Man of Science on the best model thus it does not exclude all separate & peculiar Pursuits but requires a Liberal extensive view to the Nature & importance of Collateral Studies. It is thus the Scholar may Avoid that narrow and illiberal Contempt which Professional Men sometimes entertain for every Branch of Study but their own. The Mechanic or the Chymist despises the Moralist & is equally treated in his Turn. The mere Lawyer & the mere Doctor of Medicine are but ungracious members of Society. And but lame practitioners even in what they profess from a defect  in those habits which are required in the concourse of men.
In mere Manual operations The Man is sometimes sacrificed to his Trade an separate parts are assigned to different Workmen who have to perform a Simple movement of the hand or the foot to save necessity of Thought or of time in changing Tools or of thought in passing from one Step to Another. It is Evident however That the Principle of Subdivision which is so Successful in Manufacture cannot be applied with the Same advantage in those operations where Man himself with all his Faculties is required in every Step as well as in the result or Combination of the Whole.
In the Bussiness of State and of War there are no doubt parts that Approach to mere Mechanism And in these the Statesman & the Warriour like the Master in a Counting House may have his Tools or his  workmen to whom the principle of Subdivision Applys & in respect to which The Profession of a Statesman and Warriour are materially different.
The Statesman must have his Clerks & Separate Boards of Commission in Matters of Laws & Revenue The Warriour must have his Tacticians & Leaders of Division from the Smallest of a Platoon to the greatest of a Column Line or Wing of an Army. He too must have his Clerks, his Commissaries & his Providers of every requisite to an Army. But the greatest Error that can be committed in the affairs of Men is to Suppose that the Genius or Art of a Statesman or Warriour terminates in the possession or Combination of such Mechanical parts together.
The Statesman or Warriour must be so far Master of those mechanical parts as to  know when they are well or ill performed by those to whom they are entrusted: but his own part is that of a Man fit to lead among Men on whom men will rely for Preservation or Success in all their Undertakings. Penetration & Strength of Mind Wisdom & Courage Goodness or Benevolence that Encourage a Friend Rapidity & Force that Strike Terror into an Ennemy are at once his Tools & his Arts. The Statesman must be Skillful to know how every Measure will affect every order of the People.
How the most dependent may be made to feel Secure in his right how the most powerful may be made to feel the restraints of Justice humanity & Good Order. In these respects the Warriour too is a Statesman And must practise all the Art & Wisdom of Peace in his own Line or  encampment that he may be the more terrible in the View of his Ennemy. Of this Art Socrates expressed himself like a Master no less than in Any Other department of Moral or Civil Wisdom. Of Military Tactics he said nothing Can be done without order or form: but a Warriour must be more than a Tactician He must be Cautious & Rash a Thief & a Thiefcatcher Cruel & humane Penurious & Prodigal Cautious & Rash.
His Tools or Weapons Are Men & he must know them, how to excite & how to restrain them what can be expected from them & what not & when required how they can be roused to do all that men will or Can Do.
The Departments of State Political Civil & Military in well Regulated Establishments are on account of the Mechanical details in which they differ generally Separated But in the Heads under whom those details are conducted  proceed on the Same grounds of Knowledge & of Power.
The knowledge of Men & the Power it gives is the Essence of Ability in either Department And that Strength of mind which gives an Ascendant over Men is equally required in both.
The Mechanical details in which those departments differ tho necessary are comparatively of small importance: because they may be learned & practised by persons of Vulgar capacity And ought never to be mistaken for the test or constituent of Ability in the Heads of either Department. Men of either Department are apt to be jelous of the other One or the Other may have the Ascendant under different Establishments. And whether the Statesman is to choose the Warriour or The Warriour to choose the Statesman It is evident that the Elector ought to be acquainted in either Case with the  merit on which his choice is to proceed. The Statesman ought to be acquainted with the Professional peculiarities of a Soldier that he may not Mistake them for the whole grounds of his choice or Sufficient to Justify if he commit the publick Safety to  incompetent. A Statesman or Minister who errd in this particular has been known to say. The military is not my Department. I had recourse to the Profession for a Person long Practised & Established in it he is responsible & not I for the Consequences. The mere Military Despot on the contrary may make as ill a choice of those he employs in the Civil or Political Depart: And it is Evident that in any well Established Community The Qualities of Either department should be so well combined that neither could plead a ruinous Ignorance. 
A Person ignorant of War  and its Forms is as unfit to be  Statesman as a Person unacquainted with Variable Winds & Storms is to be a mariner.
And to say that a Statesman know nothing of War or a Warriour knows nothing of The State is to detract equally from the Merit or Ability.
In the Roman Commonwealth, in many respects the Model of Felicity to Nations, The Departments of State & of War were not only Strictly Allied & known to each other but for the most  actually filled & Conducted by the same Person. All the Distinction they made between the first Magistrate & the Commander in Chief of their Armies was that he was Magistrate within the Walls of Rome & the other outside of those Walls. He acted from his Office in either & in both these Capacities. The mere forms of either were such as the meanest Could learn and never intercepted the View of his Country or his Own in the choice of Persons to whom they might entrust their Affairs. Whether in the Roman Magistrates Gown or the Sagum of the Legionary Soldier.
This Union of Departments was early provided for in the very first Elements of the Roman Constitution. It was provided that every Citizen should State himself as part of his Countrys Strength & to qualify him for any Civil or Political advance by having actually Served a Certain Term in the Wars of his Country. 
Altho The Talent for Affairs of State in general and War in particular is the same or founded in the Same knowledge of Men and Ascendant of the mind yet the exercises & the habits of Body they require Are different. Warriours have been distinguished in Youth or early Life. Statesmen profit more by experience And the deliberation of Maturity and Age.
As Military Tactics and manual Exercise are within the competence of Children they ought not to be neglected amidst the Rudiments of Education  in early Life. So that what every one knows or possesses could not be mistaken for the Criterion of great Ability or fitness for the highest & most important functions of human Life As the Habits of a Clerk in Office or a drill Serjeant on the Parade are made to pass for the qualifications of Statesmen or leaders & commanders of Men in the Field.
Nothing is supposed more important than Education. And the world & Abounds with Institutions or Establishments for that purpose yet Government is Seldom attentive to what is taught in those Institutions And even in these Later ages of great Experience few things except reading writing & Arithmetic that can be of use in after Life are taught either at School or College. The Gramar of Dead Languages The Mythology which served as the foundation of Antient Poetry Even the prosody or fabric of Verse or Metre are crammed down the Throats of high & Low of Futur Tradesmen Merchants Senators And Soldiers Rank & File Citizens And Drovers and little with any one except the habit of being obliged in Childhood to regard what Others inculcate And which indeed however little it may seem is indeed very great And actually the most important attainment of Such Schools as we have provided for the Education of the Coming Age.
The occasions & the manners of Human Society are transient And Successive. The Institutions of one Age to accommodate Ages that follow at any considerable interval are to be changed or modifyed And no Age can with advantage Legislate unalterably for the Ages that follow. 
On this Account a late writer of Eminence on the Wealth and Other Concerns of Nations places Education on the same foot with Trade and Other concerns most Safely entrusted to the Par concerned & reprobates fixed Institutions  or Intervention of Government. From this general Rule however he excepts every Case in which Defence or publick Safety is at Stake And of Course should except Education so far as the publick Safety is concerned. A Committee of Parliament or Other publick authority might no doubt with great Advantage be interposed to report from Age to Age what Regulations might be requird in Publick Schools to prepare the rising Generation for that part which necessity might impose on every Individual for the safety of his Country. He who cannot defend himself is not a Man & he who cannot take part in the defence of his Country is not a Citizen nor worthy of the Protection which the Laws of  Country bestow. Other cares may be delegated & become matter of Separate Profession  to a part of the People: but to set Valour apart as the Characteristic of a few were to change Virtue & happiness itself as a Matter of Profession & Study peculiar to a devision of the Community. For furnish Shoes or erect Palaces may be the Object of Separate Professions but to be man is the equal concern of all And the want of Courage degrades him no less than the want of Understanding or Truth.
Men are Wise to Avail themselves of every Advantage which the Subdivision of Arts and the Separation of Employments can give: but where this expedient is noxious to the Genius & Character of man it is Wisdom to check or restrain it. 
Let the Statesman be Ashamed to own he is no Warriour And the Warriour to own he is no Statesman. Under these confessions the one is a mere Clerk in Office The other a mere prize  fighter & a Bully. 


XVI. OF THE FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR AND THEIR VALUE AS A TEST OF RECTITUDE AND TRUTH 

The Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to man, have been comprised under Three general Titles.
1. The Law of Self-preservation.
2. The Law of Society or Congregation.
3. The Law of Estimation.
The 1st comprehends many or most of the Animal Instincts & propensities with the love of Ease & Safety &c.
The Second comprehend together with some Animal Instincts The preference of Company to Solitude Sympathy Benevolence Love Friendship Justice And Good Repute.
The third comprehends all the Phaenomena of Esteem or Contempt whether well or ill founded & terminating  in Vice or Virtue. Such as Vanity and Pride Integrity Magnanimity & Elevation of Mind. Well directed it is the Principle of Magnanimity & Just Ambition. Ill directed it is the principle of Arrogance Pride Vanity & erroneous Ambition.
In either way it is one of the Strongest or most powerful Principles in human Nature.
In respect to Character or Dignity it is Approbation or Admiration or the Contrary Reprobation or Contempt in all their Phases & Phaenomena.
Among the Phaenomena of reprobation may be reckoned Ridicule or Laughter.
To dissapprove or to be displeased as to Approve is to be pleasd.
These different Affections admit of indefinite Gradations.
In exception to the general Rule Ridicule or Laughter though excited by defect is not disspleasure: but is in a  peculiar Manner respecting Others joyous & Acceptable And appears to derogate from the Beneficent Character of Nature founded in the tendency of Evil or defect to give Pain and of Good or Excellence to give pleasure hereby exciting a Will to Avoid the one and Aim at the Other.
This Law indeed even with Respect to the Ridiculous holds in the concern which every Man takes in his own Character. Laughter is pleasing but no one likes to be laughed at. The Buffoon who makes him ridiculous expects to be Esteemd for his Art in doing so.
The Follies and defects of mankind are so numerous & Frequent that if each were matter of Hatred or serious Indignation; human life would be a Scene of Melancholy Anguish and despair Such as the Parent feels for the Defects of his Children or the Coxcomb feels for the dissappointments of his Vanity.
It appears therefore  among the Final Causes Suggested of the Beneficent kind that while every one hates to be laughed at in his own Person And is therefore directed to shun the Ridiculous yet many of the defects and errors so frequent in human Life may be matter of Animadversion & Censure without casting the Gloom of Melancholy or Severe displeasure over so many of the Scenes of Society & Intercourse as might furnish occasion to serious discontent.
Meanwhile it is well known That Nature does not admit of Ridicule or Laughter in every Case of Reprobation. And it were of Consequence to distinguish the province of Serious Indignation from that  Ridicule Laughter or merriment.
This disstinction like many others is Obvious in the extreme but Slight & difficult in some of the intermediat Occasions that in certain degree admit either of Ridicule or serious Reprobation.
 Malice we may assume is ever matter of Serious Reprobation not of Ridicule. Timidity is Sometimes the one & sometimes the Other. So is dullness of Fancy & insensibility of Heart Irascibility & Tameness, &c. &c.
Reprobation is the lot of Crime and Depravity.
Ridicule is the Lot of Imbecility & Defect.
Just Reprobation is the Test of one.
Just Ridicule is the Test of the other.
But Actual Reprobation or Actual Laughter may be erroneous and misslead & is not without inquiry to be received as a Test of Demerit or of Defect.
The Rhetorician by his Figures of Speech can lay the Colours of Depravity on the Innocent. Or the Colours of Defect & Ridicule on the Respectable & the Just. The Powers of Epithet and Metaphor to these effects are well known. The Epithet of Divus Julius made a  Saint or Sanctified a Bloody Adventurer in search of Power.
The designation of Contented Cuckold was meant to throw contempt on Marcus Aurelius & in some minds may have its Effects.
An imaginary Personage with nothing of Socrates but the Name brought Ridicule or dissrespect on that Person who has in fact remained the admiration of Ages.
Tho Ridicule always implies some supposed Defect. The imputation of it is no more a Test of Truth or Reality than the Imputation of a Crime is a test of Guilt.
Ridicule is most commonly the Effect of incongruity or some kind of odd Combination. Some feature of meanness with Pride or Vanity, a Dish Clout pinned to the Tail of a Person otherwise finely dressed. It is possible therefore to clap such Additions on Respectable Subjects & to raise  a Laugh.
The Lord Mayor of London on Horse is an Object of Respect but so mounted & eating Custard on Horseback on his way to the Conventicle is Ridiculous.
Lord Shaftesbury contends for the Freedom of Wit & Humour And in whatever Sense his words are understood it must be granted. For in all human Establishment if Wise & Just Crimes alone are restraind Every Innocent Act of the mind is free And it is in proportion to this degree of Freedom that minds can enjoy themselves or make any Valuable attainment Under Restraint. The Genius is Suppressed as Lamps in a Box are soon extinguished: But Wit & Humour may incur the Guilt of a Crimes & Crimes in every shape must be restrained. The Danger or Safety of this Policy depends intirely on the Character of the Tribunal before which such Crimes are tryed. Neither  the ordinary Magistrate nor the Priest is Safely intrusted with this Branch of Judicature.
The Culprit has a right to be tryed by his own fellow Citizens who are equally interested in the Safety of his Innocence or the punishment of his Guilt.
But in the Terms Wit & Humour The Noble Author does not seem to mean Ridicule but rather what is commonly termed Good Humour or Exemption from Acrimony or personal Animosity too common in Controversy or Theological Disputes. He himself indeed seldom attempts Ridicule properly so called or when he does so should be Sensible that the Ridicule employs against Certain Controversy under Analogy of Foot Ball as it is just in some Sectarian Contests might be unjust if applied to matter of Serious debate in National Councils or in Pleadings before a Tribunal of Justice.
Ridicule like any other Rhetorical Figure may be employed in any Cause.
The Art itself like any other Power compard to its opposite weakness or defect is Good but to be loved must be employed for beneficial not mischievous purposes. And even so employed is not The Test either of Truth or of Justice.
Notwithstanding the general Rule that Crimes of every Form are to be restrained it is well understood in the Policy of Free Nations, that it is less dangerous to overlook matters actually Criminal than to Unsheath the Sword of the Magistrate in every Case to repress them. Every thing human has its defects or Abuses And the Abuses of Power are more tremenduous than those of the despicable & unauthorised delinquent. Summum Jus therefore may be Summa Injuria when to correct the smallest dissorders an Open is made for much  greater.
There is therefore no Article in the Criminal Code more to be Guarded than the Law of Libel.
It may perhaps be safely Admitted that altho Calumny is punished mere Ridicule may be overlooked. There are Evils in Society which Ridicule alone can Suppress such as Solemn impostures under grave pretences of Religion or Wisdom or Science. And even where merit itself is unjustly attacked with this Weapon it is difficult to Ascertain the dammage of being laughed at before a Tribunal of Justice.
As it is difficult to form any general Rule in this matter or to be secure of its safe Application if formed The Trial by Jury is perhaps the best expedient that has been devised against the Evils whether of Criminality or Penality that may be incurred in this Matter.

XVII. WAKING DREAMS 

Something now Exists, says Dr Samuel Clerk. Therfore Something must have existed Eternally That is necessarily. But whatever exists necessarily must be boundless in its way as Space & time are Boundless. For how can supplyable limit or defect be necessary. Of this I can offer no proof: but in my thought it is insusceptible of Doubt as my own Existence. 
This Existence however & much more is contingent & Nascent, the Creation of Antecedent Power.
 In Creation there is a manifest display of Ends & Means. Or in other words the Creating Power as meaning or is Intelligent.
From what Power Else could come this Germ of Intelligence in me but from an Intelligent Source or Cause.
If the Necessity of Existence amounts to boundless Existence in Eternal Perfection The Necessary Being must have been of the highest order Supremely Excellent Supremely happy Omnipotent Wise & Good: for short of this Existence would be subordinate Contingent & Perisable.
As it appears absurd to Suppose that dead materials could engender Living Intelligence it appears so  no less to suppose that mere Intelligence could call up solid matter out of Nothing. 
All this Perception of Material World is a mode of my intellectual Being And the Universe itself consists of Eternal mind and the Germs of Nascent Intelligence the ofspring of Will & Eternal Intelligent Power.
The Perceptions of which I am conscious from abroad have their cause distinct from me. As those which I mean to give around me have their Cause in me. As I mean what I do so what is done to me of the same kind is meant also.  Part comes from Other Beings like myself. But the greater part from Being infinitely Superiour And Mere Perceptions or perceptibles are the means of communication between Created Minds & the Revelation of eternal Intelligence & Creative mind.
They are in the Society of men not only the means of communication:
but The Occasion of Action the materials of Art the exercise & improvement of progressive intelligence tending to fit & Qualify it for Other & more elevated Scenes of Being where other perceptions & means of communications will be made to succeed to these.
If the Existence  of Mind is Eternally necessary it must be boundless in Number as well  Perfection. But infinite number of mind infinitely Perfect must be at one. The same Consciousness the same Will the same meaning if ther were any difference one or other must be imperfect,
which is absurd. If the Germs of Nascent Intelligence Advance indefinitely & approach to infinitely they tend to what they possibly never can reach to be at one with God.
And if this were Possible the Eternal mind is continually Emitting its Germs And these continually returning to be at one with himself although this be too high for Belief what can be too high, for the wish of Intelligence or the Aspiring Progression of a Nature that must forever have an Aim Superiour to its actual attainments.
Such dreams are but a Stretch of the human faculties beyond their limits:
but it were pleasant even awake to think that all existence is mind Eternal & Perfect; or Nascent & progressive the only Subject of Excellence or defect of Beauty or deformity of Happiness or Misery. All Other Subjects or Names are its Modes or Relations important in being accommodated to its operations  the Materials of its Arts the expressions of its meanings & the Substratum on which are impressed the Vestiges of its Wisdom Goodness & Power. These are the distinctions of a Supposed Material World branched into Millions of Suns and Planets in voluble or quiescent order as the exigencies of mind require. To created minds revealing the Majesty of God,
and furnishing the medium of Communication with one Another.
On this Globe called Earth Invention and its Aim Variety for ever seem to Reign but Order is the more Conspicuous that parts appear to Slight it and hasten to accumulate a Chaos of discordant Parts: yet all is Harmony and the fit Conjunction of an Active and a Passive Scene.
What Mind is here Besides the Eternal God and the Created Mind of man we know not. The Work bespeaks its Author and in part even to Man its End.
The board is spread for him and coverd with a fare that is fit to nourish him. See but the infant born today  feeble but to breath in Air & utter Cries for Aid. But how kindly is the Scene prepared for his reception. The breast is made to teem with Milk. And under the Names of Parent Servants are engagd to minister in all his wants & Comforts with a Zeal & Assiduity which neither Wealth nor power could ever purchase or command.
Is he therefore nursed through Infancy to be abandoned at the Age of Man? So he is apt to think before the light of Science dawn upon his Mind.
 The Parent on whose breast he hung is forced away. Why is not the Woods and Fields to which he Seems Consigned prepared to yield him Rayment Food and Shelter: Why is he turned out naked to the Storm. Why are the Fields & woods so barren & fit to yield him nought but penury & Toil?
Is this the Lot to which the pampered Infant was preserved. And thus the Seeming favourite of Nature abandoned to himself. Why is the milk that fed his infant Organs now withheld. Why is want difficulty and Danger provided by the same beneficient Power  which Ministered so Kindly to his early wants. What has that Power bestowd upon him now in lieu of former favours. 
Those very wants difficulties & Dangers of which he now Complains. To the Active is requird A Scene of Action. To the Intelligent a Labyrinth or maze where Science Triumphs and where Contemplation Soars.
For the feeble Infant all is done but for the adult all is left to be done by himself and his very life prolonged by labours.
 The Ruling Passions of Men are Interest Dignity & Pleasure. Out of these in various measures they propose to effect their Happiness.
Interest consists Chiefly in matters of Property or Concerns of Animal Life.
Dignity consists in matters of Estimation. Such as Rank however constituted. Merit Personal Excellence And Beauty.
Pleasure consists in agreeable Sensations Occupations & Prospects & requiring exemption from Pain.
The best effect of Interest is  Frugality. Industry and Ingenious Art.
Its Evils are Covetousness Avarice & Rapin.
The best effects of Dignity are Integrity and Magnamity. Its worst effects are Pride Contemptuousness Vanity and Ambition or Lust of Power.
The best Effects of Pleasure are its Allurement to what is Salutary in Diet Excercise and amicable Society.
Its worst Effects are Effeminacy Debauchery and Prodigality.
Among those who have reasoned on the Subject  of Happiness some have recommended the good Effects of Pleasure. 
Others the Good Effects of Elevation or Dignity. That is Integrity & Magnanimity.
Interest was admitted by all in its best effects to be commensurate to the Value of animal Life And Frugality in Particular to be a Guardian of Virtue as well as Security & independence.
The Worst of Pleasure as a general appellation of Good, is to endanger Selection to lay open the mind to every present Allurement. And preclude Deliberation  where it is of all other Departments of conduct the most wanted.
Hence a Supposed life of Pleasure is for the most part Idle inconsiderate frivolous & debauched.
Happiness Pleasure & Merit are in the apprehension of most men Separate Names for different things.
But as they are objects of the most ardent Passions of Men Nature cannot be ultimately so inconsistent with itself. As to engage men in equal passion for inconsistent things. The presumption then is that when these objects are well understood they will meet like converging Rays of Light in a Focus the same to all.
The Happiness & Perfection of Intelligent Being are one and the same point.
Hence it is that in the order of things the Progress of Intelligence is provided for as the progress to Happiness.
Man in infancy has every thing provided for him in Manhood must provide for himself & Subsist by the Sweat of his brow. All his Faculties are called furth in Exertion and thereby improved. The  mistakes are corrected by experience And in the End Intellectual Power & Felicity are compl.
Why is not all Nature so formed at once?
Ask the Eternal Principle of Existence why he prefers Variety to Sameness.
Why in all living Natures He prefers Progressive to Stationary Forms.
He is the Creator of all: but the Intelligent to Obtain their distinctive Value must be in part at least the formers or Authors of what themselves become. This in the feeble line  of Created Being is that Image of the Maker which Man is said to bear.
He is like Clay in the hands of the Potter but that Potter is in part no other than himself. 
Look then from this point of View on the Scene of human things. The Germ of Intelligence by which man is distinguishd The occasion by which it brought into Excercise and into the Train of improvement.
Observe the Laws which give at once Stability to the Scene And furnish him with a handle by which to lay hold of it and influence events  his Purpose.
The Law of  Nature informs him what he must lay his Account within the undisturbed Course of things or in known conjunctions And what he may Obtain for his own purpose by modelling the Conjuncture in which the Law is to Operate.
The Law  Gravitation that would bring every Weight to the Ground is made in building by plummet is made to give Stability & firmness to Walls & Towers of Indefinite height.
Will man complain that this or any Other Law of Nature is never Suspended even to prevent harm from its Effects. It is a Sufficient Answer to say that if the Law were ever suspended it never Could be trusted at all. 
If Plants were not raised from their Seed Man would have no Power in the Fields & to obtain a Plantation could only Pray to the Almighty to favour him with one to his mind.
Observe then how man is fitted to his place & his place to him. 
On this point hangs the Order of his Planet. And tho Planets be multiplyd to Infinity, they can reveal no more than this.


XVIII. OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH WE ACT IN HUMAN LIFE 

Of these the shun is called Evil. 
Equivalent terms are common to every Language. They may be well or ill Applied And the Object may be real or mistaken.
The Accumulation of real Good is Happiness of real Evil is misery.
This disstinction therefore is the first or  most important Object of inquiry in human Life. Actions of men are regulated by what they would shun as by what they would Obtain. And in applying the great disstinction of Good & Evil they take different courses And act upon disstinctions seemingly different from one Another.
Of these the number & variety may be indefinite; but we may endeavour to comprehend them under a few heads.
1. The  disstinction of Pleasure & Pain.
2. The disstinction of Profit & Loss.
3.d The disstinction of Ri an Wrong.
4. The disstinction of Excellence & defect.
Under one or Other of these disstinctions the whole may be comprehended.
Even the first is sometimes supposed to comprehend the Whole.
In all our desires or Aversions Gratification is pleasant  And this pleasure is the Object in all And the contrary is the Pain we would Shun in all.
But this would be to take away all difference of pursuit or Character and to make Epitetus no less a Voluptuary than Heliogabalus or Sardanapalus. 
The disstinctions which  mad in every Language are matters of Experience & like the Land mark pointed out from time immemorial are of use in directing ours without recourse in every particular case to the  Observations on which they were founded.
Pleasure in Common Language is no longer the Object of all. 
opposed to Bussiness to Duty & to Honour And the person who acts chiefly on the disstinction of pleasure And pains is of a very different Character from the person who acts on the disstinction of Profit & Loss Right & Wrong &c.
Immediate pleasure attracts him immediate Pain repels him.
This is the Charcter of Childhood even of Youth.
 If continued it would exclude all Patience or Fortitude And as many of the greatest Blessings present themselves under an Aspect of Labour and Pleasure would lead to many of the greatest Mistakes.
It has frequently led to Sensuality Effeminacy And Prodigality.
The disstinction of Profit & Loss is that on which the Trades Professional Acts. It forms the Motive of Interest or what is vulgarly called Selfishness  and is the Parent of Avarice.
The disstinction of Right & Wrong is found generally in all the Characters dispositions And Actions of Men.
At the moment we are Conscious of an End or Purpose we are Conscience of its Innocence or Guilt.
When we recollect such a Purpose attempted or carryed into Effect we are Seized with a Conscience of Merit or Demerit Remorse Shame &c.
Hence the operation  of Intelligence is termed Conscience & figuratively moral Sense or Sense of Right & W.
Men Sometimes Act because it is Right to do  or becase it would be wrong to omit But in many Instances also it serves only to modify the course of Action on the disstinctions of Pleasure and Pain of Profit & Loss.
On the first of these disstinctions it is Moderation & Temp On the other it is Justice Integrity Liberality & Char.
The disstinction of Excellence & Defect applys to all those Considerations on which men are entitled to Esteem or to  contempt. There is not a commonly Stated or more Powerful  in its effects. It gives Subordination to every Society And lurks or flames in the mind of every Individual. No distinction can be more real than the Superiority of Intelligence and its Specific Accomplishments of Wisdom & Goodness to the opposite defects of Folly & Wickedness yet a distinction so commonly entertained as this of Estimation  and Rank is likely to be as commonly mistaken or missapplied. No one can be altogether indifferent to personal Qualities yet how Seldom do they bear man against Riches Birth even equipage & Dress.
This disstinction if the occasion of Mananimity And just Elevation of Mind to some is the occasion of Vanity & Contemptuous Pride to Others It is indeed the Source of great Action, but in Meaner Minds the Source of  Emulation Envy & Detraction. None Supports the Mind through difficulty danger & Suffering but none Supports Error & Mistake more Obstinately against better information or Correction.
Hence it is that Fashion prevails over reason & every consideration of Use or Convenience.
Although we have thus Stated these distinctions Apart and Asignd them their Votaries Separately, yet there is probably no person  so devoted to any one as to be indifferent to any Other. The Miser tho chiefly intent on profit and loss is not only Sensible to Pleasure & Pain but has also some points of estimation on which he values himself. Men differ in most Instances in respect to the degree in which they attend to one of these distinctions more than the Others. And this degree appears also in the degree to which their Characters Are Affected by their Partiality.
 Characters are affected by it.
The distinctive Votary of Pleasure & Pain of Right &  of Profit & loss of Excellence and defect bear a suitable Aspect in their Manners & incline to the habits whether Good or ill to which the Basis of Action on which they stand inclines them. Hence it is that among the Vices Sensuality Superstition Avarice & Pride have more hold of some. And among the Virtues Integrity Industry Economy &  Magnanimity have a preferable hold of Others.
As man is thus presented with various distinctions & is destined to Suffer as well as to enjoy: His Happiness, tho perhaps leading to a Single point at Last ________ Concourse with God: in his way to it can be no Other than the State of most Enjoyment & least Suffering of which he is Susceptible. This is at once his Excellence His prosperity or as we term it his Virtue.
In respect to Animal Pleasure it is Temperance.  In Respect to his mind it is Wisdom Goodness & Power of thought exempted from Spleen Fear Malice or any torturing Passion.
In his Relations around him It is order or beneficent Ends pursued with Apposite Means.
In respect to the Whole it is Confidence in the Order of Nature or in Other Words in the Wisdom & Goodness of God.
In the pursuit of Happiness Man must sometimes forgo present Enjoyment or incur present Suffering.
The Account to be ballanced is  long & intricate comprehending all Effects and future Consequences far exceeding the reach of his comprehension or View.
To remedy or in Some degree to supply this defect has the Creator given a discernment of Right & Wrong. With this Power in every case  need not look beyond the Case in which we are to act & if we do right have no occasion to fear the Consequences.
Here indeed we may mistake & Conscience itself may fail. But as the Mariner to keep his intended Course has only to guard the Compass from disturbances So the moralist has only to Study the disstinction of Right  wrong to be assumed in the choice he ought to make on all occasions.
In this lys the distinction between Epicurus And Zeno. Do said the first what upon the whole is most pleasant and least painful. A good if we were competent to apply it. Do said the Other what God has enabled  to discern as Right. He has made this Power umpire in every Case & Censorial inspector in every Act of Will that it might interfere and Govern in all. 

XIX . OF THE CATEGORIES 

Aristotle in his ambitiously comprehensive arrangements of Being has referred the Whole to ten Heads called Categories or Meanings and Matter of Statement of which The first or  is unfortunately translated into our Language by the term Substance & is made to mean what is not only real but substantial and in this Sense  mathematical Point tho a meaning with Place Relations &c is not a Substance.
The Meaning of Categories with this Correction may be stated in our Language under  Terms Subject or Thing Quality  Quantity,
Number Relation Power Action Passion Time & Place. 
It is pleasing thus to conceive all Being as Meaning or Matter of Statement to Mind And in Fact as all things flow from Design or Mental Purpose So they are essentially Relative to mind for any distinction of Good or Evil Excellence or defect applicable to them. A Planetary System we say is Magnificently Beautifull. The Pearl The Ruby & the Diamond are the Ornament of Scepters & of Crowns. But Suns & Planets are the Ornaments of Scepters & of Crowns, but Suns & Planets composed of Diamond or Pearl were but Dross without the mind that formed & beholds them.
The Material Universe itself is but the Emanation of  Omniscience & Almighty Power. And its fairest Corner but  Department for the Nursery & exercise of Nascent or Created Minds. Without Intelligence there would be neither Good nor Evil Excellence or Defect. Count if you Can the Myriads of human being that every moment  sends into Life. For them the Sun is made to Shine & for them this diversifyed Scene is opened that each may Act & lose or Acquire for himself & as he loses or Acquires Intelligence the essence of Being proceed for Ever or Sink into the Pit of Nonentity from which he Sprang.
The Soul of Man we say is  immortal. It is not essentially So. It arose from Mortality & from Death previously Eternal had Life & thought bestowed. These in Essence are but a Power to Ascend among Being. If it does not Ascend it will Sink among Beings & even forfeit its Power.
Why has the Almighty proposed this Alternative.
That there might be like him a Power however a Power tho in a remote degree Self forming to Wisdom & Goodness. Upon this Plan Socrates is gone up to Eternity & his Murderers Sunk again into Dust.
 Give Scope to Thought.
It must have a Subject.
The Subject may have its Qualities Its Quantity Its Number Its Relations Its Actions Its Passions Its Time & Place and so Forth. Such are the Categories of Aristotle. The first or  Being or Subject We Translate into Substance without  considering how much that Term in our Vulgar use of it is apt to Mislead. Substance in our imagination has dimension and place and however airy or Vapid occupies Space.
 is a mere Being or Subject tho no more than a Mathematical Point a Thought or Affection. It is therefore mere Entity or Abstraction of Being.
From this most General or Universal Term of Entity or Subject The first Step towards Specification Is Power: and we may venture to say That  all Being is Power.
Corporeal Being is the Power of Resistance to Change.
The Change it resists is that of Place or disposition of Parts. That is from Rest to Motion from Union to Separation of Parts Change of Velocity Change of Direction & so forth.
In the Exercise of this Power of Resistance The following Laws are Observed.
Body remains in its State of Rest or uniform Motion till some Force is impressed.
The Change is proportioned  to the Force impressed.
In the Application of Force Action and Reaction are equal & Contrary as much as the Force gains upon the Resistance it expends of itself.
Vegetation is a Power of Organisation And Assumption of Nourishment to growth & dimension. Animation is a Spontaneous Power joined to Sensation Perception & Choice or instinctive direction. All the Powers of Animation may accompany Intelligence.
Intelligence is a Power to know  to Compare to Deliberate to Judge and to determine resolve or Will.
It knows by Consciousness Sensation Perception or Experience And Testimony. The Powers of Intelligence constitute Personal Existence & Resposibility.
Persons are Many & may hold Communication or be known to one Another.
The Powers of Communication are Sensations & Perceptions.
These are Mental Appurtenances  and may have no other form of Existence: But as to every mind they come originally from Abroad They are Evidence of  external Existing Cause. And as they may be emitted in rturn are to different Persons means of Communication or Evidence of Coexisting Persons & their meanings.
In Knowledge nothing can be more certain than that which cannot be Doubted. 
Existence therefore is Certain And in the Form of some must have been Necessary  and Eternal. For we cannot doubt that have a beginning then must be a Cause & the Primary Cause have ever many must have been of itself for ever without a previous Cause. 
Power Eternal is God by Necessity unlimited And competent to every possible Effect.
From this Power all Existence Emanates or Exists in it.
The Meanings of Men Communicate to one Another  in Sensations and Perceptions bear intimation of Ends & Means of Intellectual Power And to Persons reciprocally a communication of Persons one with Another.
The Perception of Limbs & Organs of which Every Person has Cognisance in himself. And the Repetition Of Actions or expressions to which he himself is competent is the signal.
 Feeling sight Hearing Taste and Smell and the Perceptions to which they give occasion are matters in which the mind may be intirely Passive.
To the Person feeling &c. The Perception is in some Instances is that or the Perception of what he calls a Part or Members of himself As when with on hand he feels some other Part of his Body &c. or it is a feeling hearing or Sight coming from above and giving perception of Separate or Collateral Being.
Perceiving of Others what he perceives of himself & what he can give them like occasion to Perceive is Society Intercourse or Conversation.
The Communication So made may bear the Characters of Accident or design of Wisdom or Folly.
The Character of design counts of Ends & Means.
Of wisdom Important & beneficent Ends well concerted or effective means.
Ends such as Man conceives  and means such as he is known to Employ are the Evidence of Man to Man.
Ends more Vast And means above the reach of Man to employ are Evidence of Power Intelligent or Mental Superior to Man Perhaps of Power Eternal & Omnipo.
The Sensations which Men give & Take constitute the Society or Intercourse of Men.
The Sensation of Ends & Means above the Sphere of Man is the Communication or Revelation of God to his Intelligent Creatures.
 Suns & Planets Sea & Land Atmosphere Clouds Winds Rain Springs Running Stream Fertile Soil Woods Lawns Hills & Valley Flocks & Herds Artists Materials of Art uniform Laws of natural Production Occasions of Action to the Active & of Progression to the Progressive. The Power of Learning to be happy to the living or Sensitive Are the Language or Revelation of God to man.
His Being & Means are equally per in the part as in the Whole in that small &c.
 The first and greatest order of Being is that which Exists of itself. The Lowest order of Being is that which is made altogether what it is. Such we conceive to be matter or Body.
An Intermediate Order of Being. Having Power but committed to itself for the exercise of this Power And being of itself happy or Miserable Such is Created Intelligence.
As Power is the Essence of Being the Power  of Enjoyment & Perfection is peculiar to the living or Sentient Conscious & Intelligent Forms of Being.
Where Being is Necessary it is also Perfect In Will Omnipotent Therefore Happy unbounded in Wisdom & Goodness Eternal & Immense unlimited to Time or Place. It must be infinite in Number as well as Greatness or Perfection.
But the Infinitely Perfect however Numerous cannot be different without imperfection must Coincide in every Instance Whether of Conscious or Will and be therefore at one in all things the same and Unity of Being.
The Germs that Result from This Eternal Power Being endowe with conscious separate Existence Are not Powers to be perfect & Happy But the Power of Progression or Advancement in direction pointed to Perfection & Happiness.
The Line in which they proceed has no End. If it had an End it would place them  where it is impossible for them to Arrive that is At One with God.
Originating in Defect & with a Power of progression only there is no Measure of temporary aberration which they may not exhibit for the Experience of Evil as well as of Good tends to correct Error & constitute that Felicity which Consists in Choice. 
The Pupil of Wisdom may learn to be Wise And happy but must become so of himself  made so at the Power or Will of Another. In this if in any Sense it is said That Man is formd after the Image of God.
In this Image alone is the Criterion of Worth or Excellence to be found.
The Power to be happy or of Progress is that Alone which gives Value to being.
The Power of matter may be such as to form a Scene for the Action of Men  give occasion to thought and like furnish Materials to the Artist  and accommodations to the Restive and Contemplative excercise Inquiry to the Curious The means of Beneficence to the Charitable and of Communication & intercourse from Mind to Mind And from the Eternal to the Nascent & progressive Being he has formed.
But apart from the Subserviency of Such Scenery to mind Immensity replete with Diamonds And with Gold ever bespangled with innumerable Suns & Planetary Systems would be of no more value than  mere empty Space. What were the Diamond on which it Sparkles or the Sun himself without that little organ on  the Power of Vision is bestowed.
Admire as we may the Material System tis made for Mind alone And the Fairness and Magnificence of its form is but the Evidence it bears of that Eternal Goodness Wisdom & Power of which it is the Work. The Gift of Eternal Mind to  form an Equipage for those who are Travelling from Below toward the higher Scenes of Being.
It is true that the mere Sensation or Perception of what we call the Material World would have the Same Effect with that we call its reality. And indeed its reality in respect to us is no more than our perception of it the mere Appurtenance of Mind.
And as mind is the Eternal Mode of  Existence it is pleasant to think That there is yet no other nor ever be any Other.
Men who Speculate profoundly on the Essence of Matter incline to this opinion. And  the Slightest inqui into the Cause of our Sensation are inclined to entertain the same opinion respecting the Connection of Perception with its external Objects.
This Doctrine I embrace with fond Conviction.
 Who would not Gladly tell the Sun & all these Globes on which he Shines; Ye are my pleasure grounds & but the Steps on which my Mind Ascends to God. Even when above your Height I shall not cease to rise.
Blest be the Power that gives Eyes to see & thoughts to comprehend your Order So Significant of Might Benevolence & Wisdom.
This Doctrine is in the Department of mere Thought not of Art or of Action and no way affects the Conduct of life.
Common Sense is  the same whether a Person professes to act on the Distinction of his Perceptions or on the Disstinction of Things Perceived.
His perception is still the only Ground on which he can act and his Action will be the Same in avoiding the Perception of Suffering as in avoiding its Cause.
How Idle then is it to labour on Speculations that have no Consequence or Effect.
Tis true that in Practice The Theory of Corporeal Forms has no Effect But in  thought we may repeat its Effects are immense.
The first or Eternal Principle of Existence is Inteligence as appears from the Design & order of his Work but the Work itself is merely Spiritual Consisting of Mind & its Procession of Sensations perception and imagination or Thought.
To Die is the discontinuance of one System of Perceptions to enter upon Another: & mental Existence is still the same And its Power of Enjoyment the only distinction that gives value to Being. Without this Magnitude and Figure exist  in Vain & present no Reality to lead the will or the choice of Intelligence.
In thought there is no limit to Space Whether it be full or only give place to separate orbs of Matter is in itself Perfectly indifferent And of moment only as the one is Recipient of Order & is a Department of Wisdom Goodness & Power. The Other is nought but impenetrable non Existence and Death.
A Pause to Theory. Who can account for Existence? Who would ever believe its Reality if he could  disbelieve his own. But here it is; The difficulty is removed and other Beings to any extent may exist as well as mind.
The only Form of Being which I cannot doubt is mind & its appurtenances or Provisions of Sensations Perception and Thought.
This then is the Form of Being distinguished in the Superiour assurance of its Reality and I am Warranted in thinking it has prevailed from Eternity & will prevail forever.
It were perverse  to know this & yet to controvert the existence of Mind beyond the Organs of a human Body. 

XX . OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH IT IS THE LOT OF MAN TO DELIBERATE 

It is Characteristick of Living sentient and Intelligent Being to be susceptible of Good & Evil.
To be possessed of Good is Happyness. To incur Evil is Misery.
It is further Characteristic of Intelligent Being to be the artificer of his own Condition & to be vested with a choice in detail among particulars that may be referred to the general disstinctions of Good & Evil Happiness or Misery.
On these distinctions in general  there cannot be any deliberation.
But it is frequently doubtful to which of these heads a particular should be referred.
And under these most General distinctions others are comprised stating the Constituents of Good & Evil under different Aspects denominations under which men would descend to particulars: but have their expressions Still in comprehensive Terms. Such as Enjoyment & Suffering Excellence & Defect Beauty & Deformity Right & Wrong Virtue & Vice Prosperity & Adversity.
On distinctions so general as even these are there is no room for deliberation untill  they came to be applied to different Instances, or Men make their option or acquire their habits of being chiefly occupied by one or other of these disstinctions in preference to the others.
Some men in the choice of particulars are chiefly occupied by the distinctions of Pleasure & Pain Others by the distinction of Excellence & Defect Right & Wrong Profit and Loss. And on this diversity The Characters of men in a great measure depend.
The Votaries of Pleasure. Of Gain of Excellence Rectitude & Virtue exhibit  different Characters tho all of them would be happy and aim at what they conceive to be good.
When we have reduced the disstinction on which Men Act in detail to the general Heads of Profit & Loss Pleasure & Pain Excellence & Defect And class men accordingly into The Interested The Voluptuous, & the High minded Such is the present State of man that under each of these heads there is both Good & Evil.
The Interested may be Frugal & Industrious or rapacious & 
avaritious.
The Voluptuous may be Inoffensive & humain or Effeminate & Debauched.
The high minded may be Benevolent & Just or Contemptuous and Arrogant. So that when under any of these general Titles we have chosen our Class The great Task of human Wisdom Still remains to secure the Good & avoid the Evil incident to each.
This is Wisdom and Happiness or the Supreme Good consists in a proper Choice of particulars under each.
Frugality without avarice Innocence and  Complacency without Effeminacy or Debauchery. Benevolence and Justice themselves a bar to Contemptuous or Arrogance.
Philosophers in their different applications of the term Chief Good. For Pleasure Interest or Virtue & Excellence without Observing that each of these tho separately expressed & supposed different when happily pursued Actually terminate in one & the same point.
It is the Interest Pleasure & Excellence of a man to be Happy.
These are all supreme Objects of desire And Nature is not so inconsistent as  to expose the Intelligent Being in aiming at one to forgo the Other.
The Pleasure he ought to aim at is the most Agreeable & the most secure.
The state  highest Enjoyment & least Suffering.
Here is matter of Calculation for the most part easy & obvious in the result. Tho carried to the utmost or extending to the past present and Future is beyond the reach of  human Faculties. To cut Short in many Instances Nature has Affixed a mark and given a Byas to the preferable Pleasure.
The Right in contradistinction to the Wrong And Conscience the Supreme Arbiter & Byas of Nature in this distinction.
In following this Byas we sometimes appear to reject Pleasure and Rank but in Fact secure The highest Profit Pleasure & Elevation of Nature.
 The Question then among the Sects of Epicurus Zeno or Aristotle is not what is the Chief Good. For this by the Confession of all is Happiness: but by what name is it most safely designed in entering on the detail of Practice.
Conscience may mistake as well as Appetite or Interest: but not so frequently & its Gratifications are the preferable pleasures & gains of human life.
It appears then most Safe to Speak with the Stoics and go where Conscience and the Love of Virtue leads.  Virtue is supremely pleasant to those who profess it.
To Epicurus then we may say if this be the pleasure you mean as you tell us when you come to particulars it is why not Specify it at once & not leave us to contend with a Vague or general Term which every one will apply in his own way The Childish the Effeminate The Debauched all of them in a Way which you yourself will reject.
Virtue is candid Benevolent highminded Courageous & Temperate. You cannot  detract from it without impairing Enjoyment or the admission of suffer.
The uncandid repine at another Good.
Benevolence is pleasant. Indifference at best is blank and Malice is Suffering.
The low mind is drooping and mean.
The Coward trembles And the intemperate Suffers from disgust or dissease.
The interested and the Selfish are Supposed equivale terms and applied with dissapprobation  and disslike.
Why? Is it faulty to mind our own Concerns & be careful of ourselves?
No. The Author of  says not!
The first law of Nature to every living Creature is Preserve thyself. Whoever says Otherwise either Counteracts Nature or mistakes himself.
If I should limit the appellation of Self to this Animal life and the Appellation of Interest to its preservatives and Accomodations. Still even in this Sense the first Law of  Nature or Self preservation is not only blameless but the most continual & unremitted in its operation and Effects.
The Parent will expose himself & the Citizen on Occasion to preserve his Country: but these are great and occasional Efforts. The ordinary State of Nature is a Vigilance for personal Wellfare & Safety And on this the Author  Nature chiefly rests the preservation of his living Works.
But if the  Appellation of Self be not limited to mere Animal Life &c. but extend as it ought to every constituent of a rational or Intelligent Being to the mind its attainments Affections & Habits or what is best under these designations Wisdom Goodness & Fortitude. In this Acceptation of Self. The Virtuous alone are Selfish And Sefishness that Aspiring Ambition to resemble the Supreme God. Which in the Caesars of Julian is made the Characteristic of Marcus Aurelius And is actually the object  of that Work which we all the Meditations of Antoninus: but in the original is entitled The Consideration of His Own Affairs. 
To the Vulgar Selfishness is the love of personal Security & Money So little careful we are to fix the terms on which we rest the whole Estimate of human life. And whilst we require Virtue as indispensible  allow it to respect the good of Others More than our own And thus suffer a misnomer of Self to undermine the edifice  of Morality which we profess so great An Anxiety to raise.
The Praise of Virtue we are told is founded on its publick utility. 
Strange that a person distinguished for Candour Humanity Benevolence and Sobriety should forget how valuable these qualities were to himself.
The Fact is that in choosing his Friends & in acting for himself he made no mistake but in speculating on Virtue he thought of External Actions only altho when pushed in Argument he was forced to Admit that Moral Estimation was agreeable to the mind and to external actions only as expressive of mind.

XXI. OF THE INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM 

It is said that the Indian Philosophers of Old considered the multiplication of mind or Intelligence as the sole Object of Creation and mantained that the material Fabrick was altogether Subservient to this That it served merely to Manifest the Eternal mind to his Intelligent Creatures, and form to them the links of communication with one Another.
 It may no doubt be safely Assumed that is at least one Purpose for which the material System is formed: But it is in other Respects also well fitted as a Nursery to the Intelligent Being of Man. In him the Germ of Intelligence is to be evolved & enlarged by its proper exercise Observation and Experience.
Altho in Infancy he is amply provided for with little or no Effort of his own yet to his opening Faculties continual occasions of exertion are presented to him. With the Stimuli of Animal  Life he has its wants to be Supplyed advanages to be aimed as Difficulties to be removed Dangers to be encountered And Sufferings to be guarded against or Aswaged.
To his Active Nature the Active Scene is accommodated. And to his progressive Nature The Observation he is concerned to make the Lessons of Experience & the faculties acquird by Practice are fully & Specifically accommodated.
In this manner is the Creation of that Intelligence with which we are acquainted conducted and  carried on from Age to Age. The End is the multiplication & Advancement of Minds. The means are in part at least the occasions supplyed throughout the Intricacies difficulties allurements or allarms of a Material System.
But what is this Material System in the great Globe of this Earth merely Subservient to the living creatures scarcely perceptible on its Surface. Is the mighty Sun a Million of times its bulk placed merely for the use of a few such Nurseries of impalpable living Creatures? Yes! We may say, For mind altho it has no Bulk is that alone which is entitled to the distinction of Greatness of Excelence or Beauty. And the Material World if Commensurate to Space & immensity itself would have no value or Obtain any distinction but in its relation to mind alone. The Diamond has no brillancy but through the Visual Organ that conveys it to Mind & if Infinite Space were replete with such matter all would be darkness indifference & Death. Matter has no Value but in its relation to mind, As a material of art & means  of Beneficence. It has no Beauty but as it bears the Marks of Ingenuous  employd by Man or The Majesty of Eternal Wisdom & Goodness imprinted by that Almighty Power who alone is great.
Even to Man the material World is of no moment but as he perceives it.
Let the perception cease & the Universe of Matter is as Nothing: Be it the Will of God that his Perceptions return tho without any returning Matter; his condition is fully restored; And the Scene of life & intelligence is to him precisely the same as  upon the supposition of reality in the Object as well as in the perception of it.
Our sensations & Perceptions have their causes apart from us. We know not what they are but the Sensations & Perceptions are conditions of Mind And our own.
Earth Water & Air &c &c Are Names which we give to our Perceptions:
but Sensation Perception thought and Mental Affection are all that we have give them what names we please.
Of this their can be no doubt & it is possibly all that we are qualifyed to say respecting the Actual State of Existence: the  World around us. Men of Speculation may fancy what they please but a World of mental Sensation And Perception or a world of Separate Being perceived will be to us in respect to Conduct Society Religion and Science precisely the same.
Is the actual existence of Matter Necessary to give us the Knowledge of God & of one Another? For we draw the same Conclusion from our Perceptions that we would from matter perceived, and the fact is that we have no other premises on either Supposition from which to draw our conclusions.
Is it  respectful to Suppose that The Almighty has given us falacious Perceptions? We do not suppose it nor are our perceptions fallacious. They are indeed Mental not corporeal existences: but the most certain grounds on which we may rely in all our designs Selections and pursuits. My perception of Precipice or Fire does not deceive me for if I avoid them I am safe if I do not the Consequence may be Fatal: but the Admonition was true & beneficently Given.
I have sometimes found fault with  those who would explode the Existence of Matter because the question was altogether Nugatory & could have no consequence in the Conduct of Life. But there is equal  to find fault with those who contend for the Reality of matter this being equally void of any Consequence in the Conduct of Life.
In this no doubt the question is Nugatory & the Solution indifferent. But the mind independent of its perceptions from Abroad has a World of its own in which to range. Having the Knowledge of God & our fellow Creatures it is acceptable & congenial to suppose a Universe of Mind with Eternal Wisdom goodness & omnipotence at its head than so great a mass of lifeless materials as this perceptible world seems to imply.
It is justly thought absurd to Suppose that a Material Cause  produce Intelligence: but is it less so to suppose that thought or Intelligence could produce solid matter. It is difficult to conceive how mind & body as in the Case of Man can be united & mutually affected one with the Other. If our Sensations & perceptions be conceived merely as a  Mode of our Mental Existence and no more Every difficulty of this Sort will dissappear.
To be born is to be brought into a Scene of Specific Perceptions the means of Communication and the occasions of Action. To Die is to exchange the first System of perceptions for a Subsequent one And the Mind immortal receives with its advanced qualities new means of Communication And occasions of Superiour Exertion and Continual Progress.
These Considerations may incline us to adopt the Idea of a System purely Intellectual System  the Work And Province of Eternal Mind. And it is matter of Curiosity to Observe by what Steps men of Speculation have been led in different Instances to question the existence of matter in any other form than that of mental perception.
Some of those who have examined the Sources of information & the causes of belief have found the evidence of a material World deficient and accordingly withheld the Assent. Having Assumed that all our knowledge  of things must rest upon certain Ideas Types or Representations of them in our Minds and considering that Representations are no evidence of Facts they deny the existence of matter as being Supported on no other evidence than the Idea of it in our Minds.
Whatever we may think of this Conclusion the Process of supposed Reason on which it is founded is certainly incorrect. In their Haste to come at their Hypohesis of Ideas in the mind they overlook the most important part of the Fact in our Cognisance of the material World.
We do not first harbour Ideas or Representations  of a Material World and then proceed to take proofs of its Reality. We begin with perceiving it And form the best notion of it we can from continued Observation.
Perception is prior to Proof and the most convincing foundation upon which any proof of Fact can rely. We have seen the Earth & the Firmament & Cannot doubt their Existence as for the Types or Ideas you mention we do not perceive them & have no reason to believe their Existence & have no difficulty in thinking of the Sun & the Moon while they continue to pass over our head in the Sky. Our Observations in many cases may be hasty & superficial but when properly made are the best information we have to conduct us through hazards of the greatest amount.
Things may not be as we perceive them but your attemp to disprove them proceeds upon an assumption which we neither perceive nor otherwise know to exist.
Those who attend to the Facts perceived in the Phaenomenon of Body proceed more directly to a Solution of the Question relating to the existence of matter  extended and Solid. Body consists of parts. It is Subject to expansion & Contraction the parts then must approach or recede while they recede they cannot be in Contact. If they ever be in contact they cannot contract. But nobody is exempt from Expansion by heat or contraction by Cold.
Therefore no body is made up of parts in Absolute Contact. 
On this ground it is Concluded that Contact no where exists in Body that the parts or attoms of which it is Composed owe their cohesion or fixture to attraction in a certain state of Contiguity not of Contact.
 The fixture indeed a precise State if Continued, must require some power to counterballance the attraction & retain every part in its place Otherwise absolute contact would ensue And the Volubility of Living Nature would Cease.
This Catastrophe is Averted by an eminent theorist (Boscovich) who instead of parts or Attoms composing Body has recourse to Mathematical Points which having no dimension, never can touch. Attractions & Repulsions from & towards these points at different distances  ballance one Another so exactly as to Constitute limits of Bodies and by the different distances at which they Act form all the variety of Corporeal Substance with which we are acquainted.
If this theory were lyable to no Objection but that which lys against every mere Hypothesis it certainly should be rejected.
The Phaenomenon of Body is certainly in our apprehension Coeval or prior to any Law of Nature from which it can be explaind. Unless we recour to that first Law of All The Will of  Almighty God by which all minds exist and Obtain their conditions constituted in their own Nature or in other Natures with which they communicate. That the Condition of Man is effected in both ways cannot be doubted. He stands related to his Maker & to fellow Creatures of Intelligence like his own. The Link or Channel of Communication with either is the perception he receives & gives from the Stores of a Supposed Material System equally efficient to his purpose whether a System of communicable  Feelings or of things felt.
Whoever admires more the Intellectual than the Material System Will rejoice to think not only that there is  world Governed by Supreme Wisdom Goodness And Power: but that the World is actually no Other but the Eternal Essence of these Attributes for a Person from whose Invention & Will proceed new Germs of Intelligence destined through proper Stages to work their own Way in endless  Approach to the Summit of Perfection and Happiness.


XXII. OF THE SCIENCES OF WHICH THE SUBJECT IS MIND 

It is of great moment to know what we would be at in the pursuits of Science.
So prepared we are the better qualifyed to find our Way & to estimate our Attainments.
We are collecting the knowledge of Particulars from our Infancy upwards.
Their resemblancy or Sameness Their distinctions and Separations do not Escape us. They are arranged into Classes Kinds & Species and when any odd  one Appears we are Anxious to comprehend  in some kind or Species. And this in Natural History is what we call Comprehending or Understanding a Subject.
The Forms of Being are so far matter of Curiosity and the operations which take place with respect to them are so no less.
Motion Gravitation Cohesion take our Attention in mere matter.
Vegetation And fructification & propagation from Seed take our Attention in Plants.
Spontaneity Instinct Appetite & Action as well as Nutrition take our Attention in Animals.
Intelligence opinion Invention Design & Contrivance as well as Animal  Instinct take our attention in Men.
These we do or may Call the Kingdoms or Provinces of Nature.
The Facts in each are peculiar.
Matter or Corporeal Subjects exhibit what may be calld the mechanical Facts of moving Gravitating &c.
To these the Plant The Animal & The mind subjoin their peculiarities.
Operations or Facts no less than the mere forms of Being admit of being Arranged into kinds.
And when Facts of any Separate Kind are expressed in their most general Terms They are called Laws of Nature.
Thus is a Law of Nature that all  bodies Gravitate That all bodies continue in their state of motion or Rest untill some external Force is applied to change it.
Plants Spring from Seed take Root in the Soil Vegetate or Shoot Vertically in the Air in a direction opposite to that of their Weight &c &c.
Animals tho destined to derive Nutrition from the Soil are Set free from it carry their Roots wrapped up in their own Frame Change Place and seek Accommodations for themselves.
Man knows himself & seeks to preserve or improve his Condition.
These are general and Special Laws of Nature respecting the different orders of Being.
 They are collected from particular Facts or Specimens. Differing are set aside & what is common to many is Stated in a geral Rule.
When new appearances occur we are Anxious to know to what Rule they may be referred And this comprehension of Particulars is termed Theory of Science.
The first Gratification of mind is the perception of Fact.
The second Generalisation into Rules.
The Third comprehension or Theory of new or Singular Phaenomena.
Science has the merit of Classification in Common with Natural History:
but it has a further merit in being the History of what is done or Practicable  and the manner in which it may be practised. And on this account it is not only an accession of Knowledge but an accession of Power also.
The Method or Arrangement in Natural or descriptive History is in a certain degree Arbitrary & may be varyed to facilitate comprehension or Memory: but in Science it is fixed in Nature And cannot be varyd without frustrating the very Purpose for which it is instituted. Namely to Ascertain the Law by which he may proceed to Obtain a repetition of Certain Effects.
If he mistake or misstate the Law he is frustrated in all his attempts and instead of an  accession of Power betrays his weakness.
Such are the Physical Laws which in the order of Study are first investigated by induction from a Sufficient number of Specimens next applyd in Theory to explain seemingly anomalous appearances And in the end employed in practise to form Rules of Art, & give accessions of Power.
To Ascertain a Law it is Sufficient it be known as a Fact tho without any previous Cause from which to infer it. And wherever any Fact is thus proceed on as a Law its consequences not its antecedent cause is to be considered. In mechanics The Laws of motion & Gravitation are assumed And tho the Vibration of Pendulums is a Sequel of these Laws. Yet in the Science  of the Pendulum, Vibration is Assumed as a Law & from thence forward traced to its Consequences As a fixed measure proportioned to its length.
There are in all the Departments of Nature certain Ultimate facts to be Assumed as Laws within the respective Departments tho not communicable from one Department to another.
The Laws of Motion & Gravitation Are the most extensive throughout the Corporeal System but they do not account for Vegetation Animal Life or Intelligence. And in each of these departments the Laws or Ultimate Facts are peculiar And uncommunicable.
In every Attempt to pass the bounds of Separation & explain the Phaenomena of one Department on Principles taken from  a Different one The purpose of Science is frustrated no genuine accessions of knowledge much less of Power are gained. The Attempt to explain the Ascent of Sap in Vegetables by the Capillary attraction of their small ducts or Spungy Substances is altogether fruitless of any aid to Intelligence or Art. To Resolve the Spontaneity of Animals or the Intelligence of man into corpuscular combination or Form is still more preposterous And Absurd. 
As there are Facts whether Particular or General relating to Mind. It follows That in this Subject also we may Arrive at Laws of Nature and on them rest the Fabrick of Physical Science. Here we Are told  that the Sources and results of Information are extremely different from what they are in other Subjects! No doubt they are. But are not these differences Facts & if they be is not the knowledge of them a Science or history of Fact as in every Other Instance.
Here indeed the pursuits of Science have been perplexed in a peculiar degree. In part by the confusion of terms in Language And in part by confounding together the Provinces of Physical & moral Science of which the Latter refers in a peculiar manner or almost exclusively to the Department of Intellectual Nature. 
Here  not only enquire what is Fact apart from any Distinction of Choice. We inquire also what is eligible apart from any consideration of the degree in which it actually does or does not take place. Confounding any two such Questions together must be greatly Perplexing.
But apart from this difficulty which the Votaries of Science may overcome. The confusion of Terms metaphorical found in slight Analogies subsisting in subjects entirely different is a Source of perplexity. Slipping insensibly into use is yet more insurmountable by the most general even of Students & Votaries of Science.
Knowing tho very different from Drawing Painting or Modelling  is or may be expressed in the metaphorical Term of having a Picture image or model of its Subject And a Person who is Observing An remembering a Subject is said to be taking And retaining Impressions. And when we are familiar with These Expressions we are Confidently Asked what can thinking be else. It is true these are frequent or common names & expressions for thinking: but it is a Fact altogether different And a primary reform in Science would be to discard the Metaphors that mislead and betake to the proper terms which belong to the Subject without any illusive Analogy to anything else. Language has owed so  much to the liberal lending of Terms from Subjects of Perception to Subjects of Consciousness: that tho
in the case of many the Origin of the Term is almos effaced yet few or none will be found that has not been borrowed in this manner.
Idea is a Metaphor borrowed from Visible Form to conception or mental Apprehension. It has been identifyed with Picture Image or Type And the Elements of Thought are Types or Images. And to possess the whole Science of Understand is to run the Change upon Types or images of Things.
The Physical Science of mind however if ever we possess it truly is a collection not of whimsical Analogies but of Facts such as they are in themselves. Such Facts relating to what may be called the Cognitive Department of Mind have now been Aimed at in the Statement of Science its origin And its Results. For altho Science may relate to forreign Nature yet it is itself the Indigenous product of Mind and in being stated Constitutes a Considerable part in the History & Science of Mind. It is indeed far from being the whole of its History & in respect to Human Nature in particular we may find a copious List of Facts or Physical  relating to what may be called the Active Nature of Man in contradiction to what has been called the Cognitive.

XXIII. OF GOOD AND EVIL PERFECTION AND DEFECT 

It is Good to be at Ease & fraught with what is agreeable.
It is evil to be uneasy or fraught with what is dissagreeable.
It is Perfection to be powerful in commanding and communicating what is Good & in Avoiding or preventing what is Evil.
It follows that Intelligent Conscious or living Natures alone are susceptible of Good or Evil. And Powerful Intelligence  alone is Susceptible of Perfection or Defect. These appellations are bestowed on Any mere Existence figuratively in proportion as they are Subservient to the use of Intelligent Bein or are the Materials of Art.
What is the Value of Bread? It is the Staff of Life of Gold. It is Ductile durable & lasting of the Diamond It shades a Lustre on the Eye. It being Rare like Gold it Serves to distinguish the Rich without this Relation to Mind & living Nature; Inanimate Matter tho the whole were Assembled would be but a Clod neither Good nor Evil Perfect or Defective.
Man therfore in this Scene of his Being is the principal monument or repository  of Good or Evil And The Author of the Splendid Scene. The Supremely Perfect  whom nothing can frustrate or resist in Commaning and Communicating what is good.
What is the Chief End of Man is the first Question of our Catechism.
And the Answer is also given To Glorify God & to enjoy Him forever. 
The Question may be supposed to refer either to the End for which Man is made or to the End which he ought to propose in all his actions. And it is probable that his Chief End will be one & the same in both these descriptions.
What is to glorify  God: but to repeat & Multiply those Operations of Wisdom & Goodness in which The Glory of God consists.
And what is it to enjoy him forever but to have in the Created Mind all the Possible participations of those God like Attributes.
In this Question And Answer therfor tho intended for Children;
The meaning is not only just: but Sublime to the utmost reach of human Language or thought.
In deriving our Reflections from the present State of man we must be contented to Abate this Lofty Tone and Sink into the Ordinary Notes of human Life And contemplate the Animal with his means of Subsistence and  accommodations; his Arts & their results his feeble Powers whether to command or to communicate his Species of Good. The Eagle may soar as high as the Power of Wing or Specifick Gravity. But he cannot remain aloft nor build his airy above the summit of his hindred Clifs. 
Nor can Man pretend to Shape a Course for him to run in Nature of which the direction is not already fixed in the steps however tardy of which the Track is already marked.
Whence does he now derive his share of Ease & his measure of Agreeable Existence. Whether must he fly from Evils to which he is exposed.
 This may lead us to the End with wh The Almighty formed him and wh he himself should have in View in his Pursuits or in his Estimate of Things.
In Health of Body and of mind or in the Absence of bodily dissorder of conscious of Folly or of Vice Existence itself is not only tranquil but in a very high degree Agreeable.
A Simple & Well directed Author has observed That all the Emotions and Exertions in which neither Fear nor Malice have a part are Agreeable.
Mind is an Active Power & mere Action is agreeable or what is called Amusing. What may it not be if the source from which it  Springs is also sweet or of the delightful kind. Such is the tender Affection with which The Parent tends his Child. The affectionate Companion joins his Friend or the Patriot glows with eager Zeal to save his Country.
Thither then must the Caitif fly to avoid the Evils to which he is exposed. He may blame the Scene arround for what he Suffers: but the Suffering is in himself. If not the dissorder which ill conduct has brought into his Frame. It is a gnawing Pain which Malice hatred envy Fear or Jealousy engenders Which Remorse or Shame or Self Abasement fosters.
 It is a Languor which want of Proper Occupation Constitutes, or Ignorance of what his faculties may well enable him to perceive. That worlds are formed in Wisdom and the end is Secured for ever by the Power which formed them. In Such a Scene no prospect is allarming and the thought of what is to come is pleasing to the well affected mind even in the resignation of a being supposed to be temporary & come to an End of its term.
Tis Pleasant to have seen & loved the Works of God. Let Others now succeed & do the Same. 
 Mere Life if in Health of Body & Soundness of mind is agreeable And the means of Subsistence & preservation are of proportional Value. They also furnish occupation & the intercourse of agreeable offices in human Life.
The Object or end of human Life we may venture to pronounce in general is to avoid what is dissagreeable and to Obtain the reverse or what is agreeable. This Rule cannot be controverted. But being an Active precept founded in the concern which every individual has in his own wellfare: it were dangerous to extend it beyond the Limits of his Power or so far to engage him in fruitless Pursuits & vain expectations. This would be to engage him in a course of Anxiety trouble and disappoint highly dissagreeble & inconsistent with enjoyment or peace of mind.
With Respect to his own Will or choice he is absolute Master of it. And it concerns him in every Instance to decide for what is just Innocent and Beneficent.
His inclinations or habits may be dissagreeable but if he is fully decided Against them Other habits will succeed. And he is in this manner empowered not only to choose what he shall do at any particular Instant; but also what he shall be at all times inclined to do.
It is in his Power to correct his Apprehensions of things by Observation and diligent enquiry.
 His contemplations and occupations of the Mind no one can restrain from Subjects the most agreeable to him The Order of Nature & the unceasing Energies of Almighty God.
It is in his Power to choose the proper Part in his Conduct respecting Men & human Affairs. And so far the Rule is Absolute with respect to him that he do nothing that is improper, or neglect anything that is proper to be done: But events are not is in his Power And whatever they be they are to him only circumstances that Constitute the conjuncture or Situation in which he is taken. His Part on every emergence is still the same to do what  wise proper and Just.  In doing so with a diligent & decided mind,
nothing will be wanting to his happiness.
His Fortune may occupy him & it is happy to conduct himself properly with respect to it. But the precise measure of it or the Events which Affect it do not preclude the continued Propriety of his Conduct. His Health is not in his Power but a proper attention to Diet and exercise is in his Power And here the Rule of Life terminates in respect to Health. He may be in Pain but in acting properly is as happy as in that circumstance he can be And this  all that his Nature & condition of Life admits. It is known that pain is sometimes required to the Welfare of Man and his happiness does not consist in  exemption from that Pain but in the endurance & propriety of Conduct under it. The happiness of a Patient in the Stone is Fortitude and a manly resolution not to Shrink from The operation required in such cases. Nature has not enabled Man to avoid every Pain but he is enabled to bear it And this is his happiness where pain is unavoidable.
In the School of Nature where Man is to Learn what is Good to be confirmed in his Choice & by exercises be advanced in the Vigure & Extent of his Faculties The check of Pain is as conducive to the End as the allurement or admonition of Pleasure. And in such a Scene we are sometimes told that Happiness is the highest  measure of enjoyment & least Suffering Present or to come. The Rule may be just in its general terms: but in the application difficult even beyond the Reach  Man for what is pleant now may be followed hereafter & beyond the reach of human foresight be followed by an Over ballance of Pain. Man however is qualified to distinguish Right & wrong & Strictly Admonished to embrace the one And Avoid the Other. And this in matters of Choice is a Substitute for Experience & fortifys the mind against future Contingies or the possible Consequences of a present Choice & is indeed the best security we can have against any future Condemnation or Blame. The Stoic therefore Said The chief or only Good is Virtue. Do on every occasion what  is just & you are Safe. The Epicurean Said All good is pleasure do what upon the whole is most pleasant And this is your Wisdom.
This Rule might not mislead if we were qualifyed to determine in every Instance what upon the whole is most pleasant. But to apply it with Safety we must consult what is innocent & Right for if we neglect this in Search of Pleasure Shame Contrition & remorse will apprise us of our Error.
Pleasure is an unlucky designation for the chief good. Pleasures are unequally agreeable & some to be shunned alltogether. It is sometimes stated in opposition to Bussiness or any serious Concern it precludes engagement in the cares of Family or of State. And  whole Sect with its founder appear to have been the Dupes of this mistake.  The Founder betook himself to a retir and Unactive Lif in a Garden with a few Friends And the Sect admitted among their maxims that a Wise man would decline the Cares of a Family. This may be prudent in Some Instances but in all would be ruinous to mankind. Their acknowledgement that the preferable Pleasures were those of Innocence Tranquillity & a virtuous life exempt from Excess or dissorder of any Sort did not compensate the License they seemed to give the unwary & which without any offence to the School Youth in Particular were inclined to take in Shrinking from Labour & in seizing for  Pleasure or Good the nearest at hand.
The followers of Zeno maintained it is not indifferent under what Auspices we sett out in Search of Happiness. The Standard of Rectitude & Virtue is erected by Nature and The Ingenuous flock to it through every appearance of Toil or Trouble & in the result arrive at the most real Enjoyments. The standard Pleasure convokes the Remiss & the Voluptuous. They aim at Enjoyment but on  Road in which it is not to be found & they find their mistake too late when they have not the Resolution to alter Their Courses.
The  followers of Zeno took an Early impression that Virtue meaning A Wise Benevolent Fearless or Intrepid Mind was not only the most Real but the only Good & in the Sequel of this Phraseology incurred the Paradoxes by which their School was distinguished. That Pain was no Evil & surely the Pains to be suffered in the ways of Virtue are not to be shunned as such.
Their maxims promised a Life of dauntless integrity not only when it might be preserved with ease & Safety: but where it was to be mantained through Labour and Danger.
In this Sect Cato & Marcus Aurelius found the Nursery of  Heroes & The School Of Godlike Benevolence as well as Fortitude & Strength of Mind.
The Sect in which they were formed continued for Ages under the vilest Abuses of Power & Military Government to the downfall of the Roman Empire; A haven of Law & Justice to which the oppressed might recur wherever the application of Law or Jurisprudence were permitted. It remains in fact a principal Ornament of Antient Times And a kind of Reproach to Ages who with all the Advantages of Religion and Science fall greatly Short in the Schools of Morality or in the Estimate of Good & Evil.
 Among the disstinction which operate in Sentiments Agreeable or the reverse may be numberd that of Perfection and Defect. The Sentiments vary in degrees of Intensity. From Approbation to Esteem Admiration Enthusiasm on the one hand And dissapprobation Contempt Detestation & Abhorrence on the other.
The distinction of Perfection & Defect takes place like Happiness & Misery in living or Intelligent forms of Being alone or is applied figuratively to Subjects in their Relation to Living And Intelligent Being. The artist is perfect or defective The material is fit or unfit to be employed in the Art.

What is the Excellence or Perfection of Intelligent Being? Wisdom,
Goodness and Power. Its Defects the Reverse Folly Malignity and Imbecility!
 Of this distinction we are Conscious and know it as a reality not merely like Perception as a Sensation of ours. And the Affection is agreeable in the Reverse in Contemplation as well as in Consciousness.
The Sentiment is such as Intelligent Being may Command for himself on the one hand or Avoid on the other as it depends on himself to be wise & Good & so far his Power is Compleat. Excellence may therefore be admitted into the Sum of happiness for which the Free Agent is accountable.
Whether Happiness & Perfection be one and the same seems to admit in the Case of Man of some doubt.
We sometimes lament the Worthy and Complain that the Good things of this Life are the share of the worthless.  Meantime the desire to Excell is one of the most powerful of the human Breast. It is the Principle of Ambition Emulation and Elevation of mind. Where the Ideas of Excellence are Correct it is the Principle of Integrity & Magnanimity when these Ideas are false as in the admiration of Riches And their Accompaniments it is the foundation of Pride Vanity & Envy or operates in injurious Contempt of other Men which Goodness would prevent if the Notion of Excellence had been Correct.
That a Principle so Powerful when properly directed should Act in Opposition to the happiness of the Actor, is very repugnant to the general Analogy of Nature where all things Contribute to the General Order and mutual Subserviency And two such Vehement Principles As the  desire of happiness & of Excellence when well understood can never be Supposed to jarr or Counter act each Other.
Experience however which is the proper Source of information in Such matters will Authorise us to Say that in the Case of Man loaded as he is with the Conditions of An Animal Nature, the Wise & the Good and the Self Commanding in all Animal Concern are at once the most happy & the most Excellent of Men. And the Almighty who has reserved to himself the disposal of all Events in the course of things has committed to his Intelligent Creatures the Form of their own Characters & with this the Rank they are to attain in the result of their Progress. Ordaining that the way to Happiness the end of their  Creation if they continue to pursue it should lead through Actions of Moral and Intellectual attainments of Wisdom Goodness and Power.

XXIV. OF THE 1ST LAW OF LIVING NATURE PRESERVE THYSELF 

In our Estimate of Men & Manners we frequently require a Virtue that is dissinterested & proscribe the Selfish under Epithets of ungenerous & Vile.
In this we seem to fly in the Face of Nature & make it a merit to counteract her Laws which entrust every Individual with the Care and Government of himself & his own Affairs. For this she has made him Master of his own Actions & for the preservation of all relys upon the vigilance of each in his own Cause.
There is in the Mind of the Worthy a principle of Benevolence and a Principle of Elevation or Magnanimity by which they are supposed to neglect themselves in their concern for Others & sacrifice their happiness to a Notion of Nobleness & Elevation of mind.
 In this account it Should seem that the moral Nature of Man is at Variance with the Physical and Man to be praiseworthy must Neglect himself and forgo his happiness: But nature is not inconsistent with herself, And Contradictions originate in the Abuse of Words not in the inconsistency of Things or Realities.
We certainly Missapply the Terms Interest and Self when we Suppose it a merit or a Duty to forgo them. When a Person limits the Appellation of Self to his Belly & four Quarters, Interest will be limited of Course to their appurtenances or accomodations. The Man that to be sober stints his Belly or the Charitable parts with his money is praised for Self denial & the preference of compassion to profit.
Is it therefore understood that a mans Sobriety is no Concern of his or his benevolent Affection is no part of  himself? We do not in reality in passing Judgment on Virtue proceed on these Suppositions And in Word at least require that Man to be Worthy of Praise should Sacrifice himself.
Such inconsistencies in Language Argue an Abuse of Words. And the first Step towards a just Apprehension or citation of things in our communications with one Another is to clear the meaning of Words. Every Individual is to himself what Nature has made him not a Body merely with senses And Appetites but a mind Also conscious of itself Conscious of its thoughts affections intentions and occupations Conscious of Right & Wrong of Excellence and Defect of Dignity & meanness. If health & the proper gratifications or Enjoyments of Sense and appetite be agreeable So also even in a higher degree is peace or tranquillity of Mind. Exemption from Fear & Malice in any of their Forms Jealousy Cowardice or pusillanimity. Envy & Revenge Exemption from Remorse Shame or degradation.
Exemption from Languor With the Possession of Benevolent & Agreeable Affections contemplations designs And Exertions.
What shall we say then of a Person who overlooks all these Appurtenances Interests & Concerns of his Mind to limit the Appellation of Self to his mere Animal Nature  Appurtenances. Only that he is grievously Mistaken and ill qualifyd to state in what Man is truly carefull or Negligent of himself.
The Blessed Aurelius has left us a Book which we Commonly entitle his Meditations but what he himself or those who Understood him best have entitled A Treatise of his own Concerns   . What are those Concerns? His opinions or Conceptions of things his affections Resolutions and actions. Would you be happy he says to himself; Do with Diligence Benignity And Resolution what you are Conscious the present moment or occasion requires, And you will be so. Now in this no one can stop or hinder you.
Was this man dissinterested or indifferent to Self? No! He was in the true Sense of Words the most Selfish & devoted to his own Interest which he would  forgo for the sake of any other person or thing whatever.
Was he therefore indifferent to the Concerns of his fellow Creatures? No!
for a principal Concern of his own was the affection which he bore to his fellow Creatures & the fruits of Beneficence which Spontaneously sprung from  his Heart. D the Modest & humble relinquish his own Elevation & Dignity in the respect which he pays to his fellow Creatures No? For in this chiefly he conceives his own Dignity to Consist that he is Candid Benevolent & respectful towards every one Else. The Proud & the Vain are Contemptuous for they rest Self Estimation on Grounds consistent with Contempt hatred & Cruelty. These are the truly disinterested & Negligent of themselves who neglect the Genuine Interests of Wisdom & Goodness which might be their own to build on Birth & Fortune or external matter which are no part of themselves and can never constitute any real worth or appurtenance of their Nature.
Hence the perplexity of our Language because felicity implies Goodness to Others we would have it to be no Interest of ourselves.

XXVI. OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY 

Liberty is a term of many different Significations.
Civil Liberty is the security of all Civil Rights. 
Political Liberty is the Form of Government proper to that Security.
Moral Liberty is the condition in which Men may judge and act for themselves without any limits but those of Innocence & Justice.
Physical Liberty is the conscious Faculty of Volition & Choice Essential to Voluntary Agents.
On this faculty is founded the consciousness of Merit & Demerit and the Just propriety of Rewards & Punishments.
So far the Evidence of Liberty is the same with that of our Existence. I.E.
Consciousness of our Being & the mode of our Being.
There is no  Evidence paramount to this by which our Liberty can be called into question.
We are told however that Volition or will like every other contingent Circumstance has its occasion and Cause. That in this Case as in every Case of Cause & Effect the Connection is necessary And as there is no Will without a motive. The Will is precisely what the motive has power to produce As motion is necessarily what the impulse or moving force is fit to produce.
It is a Primary & Necessary Truth that every Effect must have a Cause.
And the Effect unless prevented by some more powerful cause must necessarily Ensue.
This Maxim is true as every instance of Tautology is True because the term Effect is used to Signify what is produced by something else And the maxim when the Definition is  put for the Thing defined is no more than That what is produced by another thing is so produced.
But Existence is Eternal & can have had no Cause prior to itself. 
Contingent modes of Existence succeed one another & we know not by what link or chain whether necessary or otherwise.
We learn the Connection of Cause & Effect from the Experience of Intention & Will preceeding the Act that ensues. And the Connection so learned is presumed to take place whenever analogous or Similar Antecedents & Consequence are Observed not in every case of Succession But where the Consequent always ensues from the antecedent & is in the same proportion then we presume that there is something analogous to intention connecting the one with the  Other. Of Necessity in what we ourselves do or in any thing else we know nothing. We presume it however in the case of Impulse & Motion. And we took the notion of Cause & Effect from Intention & Execution. We return the Gift in the Figurative Motive: to the connection of Will & its Objects.
This  not the only case in which we are the Dupes of our Metaphorical or figurative Language. 
A Subject has made an impression on the mind. And from thence forward the memory or remaining knowledge of a Subject is an impression a Type Image or model. What can it be else we say And all the names of Perception Apprehension or memory are discarded or consigned to the Vulgar who do not know better or in what their thoughts consist.
 There is no will we say without a Motive Any more than there is Motion without impulse And the connection is equally necessary in Both.
But motive here is a figurative Term bringing with it the assumption of necessity when the cause of motion Implys; But dissmiss the Metaphor & recur to the Language appropriate to Mind & no such implication will be found.
There is no Will without an Object. Therefore the Mind has an object in determining itself.
The Conscious Process is that the mind Conceives an Object & after comparing different Objects makes its choice. If there be any Necessity Constraining it in every Instance there is no consciousness of such Necessity nor any Evidence of its Existence where  Consciousness is the only Evidence & so far paramount to every Other that every Other glimpse of Conjecture must disappear before it.
A Person  without any apparent Absurdity that a motive was irresible But his Object was entertaind by himself & he is accountable for having Entertained such an Object.
There is no Will or Choice but we may reverse at pleasure if we are willing to stand the consequences of such a Reversal.
This is all we can ever know  this important Subject. Every argument A Priori from the Necessity of cause taken from our consciousness of Intention & Execution or from any Collateral Topic of Divine Prescience is unfounded or inapplicable in this Case.

XXVII. OF THE THINGS THAT ARE OR MAY BE 

A late Author has said that Body is a Phnomenon & he would proceed to explain it on principles very different from what we perceive it to be in Magnitude & Figure.
If the province of Theory is to be extended so far why not some what Farther.
Existence is the great Phnomenon of all, and if Theory has no bounds let this also be explained.
The Principle to which we recur whether necessity or Chance may be an Existence or non Existence. If the last attempt is for absurd for of nothing nothing can come.
If the Principle we assume be an Existence it is the very Phnomenon to be explained, & here at least we must stop as we possibly should have done at the perception of Body & be contented with the Fact that Bodies are.
If the Theorist may question the existence of whatever he cannot explain, Let him tell the first Person he  meets. I dont know whence you are & therefore doubt you are not. 
If he succeed in this doubt let him try to doubt his own Existence of this he will find that the very doubt is Sufficient Evidence & that he cannot so much as suppose it possible he is mistaken in the consciousness of his own existence.
There then commences the Evidence of Being & unquestionable Reality.
Other Beings are perceived but in them the Evidence of reality is in some degree weakened.
The Perceiver may suppose & many have actually Supposed that perception is a mode of their own existence not an Evidence of any thing else.
But if this Doctrine be true it is not worth knowing because it is not attended by Any Consequence whatever. Whether Fire be a reality or a mere perception our conduct with respect to it is precisely the same up either Supposition.
The best way then is to talk as Nature has taught us  speak of what we perceive as realities. And knowing the Reality of Existence every one in his own can be ready to admit the possibility of Existence in any other form as well as our own.  As  Forms what are we to Suppose the most likely to be found in Being.
That Form of which we cannot doubt The Reality. Consciousness Thinking Purpose & Will &c &c or Figure and Magnitude which may possly be a mere perception or Mode of our Intellectual Being. 
It is Evident in this case that the Byas of Apprehension should be to consider every Being as Thinking till we knew the Contrary. And when a Stone Falls be ready to ask what it means.
The Contrary however is the more common. Our attention is so much occupied by our perceptions & these so interesting that it requir more than the mere presentation of an Object to make us apprehend a Person or intelligent Being in the Case.
When we find Bodies like our own with similar Action appearance of Purpose & application, we do not hesitate in conducting ourselves towards a Person who separate & in any thing different from ourselves is to  be met on a Supposition that he too has his purpose & his Will and is to be gratifyed or opposed as his design may be compatible with our own. Whether we believe Persons Superiour or inferiour in the measure of Intelligence we believe it real & Multiplied in numbers indefinite wherever the Symtoms of it are apprehended or perceived. Where we see House & Cultivated Fields we know the Country to be inhabited altho we do not See a Man.
Wherever we see usefull Purpose obtained by Means which have no other connection than their Subserviency to a common purpose: we do not Hesitate to say they are brought together by design & the Agency of Intelligence.
When Vegetation is brought about by the presence of Soil of Air of Light & Warmth of the Sun & Moisture from the Clouds acting upon Seeds of Plants all these viz. Earth & Air Sea Evaporated into Clouds wafting & shading their moisture over Land. Sun rising every morning & running his Course in the Heavens not otherwise conn than as they are combined to cover the Land with  Plants & render a Proper Residence for Animals and Men. We cannot hesitate in Saying that here is purpose & every Symptom of Benefice & of a Supreme & Masterly Intelligence: We are not limited to think it the Intelligence of Man but conceive it to be of an order much superior to his. 
All Nature is full of such Evidence & proof of intelligence we are apt to conceive it where probably we are far Short of the Design or are ill qualifyed to penetrate The Purpose. Notwithstanding of Such Errors & the possibility of many Such Mistakes yet the Genuine Byas of Intelligent Being here takes place & tho all the perceptions of Sense are mere Magnitude and Figure yet we here perceive Intelligence & are ever occupied in tracing the Ends and exemplifyed in Nature And are as confident of not being mistaken as in the consciousness of meaning in ourselves. Who ever doubted that the Eye was made to see The Ear to hear The Teeth to grind & the stomach to digest the Food & so of innumerable  Instances which tho various are Still Analogous and Argue in the Power Intelligent Invention Boundless continual Analogy & combination of Parts to a Beneficent or Salutary End.
A Late Philosopher has attempted to resolve Beauty into Uniformity amidst Variety. These however are Contradictions And his meaning would be better expressed in the Terms of Variety with Analogy which are consistent & in reality form the Character of Nature And its Beauty is no other than the symptoms of Intelligence Invention Wisdom & Goodness which bears in every part.
It were vain to go into Particulars where every Reader from his own observation might Suggest many more than our paper could contain. But man is the great Subject of Animadversion in this department of Thought where Intelligence in a certain Measure is familiarly known. And easily extended in our Apprehension to indefinitely Multiplied forms of Being in Nature but  And wherer it is Supreme or that to which the Invention of its Form & Condition in the State of Man is Ascribed As it furnishes many Symptoms of a Wise & Beneficent Design So it is in his Case alledged to furnish equal or perhaps more frequent Symptoms of Neglect or faulty arrangement.
From his Case therefore we are to derive the Proofs either of Wise & beneficent Design or of the Reverse And from his Case be ready to affirm or deny the Presence and Agency of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness in Nature.
The first and most Striking Feature of Nature to a General Observer perhaps is the indefinite variety of Forms exhibited in vegetable & Animal Kingdoms.
This circumstance may not affect the question relating to the Authors
design whether marked by goodness or otherwise. If indeed in all this variety there is consistency order & mutual Subserviency besides what in the description of man would  be called inexhaustible Invention Supreme Ingenuity & wonderful workmanship. If to every Form there is an Apt Position and a wonderful fitness of the Form  the circumstances of the Case we must indeed infer not consummate Intelligence merely but consummate Order & goodness of Design.
In this variety tho partly Effected by unequal magnitude or dimension to a great extent, yet it does not appear that Magnitude implys any distinction of Estimation or Value. The Authors Work is as perfect in the microscopick Forms of being as in those of the greatest Extent as Perfect in the Gnat as in the Sun & his surrounding Planets.
This alone would lead to the assumption of mind and Will as the Principle of Existence & form.
To Mind & Will the small & the great are indifferent to itself occupying no Space there is no room required for its Attainments. The most extensive knowledge The most complicated  & various designs make no difference in this respect and Intelligence may be as perfect applyed to the organisation of a Gnat as to that of an Elephant or a Cyclops. This is the Character of a Workmanship in which dimension is indifferent And in respect to which mind the unextended seat of design Invention contrivance & knowledge of Affection & Purpose of Good & Evil of Happiness or Misery of Energy and Power of Excellence & defect of Beauty & Deformity is the source from which all things come & to accommodate which in occasions of Choice & exertion of Enjoyment & Action all things are. What is a mere inanimate Clod except it be the Material on which mind may work: untill it has received the force which mind may give it, & untill it may serve as the Conveyance of one Mind to another. A World Composed of Such Materials then we may infer  proceeds from Mind & is made for the sake of those minds to which it has had or be made to have some Relations.
Next to the Feature of indefinite Variety presented in the forms of Being.
The fabrication of all living & Organized Forms by seeds Nascent Germs & Progression through Various Stages to the Maturity or projecte attainment of each is an Obvious & Striking Feature in this diversifyed Multiplication of Being.
In this mere form of Progressive being there is perhaps nothing to affect the Question of Goodness in the Author except so far as every Germ has a proper Place for its origin and proper accommodation for its Progress & points to a Maturity of Benefit to the System And except so far as in the means by which it  be obtained & Cultivated it is fitted for the dominion of Intelligent Being for whose sake it is made.
If on this Globe man is the Intelligent Being for whose Residence & 
Dominion this scene of things is constructed. How Beneficent Design from this order of things proceeds. Man by observing the seed & the Germ from which Plants & Animals proceed the means of their advancement is enabled not only to eradicate or remove what is noxious but also to Substitute what is Serviceable or Beneficial to himself by Observing the Law of Nature in every department within his competence can procure for himself a repetition of every Salutary Effect to his own Purpose or the relief of his Necessities and in this is manifest The Goodness of his Maker relating to him.
In this Argument however it may be Observed that there is a latent defect & foundation for an Inference the reverse of that which we would draw from it. If the Supply of a want suggests Goodness in the Author of that Supply; does not the  existence of Such a want imply indifference or even Malevolence on the Part of that Being by whom it is suffered to take place. 
This Objection is apparently Subversive of every Argument in support of Religion or all the Evidence on which we erect our Faith in the Good of God. The Want disproves all that we would infer from the Supply.
Here however is the very Point at which we are enabled to seize the Clue by which to extricate ourselves from this admirable Fabrick of Contradictory Appearances.
On this Earth the Ascending Scale of Being terminates in Man. If he is ill formed or misplaced our Inference of Wisdom or Goodness in the Author will be deprived of its main Support. He is a Variety in a System of which variety is a prominent Feature. And his form originates in a Germ on which  he improves by degrees or waxs in Stature & Power.
In some things he Appears to be worse dealt with than most other Animals more feeble & longer detaind in Infancy defenceless and Naked: But in his progress shows himself of a Superior Cast Observant Intelligent Remembering Knowing Judgeing And Acting Ready to seize every means of Information or Communication & by a Multiplicity of Diversifyd Signs in Speech especially finding expression for all the varieties of his Perceptions inference imagination & affections.
He not only like the Other Animals selects & avails himself of what he finds for his purpose in Nature. But discerns also a combination of means for the Attainment of Beneficent Ends on which he grounds an Apprehension of Design and Deliberate Contrivance for the Preservation & Well Being of Natures susceptible of Good or Evil.
The Author is invisible but his operation is manifest. And this Native of the Earth soon learns to extend His Views to the Heavens. Becomes Acquainted with the Laws & forms of Nature traces them in thought through the most remote departments of observation and Thought to their Author in a Form of Intelligence & Power proportiond to the greatness of his Work & even Far Beyond what any Temporary or Created Work can ex.
He is thus  apprised of a Magnificence & Perfection which in Eternal Existence has no limits & which he assumes infinitely beyond his own Feeble apprehension. It is nevertheless a model on which he may form his Ambition or desire of surmounting Defects.
In stating what the Progressive Nature of Man may reach. We are not limited to the measure of vulgar Attainments or any Average of what the human upon the whole may have reached. Single examples are Sufficient to show what Human Nature may become in the result of happy Conduct or in the Continued progress which this Nature is yet destined to make.
There have been Men whose Ambition is said to have a Resemblance  of the Supreme Wisdom & Goodness of almighty God. And what is perhaps no less remarkable in views & Characters Apparently so presumptuous. Modesty itself was one of the Prominent Features. It could not indeed be Otherwise: For Vanity is the result of False or mistaken Notions of Worth & builds upon what others can be made to think rather than the Reality of any Good whatever And in this the Vain may arrive at a point from which he may look on his fellow Creatures Arround him: But he who would Form himself on the model of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness must in every moment be sensible how far he comes short. It is nevertheless the genuine Butt of his Progress if supposed to continue forever & through Multiplied Scenes of Being to  the progress he is destined to make.
What is this Perfection in which the Supremacy of Eternal Intelligence consists or in which the Progress of Nascent or created Intelligence may be conceived to point?
It is probably: but another Name for Happiness & Supreme Good. For in the Estimate of Things there is no Good without Happiness & of course no Subject. Estimation without mind or the Capacity of Happiness & the Enjoyment of what is Good. Even Man is happy only in the degree in which he supplys his defects and can Substitute just and Agreeable thoughts designs affections & exertions for the Reverse of what is of less value.
What has the Author  of Existence, then, done in qualifying man for a progress in Perfection and Goodness of Mind. He has in him laid the Foundation of Happiness together with that of Advancement towards Perfection & the Excellence of Intelligent which unites at once together with the discernment of what is Good the merit of Free choice & the Consciousness of security in the Good they have attaind as depending on themselves.
This indeed is a felicity in the highest degree realized in the Supreme Being alone & in the free agents he has made incident only in the degree in which their aim is directed towards him.
It is now of moment to inquire by what means the Germ of Intelligence in Man is Cultivated & brought forward in the ways of Wisdom and Goodness.
 This progress is realized in extending knowledge The fruit of observation & inquiry. In strength of Faculty the fruit of Exercise and Practice. In discernment of Good & Evil the Fruit of Experience. In happy & decided Choice the fruit of Caution & Deliberation. In Steadiness & Fortitude the fruit of Indifference to the temptations of folly or the threats of Fortune.
The Beneficence of the Author, then in devising a scene of Being for him is to be estimated from the degree in which his Observations & inquiries are prompted, This faculty excercised & his experiences confirmed into correct & unerring Judgment Resolution & persevering choice of what is Good.
In his progress he has to discover in what his good is to be found whether in himself or in the Circumstance of things around him. And in what that Good Consists if in Agreeable thoughts reflections or Contemplations resolutions designs Affections & Actions. If so the whole problem of Wisdom is Solved at once & he is master of the maxim ne te quaesiveris Extra And he may hold his Good in Security & without any dependence but upon That Power on whom Existence itself in every Form depends.
Such in general being the Form and destination of that Principle which constitutes the Germ of Mans Intellectual Being. The Place for him among the works of God evidently is where the Calls to observation and inquiry are common; Where Motives or incitements to action & improving Exertions are frequent  and Urgent. Where Objects & Events affect him with desire hope or fear, Where he is interested to know the Ends of Nature and the means by which Events may be obtained or prevented, A Regular & Orderly Scene in which the past may enable him to anticipate the Future & take measures to influence or direct the Event to his Purpose. Where the Laws of Nature interest more than any Singular Event, Where the love of Science is fostered & proceeds to Lay the foundation of Arts. A Scene in which every Faculty is likely to meet with occasions of Exercise. Advantages to be gained ills to be avoided or removed  difficulties to be surmounted attacks to be resisted & contests to be Sustained Objects of affection to be embraced or evil designs to be Counteracted. What else is the description of this Scene in which Man is placed and in which the Beneficence of Providence is conspicuous in that very mixture of reputed Good and Evil which Staggers the apprehension of Mankind respecting the Beneficent Purpose of God.
Will the tender Parent send his Child where he is to be pampered with Sweets, indulged in every freak or appetite allowed to wallow in sloth to decline every Effort & start from every difficulty or Appearance of Dangers?
No! But where he may be taught to restrain  his Appetites & consult his Reason & provide for Consequences. Where he may be taught to perform his Excercises even in the midst of Dangers and hardships where he may be kept to his studies to the neglect of his Pleasures & endureance of Severities.
These are the genuine Proofs of Parental affection in the treatment of Children & youth & corresponding to the order of Nature in disposing of Man in this earlyest Stage of his Intellectual Course, In which the Infant is to become a Man. The Savage to become a Citizen, In which society is to furnish manifold Departments for Government publick Order & National Safety. And where the greatest Proficiency of  the Individual or the Species in this stage of their Progress is possibly but a feeble Step in that Course which this intellectual Being is destined to run in future & diversifyed Scenes towards that supreme Felicity which none but the Eternal can Accomplish. Tho to the Being that would approach Shedding its Influence on the most remote or distant advance.
Here then we find the Evidence of Divine Goodness in those very features of Nature which The Atheist would paint as deformities or Indication of Positive Evil of impotence or Neglect in the Author. 
If even in these there  a Demonstration of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness Why need we dwell on this Sublime order of things in which the Perfection of God is manifest to every Observer.
 Beautiful are the works of God: but the most Beautiful are those on which the Intelligent maker has Stampt An Image of Himself or which he has admitted to a distant participation of that order of Being which is Conscious of itself and of that Good which it may Enjoy & Communicate. 
This order of Being is the original & Residence of Beauty Perfection or Estimation. Works that result from it & bear the Marks of its quality & rank in Nature are therefore Beautiful & mere mass of lifeless Materials have no rank or Estimation beyond that of being fit to receive The Print or Vestige of Intelligent mind or being Otherwise fit to give occasion to the Ingenuity of mind for whose sake they are  made.
Then Blessed oh Blessed forever be thou Eternal Essence of Wisdom & Goodness And be it done to me what The order of nature requires. And what I would fondly Anticipate if in the conjectures of feeble Reason there be not offence.
May I be right in the Conjecture; that in this Visible Scene of human Life, there is a Project of Nurture & Excercise to this Germ of Intelligence of which man is possessed. That as the Capacity of his Progress is indefinite other steps which we observe him make are but a Part in the Scheme of a Nature which is destind to endure for ever.
 The unequal Attainments of Men & the Defects which remain with the highest; seem to characterise a Part far short of what even our feeble Reason may look for in Scenes immediately to succeed those through which we are passing.
It is the merit of a School to prepare its Pupils for the Stations they are destined to fill. The most Successful proficients in the School of human Life arrive at their measure of Wisdom & Goodness when in many Instances at least The Animal Powers which are required to the Acting of a Vigorous Part begin the decline & when the most active Virtue must retire to the Shade & cease to be of any moment in the busy Scene of Life. Can we then restrain the conclusion that its part is assigned in some  future scenes to which the present is no more than a prelude.
When indeed we Consider the Scheme of Instruction most applicable to the bulk of men in his first grovelling stage of their Progress we must be sensible that The Scourge of Tiberius & Nero is more likely to succeed with them than the mild & shining examples and Admonitions of Titus Aurelius. They are more likely to Profit from the Evils of Vice than the blessings of humanity & Candour, they are apt to abuse or consider as a shelter to Vice. The Rable must be allowed to experience in full the Evils of that Intemperance which they call Pleasure And of that Brutal Force which in its success in Subduing the  Innocent they call Heroism; before they can Estimate that Wisdom & Greatness of Soul which in man is the Image of God.
In proportion as Individual Approach to this Measure they seem to be Sett aside as destined to a different Scene.
Amidst these Speculations are we permitted to inquire why the Power that has destined man to a certain Rank in the order of Intelligence has not in his Creative Might placed him at once on that Level without condemning  to pass through the Scenes which are acted in this Mortal Life.
Here it is probable that Silence would become us: But we are  free to inquire or conjecture and our steps  that course if conducted with Modesty & Candour cannot lead us astray to Any Evil Effect.
This Question which relates to the Form of Intelligence must remind us of the Distinction peculiar to that Order of Being The Intelligent when perfect is so in himself And Author of that Wisdom & Good which is his own. Such is the Eternal Majesty of God.
To be of any Rank in the Scale of Intelligent Being The worthy must have chosen to be what he is And the merit for which he is Estimated must be his own. It is in this if in Any Respect we are entitled to say that man is formed after the Image of God and hence it is  that he is placed with Propriety in the Garden of God abounding in all the Varieties of Fruit a Mere Capacity or Power of observation action & Choice. That the Merit of his Choice & the Measure of his Attainments may be his own. On this account The Progressive Form of Being so much the Predilection of Nature in every Modification of Life is peculiarly adapted to Intelligence: or derives from what is proper to Intelligence that Analogy which prevails throughout the System of Living Nature.
Part nd Of The Things that are or may be Sceptics are disposed to doubt what they cannot explain and Theorists are disposed to explain what they cannot deny some have explained or resolved mind & its operations into Vibrations and Vibratiuncles Others into irritations impressions Pictures or images of things furnished or produced from abroad. 
In return for so liberal a supply of matter from abroad to constitute a Mind within. Others would resolve the Phnomenon of Matter or Body into the mere effect of immaterial Powers of Attraction & repulsion operating from Mathematical Points and without either extension Solidity Magnitude or Figure giving occasion  to these perceptions of Sense in us but it is to be hoped that no one will suspend his belief either of mind or Body in expectation of Evidence to be derived from Such Explanations.
If Theory is thus to extend its Province beyond what is commonly thought to require explanation: let us remember that Existence itself is the most comprehensive Phnomenon of all And if we can explain the whole Universe of Science will be laid open before us.
Be our Principle what it may. Necessity, Chance or any Other yet namely origin of Things: It must be either existent or not existent. If the Latter it were absurd to Ascribe to it any Effect whatever. If it be an Existence it is the Very Phnomenon we propose to explain  and we have made no advance.
Here then we must be contented to know the Fact without being able to account for it.
It is indeed a Fact the least credible of any if it were possible to doubt of it. Every one knows it is impossible to doubt of it in his own Case & being admitted in one Case the great difficulty is removed & we are open to Evidence of its Reality in any Other Instance.
Our Perception of Other Being is not attended with any doubt of Reality.
But the Evidence declines. And the Sceptic can affect to consider his Perceptions as Modes of his own existence not the Evidence of any thing else.
 Happily for this discovery it is of no consequence whatever. I must shun my perception of Burning or of falling from a Precipice as much as I would the Reality of any such Accidents for I can as little survive the perception as I could the Reality And if the Realities would form a proper Scene of Action for me the Perceptions do no less.
If Scepticism should prevail in this Instance his Doctrine is unworthy of Notice as being of no Consequence whatever either Good or Bad. We must therefore be contented to Speak the Language of Nature on this Subject and name the things perceived instead of the Perception.
To us however the first known as well as the most assured model of Reality is that of which we are  Conscious; Altho perceptions intrude upon us afterwards with so powerful an Effect that we Consider their objects as the models of Reality & would resolve the mind itself into something that may be seen or felt. Although in the mean time The Power of seeing or feeling is certainly Prior & the most undeniable Existence of the two.
What is This Being of which we are conscious And of which the Evidence so far exceeds that of any other as to precludes even the Supposition or possibility of Mistake? It is a Power of Thinking and Acting Conscious of itself Percipient of Other things, prepared to choose among Ends to pursue & devise  means for the Attainment of them. Unequall to itself as it varys in the choice of Ends or the Efficacy of Means.
Such are Intelligent Powers and in the Case of Man are attached to the Organs of a Corporeal Frame.
There is no distinction in Nature more important than this of Power & Material on which Power may be employed.
As the World abounds in Materials so it does in Symptoms or Indications of Power.
Bodys are Powerful in Cohesion & Gravitation. Plants in Vegetation & Propagation of their kind. Animals are Spontaneous Detached from the Soil And Active to the purpose of their kind.
What mighty Power is this which actuates the Terraqueous System which has made the distribution of Land Water which has cased the Whole in Air which has prepared the Water to shed its Vapours in the Air, put the Air in motion to waft these Wapours over Land Varyed the Temperature of Air so as to Collect the Vapours with which it is charged into Clouds & by continued condensation to shade its moisture in Showers over Land.
This Agitation of the Voluble Elements which moulders & works the surface of the Earth into Soil which diversifies the Surface into Hill and Dale to give current to the Superfluous water to the sea & in its Course Supply wants of man & beast.
What mighty Power is That Plants The Sun at so fit a Distance from the Earth That opens in that Luminary an Inexhaustible  Source of Light & Heat to mature the Soil & Moisture of the Earth to fertility & Vegetation that covers the Land with nourishment for Man & Beast.
What mighty Power is this which giving to the Sun in magnitude Compared to this Earth the proportion of a Million to a Single Unit Nevertheless causes this Mighty Body to shed his light & heat in every hours quite round this Globe of Earth And in every period of twelve months to Visit the North & the South so as to give every Region of the Earth its turn of seasons for seed time & Harvest.
This first appearances Suggest a magnitude of Power which subsequent  discoveries Confirm. The Planetary System indeed far excells in Grandeur & Simplicity what the mind can figure to itself even from the rising or the setting Sun while his Glories Eclipse or seem to Surpass that of all Nature besides. This ponderous Mass of luminous & heating matter greatly exceeding in quantity the Sum of all the Planets occupies at rest or nearly so The Centre of a Sphere or World beset with Solid Globes at proper Distances that turn their sides alternally to receive his Rays & Genial warmth And so incline the Orbits in which they revolve arround him as to keep their distance and constitute the Variety of Seasons which we on this Earth experience.
What is this mighty Power whose worth is thus displayed.
If there be an End it was intended if there be means they were devised.
And Man small as he apparently is in this Scale of Magnitude has been enabled to look beyond the Vail of first appearances  perceive how Nature and recognize the end to which means other ways unconnected are made to combine their effects.
He sees in the great what he himself is enabled to  practise in the little.
Intelligence the first and only species or form of Existence with absolute and Unquestionable certainty known to him now again is Manifest in Scenes to which his limited Powers of Action cannot reach. If Intelligence is required to fabricate a Slipper for the human Foot. What was it that gave the Sun his Magnitude & Form his Place on Nature his power of Light & Warmth so well Suited to the Living World his Range & his Role Is Man to possess Intelligence & yet to doubt if such a Power exist in all the forms of being besides. If it does exist where but  in the Whole, where order is most conspicuous Invention most powerful Ends most Important or Salutary & Means most Effectual & Wise.
Is Man then to recognise himself in this mighty scene of things. What should he recognise in this best and grandest Scene of Things than that which is the best & the most Real of all he knows. He cannot act Otherwise without affectation or ev perverse effort to counteract the Natur proceeding of his Mind.
Mankind have stocked The Heaven with Gods conceived on some Approximation to the human  Form. This we must admit is far from being correct but like the bable or first notion of Infants is natural untill it be corrected.
The human Frame of Body is peculiar to an animal of this Earth.
Though attended with Intellectual power not inseparable from it.
It is found in Man but is not found where power Wisdom & Goodness are most Eminent where Sea combines with Land And Air with Water where the Sun contributes his Light & Heat to form a Living World of Plants animals Men. It is a Power that provides  at once for millions & Thousands of Millions of Men. It is great then in that proportion and in higher proportion higher in Scale of Being than Man. Man is but a part of its Work. And tho he flatters himself that he is formed after the Image of the most high All he can mean is that Intelligence of which a Germ is conferred on him is highest in the order of Be And that Indefinite Attainments on this Ground are accessible to him. The very highest of its Powers and Priviledges that of forming itself is not withheld from him. For  this he is left free to chuse his End & his Means that he may have at once the merit & the felicity of all he is enabled to become. Of this he is probably yet far short & cannot be too cautious in conceiving the Almighty on his own Model. 
When we indulge in conjectures to which we are led by the undoubted discoveries of Science. This mighty sun whose bulk exceeds our thoughts is but a Single Star whose nearness gives him an apparent Diameter of about half a Degree. The Smallest Star is a Sun as well as  he removed beyond the reach of optical Aids to magnifie him. Round Thousands of such Suns at once in sight of us there range a Group of Worlds like ours and if we could be placed beyond the bounds of all we see other Firmaments and Other Constellations would come in sight & Worlds would Multiply & number like the extent of Space would have no End. Then what is Man that he should be considered amid such Scenes of Greatness. In dimension the world that he inhabits is but a point and all that live upon it atoms. But Dimension is not the  Test of Excellence or Worth. What is it that unfolds the Schemes of boundless Power has traced his Laws from Earth to Heaven Perceives The order of these mighty Spheres And Ambitions of the Skill which leads them perceives the Maker in his Work & would walk with him throughout the wonders of this boundless worlds. Tis man that treats alike of Atoms and of Suns. And does not blindly tread the Ground on which he lives but sees the End for which himself & Other  things are made oer looks the passive Subject to adore the Maker.
In the Range of Skill & Power Dimension is of no Account And the Almighty Mind as powerful in the Organisation of a Gnat as in the scheme of World.
After all the Dreams of Imagination or Conjec nothing has yet appeared in this Created Scale Superiour to the mind of man. The Maker seems to have admitted him a kind of Partner in his Work. The Earth is fair wherever Plants or Animals abound: but where Man prevails another Scene appears. His foot Steps are the Plough mark & the  Cultivated Field The blooming Fruit and the ripening Harvest The Domestic and all his habitations from the humble cottage to the Towering City. If he is Well Our Argument concludes the Wisdom & the Goodness of his Author: If otherwise twere vain to build on mere conjecture or fancy a Wisd where we scarcely know the Fact.
Here is the test of what we are to think of Nature & its Author.
There is not per in the Aspect of this Terrestrial Oeconomy consigned to the Residence of Man a more Striking Feature than that of the Variety  exhibited through out the Detail of its Departments Animal Vegetable Mineral & Substance of Every Sort. And the Effect is surely Congenial to Man. If he is delighted with tasks of Arrangement & the Simplification of what Appears to be perplexed, Here is work for his genius and he has not neglected to seek for disstinction in this pursuit. Names the most Celebrated for Ingenuity have no high Merit than this of presenting the Catalogue of Nature under Titles at once Comprehensive and distinct. If these be the works of a Designing Power, This too we must Suppose to be designed.
That Power whose work is Universal & Consummate order does nothing in  Vain: nor does ther appear to be any end in this Terrestrial  more worthy  that of furnishing Exercise & the occasion of Improvement to the Intelligent mind of Man.
Here Also no doubt is Evidence to him of consummate Invention and amidst almost boundless Variety of Identity of the Power that has Acted & Acts throughout. The Variety is not more striking than the Analogy that is made to run through Parts unlike. From Identity in the specimens of the same Species. There is an approximation of features from Species to Species from Kind to Kind. And where differences continue to multiply there is still some foundation for union  and Classification in orders of general Denominations of Being.
The Analogy of Organisation of Nutrition & Vegetation runs from the Vegetable to the Animal. That of Generation and dissolution is common to both that even of the Sexes has been recently traced from one to the Other. 
If we should cease to Argue the Wisdom & Goodness of the Author from the Aptitude of this Order in Nature to accommodate the Genius & further the Progress of Man. Still The Individual in every Species exhibits a Frame an Accommodation in Place Element and supply Indicative of Design Wisdom & Goodness in the  Creating Power. If man like the Other Animals were blind or Insensible to the Ends of Creation in Other parts of the Work: In this of the Organisation of Plants & Animals The End for which every part is fitted could not have escaped him nor the Combind Functions of all in the composition of a whole compleated in itself & fitly related to the Scene in which it is placed. Who ever doubted that the Eye was to see and the Ear to Hear? or who ever with Study & continued Labour came to Understand The Function of these Organs ever doubted that Power who Constructed the Eye understood the Science of Optics & the Theory of Vision. Or  who ever in contemplating the anatomy of the External and Interiour Ear doubted that the Maker understood the Theory of sound And Elastic Vibrations. The Anatomy of every Animal consists in the specification of beneficent Ends and of Effectual means for the attainment of those Ends. And Comparative Anatomy pursued from Kind to Kind shows that Organisation is not matter of blind or undistinguishing Rotine: but where the Principle is the same The Execution and Application are still Varied to the Specifick with consummate skill & Goodness Man particularly is distinguished in his Organs sufficient to mark a being of Superior rank And  rank & Destination Os Homini Sublime dedit/ Caelumque Vicere Iussit/ et ad Sidera tollere Vultus. 
The poets sense tho dressed in terms that touch the Imagination rather than the Judgment is well founded in Nature. His Aspect announces Observation And thought And all his Organs fit Instruments of Art and Expression.
He is amply provided with Materials for every fabric & with every Substance required for his Subsistance and Accommodation. And the Scene in which he is placed is exquisitely fitted to such an Actor. In the midst of Order & a fixed constitution of things, he with proper attention be prepared  for the common Events of Life And the very Laws which ensure him of his State also enable him to modify it in many important Respects. The Weight of his materials assure him of the place at which he is to find them And that very weight which is a continual tendency to fall, enables him with Aid of the Climate to erect fabricks of masonry that last for Ages.
His Food his Raiment his Lodging is Amply provided for in the produce of his Fields his Herds And the Skilful direction of his Art Applied to the Materials which Nature has every where  furnished. The Laws of Propagation respecting Plants and Animals are such  enable him to choose what Animal he will rear & Domesticate, What plants or what Timber he will have to prevail in his Fields. The animals found useful in one Region are made to multiply in another.
The Harvest of China is repeated in The West And the woods of America are in small parcels of Seed transported to Europe. 
The limited duration of Life in Animals and Men. They fall we are told in hasty Succession as the leaves in Autumn And this is a Theme in Elegy  and of tender complaint in the Affairs. But it is the Circumstance which of all others is most effectual to fit this Scene for Mans dominion As the great Artificer & fabricator Of his own Attainments as an Embryo of Infantine Nursling of a Celestial Spirit on the Earth.
All the Kinds whether of Plants or Animals indeed are perishing but to be renewed in fresh and growing materials from Ages. And Reigning Man has not always to Contend with obdurate Subjects already formed to habits which he cannot change he finds on the Contrary in every Age a tender Race whom by wise And Salutary Institutions he can form to  his purpose. And if his flocks be small at the outset, he knows how they may be made to cover the Land with their numbers & occupy every Region with a Race whose habit are formed on the Spot. If his State or his City be Small he is enabled by Wise institutions to make it a great one And in Situations scarcely yet touched by Men rival the Establishments on which men heretofore have been most Successful And thus from new materials produce a Work for which former materials if they remained unfit by other manners & Obdurate Habits And so the Master is qualified for his  Work. And the Material is fitted to his hand. 
In all this however we may be told we admit of wants in Man and would Argue the Beneficence of his Maker from the manner in which his wants are Supplyed. But if the Supply Argue Beneficence what does the Want imply? Were it not better to have had no defect than to be patching up a blundering performance with Successive & precarious supplies & corrections? No doubt, but in this Case we may Apprehend that Creation itself is a continual Supply of Defects & the least defect is the greatest Perfection of which Created Being is Susceptible.
Man is of that order of Being who must choose for  himself And is in Essence a Self forming Power. Hence the continual disstinction of Praise and Blame with which he is treated. We pity his Misfortunes but we execrate his Depravity & despise his follies.
His Happiness & his Perfection are the Same The Agreeable state of a Mind well informed Correct well employed exempt from Malice or Fear in all their Vile or Piteous forms Benevolent Temperate Courageous & Just.
His information is the result of his own observation And mature reflection His Employment Benevolence Temperance Justice & Resolution are the Results of his Will  And his Habits the Result of Persevering Exertions:
Pleasure would often mislead him but a just Notion of Rectitude & Virtue is the leader to happiness and Safety from Evil.
To such a Being originating in Ignorance and faculties untried Attainments must be gradual And the experience of Error & Mistake a Principal Guide to Rectitude and Truth.
His faculties improve by Exertion And his Principal Ennemies Are inactivity & Sloth. 
To such a Being Wants no less than the manner of their Supply are Evidence of Goodness in the Author. For what Reason shall we suppose that the Almighty who  has distinguished Man with so many marks of a Destination Superior to that of any Other Animal has also marked with so many Circumstances of Apparent disadvantages and Defect.
Naked unarmed unprovided while the Other Animals find their Subsistence in every field the uncultivated Earth to him is barren & in no Climate or in any Soil yelds Spontaneously to him the Mere necessaries of Life. For what Reason is he encountered in every pursuit with Difficulty Danger & Actual Suffering. Is it from Neglect of him or a Principle of Malice towards him, asks the Tender but Judicious Parent from what Motive in placing his Child he shuns the haunts of Pampering Pleasures of Indolence and Sloth and prefers the Severities of Wise restraint And all the Labours of an Arduous Task that brings his Faculties into exertion and Confirms them in the Possession of a Strength of mind which they are made to employ. 
The miseries of human Life are the principal Theme of Complaint with those  would repell the Evidence of Goodness in the forms of Nature. This however is but one Instance of the Ignorance & Error with which we have to Strugle in our Way to that condition & those habits in which our happiness Consists & which in reality is the Natural Termination of that Discipline whi the Almighty has prepared for Man.
From his wants and apparent comparative defects originate those Arts which constitute & adorn the Prosperity of Nations & contribute so much to the order & comfort of human Life. The Ends to which they are directed are the means of Subsistence of accommodation & ornament interesting as Life itself of which they are the Support & decoration. They are the Media of intercourse the Subject of Trafic & the means of Beneficence, And in the Conduct of man with respect to them they are the Instruments or materials of the most Salutary Habits.
 If they are to be provided or secured; they are to the Individual the occasions of Industry & salutary Labour & Skill. If to be consumed they are the Subjects of Oeconomy Frugality & Temperance. They are communities the subject of Just Laws and in their distribution serve in part to mark those Subordinations that regulate the Forms of Society. They are indeed Subject to abuse. But an Abuse attended with immediate Sense of its Evil & therfore like experience in every instance of folly conducting in the result to Wisdom.
The proper conduct of men with respect to those matters of Interest is Prudence and a Principal constituent of  Happiness. The Event however of that Conduct is adverse as well as prosperous & never Secure to any precise Effect. The Person therefore who relys for Happiness on the Event is often dissapointed & never Secure. The mighty Power that Reigns in Nature by disposing of Events sometimes to the Wish of Man would encourage him to Activity & skill sometimes the Reverse would teach him that his Part in every case is to conduct himself properly & in every occasion to be what the occasion requires moderate in prosperity And in Adversity armed with Fortitude to act the Part which Circumstance requires.
Experience in the end may teach her Pupils that Happiness resides within and comes not from abroad but in the form of Warning not rely on what is placed beyond our reach. Events are various & contingent They the Circumstances in which the Man may Act a Happy Part, And fortunately for him can never shut the Doors of Fortitude moderation & propriety against him. It has been said to avail himself equally of These Virtues is beyond the Powers of Man: but who will Say that it were not happy for him to hold his Being by his Tenure. Or that he can too much extol the Wisdom & Goodness which in the conditions prescribed for humans has prepared the ground for Such a Superstructure beginning now  perhaps to terminate hereafter.
Among The Chosen circumstances in the present of Man Society itself is doubtless that most Nutritive of Good to him Whether in Cooperation or Opposition the principal Object and effectual spur to all his Energies. And if in the Argument this Circumstance be overlooked; tis because too Obvious to be mentioned where Novelties & hidden charms alone can please. If a Man could feel Benevolence without an Object; still it might  asked on whom he should bestow it. And if the Personage of Wisdom & Goodness were compleat in one where is the Scene on  which he could perform it? That Scene is Ministered to him. And nothing is withheld but that which would Subvert his Nature. Influence to constrain his Choice And the Gift of Virtues not his own. These no doubt the Almighty Could confer:
but it is not thus Intelligence acquires its Honours or confirms its Powers.
The Progress of mans Nature is Various or unequal but no where definite. He who has done most is but prepared for more And what we see is not a Limit but presages of some future Scenes ascending Steps upon the Scale of Being with ample Scope above for what man learnt below.
Socrates & Newton Zeno Epictetus The Slave & Marcus Aurelius The Emperor were distinguished Pupils in this School of Human Life And if tis wonderful that some should soar so high tis no less wonderful that others should remain so low as numbers do. But to have once beheld among the works of God the Vestiges of Wisdom & of Goodness removes the Effect of Mystery or the dread of Ill for ever.

XXVIII. OF NATURE AND ART

Nature is sometimes held forth as the Standard of Excellence in the works of Art, And of Felicity in the manners of Men. But in the Affectation of Paradox & profound Observation Nature is rejected as every where Rude & imperfect without Art.
Such Contradictions have their Source in the mere Ambiguity of words which we employ in different meanings without any warning to Others or sense of the difference.
Nature is sometimes put for some partial or Actual Aspect of things Apart from any Change to which they are Subject & which they may be destined to receive.
In this Acceptation Art is opposed to Nature as light to darkness or Motion to Rest.
But Art Also has its different meanings. It is sometimes  put for the Power of Ingenuity by which order is Obtained in the Construction of things, Sometimes for a concerted disguise which to deceive the observer or frustrate the Original purpose  things. Thus the Cook by his Art imposes one species of Food for Another. The Jocky imposes a lame Horse for a Sound one or a Gardiner mars the Effect of a Prospect by his rectilinear Plantations crouded arbours & Covered Walks.
Meantime we are the Dupes of Language & think we have made a discovery when we have changed the meaning in which we employ our words.
The Sense  which The Terms Art & Nature are Employed when The Critic tells us that Nature is the Standard of Excellence in the Works of Art or the Philosopher tells us that Nature is the standard of Felicity in the manners of Men is not Nature in any Partial View of its parts or their Actual  or Art  in any change it may produce whether for the better or the worse: but Existing things in the Progress & Attainments of which they are susceptible And of which the Specimens are Realized with or without the Interposition of human Ingenuity and Power which are in reality a part in the System of Nature, And by their Functions destind to contribute to the Author of beings gives things the Aspect which thy Bear.
In this Sense The Art Industry & Skill of Man has its place in Nature like the Vegetation of Plants The Blowing of Winds or the Current of Waters on the surface of the Earth.
The Landscape on Cultivated  owes its appearance to the Interposition of Man who instead of taking the Actual State of things for his Model is continually reversing the State in which he found them, Changing the woodland into Corn Field or covering the  bare Mountain with woods.
The Architect is causing the Stone to be removd from its quarry & is erecting Fabricks which without his Art would had no place in the System.
Yet these & many Other Arts must conform themselves to that Nature which they thus seem to Violate.
The Mechanic or the Engineer must consult the Laws of Nature in what he would per; if he neglect or Mistake them dissappoint dissaster or Ruin will ensue. He proceeds according to Nature to procure Some change in the Actual State of Things. Hence all the Arts of Agriculture Arch & Manufacture in which the Artist considers Nature not as an original to be copied or imitated: but as a Store of materials on which he is to operate  for his own Accommodation or safety.
Man however is a living Power & his energy does not terminate in the mere Supply of his Animal Necessities or Wants. Tho amply provided in these Respects; His Powers are still at Work to Observe to Contemplate & Comprehend the Appearances of things. The Result to him is agreeable or dissagreeable according as his Curiosity is gratifyd or frustrated & the Aspect of Things is matter of Enjoyment or Suffering. Order that is the Combination of fit means for the attainment of a beneficent  delights him: Dissorder or meaningless Assemblage of discordant or unconnected particulars disgust or distress him. His Affections of Love or Hatred of Confidence or Fear are the very essence of  Happiness or Misery Languor & inactivity is so painfull to him That he like Better to be Assailed with trouble and called upon to remove inconvenience than suffered to languish in the Absence of any object to bestir his Powers. When Real Occasions of Sentiment or Action are wanting or do not come up to the measure of his Interest or Concern he recurs to Invention & Fiction to recollection of the Past or Apprehension of The Future.
Hence the charms of History of Poetry & Painting. In these he not only proceeds on the Laws of His Nature: but the Effect is a Copy or Imitation of Nature in its Actual State. History & Portrait Painting are transcript or Copy of what Nature in some Instance has realized Poetry or Invention & fiction conveyed in  Language or in Figures upon Canvas are Imitations of Nature or Compositions formed upon the Plan of her Works & calculated to Supply the Intervals of Actual interesting Occasions & to raise the sentiments & Imaginations of Men above the Pitch of Real or Actual Life.
These therefore are properly termed imitative Arts. And tho permitted to raise their Objects above the common level yet never to quit the Path in which Nature is known to move or exhibit a Result which her original Stamina are not Qualifyed to reach. Achilles may be fabricated a greater Hero than has ever yet appeared in History: but not with power to control the Elements or to be what the human powers however  improved can never become.
Man the great Artist in this Terrestrial Sphere or lower department of Nature has in himself as well as in the world Arround him The Materials of an Art, by which in following up the line of his Progress he may arrive at Indefinite Perfection still proceeding on the Germ or first stamina of His Intellectual Being.
That Knowledge of which he was so Curious in Infancy Those schemes of Rectitude & Beauty which he admired those benevolent Affections which formd his purest Enjoyments That force of mind which raised him above the consideration of inconvenience or Danger & may be improved indefinitely both in measure & Correctness And to engage him in the Arts which Aim at this object nothing perhaps is required but  the just Apprehension of its Importance & the peculiarity of the Charge as committed to him within the reach of his Powers depending on his Will & rendering him accountable for the Result.
Here then is a peculiar Art of which the Object may be sought for in the Copy or Imitation of Nature May terminate in a repetition of what has been actually done or Attained or in the Conception of a Model to which Nature points: but is removed beyond the Actual Attainments of Men.
The most Excellent of Men have had their Defects and Defects are not proper Objects of Desire the best men are not in all Respects proper Subjects of Imitation.
Yet a Life Agreeable to Nature is the Recommendation of every Philosophical Scool And as it refers at one to the Powers which Nature has given & to the specific Attainments to which Nature points.
The Rule must without doubt except it Even in the Application be admitted as supreme & without exception in directing the Choice & the Pursuits of Men.
What is this Nature which the wise man is to consult and retain on all occasions? It is not the Temperature of Seasons the Vegetation of Spring or the Maturity of Autumn. It is perhaps somewhat Analogous to these but differing as the Subject to which it refers is different.
The Analogy in which they Agree may consist in the Corresponding beneficence of Ends & the relative fitness of means in each. These are Visibly realised in Nature & with  propriety presented as models of imitation to Intelligent Beings whose Nature it is to Act from Design to have an Object or End in every effect & to distinguish themselves by the good which they intend & the effectual means they employ for the Attain of those Ends.
So far it may be said in General Terms that Nature as in other Arts is the Model of Felicity and good conduct in human Life.
But there is a sense in which it may be said more particularly that Nature Suggests the Rule of Life for Man: not by Analogy or imitation: but by giving Effect to the Specific of his own Constitution.
These indeed do  not command him as the Laws of Motion & Gravitation command the Material World.
Whatever may be his propensity or Byas at any particular time His conduct is matter of choice in which he proceeds with unequal Degrees of Consideration & merits the opposite characters of Wisdom or Folly.
Of his Affections some are grateful or ungrateful in all their Exertions.
Benevolence in all its Forms is grately Malice & Fear in all their forms the Reverse. To his Active Nature mere exercise is pleasant but may be hightened by the Affection or occasion from which it takes place or marred and poisoned by Affection And occasions as in the Case of Malice Envy Fear & Jealousy.
 Here therefore Nature surely suggests that whatever Power he has over himself should be exerted in retaining & fostering Habits of the one Sort & Suppressing those of The others.
He is by Nature Conscious of this difference in the modes of His Existence but is also Conscious of a distinction by which the one is an Excellence or Perfection of his Nature. The other a Blemish or Defect Constituting to him Subjects of a Nature highly placed or the Reverse. Here also Nature has pointed out the Line of his Conduct. For we cannot Doubt that what is by Nature Agreeable has the Sanction  of Nature as an Object of Choice And to be happy is in other words to live as Nature directs And Happiness is the Standard of Estimation and Merit as well as Prosperity to Man.
So far the Life according to Nature which Wisdom Requires is no more a Copy of what men Commonly are than a Well Cultivated Field is a Copy of what is general in the Neighbouring Forest And Nature for the most part in things within the Reach of Man does not so much as to leave nothing for him to do.
 Hence it may be said of all his Mechanical accommodations that Nature has furnished the materials & entrusted the Art to him.


XXIX . THE DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF MORAL SCIENCE 

Some appearances in the History of Science would tempt us to believe that men are most Solicitous about what concerns them the least. They overlook the Earth to gaze at the heaven and neglect the present to Penetrate the past or the Future.
This appearance however is no more than the effect of Curiosity which fixes on what is Strange in preference to what is familiar however important.
The most pressing object of Curiosity is the Alarming if unknown: but among things familiar the most important has the perfect right to our habitual Attention And in fact whether well or ill understood has its place among the affairs of Men.
The Condition of every Individual is of the highest importance to himself. The manner of a Man in Society is of the greatest Importance to his associates. Hence the consideration of Character of Morality & the preferable disposition of habits of Action amongst men.
It is considered as the Preferable object of Rule & Instruction.
Persons willing to overlook it in themselves require it as a guard On the Actions of Others. Statesmen require it as Essential to the order of Society & a principal Engine of Government. Priests Require it as a Duty binding on Man to his Maker & do not fail to charge with Rules &  Observances such to the Interests of their own Order. It is by them termed Religion. And whilst the Social Moralist requires from his Neighbour an habitual preference of Justice & good Will to Others in preference of any Selfish Concern of his own. The Religious requires it as a Duty to God in preference to any Interest of Man And in both there is a Settled Byas of Nature which operates in secret against the Hearty Embrace of Morality; in the heart whilst every one calls for it aloud as the only  condition on which he can endure his Neighbour or on which a People can hope for the Protection of Heaven.
The Idea of Morality under both these Aspects tends to set Conscience at Variance with that Universal Principle of Self preservation on which Providence seems to rely for the safety & advancement of her Works.
Benevolence no doubt tends to make man the Safeguard & Keeper of his fellow Creature but its effects are occasional & are feeble compared to the Constant & unremitting Care which every one entertains for himself.
If Morality or  Religion then be so gretly desireable in human Life as we affect to believe we do wrong in representing them as considerations altogether dissinterested & Suppressive of Self-Love. It would almost seem that in doing so we meant to warn the Individual to beware of them as considerations that impose the neglect of himself.
Nature has in fact given to every Individual the Charge of himself. Here all his concerns are Centered & so far his Dominion extends & no farther.
And the selfish Moralist is well founded in saying that every Scheme of Morality is Illusive and Tyrannical that requires him to prefer the Wellfare of Others to his own. This  in Abstract & general Terms is undoubtedly true. But in proportion as a man is devoted to himself in the same Proportion he is deeply concerned to know how this self is constituted & in what its Welfare consists. The selfish in common Language are those who prefer their property their ease and their safety to every other consideration whatever. So much that while such Persons consider their property & circumstances as themselves: the vulgar Moralist concurs with them in that Apprehension but is so unreasonable as to require from them a preference of the welfare of Others to their own.
The Emperor Marcus Aurelius has left us a Book which contains what we call His Meditations but which was called by himself or by Others who understood him a Treatise of his own concerns (  )  He agreed with those who think a man is entrusted only with his own concerns and Answerable only for himself having no Power over any other Person or Thing. It is worthy of Notice however that to him this self with which he was so charge was neither His Property his Body his Food or his Rayment But his Mind His affection his Purposes and his Actions And so Constituted he would not forego the Tranquillity of a mind Conscious of innocence & Goodness his Good will to Mankind his diligence in Action his Fortitude & Resolution His Temperance & moderation for the Concern of any other Person whatever. If a Rival attempted to supplant him in the Empire in this he would not allarm for himself.  This was not the self which he was determind to support against every Assailant Moralists statesmen & Priests the Founders of States and of Religion considered Morality as matter of obligation & of Duty. Long as the World had existed before the Age of Socrates no one considered morality as the best condition not only of society but of The Individual or the Moral Agent himself. 
From the Conversation of this Simple Athenian Citizen there resulted Enquiry into the chief Good of man. Which was variously expressed by different persons.
This question in whichever terms it be solved is doubtless the first in point of importance to man and when we consider how seldom it has been seriously discussed we are tempted to rd our Doubt whether The Professors of Philosophy and are not most apt to be occupied with what concerns them the least. Although in this & in other instances; the important being familiar gives way to what is strange & Remote.
The Existing Forms of Being are mind That is conscious of itself that acts enjoys or Suffers and the Lifeless matter composing the Scene on which mind is placed. The distinction of Good & Evil with that of Enjoyment & Suffering is relative to mind alone. Matter in all its variations unperceived unfelt & unestimated is merely indifferent and in the Universe is provided in Subservience to mind. And yet Philosophers except in an Age or two overlooked the mind & its condition to gaze on the Material World & its appearances  when strange or uncommon. In such Subject and the inquiries they suggest mankind no doubt is deeply concerned.
The Laws of Nature in the material World in what may be called The Province or district of Man carry an immediate reference to him as an Actor in the Scene they Constitute. Without an Order of things so Established, he could not move a step in the Scene with Safety or Success & without certain knowledge of these Laws profound & accurate. His Power or the limits of his Art would be extremely Narrow. And when we consider the Art or Powers he has Established on the Laws of Mechanism or Motion on the Laws of Optics of Heat & mixture in the Laws of Vegetation & Animal Life  we are justifyed in rating the value of Science as it relates to the Material World very high. They not only enable the Student to advance in the way of his Accommodation & Safety: but lead him also to the most Important Apprehension of that Wisdom & Goodness from which they are derived. But to reap any Benefit from Science so happily formed & Accomplished he must enter with peculiar  on the study of himself.
His Capacities of Enjoyment his exposure to Suffering And among the Objects which present themselves to his choice what is that which he is most concerned to command & secure.
And untill he has made up his mind on this point he may reckon his Science on every Subject comparatively as of little avail. We are ever forming  some purpose engaged in some pursuit in which we are lyable to mistake Miscarriage Dissappointment, Calamity or distress. And in the case of a Being so situated & exposed it is evident that whatever concerns the Nature & Character of his different Objects is of the greatest importance.
It has been Observed and indeed is Evident that good & Evil whatever be their Cause subsist in Living Conscious or Sentient natures alone.
It is to the mind then we are to look for the good constituent of its Happiness & there we are to beware of the Evils constituent of its misery. The Apprehension of Things are Satisfactory & Agreeable or the Reverse Affections are joyous or painful And occupation of mind may be diversifyd in the extremes of alacrity & Joy or  Tortures. The Good then we Are to aim at is that of a Mind well condition well employd a mind whose Apprehensions & Contemplations & Affections are pleasant, to whom the Affections of Benevolence & Good will are habitual exempt from Fear and Malice in all their forms of distrust Jealousy Envy Hatred or Revenge to which Existence itself is A Mode of Alacrity tranquillity & Peace. So the wise conceives himself & in maintaining such a State of his Being is not dissinterested but Selfish in the best sense & in the highest degree.
He does not consider this as a Duty imposed upon him by the command of a Superior nor as a sacrifice made  the wellfare of Others or the Neglect of his own. He considers  it as the health of his mind in the preservation of which he no more considers the World as Obliged to him than they are Obliged for his preserving the health of his Body & the proper use of the Supply which Nature has destined for his use.
Such is the view in which sound reason will consider the Distinction of Virtue & the object of a Selfishness decided and well understood: but if we err in the Apprehension of Self our Morality will return into the Channel from which Socrates Plato & Zeno endeavoured to rescue it a Channel in which it ran counter to the Interest of the Actor & was a Sacrifice of Self to the wellfare of other men. The Virtuous indeed has but little Power in the Concerns of  others: but in doing what he can on a principle of Beneficence & Justice he places his own most Essential & principal Concern.
Thus Virtue which in its perfect Measure is an exemption from all the Sufferings of Fear or Malice & the exercise of every Agreeable Affection or thought, is the happiness of those who possess is naturally useful to those who are within reach of its Influence. And on this Account or in this point of View Utility is sometimes Assigned as the Test or measure of its Value. 
But in itself & to those who possess it it is happiness or it has nothing to attack them. Self Preservation is the primary Law of Nature & cannot be disspensed with in Any Instance. Even the Generous & the Be who expose their property & their Lives are Justified  in doing so because their Generosity and Valure are of more value to them than Life or Property.
As Virtue is Happiness So Happiness is the highest Term of Praise. As Happiness to every Person is the primary object of Self Preservation or the highest concern to himself: in the choice of Virtue or a perfect The Law of Nature whether Self Preservation Society or Estimation combine their Effects. And in the Combined Result of all when well understood, we may recognize the Object of Eternal Wisdom and Power in respect to Man, The Progress for which he is qualifyd towards the Attainment of a Perfect mind which if he could reach it would reunite him to that Perfect Intelligence from which the Germ of his Nature has Sprung as the Rays of Light are emitted from The  Sun.
If Existence as we must Suppose be necessary it seems to follow that every Germ must tend to the Perfection of Being And Perfect Being must be infinite in Number as well as Greatness & Might; But in the Order of Absolute perfection there cannot be more than one. If in plurality there were Separation & difference one or other must be imperfect or defective.
Perfection then is a Point in which those who arrive at it must be at One.
The same mind in the same moment & in every Respect but one mind. And in this may be realized the Mystery of Unity in Plurality of Being And the Necessity which is infinite & Boundless in its Effects yet terminates in one & the Progression of Created or Nascent Intelligence, Altho it never can Arrive at Separate Perfection may  terminate in being at one with the Mind that is Perfect & removes every Defect from the Beings that Approach it.
In all this we my possibly without Blame indulge in the Exercise or Play of Thought. Happy if in Nothing we foster pernicious Error or avocation from the Real Business of human Life.
Some such Indulgence of Thought may have taken place in the mind of Zeno When he Apprehended the Human Mind as a Spark from the Eternal Intelligence Destined at its Separation from the Body to return to the great Mass of Intelligence As the Body is returned to the great Mass of Earth & Matter or as the moisture evaporated from the Sea return to the Ocean again in Springs Rivulets & Rivers.

XXX . OF THE LAWS OF NATURE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ACTIVE MAN 

From a fair Induction of Particulars in the history of men The following Results may be assumed as Laws of Nature.
1st The Law of Self Preservation resulting from various propensities to what is Salutary or Repugnance to the Reverse.
2nd The Law of Society resulting from the Propensities by which Man is Gregarious or Political.
3d The Law of Progression resulting from those Propensities by which is led to advance or aim at Perfection in his work or Attainments. 
Of These Laws The Reality cannot be doubted, Nor are they known in any other Form than that Facts, or Mode of  Existence constituent of Mans Natures not deriveable from any other Source than the Will of his Maker.
If there be any Phnomenon in Human Nature apparently Anomalous. 
The Regular Object of Science is either to trace such Phnomenon to some Acknowledged Law or to find the Terms in which the Fact may be Assumed as a Law separate from any that is previously Known.
To the Law of Self Preservation may be traced all the Vital functions whether Animal or Intellectual.
To the 2d or Law of Society may be referred All the Instincts of Gregarious Animal.
The Sexual Propensities The Family Propensities of Parent & Child.
Consanguinity Councourse or Dislike of Solitude aptitude to lead or to follow  in the Troups or Multitude of Men. Benevolence & Personal Attachment Even Vanity the Love of Praise & Celebrity among Men.
To the 3d or the Law of Progression may be referred all the Instinctive distinctions of Excellence & Defect of Right & Wrong of Elevation or meanness of Honour & disshonour.
If Moral Approbation or Dissapprobation be stated as a Phnomenon to be explained.
So far as its Objects are the constituents of human Excellence or human Defect it is Evidently Comprehend in the Law of Progression or Estimation by which Man is directed in the way of his advancement or the improvement of his Nature.
When the Objects of Approbation or Censure are not of this Sort  but matters altogether indifferent or the Reverse of what they are accounted to be we must refer them to some casual association of Superstition or Fashion.
For the Law of Estimation or Progression in General there is nothing  nature better known from which to derive it And the only Account to be given of it is that in the Record of Facts relating to our Existence this is known as one And may be enterd as Follows:
The mind is Conscious of its Being and the Modes of its Being in Thought Apprehension & Will.
It is Conscious of a Distinction in the Forms or Attainments or incidents. Of its some that lead to Honour others to disshonour Right or Wrong.
Consciousness of the first is agreeable constituent of  Joy & Peace of mind. The Consciousness of the Other is painful or accompanied with Shame Remorse or horror.
And this Censorial Act of the Mind in rating itself or its Action is by way of Eminence among the functions of its Conscious Being is in common Language termed Conscience & figuratively The Lamp of God in the Soul of Man. 
Men who would willingly dispense with its Influence on their own Conduct give it full scope in the Consideration of what they would require from others.
The great Object of human desire or Ambition is happiness. And the Choice in every particular Instance should be that which upon the whole is constituent of most enjoyment & least Suffering whether in the present or the Future. This to most men is a Matter of Deliberation extending beyond their powers of Estimation or Conjecture & for this reason they abandon themselves for the most to some present impulse.
In this Exigence the distinction of Right & Wrong is of the highest importance. It gives a present impulse & is Secure of the Future so that if a person is in doubt what upon the whole is constituent of most Enjoyment & least suffering Let him consult his Conscience & he is safe.
The Laws of  Nature in this Department as in Material world combine or ballance & Counteract forming various Conjunctures & exhibiting various Effects As the Laws of Gravitation Cohesion or tenacity combine or counter one another in the Construction of the pendulum And the Bulb instead of a Vertical Descent which its Gravitation would exhibit is made to Vibrate in a Curve.
The Law of Self Preser is still in Act whilst the occasion on which other Law are in force is Wanting. The Laws of Society and Estimation are more Subject to intermission: but on Occasion modify or suspend the Other. Men will expose themselves in behalf of a Friend or their Country The Parent whether  Male or Female is ever ready to interpose for the Child And they who would desert their Friend or their Country are faithfu to their ofspring.
The high mined neglect of their Ease or Safety when their honour is at stake And Moral Charact take their Denomination from the prevalent Law of their Nature.
The Miser will not forgo his Property the faithful his Friend nor the Heroe his honour for any other consideration.
In each the Effect may be erroneous & culpable as well as correct & happy.
The Miser is Seldom reasonable or Correct. The Faithful seldom Errs.
The Heroe is sometimes vain glorious contemptuous or Proud when he happens to mistake the ground on which he rests his Elevation or greatness.
Julius Caesar had the Faculties of a Superiour Being: but a Vulgar Notion of Greatness, Was accordingly  at times a Coxcomb or a Tyrant. 
The Dramatick Poet has occasion to study the Laws of Nature and Skilfully in the Conduct of every Character abide by that which he has Supposed to be uppermost in each & is then most admired when he makes the Peculiar appear even when least expected.
The Miser in Moliere kindly prescribes to his Favourite for a Cold: but it is a large & liberal draught of Cold Water.

XXXI. OF THE INTELLECTUAL OR CONSCIOUS POWERS CONCEPTIVE COGNITIVE AND SPONTANEOUS 

1st Of the Power Cognitive, And The Sources of Knowledge.
The Power conceptive may act with or without reference to any external Object.
The Power Cognitive is that by which the mind Obtains Knowledge of Realities.
The Sources of Knowledge are fixed or Necessary. Perceptive and Conjectural.
With respect to the fixed or necessary Sources. The mind has only to exist or to think in order to know.
The existence of mind & conscious of itself & modes of Existence are one.
To Think of certain Subjects and to know necessary truths are one.
To every Individual the first Truth is that of his own Existence: Of this he cannot doubt but may conceive it not have been & not to continue.
 The next perhaps in the orde of Succession is the existence of a World in some of its parts.
The source of this Knowledge is perceptive he perceives things to exist:
but can conceive them not to be. 
The third in succession proceed upon the Former & is the Arrangement of Things under the Titles of particular Facts or Phaenomena General Rules or Laws of Nature And Theory.
Here the Source of Know is Conjectural And consists of Observation Research & inference ever lyable to be questioned confirmed or exploded.
2d Part. To every Individual Existence is unquestionable and in its Source is so far necessary or fixed: But there are Truths necessary in a different Sense from This either absolute as the Existence of Space & time which can neither have beginning nor End. 
Things Existing by such Absolute Necessity are infinite in their Being that is to say time is Eternity And Space is Immensity.
 Other Existences or Truths are necessary hypothecally or upon certain Facts or Assumptions of Facts.
If there be a Triangle or Space contained by three right Lines the following  necessary Truths:
Any two of the sides are greater than the Third. The sum of the three Angles will be neither greater nor less but precisely Equal to two right Angles.
If any two of the Sides be equal two of the Angles also will be equal.
If one Angle be a right Angle The Square of one Side will be equal to the sum of the Squares of the Other two &c &c. 
And so on in every Branch of the Mathematicks.
Part 3d If there be any Contingent Existence There must have been a power to produce it. Of this no one ever doubted or desired any Evidence.
To think of it is to be conscious of its Necessity.
The Succession of Powers And Productions or cause & Effect cannot be Eternal. There  must have been a Power underived or which had nothing Prior to itself. And This Power like Eternity & Immensity must exist in the necessity of its own Nature And like them must be infinite in the Form it bears.
What is necessary in itself cannot be circumscribed by time or Place.
And must be through all & to every Extent what it is by Necessity.
Part 4. It remains to Observe: whether in the Forms of fixed necessary Apprehension there be any Datum from which to conceive the Form of this Primary & necessary Existence.
The Data of Ends & means in the Combinations of Contingent Being Like the construction of a Triangle & its consequences necessarily imply design & concert in the Cause or producing Power.
To suppose a Triangle is to Assume the Equality of its Three Angles to two Right Angles And to suppose ends & Means is to Assume Design in the Author of Nature.
It remains to inquire whether the Assumption be  Necessary.
With respect to the Power Cognitive it has been stated That the grounds of assent are Necessary or Conjectural.
The Necessary are Absolute as in the case of Space & Time together  the Metaphysical & Mathematical Axioms.
Conditional as in the Mathematical Theorems & in the Abstract relation of Contingent Events to a producing Power.
There is yet a third Species of Necessity which may be called Instinctive or modification of our Existence.
Instincts we know influence the Will: but as the Will is free. The Effects of an Instinct may be suspended indefinitely.
But the Assent being necessary where the Grounds are sufficient It is so particularly where an Instinct directs.
All our knowledge of Nature beyond our own existence and Ideal Forms being instinctive perception is derived from this Source.
Matter of Instinctive necessity may not only be conceived not  to be but may be questioned & scrutinised upon other ground of Evidence.
So is the case with our perceptions of Sense. A skillfull Artist can give the perception of An Orrange upon a flat Surface or in a Model of rounded Materials: but the beholder may question it by the touch: and if this does not discover the truth, it may be tryed by the smell & the Taste or after all by the Test of Metaphysical Analogy as a Mode of our Existence not an Evidence of any thing else.
Under this Inquest however The Assent is still necessary & uninterrupted. While the Sceptic is disputing the reality of things perceived. The Approach of a venomous Insect will Scar or the Cry of Fire will put  to Flight. He questions the Reality but the Instinctive necessity of Assent remains.
It is so also where Nature presents a Combination of Ends and Means.
Our Perceptions in this Class as in every other one are  limited & various in their measures of Cogency.
There are many Phnomena in which we perceive no End and look for no means.
But where we ourselves are conscious of Ends and would gladly devise And employ means as in our enjoyments our preservation & well being: the Nature of an End or Object is well Understood. And when we find adequate means not our devising employed to Obtain & Secure them the perception of Means in Nature is also Instinctive & Necessary. When a number of circumstances Simultaneous or successive without any Other connection than that of their common tendency to a Salutary purpose are Observed in numberless Instances who can suspend or withhold the perception of an End & means & with these the perception of meaning & Design.
In the animal Kingdom  There is a distinction of Sex A Mutual Attraction & concourse. Generations Perish but a Provision is made for Succession. A Germ is formed & circumstances concur to its advancement.
As the time of its appearance in Life approachs A Secretion of Milk is commenced & effected in a proper organ of the Parents frame. A tender Affection is inspired into the Parents Breast. And when the Foetus Appears all things connected or unconnected are already prepared for his reception & he is a ready member of A Society already prepared to receive him. Does any one or can any one that reflects upon the matter resist the necessity of Perceiving The End & the means Employed by Nature or its Author? Who ever doubted or can doubt that the Eye was made to see And the Ear to hear. The atheist may say he doubts it: but let a light break upon him or A Sound assail, he will open his Eye to examine or incline Ear to  hear it as he may most distinctly. His Action belies his assertion and shows that he knows the purpose for which those organs are formed & cannot refrain his Belief while he perversely denies it. Such is our Way or the mode of our Existence And if we are not changed is as necessary as our Existence itself.
Here the Poets Adage applys as in any other Instance.
Naturam expellas furca tamen usque recurret. 
Sceptics pretend to doubt: but they Act the Believer & do not mistake the purpose which things in Nature are fitted to Serve.
If that Character of the Creative Power which we look is Design Invention & Concert the leading Forms of Intelligence be manifest in the cases Specifyed. It is so also as far as our observation or comprehension extends.
In every combination the Part is exquisitely formed for its place; it is itself a combination & the design  for which its parts are fitted manifest themselves in the design which is Accomplished on the whole. Solid fluid & Aerial are composed of many Parts Aptly combined & come together with admirable Effect in this Terrestrial System or living World of Plants Animals and Men. This Terrestrial System is but a part in the Solar or Planetary System, where Science every where discovers the same monuments of Design as in the Organization of a Plant or an Animal. The Work is one & the Author we  no reason to Believe is Otherwise. 
Variety indeed appears to be an Object or primary End of Creation. But the Analogy that is preserved in the midst of Diversity marks the Identity of designing Power & unites a Multiplicity of Forms in one in many Instances they are mutually & Visibly Subservient & in all Consistent.
 We have Stated as necessary Truths:
That contingent Events imply a previous Power to produce them.
That Ends  means imply Design. And We conclude that this passing Scene is a work of Intelligence And so the first Cause or Primary Power is Characterised.
There cannot any thing have been prior to him he is self existent & Necessary. 
And if necessary at one Time or Place equally so in all every where present Eternal & Immense.
In his Attributes Necessary as well as in his Being.
If necessary in Power: Omnipotent. If necessary in Knowledge omniscient.
If necessary in the Energies of Creative preservative & and Beneficent Power. In these all consummate & Perfect.
His Work in every particular Instance is limited. On  Earth the Sea & the Land are Separate. Every Plant & Animal terminates in itself. The Globe with its Atmosphere is rounded And has an Empty Space in what to revolve or perform its Motions So of Other Planets and of the System itself.
The Space to which our Sight extends marked as it is with distant lights remote from us & from one Another which is respect to the Immensity of Space may be as a Point in respect to us is immensity itself & an Image of that Creation which is the Work of Boundless And unceasing Power which Acts by Choice & within the limits of Choice alone. 
In all this process as resulting from Truths absolutely or instinctively necessary it may be said we resort to the form of Argument a Priori long Since Exploded and now supposed to be a mere System  of Words without meaning & like a Cobweb tho visible at a distance has no Substance to Withstand the Touch ever presenting what we cannot deny: but what we never can lay hold on as true.
In this we agree with that Student of Euclid who after a Proposition was demonstrated  still recourse to the Compass to know whether it was true.
We are used to rely on Experience as the source of Information that we forget Experience itself is founded on the basis of Instinctive Necessity. & in its Applications must conform itself to the maxims of Reason or Necessary Truths of Things contradictory only one can be must be true of things Contrary both may be false but only one can be true. Two things equally to a Third must be equall to one Another.  Whatever Argument derives from these principles is an Argument a Priori. And there is no disscussion in which such argument must not be either expressed or Understood.
If we are to have experience as our Sole guide in every Case. We cannot reason it will be said beyond what we have seen or experienced.
If Arriving on the Coast of An unknown Country. The mariner upon seeing houses And Cultivated Lands concludes the Country is inhabited it is because he has seen such works produced by Men. He knows the Works of Men & where he sees the Work concludes that there are Men.
But the Works of Nature are different. Must he have seen the Creator at Work So that in seeing Such Works  repeated he may conclude the Creator Characterized As he experienced him was here.
On this Sceptic founds his refusal to admit any Inference from the Nature of Works altogether new to us & unlike to any thing we have Actually seen or performed by any Power whatever.
It is probable that no single Particle nor any number of detached facts whether a work accomplished or part of the means employed to produce it will prior to experience Suggest the design or contrivance from which the whole proceeded: but the process seen in detail & in Effect will not fail to present the Intelligent mind with Evidence of Design & with this of Intelligence modified by the end proposed Whether Good or Evil a Person having experience in Agriculture on seein a Plough in the Field or a Stack of Corn in the yard, apprehends  the whole process of Sowing and reaping: but a Laplander to whom this process was unknown or unexperienced on seeing a Plough had no perception of its Use Supposing from the Traces it might be intended for a Sledge he censured the Construction Seeing it at Work he still more severely condemned the practice of tearing up the Soil & destroying the moss or the Swerde on its Surface.
The Sower appearing to cast away his Grain to be irrecoverably lost was Still more blamed When the new plant appeared he supposed it should pasturd And was amazed to see it reserved to shoot to lose its Verdure & Decay: but when Reaped and the Grain which appeared to be thrown away is returned manifold into the Labourers hoards. The End & the means force themselves upon his mind & he perceives the Design and the Skill of the Labourer although he had no  previous experience of such a process and its result.
We are precisely in this Situation respecting Some Works of Nature we are in Such Instances presentd not with finished works or detached means but are present the process & in the relation of Ends & means find the apprehension of Contrivance and Design necessary to our Thinking Faculty.
To those who Think to this extent the Result is as necessary as seeing & hearing are to those who look about them or who listen to the sounds produced in the air arround them. Hence the Universal Apprehension of Intelligent Power operating in Nature An Apprehension that is part of Wisdom when the Apprehending mind is Wise And Partakes of its folly & dottage where the mind is doated or feeble.
It is like every other principle in the progressive Nature of man a Germ to be improved  or a Possession that may be neglected & even debased.
The Ends most Obvious to us in the System of living Nature or Procreation Preservation Accommodation, And Perfectibility or Progression.
These Ends are Consonant to the Nature of Beneficent Power Together with the means by which they are Obtained or promoted amidst the Variety and Analogy of the Whole Constitute the Supreme Order & Beauty of the Works of God. Unhappy is he who feels a Motive whether of Vanity or Interest to deprecate them or whose Mind is not wrapped in Joy apprehending the presence of their Author.
Procreation is another name for Creation itself or the continued extension of Being in this System.
The seminal & progressive means employed in it gives to created Intelligence the Power of Controuling it to his Purpose.
Individuals are preserved by Respiration & proper Food Species by succession.
 For their Accommodation The Earth with its Land Water and atmosphere, The Solar System itself are provided.
For man in particular a Scene of Action is opened. His Wants make it necessary for him to contrive a Supply. The Materials on the Surface or in the contiguous Strata abound but require the work of his hand to become Serviceable. 
His mind Capacious of Knowledge has the Fabrick of Nature to a considerable extent laid out before him.
The Society in which he takes Life The Supreme Blessing of his Lot is to him also the Supreme Object of his Anxiety & Care full of trouble distraction and Ruin if neglected or Mismanaged: Therefore a principal occasion of his best Exertions the School of all his Virtues or Nursery of his Perfectibility which in mere Animals as well as Plants consists in a Progress from the Seminal Germ of their respective Natures to the full Maturity or developments of their material Stamina: in him probably extends beyond this Visible Scene as far as the perfectibility of Created Intelligence can Extend.

XXXII. CHARACTERISTICS OF MANS NATURE

Man or else the mind of Man so far as known to himself is an Active Power.
His Energies are compared to the movements or Agitations of material Substances And Theories of mind have been admitted on the Slightest Analogies tho in Subjects so different.
The movements of matter consist in Approach or recession in impinction pression or friction.
The Energies of mind are Instinct Opinion & habit.
 Instinct is the original Form of Being in which minds resemble or differ from one another.
In this respect mind differs from Body The Associating from the Solitary the Benevolent from the Malicious. The mild from the Irascible The Prompt from the Sluggish &c. &c.
Consciousness of itself is the first great instinct of mind.
Perception and apprehension of Other objects is the next.
The fruit of this instinct is knowledge or opinion.
Opinion is acquired and varies indefinitely. Opinions respecting  the causes of Good & Evil or Enjoyment & Suffering affect the original Instincts or give desires And Aversions corresponding to the apprehension of Good or Evil.
The opinion of Good excites desire & hope.
The opinion  Evil excites Aversion & Fear.
Habit is the propensity to repeat what has been repeatedly thought or done.
This of Course is not original but acquired.
Instincts are in Nature agreeable or dissagreeable.
Consciousness  of Existence if undisturbed is agreeable. Benevolence is agreeable so is Esteem and Hope Malice & Fear in all their Forms are dissagreeable.
Active engagement if Clear of Malice or Fear is Agreeable; Languor is the Reverse. 
Habits are agreeable or dissagreeable according as the Acts of which they are the Repetition are so.
Instincts opinions And Habits are to man the constituents of Excellence or defect of Happiness or Misery.
The Prevalence of Benevolence and alacrity & exemption from Malice fear or Languor is the Excellence  and Felicity of Mind.
Just opinions of Good & Evil of the Attainable or unattainable secure the rectitude of desire & Aversion Success or exemption from dissappointment.
The Habit of What is Good facilitates & confirms it.
We look abroad for Happiness or misery: but that is an Absurd Habit.
These are conditions of the Mind not of any external thing & this is so evident that no one disputes it: But as we consider some external thing as the Cause of what is ill within we  precipitatly transfer the Name of Good or Ill to the External thing which we admit as the Cause.
A man is glad of an Estate He therefore says an Estate is a good or happy thing: But if he could be as glad without an Estate would he not be as happy?
True but how to be glad without an Estate is the Problem.
This after all should be no difficult matter; what so many have learned cannot be difficult.
In every Croud assembled to divert themselves few have Estates & these generally the least noisy in their Mirth.
With respect to  this matter that is of so much Consequence in human Life, The proper question is in what does its value consist? In its quantity,
or in its use? As to its quantity if insufficient to Subsistence or Health Life & every question relating to it will be at an End.
If on the other hand the quantity be sufficient to subsistence Health The proper use is all, for unused it is nothing, & Abused it is Worse or actually hurtfull. The diligent or industrious may be happy in honestly acquiring it. The proper occupation is a constituent of Happiness. The moderate the Frugal the Liberal & benevolent will be happy in using it And in this its  value consists that in contributing to preserve Life it gives occasion to those habits in which the happiness of Life consists. This we cannot doubt is intended by the Author of all things in laying the Scheme of human Life.
Are the Pleasures of Sense then to be reckoned for nothing in this beautiful Scheme? They are of value no doubt: but whatever that value may be in the Scheme it is counterballanced by the opposite Pain or Suffering of Sense, and in respect to the design it is doubtless the same in both The preservation of Life The one by alluring to what is Salutary; the other by deterring  from what is pernicious And in fact so far as the pleasures of Sense enter into the Sum of human happiness, they are most entire to the Temperate or so far as bodily pain is constituent of Misery it is most successfully avoided also by the Temperate and lightest in effect to the Intrepid and the Patient.
From all these considerations it is evident That what we are to rely on for happiness is not Wealth for in this our best endeavours may fail But on Industry Frugality Oeconomy Temperance Liberality Charity and Beneficence: For in these nothing  can hinder or dissappoint us.
Whatever we propose to ourselves abroad; it is within we are to look for happiness. 
The Maker of the Old Song: My Mind to me a Kingdom is is perhaps the best instructor in this mighty Choice of Subject on which to bestow our Skill & Labour. Here we may have agreeable Instincts or in lieu of them agreeable habits exemption from Malice or Fear envy or Jealousy Correct opinions Agreeable occupation of Thought possession of Science & the most Agreeable Range of Contemplation in the ends & means presented to us in the Works of God.
 Here perhaps it is not enough tho true to say That the Will is all That whoever is realy Willing to be Benevolent is so in the very Will to be so.
There are sometimes unhappy Propensities whether original or acquired which the Will cannot at once eradicate, & which mix their bitter with the most agreeable Resolutions we can form. Supposing ourselves for instance provocked to hatred while we are resolute to do nothing hostile while innocent in Action the Heart is Stung & cannot divest itself of all the Poison it has received. There is a Sore  within that must have other Medicine than the mere prescription of the Will not to harbour any Sparks of Hatred.
This Will indeed if real is migh Gain. The Work is well nigh done.
There is nothing to provoke new ills or to sustain the old. Not to have done harm in word or deed is agreeable & is easily followed o occasion with Obliging Acts of Will, And conciliating manners tho not at first umixed with inward alloy becomes so by degrees and minds from being at Variance unite in confidence And Goodwill.
 Nay but says on of these Sickly Patients who would purge himself of Ill. I found that my Innocence did but encourage further wrongs And after I had forced myself to obliging returns The Opportunities I gave were seized against me.
This surely is no Object of Love, and the Innocent can do no more than avoid the Contact of Contagion.
If the infected Labours under putrid or cankered sores The sound must admit infection to his own breast under the pretence of resenting what another  harbours as an ordinary state. He is in fact to be Pityed but to be shunned & forgotten. The very memory of such a past is dangerous.
Abstinence from Harm indeed is not the only form of innocence or Symptom of a Sound & healthful Mind.
The indignant Sense of Wrong in such a scene as Man exhibits is no less to be indulged And tho seeming to partake of Hatred is nevertheless among the surest Symptoms of a just & Vigorous mind. It is not Suffering but a test of Strength And preparation for the greatest Triumph that of Justice over Wrongs.
Aurelius had compassion on the very Man that would dethrone him:
but amidst the vile depravity of Marius and his Gang he would have felt with Sylla. We naturally Sympathise with sufferers but they who do not Sympathise with the Injured do but mock Compassion when they bestow on the Wicked who perish in the  Snares they laid for Other men.
Benevolence is not faint nor indiscriminately mild to all. It wields the Sword of War as well as ministering the Balm of Peace.
Its Indignation is a principle of Valour The most powerful of any in the human heart and extends its influence even to Animals of the most timid Race. The sheep when she has dropt her young will turn upon the Dog.
If Hatred even provoked be Misery or Dissease what shall we say of Envy or Hatred & of those whom Others Praise or  Love; merely for the Eminence they gain in what the Envious Value? It is a lurking Sore the most debasing & unhappy.
The more it dare not own itself, and works on false pretences sometimes even of Benevolence and regret. Preserve us Heaven from this Infection or teach how to Cure it.
Of This great part is gained If the Envyous but know themselves The Vile Tincture of their Thoughts & putrid burning Ulcer in their hearts.
None surely can be willing to be so afflicted, or Spare what Will can do to Cure it. The Will can certainly at once withhold  each overt Act or Word of Malice, And the forms at least of Candour may become a Habit.
We surely cannot for Wisdom or for Goodness. It is the Reputation or the Fame of these we Envy. If Fame be true is it not rather pleasant to think that Reputation may be gaind by what is so much in our Power as doing what we ought in matters trusted to our Care.
The Good Man is my Friend His track may lead me & his Arm Support me I cannot hate for that. Nay but his Lustre may eclipse me and for this I hate him. His  Lustre takes no light from me Tis the infernal Tint of hatred I assume that shades me in my own Esteem And in the View of Others.
Good is absolute or not at all. Why compare myself with other men?
Because forsooth Emulation is a rousing Principle! But he who labours to excell or Equal Other men has fixed his aim a point below the mark of Excellence & if he is not entered is hastening to the Door of Envy, or what is not better malicious Joy & insolence on the miscarriage of a Rival. Happy is he who does what he can in every  Laudable pursuit, enjoys what he gains himself & rejoices for what is gained by others. And this if our Object be real happiness may be the common Lot of all. Who can restrain me from cultivating in my mind the most Agreeable thoughts Habits & affections & from doing what is proper in My Station And if this be happiness have I not to rejoice that Others do the Same?
Yes but this  weeding Envy from a Field on which it never yet has grown. The Field of just Aspiring minds to Wisdom & to goodness. The Envious fix on Joys to lead their Hopes and  Fears their Triumphs & their dissappointments. This is the bare exhausted Soil on which they reap the baneful Fruits of Envy & Malignity. And if they would expell Such Noxious Matter from their hoards, They must clear the Ground they must relieve the mind of false opinions and the admirations that misslead its Judgements. Fashion Dress Idle Fame and Fortune must be left for Balls to play at And our Object be to play our Party well & leave nought to chance but the Event which we may try to Rule but take as it is given from higher  Powers over which we have not any Controul nor Cause of Anger while they leave us still what is our Pastime and felicity. The same Ball to play at the same Ambition Still to play it well Perhaps to gain a Prize we have not thought of the Worth Splendor of a Being doomed to form it for higher Scenes Amidst the Labours of this Lower World.
Next to Envy or Malice Fear & Jealousy are the principal Sources of Dissease suffering in the human Mind.
Among Animals of which some Are a Prey to others, the weak are timid & prepared for  Flight & this is their means of preservation.
In childhood or Infancy man too weak & timid on every new or Strange Appearance his Cry demands protection. The Nod of Hectors Crest allarmd Astyanax: But on the Approach of manhood this is not to be endured. His Faculties enable him to distinguish real from Apparent Danger, And his means of Preservation Resistance Art & Conduct incompatible with Terror.
On the Approach of danger he is qualified to devise the means of Safety And Danger is  ordained for him that he may try his faculties. 
Tu ne cede Malis is the motto of his Life. Fear so useful to the Infant would be to him a Traytor & ensure worse than the Evil which he dreads.
Epictetus somewhere says you are affraid of this & other Thing But you have more reason to be Affraid of Fear itself. The very thing you dread is not so bad as this to be affraid. 
The mind is on The Rack debased and Stupefied so Anxious to be safe as to be incapable of any means of Safety.
The Sense of Mankind is strongly Bent against this Weakness. Contempt  and Obloquy attends it in the World that sees the effect Shame & consciousness of meanness haunt it in the mind itself.
The sense of Honour is enough to make the Coward wish for Courage And in this Case the Will to be reformed is the first Step to Reformation.
While Fear still lurks within we may command the overt Acts And by Acting like the Brave learn to pass through danger undismayed or detect the imposition where a Bugbear threatens or untried Scenes allarm.
All men are willing to disguise  their Fears, The Wise or Prudent would eradicate them. How? you will say. Forecast & be prepared for what may happen. When you Bathe say Epictetus, consider what may happen in the Bath & be prepared to bear or remedy it with deliberate & manly Firmness. This  your Specifick Safety on all occasions. To be affraid is to be weak & helpless. If this be truth and sure it is. Fix it in your mind by constant Thought & Habit. The Ills you dread are mere impostors And owe the greatest of their Effects to your Timidity.
 Fortitude alleviates present Pain and Setts the future at Defiance or takes the most effective measure to Avoid it.
The Ills of human Life must terminate in Death and owe their terrific Aspect to its Supposed Approach. And is it then so terrible to meet what Thousands meet in every Hour What Cato Brutus & Aurelius incurred & what in Fact is a mere Feat of Nature as common & as necessary As Birth itself or Stature waxing from Infancy to youth & Manhood. Nature has inspired this care of Life that we might  not idly part with it not that in any Case it can be kept for Ever And She has ordained The Weakness imbecillity and decline of Age to wean us Gently From it.
What then is Death. The King of Terrors A Transition to some Further Scene of Being under the same Wise & Beneficent Government which we experience here.
Or if it be with us to terminate Existen or cease to be Then to us tis Nothing but to the World a Continuation of what it is happy to have seen & to Anticipate.
 Or of these we are informed that Death is neither: but the entrace on a State of Retribution of Reward or punishment corresponding to the Part that we have Acted here. On this foundation the object of our Fears should not be Death: but that which renders Death terrific the fatal errors of a Sinful Life: A  Principle which may be better termed than Fear the Steady purpose of an honest mind.
Fear is the link by which the Tyrant holds his Power by which the Slave is bound. If you would be free you must not wear the Chain: but Spurn injustice wheresoever it is. Strength or Weakness you are surrounded by a troupe of Men of whom even those who mean no ill would impose if not withstood their yoke on all arround them and recur to force or Violence where persuasion fails.
In states where  Wisdom Rules; Fear is the Lot of Guilt. And who denies The Preservation of a State depends on what its members can perform to Save it.
Man by Art & Confederation is the Sovereign Power on Earth.
Other Races can not contest with him. Tis in his own Race alone he finds an like his own presented to his breast.
Arms are necessary & in many a Scene there is No Other Safeguard to the innocent. But arms on Cowards are of  Avail. A Weapon even in his own Hand would be unfruitful unlearn this dastard Prejudice the state has no support in him.
 Here the office of Private Moralists devolves upon the State: The task is easy to dispel the Fear of Arms by practice & the permitting men  use them is necessary if to inspire the heart with Active Valour.
To the Warmth of Patriot Sentiment Esteem of Valour and the Rank it gives must be instilled.
This be your task you Generous Statesmen who know the human Heart and can conduct the Multitude whether in the Ways of Peace or fields of War.
The Ills that spring from Cowardice & thus call for Notice from the State have  many forms in private Life for which the unhappy Sufferer is deeply concerned to find a Remedy. What is Jealousy but the Fear of what may be doing to our prejudice It operates in distrust and seeks for causes to Augment itself. When oft the very worst we dread is less an Evil than the guard we place to hinder it.
The name almost appropriated to the Distrust of the Fidelity which the Sexes in their connection mutually require implys the meanest & most helpless State of suffering.
Happy are they  who know it only from the Stage where it has been dragged into view by Authors who can best unfold the human heart.
Spies Information Assurance disbelief the Slightest signs received for certainties desire of Evidence to confirm Suspicion Aversion to whatever tends to remove it.
Horrid Purposes restrained by Fear And distress confirmed by hatred of Relief. The Brave made Cowards & the Innocent involved in Guilt. Read the Moor of Venice where this & more will tend the Heart to Pity, And where The Evil may suggest the Cure.
 If there be resolution or remaining Strength of mind disdain to notice what ought to be contemned the Part that must depend on others Caprice & their own affairs, to all besides indifferent.
This unhappy Ill should serve to cure itself. It seems to Arise from Love and in proportion as it grows should kill the Root from which it Springs.
But in this Expectation facts And often hatred seems To feed what sprang from Love And all is madness or defect of Reason. If the Insane could be made  Sensible of where he erred tis poss some Benefit might come from the Resolution to be Wise.
Tis all perhaps The Jealous or the Coward can accomplish for himself.
Distrust and Treason are the Bane of human Life Begetting and begotten they are mostly joined together &  this vye with their Counterparts Fidelity & Confidence. The Macedonian Conqueror of Persia we are told being ill of a Fever had secret Notice that his Physician was suborned to poyson him And while the informers illet was in his hand The Physician brought a Potion he had prepared.
The King  received & Drank it then showed to the Physician the caution he had in his hand what could innocence have done in such a Scene. Burst you will say with Love and Admiration too big to be contained: No! He too was Calm familiar with Fidelity and thought such Confidence a common Thing. Twas here The King was Great his conquests but disgraced.
Suspicion is too oft the Child of Guilt or Conscious Vileness.
The slightest mark of such a stain allarms the genuine Moralist. Tis better to be deceived than live in Fear or own a Party whom he  dare not trust.
The Moralists first Object is to be free from Suffering. The Sun shines bright amidst the Cloudless sky And Being is joy when nought offends and all is Peace. Thought is pleasant Memory is Sweet And Prospects are all Gay. Benevolence & Confidence will Spring where Malice and Distrust are wanting Self Esteem is pleasant as remorse & shame are painful: But let the Moralist beware of fancied Merit. Tis safe to brood our Innocence but the Virtuous Seldom thin they have done enough or that Mankind owe them any thanks for being  it were vile and miserable not to have been.
Self Esteem is dangerous. Its Genuine Object is Benevolence And Love to Man. The very ground on which it grows forbids Contemptuousness or Pride. The vain for ever dwell on what they have to merit Praise the modest & the worthy rather think of what they want to please themselves.
Perfection present in the works of God or in the sense of Innocence & Candor is of all Delights the most agreeable.
Its names are Merit Beauty Excellence and Greatness wheresoever applied they carry Praise expression of Esteem & Love or admiration. Well understood they form the Mind to Dignity and Goodness: but misapplied they lead to Guilt or folly.
What is the Coxcombs what The Tyrants Bane but that the one mistakes for Excellence some frivolous distinction of his Dress or Person.
The other mistakes his Power for greatness. Beware then how you use these names or suffer the vulgar acceptations to prevail with you. Hence Caesar Triumphs all besmeared with Blood, durst Vie for Praise with Catos Innocence  and hence popular applause is next to Infamy. Ambition is the Spur to mighty Deeds And tho we want a name for Genuine Greatness yet this is prostitute and if not qualified by some restriction means no more than Riches Birth and Titles.
Beyond the limits of Vulgar Fate Beneath the Good How far, yet far above the Great Ambition too tho it should ever be desire of somewhat better than the present is in common use consigned to love of Power folly treachery & Crimes. Let not words Misslead or vulgar Notions pass for true opinions.
The  Speculative are sometimes not unjustly charged with Paradox:
but none so ruinous as what the very mob exhibits.
The Cry for Liberty or mean Licentiousness and yet admire the Arm of Force that by its Triumphs falls to crush & leave them nothing but the Name of Man. Julius whose Victories turned the Multitude who servd to a herd of Beasts was for Ages Worshiped as Divine.
The very life of man is Action And Languor not to be endured. d8 The unemployed betake themselves to what they call diversion oft more toilsome and more dangerous than any Trade or Labour Yet hear the Vulgar Moralist with him Tis happiness to be exempt from  Duty & have Nought to do.
This is the Paradox of Folly & of Crimes. Beware of Languor or a vacant mind. They lead to guilt & misery. The merest trifling is to be preferred and Any honest excercise of mind or Body Comparative felicity. 
Few are the Conditions in which there is not some function or some Duty to be done. These we sometimes hate or deem a trouble & fly to pastime to relieve our Languor & fill up our time. This is mere dissease and Folly. If you wish for Pastime Be assured that nothing can amuse you better than that which  in the present Moment you Are called to do. 
Ever have some Object & some standard by which to fix your Choice. 
What is this to the Labourer at his Plow or Spade or Artist in his Workshop to the Master of a Family among his Household: the Object is familiar & near at hand.
The dissengaged must have to look for it And to chuse it well is happiness for Life.
What should this Object be to Man: but Man himself And his true Good.
The Moralist has told us that The Good of Mankind is the choice pursuit of Man.
Does he therefore mean that all be Statesman and calulate alike for Europe Africa Japan or China.
The Good of Mankind to every Individual is at home. 
Be what Man should be this is your Good & that of every Man within your Reach.
The Fair & Candid is the Friend of Man. From him the Stranger has no prejudice to dread; The weak no Injury; The mighty no delusive flattery,
Nor the Humble Supercilious neglect or Scorn.
There is influence in Goodness to diffuse itself; and here Beneficence is most effectual tho there should be occasion to Feed  or Cloath the Poor. The Eye that sees will bless it & the Ear that hears will praise; And in this the way to happiness will be displayed.
This is to Love & serve mankind.
Tis not indifferent how the Ingenuous mind directs its thoug.
The dissengaged & they who would be wise will choose their Contemplations and their studies. Whatever God has made may claim their Notice But the first of Sciences is that by which we Assign to every subject its relative importance.
To Man what Knowledge can precede that of himself and of the God who made him. What claim his notice if he mistake the End prescribed to him or sees not  the means by which it is to be attained.
What is he? Where? Under whose Government? And whether bound?
These are Questions of such consequence to him. That untill they are resolved no Themes besides can claim attention. The Animals are doomed to feed on Stores provided for them, without inquiry whence they come.
To Man the Giver is of more importance than the Gift. Tis he ensures him of his Lot, and makes each present Gift the earnest of Eternal Goodness:
The Wise Aspire to Independence: but to exist is to depend on God The Principle and Source of Being. Ignorance or Mistake of him is misery & Degradation  from The Rank of Man. And whatever leads from Great first & best of Objects But betrays the Mind And frustrates all its Powers of Reason  Intelligence.
Thus Mans felicity begins in Peace of Mind exempt from Malice & from Fear Active in Benevolence & in the Contemplation of Supreme Perfection The mighty Source of Being from whom he sprang & to whom he must return promoted or degraded. 
Such is his Rank in Nature Free to Act and bear The Consequences.The immediate Object of the Inquiry now depending before the Commons of Great Britain is Whether Sir Wm Howe is a Man of Capacity & has ably conducted The American War.

This Question is of very little consequence to the Publick & may be decided in any Way without affecting the State otherwise than by promoting or defeating the Purpose of Party.

The Inquiry however has led to Questions of more Moment.

1st How far the State has a Right to Employ the Ordinary means of War in order to Suppress a Rebellion which has outlived all the Grievances from which it was Supposed to Arise, & how far his officers have already Abused these means.

And What Prospect  remains to Great Britain of being able to effect a Reunion with Her Colonies.

As to the 1st Question. It is not easily conceived how Subjects in Arms against Their Sovereign & in Alliance with his ennemys, should be entitled to more favour than the Subjects of a Forreign Prince at War upon some problematical Questions of State.

The Subjects of a forreign Prince involved in a War by their Sovereign may not have incurred any personal Guilt by that Circumstance And it is not Lawfull to Distress them except so far as that is allowed in order to Disstress the State to which they belong.

But Subjects in Rebellion incurr a Personal Guilt & may be disstressed not only in order to disstress their Community but likewise in order to Punish Their Crime.

When a Controversy nevertheless, whatever may have been its origin,  has been brought to the ordinary Issue of War. It must be conducted according to the Rules of War least Innocent Subjects employed against Rebels & Criminals shoud be exposed by Retaliation to Suffer what Justice permits to be inflicted on Rebels & Criminals Alone.

War is supposed to permit Reprisals, Circumvention, Force, Bloodshed Slaughter & a Variety of means that may be employd to force an Ennemy to Justice.

In the use of these means however the operations of War are limited with a View to the End, & to the just measure of Hostilitys that may be necessary to Obtain it.

No Act of Hostility not even the smallest Molestation to the Person against whom it is employed is Lawfull Except so far it is necessary to prevent a Wrong, or  to redress an Injury.

The Principle from which the Rules of War are derived is. That a Person apprehending wrong may defend himself at the Expence & Hazard, and if necessary even by the Suffering & Destruction of the Party who wrongs him.

And the Source of the Limitation is likewise Obvious: That he is not to do harm wantonly nor beyond what is necessary to preserve or recover his Right.

The first & most ordinary Species of Hostilitys in case an ennemy persist in the Wrong, Are seizing his Person & Effects or His Territory & in case of Resistance, Military Execution & Slaughter.

1st  A Party Aggrieved has a right to make War at the Expence of His Ennemy, And therefore has a Right that [xxx] isnever Contested, to raise Contributions, to exact  Supplys of every Sort, as far as they are Necessary to Support, the War or as far as they tend by distressing the Ennemy to compell the Ennemy to Justice.

Armys on the Territory of an Ennemy sometimes Spare the Countrey from a Consideration of Safety & Expedience to themselves.

It is expedient to Protect a Countrey in which an Army is to make is the Seat of War, in order to enjoy its Resources which might be exhausted at once if the Countrey was laid Waste or exposed to Rapin.

An Army endeavours to Avail itself of the Resources of an Ennemys Countrey either by Exacting regular & Measured Contributions under a perfect Security to the Persons & remaining Property of those who pay those Contributions.

Or by means Still more Mild by requiring the Ordinary Supply of the Camp at a Marketable & Reasonable Price. 

If the reasonable dem[and] whether of a free Contribu[tion] or Marketable Supply a[re] refused it is undoubtedly Lawfull to Exact Complyance under Pain or Military Execution. And Countreys in the Power of an Ennemy for the most part are so well apprised of what they have to Expect that they never refuse such Contributions or Supplys.

2  Every Person that is Found in Arms is Supposed to Resist & may be proceeded against accordingly. And Every House from which Hostilitys are Committed may be destroyd & is accordingly destroyed to deterr the Peasant from Practices that Approach to assassination & hurt particular persons without affecting the General Cause.

3  An Army being to Withdraw from a Countrey or being to leave it to be occupied by an ennemy may if Expedient not only break up high Ways  demolish Bridges. Fell Timber. Destroy Forrage Provisions, & every Species of accommodation that would facilitate the operations of An Ennemy. This is Practised by Armys on the own Territory of a Friend & the Right was never Questioned on that of an Ennemy.

When a Party at War is to Abandon a Possession that may be instantly turned against him by an Ennemy, it is undoubtedly lawfull to consult his own Safety by destroying Such Possession.

Thus not only Arsenals & Magazines with their Contents of Arms Amunition stores and Provisions. Not only Fortresses Docks & Harbours but Sea Ports of any description [xxx] Towns & Villages are destroyed when they are likely to become a dangerous Accession of Force to an Ennemy.

And the Party who persists in the Wrong so  long as to render those or Other Acts of Hostility necessary against him has no one to Blame but himself.

If The Party whose Right is withheld from him, abstain, upon Considerations of Humanity or Prudence, from such Severitys; this conduct depends upon his own Choice & cannot be exacted from him by any Strict Rule of Justice.

On the Contrary Justice to the Cause in which he is engaged may frequently make it necessary for him to proceed so far.

These Maxims of War have not been practised much less Abused in the general Conduct of the American War.

Accidental outrages take place without making any Part in the Plans or Systems of Hostilitys.

The Plan of the War seems to have been formed upon an Idea that we  were engaged in a Contest with our Brethren to be reclaimed by the mildest Possible Methods, That their Armys were to be defeated but their Persons and Property Spared. No contributions were exacted, No Markets were forced, The Peasant lived undisturbed within Reach of our Guns Cannon & denyed us that Relief & those Supplys which a Single discharge could have forced, or Amply punished him for refusing.

Must Great Britain forego every Right that is not to be recovered upon such Maxims of Lenity or rather Timidity as these?If so Every Obstinate Ennemy or Rebel may forever with hold her Rights.

But the American Rebels must not be flatterd.

Every Species of War that is lawfull against an ordinary Ennemy is lawfull against them. 

And as the Passions of men are more Violent in Civil and Domestic than in Forreign Wars, The Obstinate American Rebel who professes to throw himself into the Scale of France, against his own Countrey, has more Severitys to dread from his Injured Countrey than any Forreign Ennemy would have to dread in the result of an Ordinary War.

The Congress now Usurping the Government in America & Violently restraining the People from returning to their Allegiance & Duty, Intend the deepest Wound that ever was aimed at Great Britain, and appea[r]s to be Animated with peculiar Sentiments of Animosity & Rancour.

The Consequences of their Pretensions to Independence, Are the Dissmemberment of the British Empire by a Separation of the whole Continent of North America from the  Crown of Great Britain: The Consequent Exclusion of Great Britain from the Naval Resources which she had with so much Care Studyed to acquire with so much care on the Other Side of the Atlantic. Her Exclusion in time of War time at least from the Parts of the Atlantic sic become precarious & insecure, & consequently the Danger of her Possession in the West East Indies become equally precarious Insecure, & or a Ready Prey to her Ennemys. And last of all the Eventual transferance of all the Maritime advantages now Enjoyed by Great Britain to Her Ennemys.

Whoever therefore sees nothing to be regretd in the Contest now Subsisting with the Rebels in America & in its Consequences, besides  the hardships likely to be Suffered by the American Rebel in Carrying to its full Completion this System of Wrong & Injustice to this Countrey & whoever feels not the wrong the[re]by intended & actually impending to Great Britain: is not, in his Heart, a British Subject but an Alien & an Ennemy.

When it is considered That, if in case the Ennemys of Great Britain whether forreign or Domestic Prevail in this Quarrel, Our Countrey still will be Stript of Possessions [xxx] improved with so much Care; will be deprived of the expected Returns from thence, & reduced to this Single Island, with Towns going to decay And Inhabitants Perishing for want of their former Resources: With a People Enured to Wealth disused to the Virtues,  required what might to Support them in Poverty; & in no Condition to Strugle with the difficulties of so new a Situation; No longer able to mantain such Fleets & Armys for the Defence of her Coasts & therefore an Easy Prey to any forreign Ennemy.

When it is considered, that these are the Evils which we are now Striving to Avert: The Person who now affects to Weep for over the temporary Sufferings which the Americans may now draw on themselves by persisting in this Rebellion, will, it is hoped, change the Object of his Fears or Confess himself to be an Ennemy not a Friend to Great Britain.

This Idle Inquiry has likewise been directed to Cloud the Prospect of Great Britain in Her endeavours to recover  Her Interest in the American Colonies.

Her Difficulties are Exaggerated; Her Forces & her Resources are depreciated & Vilifyed; in order to Support a Character for Ability in the Officer who has been Employed in this Service. And The Empire of Great Britain must be dissmembered rather than we must Suppose any Defect in the Capacity of our General [xxx] who certainly might rise in our Esteem as much by the diffidence which in the world Modesty inspires as by any Pretences to Ability & Superiour Genius but from his failure hitherto to Restore America to its Duty the Obvious Consequence, I hope, is not despair of our Countreys Cause but farther & some different change of Plan exertion.

We must Protect & Support our Friends on that Continent, [xxx] & dissarm our Ennemies.

We must Put our Friends in Possession of Civil Government & reserve the effects of Military Government for our Military dissorders & Severitys our Ennemys.

I do not say mean to insinuate that the Reverse has hitherto been done, experience is not necessary to condemn The Idea Such Proceedings whether real or Supposed.

The Force of Arms is ever but a small part in the great operations of State to restore & to heal a Wounded Community.

The Force of Wisdom & of Justice the Sense of Mutual Interest, directing the Arms that are to be employed against a desperate Faction that has usurped usurping the Government of North America, may soon do more than has yet appeared to be Practised. The mere Military Move has hitherto performed however much tho supposed above Censure have been able to Accomplish.
OF MANS PROGRESSIVE NATURE

There is in nature a well-known distinction of things progressive, and stationary, to which we must attend in the farther pursuit of our subject.

To be stationary, it is not necessary that a subject should be incapable of change, even from the action of any external cause; it is sufficient that it have not any principle of change in its own nature. To be progressive, on the contrary, does not consist in any variation or change which an external cause may produce; but in those transitions, from one state to another, which proceed from a principle of advancement in the subject itself.

A block of stone, from the quarry, may receive, in the hands of a workman, any variety of forms, but left to itself, would remain in its state.

A seedling plant on the contrary, in a favourable soil and exposure, takes root and grows of itself.

Progressive natures are subject to vicissitudes of advancement or decline, but are not stationary, perhaps, in any period of their existence. Thus, in the material world, subjects organized being progressive, when they cease to advance, begin to decline, however insensibly, at the time of their transition from one to the other. In this consist the operation or failure of vegetable and animal life. In their advancement, the matter of which they are composed accumulates, and at every period acquires a form that approaches to the end of their progress. The principle of life itself gains strength or ability to discharge, and to vary, the functions of nature. In their decline they fade, shrink, and abate of their vigour and force.

Intelligence appears to be, in a still higher degree, a principle of progression, and subject to greater extremes of comparative advancement or degradation. It is advanced by continual accessions of observation and knowledge; of skill and habit, in the practice of arts; of improving discernment of good and evil; of resolute purpose or power. It declines through defect of memory, discernment, affection, and resolution.

While subjects stationary are described by the enumeration of co-existent parts, and quiescent qualities, subjects progressive are characterized by the enumeration of steps, in the passage from one form or state of existence to another, and by the termination or point of approach, whether near or remote, to which the successive movements of their nature are directed.

The rank of a progressive subject is to be estimated, not by its condition at any particular stage of its progress, but by its capacity and destination to advance in the scale of being. From the feeblest shoot or seed-leaf of the oak, though more diminutive than many plants of the garden, we already forecast the stately fabric it is designed to raise in the forest. In the human infant, though inferior to the young of many other animals, we anticipate the beauty of youth, the vigorous soul of manhood, and the wisdom of age. And the highest rank, in the scale of created existence, is due to that nature, if such there be, which is destined to grow in perfection, and may grow without end: its good is advancement, and its evil, decline.

We are inclined to consider progression as made up of stationary periods; as we consider a circle as a polygon of an infinite number of sides; a fluid as made up of solid parts indefinitely small; and duration itself, as made up of successive points, or indivisible moments of time.

In this our conception is inaccurate, and our reasoning, of course, likely to become incorrect. Progression may, no doubt, be divided into periods; but in no period, perhaps, is the subject stationary. Every subdivision, like the whole of its progress, is a transition from one state to another, and through states intermediate, more or less numerous according to the divisions under which we are pleased to conceive them. The progress of intelligent being, for instance, may be more or less rapid, but is continual; and in the very continuance of existence, and the repetition of consciousness and perception, must receive continual increments of knowledge and thought. Or in the failure of the source from which it derives improvement, it is likely to incur degradation and decline.

For our purpose, however, it is sufficient to observe, that the state of nature or the distinctive character of any progressive being is to be taken, not from its description at the outset, or at any subsequent stage of its progress; but from an accumulative view of its movement throughout. The oak is distinguishable from the pine, not merely by its seed leaf; but by every successive aspect of its form; by its foliage in every successive season; by its acorn; by its spreading top; by its lofty growth, and the length of its period. And the state of nature, relative to every tree in the wood, includes all the varieties of form or dimension through which it is known to pass in the course of its nature.

By parity of reason, the natural state of a living creature includes all its known variations, from the embryo and the ftus to the breathing animal, the adolescent and the adult, through which life in all its varieties is known to pass.

The state of nature, relative to man, is also a state of progression equally real, and of greater extent. The individual receives the first stamina of his frame in a growing state. His stature is waxing, his limbs and his organs gain strength, and he himself a growing facility in the use of them. His faculties improve by exercise, and are in a continual state of exertion.

If his thoughts pass from one subject to another, he can return to the subject he has left, with some acquired advantage of discernment or comprehension. He accumulates perceptions and observations, takes cognizance of new subjects, without forgetting the old; knows more, of course, at every subsequent period than he did in a former; reasons more securely; penetrates obscurities, which at first embarrassed him; and performs every operation of thought with more facility and more success.

With respect to the period of his existence he sees it but in part. When he looks back to the point from which he set out, he cannot descry it; when he looks forward to the end of his line, he cannot foresee it. He may observe the birth and the death of a fellow creature, but knows nothing of his own. If he were to assume the earliest date he remembers as the beginning of his existence, he might soon be convinced that he overlooked a considerable period which had preceded; or if he should suppose his being to end with the dissolution of his animal frame, it is possible he might be equally mistaken. Yet he finds nothing in the world around him beyond the limits of what he can collect from the remembrance of the past, or infer by sagacity from the laws of nature in foresight of the future, from which he can fix any certain marks of his own beginning or his end.

Such, without entering into the peculiarities or unequal degrees of power incident to different men, we may assume as the state of nature relative to the individual.

The state of nature relative to the species is differently constituted, and of different extent. It consists in the continual succession of one generation to another; in progressive attainments made by different ages; communicated with additions from age to age; and in periods, the farthest advanced, not appearing to have arrived at any necessary limit. This progress indeed is subject to interruption, and may come to a close, or give way to vicissitude at any of its stages; but not more necessarily at the period of highest attainment than at any other.

So long as the son continues to be taught what the father knew, or the pupil begins where the tutor has ended, and is equally bent on advancement; to every generation the state of arts and accommodations already in use serves but as groundwork for new invention and successive improvement. As Newton did not acquiesce in what was observed by Kepler and Galileo; no more have successive astronomers restricted their view to what Newton has demonstrated. And, with respect to the mechanic and commercial arts, even in the midst of the most laboured accommodations, so long as there is any room for improvement, invention is busy as if nothing had yet been done to supply the necessities, or complete the conveniences of human life. But even here, and in all its steps of progression, this active nature, in respect to the advantages, whether of knowledge or art, derived from others, if there be not a certain effort to advance, is exposed to reverse and decline. The generation, in which there is no desire to know more or practise better than its predecessors, will probably neither know so much nor practise so well. And the decline of successive generations, under this wane of intellectual ability, is not less certain than the progress made under the operation of a more active and forward disposition.

Such is the state of nature relative to the human species; and, in this, as in every other progressive subject, the present being intermediate to the past and the future, may be different from either. Each is a part of the whole; and neither can, with any reason, be said to be more natural than the others. It cannot be said, that it is more natural for the oak to spring from its seed than to overshadow the plain; that it is more natural for water to gush from the land in springs than to flow in rivers, and to mix with the sea.

The state of nature relative to man, however, is sometimes a mere term of abstraction, in which he is stated apart from the society he forms, from the art he invents, the science he acquires, or the political establishment he makes. And, when his progress in any of these respects is to be considered, it is no doubt convenient to consider the particular in question apart from himself, and from every thing else. It is not, however, to be supposed, that man ever existed apart from the qualities and operations of his own nature, or that any one operation and quality existed without the others. The whole, indeed, is connected together, and any part may vary in measure or degree, while in its nature and kind it is still the same.

The child may be considered apart from his parent, and the parent apart from his child; but the latter would not have existed without the former. If we trace human society back to this its simplest constitution, even there the society was real. If we trace human thought back to its simplest exertions, even there it was an exercise of understanding, and some effort of invention or skill.

The groups in which the rudest of men were placed, had their chiefs and their members; and nothing that the human species ever attained, in the latest period of its progress, was altogether without a germ or principle from which it is derived, in the earliest or most ancient state of mankind.

It may no doubt be convenient, we may again repeat, in speculation, or in assigning the origin and in deriving the progress of any attainment, to consider the attainment itself abstractly, or apart from the faculty or power by which it is made; and we must not deny ourselves the use of such abstractions, in treating of human nature, any more than in treating of any other subject. But there is a caution to be observed in the use of abstractions, relating to any subject whatever: That they be not mistaken for realities, nor obtruded for historical facts.

The language of geometry is necessarily abstract. A point is mere place, considered apart from any dimension whatever. A line is length, considered apart from breadth or thickness. A surface is length and breadth, considered apart from thickness. And, in a solid, all the dimensions of length, breadth, and thickness, are admitted. But the geometrical abstractions are nowhere mistaken for realities: length is not supposed to exist without breadth, nor length and breadth without thickness. Or, if such mistakes are actually made, yet, no one would infer that lines are more natural than surfaces, or surfaces more natural than solids.

Such mistake and misapprehension of terms is scarcely admitted, except in treating of human nature. In every other progressive subject, progression itself, not any particular step in the progress, is supposed to constitute the natural state. The last shoot of the oak, after it has stood five hundred years in the forest, and carried a thousand branches, is not deemed less natural than the first.

Under this term, of the State of Nature, authors affect to look back to the first ages of man, not without some apparent design to depreciate his nature, by placing his origin in some unfavourable point of view; as we derogate, from the supposed honours of a family, by looking back to the mechanics or peasants, from whom its ancestors were descended.

Hobbes contended, that men were originally in a state of war, and undisposed to amity or peace; that society, altogether unnatural to its members, is to be established and preserved by force. Or this, at least, may be supposed to follow from his general assumption that the state of nature was a state of war.

If this point must be seriously argued, we may ask in what sense war is the state of nature? Not surely the only state of which men are susceptible; for we find them at peace as well as at war: nor can we suppose it the state which mankind ought at all times to prefer; for it labours under many inconveniences and defects. But it was, we may be told, the first and the earliest state, from which men were relieved by convention and adventitious establishments.

This assertion, that war was the earliest state of mankind, is made without proof; for the first ages of the human species, in times past, are as little known as the last, that may close the scene of its being in times to come. In every progression, it is true, may be conceived a point of origin, and a point of termination, to be collected from the direction in which the progress proceeds. The sun, even by a person who never saw him rise or set, may be supposed, from the course he holds, to have risen in the east, and to set in the west. Man, who is advancing in knowledge and art, may be supposed to have begun in ignorance or rudeness; but it is not necessary to suppose that a species, of whom the individuals are sometimes at war, and sometimes at peace, must have begun in war. There is, on the contrary, much reason to suppose, that they began in peace, and continued in peace, until some occasion of quarrel arose between them.

The progress of the species, in population and numbers, implies an original peace, at least, between the sexes, and between the parent and his child, in family together; and, if we are to suppose a state of war between brothers, this, at least, must have been posterior to the peace in which they were born and brought up, to the peace in which they arrived at the possession of those talents, and that force, which they come to employ for mutual destruction.

Another philosopher, in this school of nature, has chosen to fix the original description of man, in a state of brutality, unconscious of himself, and ignorant of his kind; so far from being destined to the use of reason, that all the attempts he has made at the exercise of this dangerous faculty have opened but one continual source of depravation and misery.

But, as the former of these philosophers has not told us what beneficent power, different from man himself, has made peace for this refractory being; no more has the other informed us, who invented reason for man; whose thoughts and reflections first disturbed the tranquillity of his brutal nature, and brought this victim of care into this anxious state of reflection, to which are imputed so many of his follies and sufferings.

Until we are told by whom the state of nature was done away, and a new one substituted, we must continue to suppose that this is the work of man himself; and the whole of what these shrewd philosophers have taught, amounts to no more than this, that man would be found in a state of war, or in a state of brutality, if it were not for himself, for his own qualifications and his endeavours to obtain a better; and that, in reality, the situation he gains is the effect of a faculty by which he is disposed to choose for himself.

This we are ready to admit. Man is made for society and the attainments of reason. If, by any conjuncture, he is deprived of these advantages, he will sooner or later find his way to them. If he came from a beginning, defective in these respects, he was, from the first, disposed to supply his defects; in process of time has actually done so; continued to improve upon every advantage he gains; and thus to advance, we may again repeat, is the state of nature relative to him.

It were absurd to think of depreciating a progressive being, by pointing out the state of defect, from which he has passed, to the attainment of a better and a higher condition; for so to pass is the specific excellence of his nature.

The grandeur of the forest is not the less real, for its having sprung up from among the weeds of the field: the genius of Newton not the less to be admired, for his having grown up from the ignorance and simplicity of his infant years: nor the policy of Athens, Sparta, or Rome, less to be valued, because they may have sprung from hordes, no way superior to those who are now found in different parts of Africa or America.

It is the nature of progression to have an origin, far short of the attainments which it is directed to make; and not any precise measure of attainment, but the passage or transition from defect to perfection is that which constitutes the felicity of a progressive nature. The happy being, accordingly, whose destination is to better himself, must not consider the defect under which he labours, at the outset, or in any subsequent part of his progress, as a limit set to his ambition, but as an occasion and a spur to his efforts.

The life and activity of intelligent beings consists in the consciousness or perception of an improveable state, and in the effort to operate upon it for the better. This constitutes an unremitting principle of ambition in human nature. Men have different objects, and succeed unequally in the pursuit of them: but every person, in one sense or another, is earnest to better himself.

Man is by nature an artist, endowed with ingenuity, discernment, and will. These faculties he is qualified to employ on different materials; but is chiefly concerned to employ them on himself: over this subject his power is most immediate and most complete; as he may know the law, according to which his progress is effected, by conforming himself to it, he may hasten or secure the result.

The bulk of mankind are, like other parts of the system, subjected to the law of their nature, and, without knowing it, are led to accomplish its purpose: while they intend no more than subsistence and accommodation or the peace of society, and the safety of their persons and their property, their faculties are brought into use, and they profit by exercise. In mutually conducting their relative interests and concerns, they acquire the habits of political life; are made to taste of their highest enjoyments, in the affections of benevolence, integrity, and elevation of mind; and, before they have deliberately considered in what the merit or felicity of their own nature consist, have already learned to perform many of its noblest functions.

Nature in this as in many other instances does not entrust the conduct of her works to the precarious views and designs of any subordinate agent. But if the progress of man in every instance were matter of necessity or even of contingency, and no way dependent on his will, nor subjected to his command, we should conclude that this sovereign rank and responsibility of a moral agent with which he is vested were given in vain; and the capacity of erecting a fabric of art, on the foundation of the laws of nature, were denied to him in that department precisely in which they are of the highest account. If he may work on the clay that is placed under his foot, and form it into models of grace and beauty; if he may employ the powers of gravitation, elasticity, and magnetism, as the ministers of his pleasure; we may suppose, also, that the knowledge of laws operating on himself should direct him how to proceed, and enable him to hasten the advantages, to which his progressive nature is competent. If his Maker have destined his faculties to improve by exercise, and by the attainment of habits, there is no doubt that he himself may choose what exercise he will perform, and what habits he shall acquire.

But in order to profit by the laws of progression which take place in his frame, it behoves him to recollect what they are, and to take his resolution respecting the purpose to which he will apply their force.

To this object, he is urged at once by the double consideration of a good to be obtained, and of an evil to be avoided. Most subjects in nature, which, from the energy of a salutary principle, are susceptible of advancement, are likewise, by the failure or abuse of that principle, susceptible of degradation and ruin. Plants and animals are known to perish, in the same gradual manner in which they advance into strength and beauty. Man, with whom the sources of good and of evil are more entrusted to his own management, is likewise exposed, in a much higher degree, to the extremes of comparative degradation and misery. The progress of nations in one age to high measures of intellectual attainment and cultivated manners is not more remarkable than the decline that sometimes ensues in their fall to extreme depravation and intellectual debility.

It may not be in the power of the individual greatly to promote the advancement or to retard the decline of his country. But every person, being principally interested in himself, is the absolute master of his own will, and for the choice he shall have made is alone responsible.
The history of the progress and termination of the Roman Republic. By Adam Ferguson, ... In three volumes. ...
S T R E H I STORY
O F T H E PROGRESS AND TERMINATION
OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC.
B 0 K I.
C H A P. I. Yhe Sbdjecl.-Stlppofed Origin of the Roman State.
-Its Government.--The King.-Setnate.-People. Curice.-Centurie ribeTries.-Reigion.--The Tri- umph.-Original Maxims.-Progrefs of the State under its Kings.-Change to a Republic.
H E Roman State was originally a small prin- B o K I. cipality, and one of the many little cantons, CA. which, under the denomination of Latins, occupied the left of the Tiber,from its confluence with theAnio to the Sea, and from Oitia to Circeii on the coast. Within.this narrow tract, reaching in breadth in- land no more than sixteen miles, and extending on the coast about fifty miles, the Latins are said to have formed no less than forty-feven independent itates (a); each of whom had a separate capital or
(a) Dionyr. Halicar. lib. iv. VOL. I. B frong
B o o K strong hold, to which they occasionally retired for-
. safety, with their cattle and other effecs, and from
which they made frequent wars on each other (b)... The country, divided into so many separate terri- tories, we may confider as resembling some of the lately discovered islands in the Southern or Pacific Ocean (c),where every height is represented as a for- trefs, and every little township, that can maintain its possessions, as a separate slate. Among fettle- ments of this description, the Romans, though they were originally no way diftinguiflled in point of poffeflions or numbers, yet, in consequence of some superiority of inlfitution or character, they came to have a decided ascendant.
Beyond the Tiber onr the one hand, and the Liris on- the other, the contiguous parts of Italy were possessed, in the fame manner with Latium, by dif- ferent races of men, who, under various denomina- tions of Etrurians, Samnites, Campanians, and others, formed a multiplicity of little nations, united by leagues for common safety, and ranged under opposite interefis, with a view to oime balance of power which they endeavoured to maintain. The peninsula towards one extremity (d), was from time immemorial peopled with Grecian colonies. Tow- ards the other, it was, in the first ages of the Ro- man state, over-run by nations of Gaulish ex- traftion (e).
The land throughout, hi refpe& to situation, cli- mate, and foil, was highly favoured, diversified. with mountain and plain, well wooded and water- ed, replenished with useful materials, fit to yield pasture for numerous herds, and to produce abun- dance of corn, wine, and oit. And, what is fiill of more importance, was already become the flou- rifhing nursery of ingenious men, ardent and vigo- ( ') Liv. lib. i. c. 5, &c. (c) See Cook's Voyage to New Zealand. t) Magna CGzcui. ( ) Gallia Cifalpina.
70 sl- '
rous in their pursuits, though, in refpe& to manyc H A p. arts and inventions, yet in a itate of great fimplici- ty or ignorance.
The Romans, who made their firit ftep to domi- nion by becoming heads of the Latian confederacy, continued their progress to the sovereignty of Italy; or, after many struggles with nations poffefled of resources similar to their own, united the forces of that country under their own dirEtion, became the conquerors of many kingdoms in Asia and Africa, as well as in Europe; and formed an empire, if not the most extensive, at least the molt splendid of any that is known in the history of mankind. In pof- session of this seeming advantage, however, they were unable to preserve their own institutions; they became, together with the conquests they had made, a prey to military government, and a signal ex- ample of the viciflitudes to which prosperous nati- ons are exposed.
This mighty Rate, remarkable for the'fmallnefs of its origin, as well as for the greatness to which it attained, has, by the splendor of its national exer- tions, by the extent of its dominion, by the wis- dom of its councils, or by its internal revolutions and reverses of fortune, ever been a principal ob- ject of history to all the more enlightened nations of the western world. To know it well, is to know mankind and to have seen our species under the fairest aspeA of great ability, integrity, and cou- rage. There is a merit in attempting to promote the study of this subjed, even if the effect should not correspond with the design.
Under this impreflion the following narrative was undertaken, and chiefly with a view to the great revolution, by which the republican form of go- vernment was exchanged for despotism; and by which the Roman people, from being joint fove- reigns of a great empire, became, together with their own provinces, the fubjets, and often the
B z prey,
B o o prey, of a tyranny which was equally cruel to
-both.
As in this revolution men of the greatest abilities, pofeffed of every art, and furnished with the most ample resources, were acting in concert together, or in opposition to each other, the scene is likely to exhibit what may be thought the utmoit range or extent of the human powers; and to furnish those who are engaged-in transactions any way similar, with models by which they may profit, and from which they may form found principles of condut, derived from experience, and confirmed by exam- ples of the highest authority.
The event which makes the principal objeEt of this Hifiory, has been sometimes confidered as a point of reparation between two periods, which have been accordingly treated apart-the period of the republic, and that of the monarchy. During a considerable part of the firfi period, the Romans were highly diftinguiffed by their genius, magnani- mity, and national spirit, and made suitable attain- ments in what are the ordinary objeas of pursuit- wealth and dominion. In the second period they continued for some time to profit by the attainments which were made in the former, and while they walked in the trad of the commonwealth, or prac- tifed the arts and retained the lessons which former ages had taught, fiill kept their poffeflions. But after the springs of political life, which were wound up in the republic, had some time ceased to aft; when the fiate was become the concern of a tingle person, and the vestige of former movements were effaced, the national charater declined, and the power of a-great empire became unable to preserve what a small republic had acquired. The example, whether to be shunned or imitated; is certainly in- ftructive in either period ; but most so in the tran- fition that was made from one to the other; and in the forfeiture of those public advantages, of which'
- Ithe
the Roman people, in some part of their courfe,c H A p. availed themselves with so much diftinaion, and 1, which, in the sequel, they abused with so much dif- order at home, and oppreflion of their fubjets abroad.
With this objet before me, I hatten to enter on the scenes in which it begins to appear; and shall not dwell upon the history of the first ages of Rome; nor flop to collect particulars relating to the origin and progress of the commonwealth, lon- ger than is necessary to aid the reader in recolleat- ing the circumstances which formed the conjunc- ture in which this intereiting change began to take place.
For this purpose, indeed, a general description of the slate and its territory, such as they were in the beginning of this tranfafion, might have been sufficient; but as it is difficult to fix the precise point at which causes begin to operate, or at which effets are complete, I have indulged myself in looking back to the origin of this famous republic, whether real or fabulous, and shall leave the reader to deter- mine, at what time he will suppose the period of authentic history to begin, or at what time he will suppose the causes of this revolution to operate, and to produce their effets.
As it is impoflible to give, in mere description, a fatisfacory account of a subjec which is in its na- ture progressive and fluctuating, or to explain poli- tical eflablifhments without some reference to the occasions from whence they arose, I have, upon there accounts, endeavoured to give, even to the first part of my labours, the form of.narration; and, together with the progress of political inftitu- tions in the ltate, remarked its territorial acquisitions and conquefis, in the order in which they were made. In proportion as the principal object of the history presents itself, I (hall wish, as far as my ta- Jents and the materials before me allow, to fill up
the
B o o K the narration, and give to even, scene of the tranf-
. action its complete detail. When this is done, and "'the catastrophe is passed, I shall wish again to con-
tract my narration; and as I open with a summary account of what preceded my period, close with a similar view of its tequel.
The Romans are laid to have made their fettle- ment in the end of the sixth, or beginning of the seventh Olympiad(f), about two hundred years before the accession of Cyrus to the throne of Per- fia, seven hundred years before the Christian tEra, and long before the date of any authentic profane fiitory whatever. The detail of their' tory is mi- nute and circumfiantial; but on this account is the more to be fufpeted of fidtion: And in many parts, besides that of the fable, with which it is con- feffedly mixed, may, without any blameable fcep- ticism, be rejeced as the conjeture of ingenious men, or the embellishments of a mere tradition, which partakes in the uncertainty of all other pro- fane history of the fame times, and labours under the obscurity which hangs over the origin of all other nations(g).
That the Roman slate was originally a small one, and came by degrees to its greatness, cannot be doubted. So much we may safely admit on the faith of tradition, or in this instance, infer, from the continuation and recent marks of a progress which the people were still making, after they became an object of observation to other nations (h), and after they began to keep records of their own: That they had been an assemblage of herdsmen and warriors, ignorant of letters, of money, and of commercial arts, enured to depredation and violence, and sub-' sifting chiefly by the produce of their herds, and the fpcils of their enemies, may be safely admitted; because we find them, in the most authentic parts of (f) Dionyf. HaL lib . i. (g) Liv. lib. vi. (A) Dionvr. Hal. lib. i.
their
their hiflory, supplying these defets, and comingc H A P. forward in the fame direction, and consequently si_ .proceeding from the fame origin, with other rude nations; being, in reality, a horde of ignorant bar- barians, though likely to become an accomplifhled nation.
-In the firlt accounts of their fettlemert, it is said that they mustered three thousand men on foot and three hundred on horseback (i). Their eltablifh- rent being effeced by surprise or by force, and their people conffting of armed men who had every acquisition to make at the expence of their neighbours, they were naturally in a state of war with the country around them. They took post on the Palatium, a small height on the Tiber, which, according to former traditions, had been previously occupied by five different races of men, who, in a -country so precariously fettled, were frequently changing their places (k). Their city was the sirs model of a Roman camp, fortified with a square breast-work and ditch, to serve as an occasional re- treat to themselves and their cattle. Their leader, .or chief, was the sole magifrate or officer, either civil or military. The members of the common- wealth were diftinguifhedinto different classes or ranks, under the names of Patrician and Plebeian, Patron and Client. " The Patron," fays Diony- *flus, " was to protea, to give counsel,; and, " whether present or absent, was to his clients " what the father is to his family. The Clients, in " return, were to contribute to the support of their " Ptron, to aid him in placing his children in mar- " riage; and, in the cafe of his being taken by ' an enemy, were to pay his ransom or of his -" being condemned in a fine, were to discharge it '" for him (1)," ,A) Liv. Lib. i. c. 4. (A) Dionyf. Hal. lib. i (I) Ibid. lib. ii. c. o.
TIhe
B O K The limits of prerogative and privilege, as in
other rude societies, were vet imperfectly marked. It was the prerogative of the king to lead in war, and to rule in peace; but it is probable that he no more wished to deliberate, than to fight alone; and, though he may have done either occasionally, yet numbers of his followers were ever ready to attend him in both. The people acknowledged him as their leader, or prince; but they themselves, as in other instances of the fame kind, were accustomed, on remarkable occasions, to assemble; and, without any concerted form of democracy, became the so- vereign power, as often as their passions engaged them to at in a body. The superior class of the people as naturally came to have their meetings apart, and may have assembled frequently, when the occasion was not fufficierit to require the atten- tion of the whole (n). Hence probably the ella- blifhments of the senate and of the popular assem- blies, which were called the Comintia, and were both of so early a date as to be ascribed to the first of their kings (;).
Even this founder of the fiate, we are told, was difiinguifhed by his ushers or limtors carrying before him the axe and the rods, as the emblems of his power, and the infiruments of his justice. The names of the senators were entered in a lift, and they were separately called to their meetings. As- femblies of the People were intimated by the found of a horn. The citizens were difiinguifhed into CuriaE, Centuries, and Tribes; divisions under which they formed their several compartments, for military array, religious ceremonies, or political deliberations. When met to decide on any public queition, each division apart colleced the votes of its members, from thence formed a vote for the (f) De ninuonbs rebus PrincipCs, de mnjoribus omues confaltant. Ta. :: de Moribus GCrm. (.) Dionyf. lib. z.
*Curia
Curia or Century; and, by the majority of thefe,c H A P. determined the whole. The Curiae were fraterni- 1 ties, or divisions of the people, which met for the performance of religious rites: each had its separate priest, and place of assembly. When the Curia were called on matters of slate, they retained part of their religious forms; opened their meeting with observing the auspices, or signs of futurity; and if these were unfavourable, could not proceed on business. The Augurs, therefore, in'this mode of assembly, had a negative on the proceedings of the People.
The Centuries were formed on a more artful idea, to make. power accompany wealth. The people were divided into classes, according to the rate of their fortunes : each class was divided into Centuries; but the number of Centuries in the dif- ferent clailes was so unequal, that those of the first or richest class made a majority of 'the whole; and when the Centuries of this class were unanimous, they decided the question. By this institution, the rich were masters of the legislature, though not without some compensation to the poor, as the fe- veral claffes.were charged with taxes and public services, in the fame proportion in which they were vefied with power.
The people, when thus assembled, were diftin- guified in their classes by their ensigns and arms, and, though called together on political affairs, were termed the army (o).
In the firit ages of this principality or common- wealth, the meetings of the people were held first by Curiae, and afterwards by Centuries. The prac- tice of voting by Tribes was of a later date than either, and was ihe device of a popular party to ex- clude the auspices, to level the condition of ranks, and by there means to turn the channels of power
(0) Dionyf. Hal. lib. iv. c. 16,17, i8. . iv b. i. c. 43.
in
B 0 o K in their own favour. The people were formed into
* their Classes and Centuries, to elect their officers, to '' e na ct laws, or to deliberate on other affairs of state;
but they did not without itruggle or contest always acquiesce in this mode of allembly. The poorer citizens often insisted to be called in the Curie, and afterwards in the Tribes, to decide on affairs which the rich would have referred to the Centuries alone. The question on there occasions went to the founda- tion of the confiitution, and implied a doubt whe- ther the state was to be governed by the balance of numbers, or the balance of property(p).
To these original springs of the political frame may be joined those of religion, which in all go- vernments must have a considerable force; and in this has always been supposed a principal power to regulate its movements. Here indeed, there being no difiinction of clergy and laity, the authority of the itatefman, augur, and priet, was united in the fame persons, or in the fame orders of men : and as, in the mind of every citizen, notwithstanding the high measure of his fiperfitiion, the sword of fate was preferred to the altar, the politician and ({) State of the Cliffes and Centuries at the establishment 9f the CenAus: Valuation.
Clafr. Roman. Sterling. No. ofCent.
1. s. z. 1oo,0oo 322 1S 98 2. 75,000 242 3 Pl 3. 50,000co i6 9 2 4- 25,000 So 14 1l 5. 1,ooo0 35 o0 31 6. - _ Total 193 From First Class - - - 9S Sub.
95 Majority of the frtft Ci=fs 3 A property of loo,ooo ass=s or pounds of copper intitled the owner to z Slace in the first Clafi, 75,cco to a place in the second, 5o,0oo to a place in the third, 25,00o to a place in the fourth, 1,000 to a place in the fifth, and the remainder of the people, having no valuation, or having less than tha: of the fifth Claf., were thrown into the sixth or lafl Class. The whole were divided into 193 Centuries, of which the first Class contained So Cen- turies of foot, and 18 of horlmenn, in all 9g ; being a majority of the whole. The sixth Class formcd no more than one Century, as appears from the in. section of the preceding table.
warpor
warrior availed himself of the respect which wasc H A P. paid to the priest, and made fuperfitiion itself sub- servient to the purposes of slate. With presages and prodigies he encouraged or refrained the peo- ple in their desires and pursuits; he bound them with vows and with oaths, to a degree that has not been equalled by mankind in any other initance and, with reference to this circumstance in particu- lar, it has been observed, that the feeds of Roman greatness were laid in the implicit respeCt with which every citizen revered the first inffitutions of his country (q).
The wants by which the Romans were impelled in the first slate of their settlement, made it necef- fary for them to vanquish some of their neighbours, or to perish in the attempt. Valour, accordingly, in their estimation, was the principal quality of hu- man nature, and the defeat of an enemy the chief of its fruits. Every leader who obtained a vicory made his entry at Rome in proceflion; and this gave rife to the triumph, which continued, from the first to the last age of the commonwealth, to be the highest object of ambition.
Hiflorians, admiring the effect of this and of other practices of an early date among the Ro- mans, have represented their founder, and his im- mediate fucceflbrs, as philosophers, statesmen, and able tutors, who, with a perfect foresight of the consequences, suggested the maxims which gave so happy a turn to the minds of men in this infant republic. They are laid to have taught, that by frugality and valour the Romans were to conquer the world: that they ought not to lay waste the lands which they conquered, but to possess them with colonies of their own people: that they ought not to flay the vanquished, but transport their cap- ives to Rome, as an accellion to the number of
(q) See Machiavel's Dircourfcs on Lisy.
thelt
a o o K their own citizens: that they ought not to make
L _ war without provocation, nor to commence hoffili-
ties until they had demanded and had been refused reparation of wrongs. In whatever degree we sup- pose these maxims to have been expressed or under- flood in the councils of Rome, it is certain that the successful condut of the state in there particulars was sufficient to have fuggefled the idea that they were known.
To the other fortunate customs which may be traced up to those early times of the fiate, we may join that of the Census, by which the people, at every period of five years, took a regular account of the numbers and efiates of their citizens, as the best measure they could have of their own progress or decline, and the furefi test of their policy and conduct as a nation.
The Romans reckoned in the firfi period of their history a fucceflion of seven kings (r), to each of whom they ascribed the invention of their several inflitutions. To Romulus, the mixed form of their government, the establishment of the senate and assemblies of the people, the ranks of Patri- cian and Plebeian, the relations of patron and cli- ent. To Numa, the religion of the people, and their regard to oaths. To Servius Tullius, the Census, or periodical muster; and so on. But whether we suppose these inflitutions to have been the suggestion of particular occasions, or the inven- tion of ingenious men, dire&ed by a deep preme- ditation of all their effects, there is no doubt that such inltitutions existed in very early times, and served as the foundation of that policy which dif- tinguifhed the Roman state.
The monarchy of Rome is said to have lafied two hundred and forty-four years, a period in 'r) RomrninU , Nnam, Tu:lls Hofiliu', Ancus Martius, Tarquinius Prif- -: , S.nsius Tulliu;, T:.ui:nias Suptrbus.
which
which the numbers of the people, and the extent ofc H A:P., their settlement, had greatly increased. During ' this period, they had drawn many of their neigh- - bours to Rome, and sent many of their own people to occupy settlements abroad. By the inrolment of aliens, they procured a certain increase of people; and by spreading their colonies around, they made acquisitions of territory, and extended the nursery of Roman citizens. We find, nevertheless, that, by -the last part of this policy, they incurred a danger of losing the people whom they thus established or bred up in new settlements, however little removed from the metropolis. Men had not yet learned to confider themselves as the citizens of orie place, and inhabitants of another. In departing from Rome, the Colonifis ceased to be inrolled in any tribe or ward of that city, or of its diftriEt; or to be ranked in any class of the people. ' They ceased, of course, to be called upon to vote in any of the assemblies, which they no longer.attended. They formed no- tions of an interest separate from that of their origi- nal country, so much, that the colonies which had been planted by one prince, refitted the power of his successors; and conqueils, where the Roman citizens were mixed with the natives, in order to keep them in fubjeEion, were sometimes in danger of being loft. The colony itself took a part in the discontents of the people they were sent to restrain, and became parties with the vanquished in their quarrel with the vitors (s). But, notwithstanding frequent infiances of this fort among the Roman colonies, the memory of their descent and the ties of consanguinity, the pride of their diftintion as Romans, the capacity which every colonist retained of returning to Rome, and of being reinflated in the rolls of the people, for the most part preserved their attachment to Rome, and made them still a part of her strength, and a principal source of her greatness.
(j) Liv. lib. iii. c. 4,
During
o o K During this period of the kingly government,
.L the numbers that were inrolled in the city and its '-"'"territory increased from three thousand and two
hundred to eighty thousand men of an age fit to carry arms (). The number of Roman tribes or wards of the city was augmented from three to twenty-one. The kingdom itself extended over the greater part of Latium, and had an intimate al- liance with the whole of it. The city of Rome was become the principal resort of all the Latin confe- derates, the place of their meetings for devotion or pleasure, and the feat of their political confulta- tions (n).
To accommodate and secure this populous and growing community, several of the heights conti- guous to their original settlement were, during the fame period, fucceflively occupied, the marfles be- tween them were drained by excavations and works of great magnificence, of which a-confiderable part is fill entire. The city itself, .instead of an earthen rampart, was surrounded with towers and battle- ments of hewn fione (.).
So (!) Lr. ib. i. c 44. (u) Dionyf. Hal. lib. iv. p. So0. {x) The ito-es employed in building the walls of Rome were laid each to ha*'- been fcrtcient to load a cart. Te common fev ers were executed at a great expence. It was proposed that they fnould bz of futicient dimcnfions to admit a waggon loaded with h:y (Pi'. lib. -xavi. c. 15.). When there common Icwers came to be ob- l-ruEted, or out of repair, under the republic, the Censors contraced to pay athoucand talents, or about 193,oc 1. for clearing and repairing them (Dionyr. Ha!. lib. iii. c. 67.). They were again in'difrepair at the acceflion of Aueu0usCafar, and the reinflating them is mentioned among the great wo:ks ofAzrippa. He i said to have turned the course of leven rivers into thf- fiabtcrr.anous paftzges, to have made them navigable, and to have anucliy palTed in barges under the fireets and buildings of Rome. These so:ks are liill icyppofd to remain ; but, as they exceed the power and re- fer:ces of the p-refnt city to krelp them in repair, they are quite concealed, except t one or t-o placer. They were, in the midst of the Roman great- unzf, and tlil-are, reckoned amnong the wonders of the v;orld (Liv. lib. i. c. 3) ; and yet they are said to have been works of the cider Tarquin, a po:-= whose territory did net extend, in any direction, above sixteen miles; an-, on this fappofition, they must have been made to accommodate acity th:a was calcul;ted chiefly for the reception of cattle, herdfnren, and ban* d.t:i. Rude nations femetimes execute woiks of great magnificence, as fortrcftes and temples, for the purposes of war and superstition; but fel- doar palacs, and till more fe!ldo works of mere convenience and clean.
linsfs,
So far it appears, that while every fuccefivec H A p. prince gratified his own ambition by subduing some . neighbouring difiria or village, and brought an ac- chane t ceflion of riches or territory to his country, the ge- republic. nius of monarchy was favourable to the growth of this rising empire. But when princes became sati- ated with conquests abroad, or began to meditate schemes to increase their own importance at home, their ambition took a different direAion, and led them to aim at making the kingdom hereditary, and the people more subservient to their pleasure. Under this direction of the monarch's ambition, the slate, as Montesquieu observes, was likely to be- come stationary, or even to decline. A revolution became necessary, in order to preserve it in its for- mer progressive state.
Such a revolution, we are told, took its rife from u. c. z44 the resentments of the people, excited by abuses of power, and was haflened by a momentary indigna- tion, roused by an insult offered by a son of the king to a Roman matron. As the political evils which. this revolution was intended to remedy were, theftate of degradation and weakness to which the Sc- nate had been reduced, the usurpation of hereditary ficceffion to the crown, and the general abuses of go- vernmentt, suitable remedies were fought for to these evils, by restoring the numbers and power of the liness, in which, for the most part, they are long defecive. It is not nnreafonable, therefore, to question the authority of tradition in refpa& to this singular monument of antiquity, which so greatly exceeds what the beR accommodated city of modern Europe could undertake for its own conveniency. And as thole works are till entire, and may tontinue Ib for thousands of years, it may be suspected that they were even prior to the fettlcment of Romulus, and may have been the remains of a more an- cient city, on the ruins of which the fellowers of Romulus fettled, as the Arabs novw hut or encamp on the ruins of Palmyra and Balbeck. Livy owvn%, that the common fewers were not accommodated to the plan of Rome, as it was laid out in his time; they were carried in direcions across the greets, and palred under buildings of the greatest antiquity. This de- rangement indeed he imputes to the hasty rebuilding of the city after its de- llruaion by the GauL ; but haste, it is probable, would have determined the people to build on their old foundations, or at lealt not to change them so much as to cross the direrion of former Ctrects.
Senate,
B o O K Senate, by abolishing the royalty, and by sub-
fiituting in its place an elecive and temporary ma- gifracy.
The principal part of the revolution confifled in fubflituting the Consuls, two annual magifirates, in place of the King. These officers were chosen in the assembly of the Centuries. The officer who was to preside at the election erected his standard, and pitched his tent in the field of Mars(y), a meadow which lay on the banks of the Tiber, above the city. The people repaired to him in arms, and, difiinguifled by the ensigns and armour of their different classes, proceeded to make their eletion.
That the city might not be surprised while its defenders were thus abroad in the fields, a guard was poted, with its colours displayed, on the Jani- culum, a hill on the right of the Tiber, which over- looked the river and contiguous plains. If an enemy appeared during the election, the guard had orders to firike their ensign; and on this signal every Century repaired to its post of alarni, and quellions of slate were suspended until the danger was removed. As it became an article of fuperfii- tion, that the Centuries could not proceed in any business without having an ensign displayed on the Janiculum, it was in the power of any person, by iiriking the ensign, to break up an assembly of the people: and this expedient for flopping the pro- grefs of any business was accordingly made use of at different times to the end of the republic (z).
It was meant that the Consuls should succeed to all the powers of the King; and in order to enforce their authority, a penalty of five oxen and two sheep was denounced against every person who re- fused to obey them (a). Their joint and divided (j) Campns Martius. (r) Sre Book II1. Chap. III. (a) Plntarch. in Vi:. Po!ecalz.
command,
command, with the limited term of one year; whichl - o K was to be the duration of their power, were thought -., sufficient securities against the abuse of it.
The government, by this revolution, devolved on the senate and nobles. The Plebeians, in the firit formation of it, were favoured-by-theadmiffiori of a certain number of their order to fill .p the fe- nates, hich had been. reduced in its numbers .by the tyranny of the late king- and they Cwere'de- clared,. in cafe of any opprellion, to have a rightfof appeal fromi any- entence or command of -.the. ma- giftrate' to an affernbly. of -the ,people -.at .large; This was understood- to be the great charter of every citizen.. But the Patricians alone could be chofert into the.newly'eftablifhed qffices 'of itate. They. alone were to furnish the ordinary fucceffon :of members to the senate, and, by their inrolment in thefirft and second classes,, to- have a decided:ma- .. jority. in all the meetings or' cbmitia of..the Cen- turieS ()); that is, in all arfemblies. of the people that were called to .eleat.offieers of tate, to o : laws, or to. judge of'appeals.. By there fevaral: provisions in their, favour -they-were in poffelion of a complietecaritocracy, which they claimed as. heee- ditary p-:: their families, but which they were not. likely td retain, without much discontent and Oni=, mofity on the part of their: fibjetS .
(Ai Pionyr. Hal. lib. v. Vot. I. C eHAP4
CHAP. II. Form of the Republic.-Dffention of Parties.-Firf
Dicator.-Secelffon of Plebeias.--Tribunes of the Peopk!e.-Their Objets.-Diftribution of Corn.- Division of Lands.-Preteifions of the Plebeians.- Cmnimffion to compile Laws.-Decetmvirs.-Twelve ables.-Intermarriage of Ranks.-Claimn of the Plebeians to the Confullate.-Military or Consular Tribunes.-Cenfors.-zEdies.-Prefetlus Annone. Fortune of the Republic.-Redutlion of Yeie- Dejfrucion of Rome by the Gauls-Rebuildingof the City. C H A P. H E government of Rome, as it is represent-
j . ed after the expulsion of the king, was be- U. c. 44. come entirely ariftocratical. The nobles had the
exclusive poffeflion of office, without any third party to hold the balance between themselves and the people. The Consuls were the sole executive ma- giftrates, and the only ministers of the senate ; they: were understood to come in place of the king; per-, formed all the fnmtions of royalty; and, in thei manner of the kings, to whom they succeeded; united in their own persons all the dignities of the fate, those of 7Jdge, Magifrate, and Military Leader.
Such, at the first institution of the common- wealth, was, both in refpec of government and manners, the simplicity or rudeness of this commu- nity. The People, however, in their new situation, were gradually and speedily led, by the accumula- tion of their affairs, by the contest of their parties and by the wants of the public, to a variety of establishments, in which they separated the depart- ments of state, more equally distributed its powers,
filled
illed up the lifts of office, arid put themselves in aC H A P. poflure to wield with advantage their strength as it "_ encreafed, and to avail themselves of everry circim- fiance that occurred in their favour..
While the exiled king was endeavouiridn , by continual invasions, to recover his power, disputed arose between the parties who had joined to expel him (a) i creditors, supported by the ariftdciidy, of which the nobles were now in full pofeflloi, be- came severe in the exa(ion of debts, or the paifons laid claim to more than the clients were wllling to pay (b). The slate was diftrasted at 6nce by its enemies from abroad, and by the differitidn of par- ties at home. The authority of the new govern- ment not being sufficient to contend with these dif- (a) In these original disputes between'the Patricians and Plebeians at Rome, it is implied that they frequently or commonly flood in the relation of creditor and debtor, as well as of patron and client. And we may ac- count for this circumstance in either of two ways: First, by supposing that the client was in rome degree, tributary to his patron, as the valfal was tri- butary to his lord in the original slate of modern nations. Dionysius of Halycarnaffus has laid some foundation for this supposition, in the passage above cited, Or we may suppose, in the second place, that the debts in qoeftion were money or eTffes aEtually borrowed by the client and lent by the patron. The firIt supposition is most agreeable to the manners of modern times; but the lafR is more likely to have been the fact in the original (late of the Romans, and of ancient republics in general. Among them the greac diflintion of persons was that between freemen and slaves. The rich freeman was supplied with every thing he wanted by the labour ofhis slaves. The necessitous freeman toiled with his own hands in labouring a frtall piece of ground, or in tending a few beasts. He had do trade by which to'fupply the luuries of the rich, or by which, as in modern times, to make them his debtors. When he wanted their aid he was obliged to borrow; add there was, perhaps, but one occasion on which he had credit for this purpor ; when he was going to war, and when he both had a reasonable excuse for borrowing, and a probable profpe& of being able to pay, perhaps with in- terefI, from the spoils of an enemy. But when his hopes failed, he might become insolvent, and exposed to all the severities of which we read such complaints in the early part of the Roman Hiloi y. There it, throughout this History, fufflcient evidence that the popular party were on the fide of the debtor. The prejudices of this partyoperated against the exaAion of debts. Their influence was employed in reducing the interelt of money ; in having it abolilied, and in having it detefled, un- der the invidious appellation of usury. They even strove, on occasion, to abolish debts: The result was far from being favourable to the necessitous borrower; he was obliged to pay for the rilk, the penalties, and the obloquy to which the lender was exposed in tranfgrefling the laws.
(b) Dionyf. Hal. lib. 5.
C: z ficultiesd
B OO ficulties, the senate resolved to place themselves
and the commonwealth, for a limited time, under uc. -. the power of a single person, who, with the title o455*- of Dictator, or Maiter of the People (c), should
at his pleasure dispose of the fiate, and of all its re- sources.
This officer was invested with power to punish the disorderly without trial and without appeal to arm the people, and to employ their forces on any service; to name his own lubftitute, or second in command; and to aa without being, even at the expiration of his office, accountable either to the senate or to the people. The circumstances that were probably accidental in the first nomination of this extraordinary officer, were afterwards repeated as unalterable forms in every successive appoint- ment of the fame kind. It became the prerogative of the senate to resolve that a Ditator should be named, and of the Consul to name him. The ce- remony was performed in the dead of night; (d) and as soon as the nomination was known, the Lic- tors, or ministers of justice, armed with their axes and rods, withdrew from the ordinary magifirate, to attend this temporary lord of the common- wealth.
This was the first political expedient to which the state was dirested by the exigency of its new government. The precedent came to be repeat- edly followed in times of calamity or public alarm, and the whole powers of the state were occasionally entrusted to single men, on the sole security of their personal characters, or on that of the short dura- tion of their trufi, which was limited to fix months. This intfitution was devised by the senate, to re- press the disorders which broke out among the peo-
Mi) Magifter Popuni. (d) Liv. lib. viii. c. 2o. & lib. ix. c. a8. The date of the nomination of the first Diaator is uncertain* Liv. Sib. ii. Sinme place it nine years after the expulfon of the King,; Dionyf. 1i yaer'.
pie,
pie, and to unite the forces of the commonwealthc H A p. againfi its enemies. The next-was of a different _" nature, and was meant to prote&t the Plebeians against the oppreliion of their lords.
The inferior c'afs of the people, almost excluded from any share in the new government, soon found that under its influence they had more oppression to fear from their Patrons, than they had ever ex- perienced from the prince they had baniihed. So long as the king and the senate shared in the pow- ers of the state, the one took part with the people, when the other attempted to oppress them ; and it was the ordinary interest and policy of the prince to weaken the nobles, by supporting the Plebeians against them. This effect of the monarchy still, in some measure, remained, so long as the exiled king was alive, maintained his pretensions, and made the united services of the people neceflary to the senate. During this period the Patricians were still on their guard, and were cautious not to offend the people; but upon the death of the king, and the security which the new government derived from this event, the nobles availed themselves of their power, and enforced their claims on the people with extreme severity. In the capacity.of creditors, they imprisoned, whipped, and enslaved those who were indebted to them, and held the liberties and the lives of their fellow-citizens at their mercy. The whole body of Plebeians was alarmed; they saw more formidable enemies in the persons of their own nobility, than in the armies of any nation. whatever. When the republic was attacked, they accordingly refused to arm in its defence. Many who had already suffered under the rod of their cre- ditors, when called upon to enlist, shewed their limbs galled with fetters, or torn with the firipes which they had received by command of their mer- Giless patrons,
TIhefe
Bo o K These diftrations, joined to the acual presence
of a foreign enemy, obliged the senate to have re- course to their former expedient, and to entrust the republic again in the hands of a Didator. Having succeeded in their firfi nomination, and having driven the enemy from their territories, they re- curred to the fame expedient again, on the return of a like occasion; but, in order to mix insinuation with the terrors of this measure, they made choice of Valerius, a person whose name was already known to the sufferers by some popular laws which they owed to his family. This officer had credit enough with the people to prevail on them to take arms, and had the good fortune to repel the enemy, by whom the fiate was invaded: But, upon his re- turn, not being able to prevail on the senate to ful- fil the hopes which he had given to the people, he made a speech to exculpate himself, and laid down his power. The citizens who had fought under his banner being still in the field, and, without any orders to disband, suspecting that the senate, under pretence of some war on the frontier, meant to re- move them from the city, ran to their arms; and, if they had not been restrained by their military oath, and the refpet they paid to the government of their country, must have entered the gates by force. But, under the imprefflon of these motives, they fled from the walls, instead of invading them, retired beyond the Anio, and took pofleflion of a height about three miles from Rome (e), after- wards known by the name of the Sacred Hill. Their officers followed, and endeavoured to per- fuade them to return to their duty; but were told, that no duty was owing to a government which had withdrawn its protecion, and encouraged oppression; that free citizens own no country in which they are not permitted to enjoy their free-
(e) Cicero dc Claris Oratoribus, c. 14.
dom.
dom. " To what purpose," said Sicinius Bellutus,c H A P. who was then at the head of this mutiny, " recal __
us to a city from which you have already forced " us to fly by your extortion ? By what new as- ' furance can you persuade us to rely on a faith " which you have repeatedly broken? By what "charm can you engage us in support of a corn- " monwealth, of which you will not allow us to be "members ? You mean to engross all the fruits " which are to be reaped in your country, and it is " well. We shall leave you to do so, and do not " mean to interrupt your enjoyments."..
This secession of a great body of the people hav- ing continued for several months, and in'this:time received a constant acceflion of numbers from the city and from the contiguous fields, threw. the re- public into the greatest disorder; exposed its lands to be negleted or pillaged by its own inhabitants, and ravaged by numerous enemies, who took this opportunity to invade it without opposition.
The Patricians had sufficient force in their own body, and in that of their faithful retainers, to guard the avenues of the city, and to secure it from surprise: But being reduced to great difficul- ties for want of their usual supplies of provisions, and apprehending fiill greater from the interrup- tion of labour and the suspension of government, they came to a resolution to negotiate with the leaders of the mutiny; and, for this purpose, raised Sp. Caflius, a person who, though of a patrician family, was in high favour with the people, to the office of Consul. They agreed to mitigate the fe- verities which they had hitherto praCtised against in- solvent debtors, and to release such of them as were atually in bonds, or had been destined to slavery.
With there conceflions, a deputation was sent to. the camp, and a negotiation was opened, in which the Plebeians obtained, not only a full acknow- ledgment of their privileges, but, what was of
more
B o o K more consequence, a power of forming assemblies
_ apart from the nobles (f), and of electing annual
magistrates to guard and watch over their own fe- parate rights. " Your Consuls," they said, " are " not so much the officers of the commonwealth as " the heads of a faction; and, in all quefiions that ' relate to the people, are parties rather than " judges. It is reasonable that we too have a head " or representation in the commonwealth, under " which we may act, at least, in our own de- " fence." u.C. c.6o. In return to this well-advifed and specious requi-
ition, the trihunitian power was eflablifhed, and with it the foundations of some good, and of much harm, laid in the commonwealth. Great part of the last might have been prevented, if the Ple- beians, now in poiReflion of a right to nominate Tribunes for the care of their interests, had from thenceforward been content with the power of elec- tion merely, had discontinued their own collecive afiemblies for any other purpose, and encreafed the number of their Tribunes to a just representative of their whole body. 'The return, however, was more agreeable to the spirit of the times. The people were allowed to afiemble ; and, instead of-a repre- fentation to support and preserve their rights with steadiness and with moderation, they proceeded to elect a few leaders, who, from thenceforward, were to head every popular tumult, and to raise up every wind of contention into a florm.
The Tribunes were authorised, at their firfi infli- tution, to forbid, or to restrain, any measures which they thought hazardous, or injurious to the rights of their confituents, but not to propose any law, nor to move any positive resolution. They were not entitled to exercise' their powers beyond tss walls of the city, or'to absent themselves from
-() Dionyf. Hal. lib. vii.
* :;~~~~~~\
it for a whole day, except in their attendance on c H A P. the fefiival of the Latin allies, where the presence of all the Roman magistrates was required. A fin- gle Tribune might stop the proceedings of his own body, and of the people themselves, as well as the proceedings of the senate and patrician magistrates. In the exercise of this last part of their trust, though not permitted in this age of aristocracy to mix with the senators, they had places afligned them at the doors of the senate house, from.which, as from a watch-tower, they were to observe, and on occa- sion to flop, the proceedings of the lords.
As the Tribunes were destined to withfland the exertions of power, and were supposed, on the moll dangerous occasions, to expose themselves to the axe and the sword of their adversaries, it was thought necessary to guard their persons with the most sacred fences of religion and law. For this purpose an inviolable rule was prescribed in the fol- lowing terms: " Let no one offer violence to the "person of a Tribune; neither kill him, nor pro- " cure him to be killed; neither firike him, nor " procure him to be struck. Let the person who " offends against this law be accursed; let his es- " sets be made sacred to pious uses, and let every "one pursue him to death."
To render this at irrevocable, a solemn oath for the perpetual observance of it was imposed, and dreadful imprecations were denounced againit any person who should propose to repeal it (g) and such was the effect of there precautions, taken for the safety of the Tribunes, that, under the re- public, persons obnoxious to public justice could not be punished, while they continued to bear this sacred charater. And the Emperors themselves, after they had abolished all the other rites of the re- p.blic, found, under this sacred title of Tribune,
(g) Dionyf. Halicar. lib. iv. p. 410.
a refuge
B o o K a refuge to their crimes and oppreflions, and a ,_. proteEtion against the designs of assassins, or the
resentment of those they had offended by their ty- ranny.
The College of Tribunes, at its intfitution, was not limited to any precise number of members; it consisted at first of such persons as had been molt active in procuring the establishment, and conti- nued to be filled with the most zealous partisans of the people, the number being three or more, ac- cording as persons appeared to merit this honour. But in process of time both the Plebeians who as- pired to this diflinEtion, and the Patricians who were jealous of it, conspired to augment the num- bers.-The first, in order to make way for their own preferment; and the second, to the end that they might be the better enabled, on occasion, to disunite their enemies, and to procure the negative of a part, to arrest the proceedings of the whole. The College of Tribunes was accordingly aug- mented by degrees to ten; and a law was made to provide that the eleaions should not flop short of this number (h).
Patricians could neither elea nor be elected into this office (i), although in the midli of irregularities incident to all unformed, especially to all popular governments, some exceptions are mentioned, even to the last part of this rule. The Tribunes were at firit eleced in the assembly of the Curia, where the vote of the poorest citizen was equal to that of the most wealthy. But even here the Patricians, al- though not absolute masters, as they were in the as- fembly of the Centuries, having great influence, and, by holding the auspices, having even a nega- tive on all proceedings, it was thought necessary to alter the form of the assembly in which the Tri- bunes were elected to that of the Tribes; and by (;) Lex T.:bonia. Liv. lib. iii. c. 65. (;) Dioayf. Hal. lib. vii.
this
this means to enable the people to make their elec- c H A P. tion, without any controul from the nobles, either _ in virtue of the authority of the senate, or the in- terpofition of the augurs (k).
Such was the inflitution of the Plebeian Tri- bunes, while the fiate yet knew of no other magi- sirate besides the Consuls and the Quaetors, of whom the last, even under the kings, had been em- ployed as a species of commiffaries, or providers for the army. The expedient was adopted by the senate, to quiet the animosity of parties; but tend- ed, in fact, only to render the contest between them more equal, and to multiply the fubjecs of dispute. The Tribunes being velted with power to aflemble the people, could not long be confined to the mere negative with which they were at first entrufled; nor was it easy, on every occasion, to difiinguifh the measures of attack from those of de- fence; and the party of the Plebeians, with there officers at their head, were then in a posture, not only to preserve their. rights, but likewise to gain to their order continual accefions of privilege and power. Happily for the slate, there was yet much ground of this fort to be gained, without transgress- ing the bounds of good order, or encroaching on the authority of equitable government.
The popular leaders in this career had to break through the bar of hereditary diiintion, which, it was pretended, contrary to the genius of the re- public, that no personal merit and no measure of ability could remove. One of the first steps they made in pursuit of this object, was to preclude every other power in the slate from a negative on their own proceedings. For this purpose it was enated, by the authority of the Tribes, that no one, under pain of death, or of an arbitrary fine, floutd interrupt a Tribune while he was speaking
(k) Dionyf. Hal. lib. ix. p. 65.
to
B o o K to the people (). Being thus provided againit in- i1, terruption, as they were by a former law againit
violence to their persons, they not only took up the complaints of their constituents, they suggested new claims to be made by them, and, at every fuccelfon to office, endeavoured to signalize their term by some additional eflablifhment for the be- nefit of the people: They even interrupted the itate in its councils and military operations, and al- most in every instance hung upon the wheels of government, until the grievances they complained of were redressed, or the demands they made were complied with.
In order to encreafe the number of Plebeian of- ficers, whose aid the Tribunes alleged were necef- O.c. C=-. fary to themselves, they, soon after their own initi-
tution, procured that of the _Ediles, who were to inspect the markets, and have charge of the pub- lic buildings and public shows. Being Subordinate to the Tribunes, as well as to the Consuls, they acted, upon occasion, in what related to the policy of the town, as assistants to both (ni).
As Rome was a place of arms, and fubfitled in some measure by public magazines; as settlements won from the enemy were often to be disposed of to citizens; as its inititutions were yet new and in- complete; and as the Patricians fiill claimed an ex- clufive right to all the offices of irate, there was much to occupy the cares of the Public-the difiri- bution of corn from the granaries, the division of conquered lands, the defects of the laws, and the arbitrary proceedings of the magistrates. The qua- lifications of candidates for the office of Consul fur- nified, during some ages, the subjet of continual debates, and frequently exposed the parties con- cerned in them, if they escaped the swords of their enemies, to perish by their own dissentions. Their
(I) Dionyf. Hal. lib. vii. (m) Ibid. Hal. lib. vi.
civitl
civil and military tranfalions were constantly H A P. blended together. The senate frequently involved "- the state in war, in order to suspend its intestine di-'-" visions, and the people as often took occasion, from the difficulties in which the community was involved by its enemies, to extort a compliance with their own demands.
The first subject of contention that arose after the institution of the Tribunes was a fequei of the troubles which had preceded that establishment; The fecefion of the people took place in Autumn, the usual seed-time in Italy; and the labours of that season having been accordingly interrupted, the city was threatened with famine; and the senate exerted all its industry in guarding against this evil (n). After the public granaries were filled for this purpose, it became a question, upon what terms, and at what price, the poorer citizensifhould be supplied from thence. Their insolence in the. late mutiny, and the part which they themselves, by furpending the labours of the field, had taken, in bringing on the distress with which they were now threatened, were fully flated against them in this deliberation. The opportunity was.thought to: be fair, to recal the several concessions which had been extorted from the senate, and, in particular, to oblige the people to part with their Tribunes, and to return within the former bounds of their duty.
Such was the substance of a contumelious speech, delivered in the senate by the celebrated Caius Mar- cius Coriolanus. The younger nobility applauded his sentiments; but the greater part of the senate, having recently escaped from a popular storm, were unwilling to engage themselves anew in the fame dangerous situation. In order, therefore, to appease the people, who were greatly incensed at
.. (n) Dionyf. lib. vii.
- the
B oo Kthe proposal which had been made to subdue them,
L they agreed to deliver corn from the public grana-
ries, at a price below that of the most plentiful sea- son. And, by this proceeding, for the present pa- cified the Tribunes, but flattered their presumption, and encouraged them to meditate fiill further de- mands. The distress with which their constituents had been threatened was prevented, but the insult they had received from Caius Marcius was not avenged; and they cited him to appear before the tribunal of the People, to answer for his conduE to the party he had offended. The Senate and Patri- cians were disposed to proteEt him; bit, trufling that by the majority of their votes they might be able to acquit him in the comitia of the Centuries, the- only assembly before which, from the time of its first institution, any capital charge had been hi- therto laid against a citizen, they suffered the trial to proceed. In this, however, they were difap- pointed. The Tribunes infifled, that the people should assemble in their Tribes; and having pre- vailed in this previous question, the accused, as be- ing already condemned by this determination re-; lating to the form of his trial, withdrew from his sentence (o), v. c. z6. Coriolanus, in resentment of this p'rofecutionz,
which forced him into exile, joined the enemies of his country, and by encreafing the alarm of war from abroad, helped to suspend for a while the ani- mofities of which he hirifelf had furnished the oc- cafion at home. The contest in which he had en-. gaged the parties ended with his own exile, and was not attended with any other political effects but it merits a place in there observations, as a- proof of the great influence which the Plebeian party, under its new leaders, had acquired, and as an evidence of the singular state of the Roman po-
(:) Dionyf. Hal. lib. i. p. 469. i. ' slicy
licy, by which, in the uncertain choice of differentc H A p. modes of assembly, the very form of the govern- ment was left undetermined, until the occasion oc- curred on which this government was to at.
The assembly of the Centuries formed an arifto- cracy, that of. the tribes a democracy. They did not partake in the sovereignty by any determinate rule, but each of them occasionally seized upon the whole of it; and, inflead of balancing each other. by regular checks and interruptions, threatened to render the administration of the Republic a conti- nual. scene of contradictions and inconsistencies. Such at least is the judgment which we are tempted, in speculation, to pass on this singular conflitution, although, in the sequel of its hifiory .-it will appear. to possess, at least, one.of. the highest political ad- vantages, in, being the most excellent nursery of flatefmen. and warriors, and in forming the most conspicuous example of national 'ability and fuc- cess. . . :
The calm which the approach of Coriolanus, at the head of an army of Volsci, produced within the city,..was of no longer duration than the alarm which produced it. As soon as the external enemy withdrew, the parties within resumed their disputes; but on a subjea which was fill more important than that which had recently employed them; and Which, continuing to be moved at intervals, served to the laft.hour of the Republic as an objea of po- pularzeal, or furnilhed a specious pretence, which ambitious and designing men continually employ- ed, to captivate the ears of the populace. This was the. most popular of all propofitions--an equal di- vision of land propertyi known by the name of the Agrarian Law .
While the Romans were making their firfl. ac- quifitions of territory, their conquests were under- stood to be made for the people, and were accord- ingly divided among them, or given to, those who
had
B o o K had not a sufficient provision for the fubfifience of
L their families (p). But of late, during a confidera-
ble period, while the Republic barely withitood the attacks of the exiled king, or recovered the losses sustained in the wars with the numerous enemies that supported him, she had either made few acqui- fitions of this fort, or, suitably to the growing dif- parity of ranks, which, though not necessary in very small republics, becomes so in proportion as nations extend, suffered the conquered lands to pa.s by connivance, occupancy, or purchase, into the hands of powerful citizens, who made use of there opportunities to appropriate eflates to them- selves. f. c. =67. The Tribunes had not yet begun to make their
complaints on this fubjeet, when they were antici- pated by the Consul Sp. Caflius, .who, being al- ready in high favour with the popular party, conti- nued to flatter the passions of the inferior class, and is said to have aimed at an improper and dangerous influence in the slate. He affeced great zeal for the rights of the people, and proportional indigna- tion againif their oppressors. He complained,-:in particular, of the improper use which had been re- cently made of the conquered lands, by suffering them to become the property of persons who were already too rich. Having himfelfmade some con- quests, he showed how the lands of the Republic ought to have been disposed. of, by making an equal division of his own acquisitions among. the more indigent citizens (q). He obtained an at of the people to appoint three commissioners to en- quire into the abuses which had been committed in the disposal of lands acquired from the enemy, and to confider of the proper corrections.
The senate, and the Patricians in general, were greatly alarmed; most of them had possessions that
(p) Dionyf.-Hal. lib. ii. (q) Liv. lib. ii. c. 41.
feemned
seemed to fall within the objec of this inquiry.c H AP. The popular party alleged, that conquered lands _, being acquired by the joint labours, and at the common hazard, of all the people, should be equal- ly divided among them. The Patricians contend- ed that there levelling principles led to confusion and anarchy; that, in a ilate of which all the terri- tory was acually, and within a few centuries, ac, quired by contest, there maxims could not be ap- plied without the subversion of government, as well as of property.
In this contest, Caflius appeared to have the ad- vantage of numbers on his fide; and if he had con- fined his views to the division of lands, under which he was said to disguise a more dangerous in- tention, the senate and nobles muff have at least devised considerable settlements for the people, in order to elude his demands. But while Cassius alarmed the rich with danger to their property, he at the fame time alarmed every citizen with danger to his personal consequence, by offering the free- dom of the city to every alien, who, at his ium- mons, crowded from all the cantons of Latium to vote in the assemblies of the Roman people. His colleague opposed this measure, and the city, for the present, was saved from the intrusion of firan- gers. The attempt, however, gave offence to the people, as well as to the senate and the unhappy author of it, in order to regain the favour of his party, proposed a resolution, not only to make a gratuitous distribution of corn, but even to refund what had been formerly paid by any citizen at the public granaries. This proposal too was interpreted to his prejudice, and raised a suspicion that he meant, with the aid of aliens and of indigent citi- zens, to usurp the government. On this fuppofi- tion, all parties in the state combined against him, and he was condemned to susser the punishment of treason.
YOL., . D This
B o o K This appears to have been the first projec after
the state began to have its demesne lands, and after private estates began to be accumulated, that was made to divide all territorial acquisitions in equal shares to the people. And though the author of it perifled in the attempt, the project itself was en- tailed on the commonwealth, as a subjet of diflen- tion, and became the source of repeated demands on the part of the people.
The Tribunes had no sooner accomplished the ruin of Cassius, in which they concurred with the senate, than they infifed for the execution of the law he had framed, and for the nomination of three commiflioners already resolved on, for the division of conquered lands. They proteded the people in refuting to serve the slate in its wars, until this de- mand ihould be granted. And having absolute and irrefifiible power to flop all proceedings in the city, they prevented all military levies within the walls, obliged the Consuls, during a certain period, to erect their ltandard in the country, and there to force the herdsman and labourer to enlist, by driv- ing away the cattle, and difiraining the effects of those who were unwilling to obey them (r).
In these exertions of political strength, the par- ties at Rome learned by degrees to form their different plans, whether of adminifiration or of op- position.
The senate endeavoured to furnish the people with employment abroad, to amuse them with tri- umphal processions, to gratify them with partial Settlements and allotments of land; and, in order to fop the violence of their leaders, by the nega- tive of some one of their own order, continually endeavoured to d- .ide the College of Tribunes.
The Tribunes, in their turn, endeavoured, by oaths and private engagements, to secure the una-
(r) Dionof. HZl. lib. viii. Ibid. No. 273 and No. S78.
nimity
nimity of their own body, or to bind the minorityc H A p. to follow the decision of the greater number. They s' taught the people to despise the partial settlements, which, to pacify or to suspend their importunities, were offered to them at a diflance from Rome. They taught them to aim at a higher object, the political consequence of their order, and an equal share in the government of their country. The Tribunes were honoured in proportion to the part which they took in support of this popular cause; and Plebeians were fucceflively raised to this office, in reward of the animosity they had occasionally shewn to the senate, and from refpet to the cou- rage with which they had, in any cafe, withstood the authority of the magistrate.
At every fucceflion, accordingly, the new Tri- bunes endeavoured to signalize their year by fug- gesting some advantage to the people; and, in the course of their struggles, obtained many regulati- ons favourable to their interefi as an order in the State.
One law which has been already mentioned, and which is of uncertain date, they obtained, to fubfti- tute the assembly of the Tribes for that of the Curiae in the election of Tribunes (s).
Another, to exclude the Patricians entirely fromu. c. tsa. the Assembly of the Tribes (t)..
The Agrarian Law itself they frequently moved, in the interval of other claims and pretensions, or brought it forward along with such claims, in order to alarm the Patricians, and to force them, under apprehension of this principal objec of their fears, to a compromise, or to a compliance in some other demand.
To the other circumfiances, which tended fre- quently to revive these political flames, may be joined the arbitrary proceedings of the magistrate, (s) Dionyf. Hal. lib. 9. Liv. lib. ii. c. 56. (t) Liv. lib. ii. c. 60.
D 2 and
B o o K and the defect of judicial forms in the common-
* wealth. The Consuls had succeeded to the Kings, * -' as sole Officers of State, both civil and military;
they had not sufficient forms or limitations prescribed to them in the exercise of their power (u). This defect, which is common in the administration of rude governments, is for the most part supplied by degrees. Evils are corre6ted in proportion as they are felt, and the rational proceedings of one age are adopted as precedents to regulate the next. But, in the present inflance, at Rome, the popular party, it is said, demanded at once a system of jurifpru- dence and a complete body of laws. Being op- posed by the Patricians, they came to confider the measure as an object of party; and they pressed the acceptance of it, as much from animosity to the magifirates, as from a desire to secure public jus- tice, or to regulate the forms of judicial procedure: The Patricians confidered the project as an attack on their power; and, however innocent or reason- able it may have been, endeavoured to elude the execution of it with all the arts of evasion and de- lay, which they had employed to prevent the divi- sion of the conquered lands, or to frustrate any other the most faEtious purpose of their adver- saries.
In this contest the powers and artifices of both parties were fully exerted. To the great autho- rity and address of the nobles, the people opposed an ardour that was not to be cooled by delays, to be discouraged by partial defeats, or restrained by scruples in the choice of means for the attainment of their end. From this, as from many other in- frances, it may be inferred, that the popular party, in the contest with their superiors, are apt to think, that the rules of veracity and candour may be dif- pensed with, and that the means of deceit and vio-
( r) LiT. lib. iii. c. 9. Dionyf. Halycar. lib. x.
lenc!
lence may, without any feruple, be employed inc H A P. their own favour. With less honour and dignity to. . maintain than their adversaries, they are less afraid of imputations that detrat from either; and their leaders, supported by the voice of the more nume- rous party, are less apprehensive of evil fame. In this contest, accordingly, fititious plots and con- fpiracies were fabricated by the popular fide, and. fi&itious designs againfi the liberties of the people were imputed to the Patricians, in order to render them odious, and to deter them from appearing in support of their real pretensions (w).
In the issue of these contefis, the senate, despair- ing of being able to divert the people from their purp6fe, agreed to the nomination of three com- missioners, who (hould be sent into Greece to make a colletion of such laws as, being found salutary in that country, might- be transferred to Rome. Soon after the return of the commiflioners, the Se- nate approved their report, and concurred in the nomination of the famous Decemvirs to compile a body of laws for the commonwealth.
The Decemvirs were appointed merely to makeu. c. 302. the draft of a new code; and to propose matter for the consideration of the Senate and People, from whom alone the propositions could receive the au- thority of laws; yet the persons named for this pur- pose, as the History bears, had credit enough. with the people to be vested with a temporary fove- reignty, in which they superseded the authority of the Senate, as well as that of the Consuls, and had. unlimited power over the lives and fortunes of their fellow-citizens (x). Before their commiflion ex- pired, -they presented a number of laws, engraven on ten tables or plates, and. containing a summary of the privileges to be enjoyed by the- eople, of the crimes to be punished by the Magistrate, and
, ' (e) Dionyf. Hal. lib. x. (,) Ibid. No. 303.
of
B o o K of the forms to be observed in all judicial proceed-
L ings. They, at the fame time, informed the peo- b'y' pie, that their plan was fiill incomplete, that many
useful additions were yet to be made; and, upon the faith of these declarations, obtained for another year the renewal of their powers, with a change of some of the persons who were named in the com- mifion.
In this second year of the Decemvirs appoint- ment, two more tables or plates were added to the former ten; a circumilance from which this part of the Roman law has derived its name. This sup- plement, as well as the former body of laws, was received with great avidity, and the twelve tables continued to be respected at Rome, as the antient titles, by which men are supposed to hold any va- luable rights, are revered in all nations (y). No complete copy of them being transmitted to mo- dern times, we cannot fully judge of their value; but, from the fragments remaining in Authors that occasionally cite them (z), this Code appears, in. some clauses, to have been a first draft of the regu- lations which are necelrary. in the efiablifhment of property, and in making private parties answerable to public judicatures in all their difputes.--The property of land was eitablifhed by a fair prefcrip-' tion of two years, and that of other effecs by a prescription of one year.--Any controversy con- cerning the boundaries of land-property was to be determined by arbiters or jurymen appointed by the Magiftrate.-Parties cited to a court of justice were not at liberty to decline attendance.---Judg- ment in capital cafes was competent only to the As- fembly of the People in their Centuries; but this fu- ,(j) Livy calls the Twelve Tabls F:rs cmnis publici privartiqu juris. Tucitcu cal: them Fieis euqi j-ris. And Crassus, in the Dialogue of Cic. de Orat. is mrde to fay, Bblhothecas omhium philofophorum, nus mnihi rid-tur tzbalarum l;bellu fuperare. De Orat. lib. i. c. 44. (=) Vie. Gravini de Origine Juris Civilis. Pighii Anal,
preme
preme Tribunal might delegate its powers by a c H A P. special commiflion. 1.
In confidering this Code as a record of antient manners, the following particulars are worthy of notice:
The dilinEtion of Patrician and Plebeian was so great, that persons of there different orders were not permitted to intermarry.
The father being confidered as the absolute maf- ter of his child, had a right even to kill, or expose him to sale (a).
The interest of money was limited to one per cent. (b); but bankruptcy was treated as a crime,
and, (a) The clause in the Twelve Tables relating to the father's power *f sale, contains a Gngular limitation. Vendendi filium patri potellas elto. Si pater filium ter venundavit. fiiius a patre liber cito. The father may fell his child, but if he has fold him three times, the child (hall be free. (Dionyf. lib. ii. c. 27. p. 97.) This law, in its firllt appearance, carries an implication that, until this restriction was applied, fathers pracifcd felling their children times without limit. No law, it may be laid, is made 2gainft crimes altogether unknown; and, in general, what people do, may be inferred from what they are forbid to do; and yet the clause, con- lidcred in this light, is full of absurdity. The child, to be repeatedly fold, mult have repeatedly disengaged himfclf from fivery. After being twice fold, he mull have put himlelf a third time in the father's power; and to render such cales the object of law in any age or country whatever, the great law of parental affeaion mull have been strangely lufpended. The auestion therefore may be submitted to Civilians and Antiquaries, whether it be not easier to suppose a miltake in the tradition or in the record, or an unnecessary precaution in the compilers of this Code, than such a fre- quency of the circsmltances presumed in this clause, as would make the olfence a proper object of legislation in any age or nation whatever, and whether this law may not have been, in its original intention, what it be- came in the fubfequcnt applications of it, a mere precaution in favour of the parent, that he Ihould not be deprived of his child by furprize, and that unless he had fold him three times, he was not fuppolcd to have fold him at all. The form by which a Roman father emancipated his ofn, con- sifted of a sale three times repeated. The father fold him and received his price. The buyer once and again re-delivered the child, and had his p: ice returned. After the third purchase, the buyer manumitted him by a fin- gular ceremony prescribed in the laws. (b) Nam primo duodiecim tabulis fancitum, ne quis unciario (. per mon. or I per cent. per ann.), focnore amplius exerecret, cum antOa Ox libidine locupletium agitaretur; dein rogatione tribunitia ad femuncias rc- daOa; l poremo vetitz ufurme multifque plebifcitis obviam itum fraudi- bus, quae toties repreifa: miras per artcs rurlus oricbantur, Tacit. An. lib. vi. Montesquieu ventures to rejct the authority ofTacitus in this inflance, and supposes that the law which he ascribes to the Decemvirs had no tx- jltence until the year U. C. 33g8 when, according to Livy, lib. vi. it was
obtaincd
B o o Kand, without any difiinction of fraud or misfor- .--. tune, exposed the insolvent debtor to the mercy of
his creditors, who might put him to death, diffief or quarter him, and difiribute his members among them (c).
Mixed with laws that arose from fuperfiition, there were others containing proofs of great nati- onal wisdom. In private, every family were free to worship the gods in their own way. And in pub- lic, though certain forms were required, yet there was not any penalty annexed to the omiflion of them, as the punishment of offences in this matter was left to the offended god.
The people were required to build their houses two feet asunder, to leave eight feet for the ordi- nary breadth of fireets and highways, and double this breadth at the turnings.
They were forbid to dress or to polish the wood employed in funeral piles, or to exprefa their sorrow for the dead by wounding their flesh, tearing their hair, or by uttering indecent or lamentable cries.
Such are a few of the more singular and charac- teriftical clauses which are mentioned among the obtained by the Tribunes M. Doellius and L. Meneniun, in favour of the people. Haud zquc patribu, Irta, infcquente anno C. Mario & Co. Maniio CosT. de cncirio fenore a M. Duellio, L. Menenio, tribunis ple- ti. rogatio perlata. It is indeed probable that many antiquated laws were referred to this Legendary Code of the Twelve Tables on no better au- thority than that of their mntiquity; And so gieat a reducion of intcr'ef was more likely to come from Tribunes actig in favour of the people, who were generally the dcbtors, and who soon after procured the entire abb- !ition of the interest of money, than from the DecemTirs, wvho, being of the ari;oratical faaion. look part with the creditors. (c) The clause in this Code respecting insolvent debtor,, is equally ftranse wih that which refpeafs the power of the father, 'and shews no let npon what atrocious ideas of what they were to permit, as wGell as of what they were to prohibit, the compilers of this Coae proceeded. Their ideas in either, it is p-obablr, were never realized. Livy fays, that debtors were r txi & trrcdii crejirris (Liv. lib. ii. c. 23 & 2q7.) But it is affirnmed with great p-obability of troth, that no creditor ever took the full benefit of this law avainIt his insolvent debtor (Aul. Gell. lib. "o, c:. .). Laws that reflk from cn"om, and are fnggefted by real occafibnd, 'are genuine proofs of the reigning manners; but laws enacted by special lawgivers, or comniilToners, only indicate what occurs to the fancy of the compiler, and i'ha are the prohibitions he is pleased to fuppofr may be necessary.
'fragments
fragments of the Twelve Tables. The ardour ofc A p. the people to obtain this Code, and the unlimited powers which they entrusted to the commissioners appointed to frame it, had nearly cost them their liberty; and thus ended the progress of their com- monwealth. The Two additional Tables, as well as the firit Ten, having been posted up for public infpectibn, and having been formally ena&ted by the Senate and People, the objec of the Decem- virs commission was obtained, and it was expected that they were to abdicate their power; but the principal persons vested with this trust, having pro- cured it: with a view to usurp the government, or being debauched by two years uncontrouled domi- nion in the possession of it, refused to withdraw from their flation, and boldly ventured to persist in the exercise of their power after the time for which it was given had elapsed. At Rome, the power of the magiotrate was supposed to determine by his own resignation, and the republic might susser a peculiar inconveniency from the obstinacy of parti- cular persons, who continued to exercise the funai- ons of office after the period assigned them by law was expired.
The Decemvirs took advantage of this defect in the confittution, continued the exercise of their power beyond the period for which it was given, took measures to prevent the restoration of the Se- hate and the Afiemblies of the People, or the elec- tion of ordinary magistrates, and, even without employing much artifice, got the People to.acqui- efce in their ururpation, as an evil which could not be remedied; and the usurpers, in thisas in other initances, seemed to meet withia: submission that was proportioned *tb the confidence with which they assumed their power. The wrongs of the State appeared to makle little. impieffiocn on parties who had an equal concern to prevent them; but a barbarous insult offered to a private family rekin-
dled
s o o Kdled or gave occasion to the breaking out of a flame,
which injuries of a more public nature only seemed to have Smothered.
Appius Claudius, one of the usurpers, being cap- tivated with the beauty of Virginia, the child of an honourable family, and already betrothed to a per- son of her own condition, endeavoured to make himself mailer of her person, by depriving her al once of her parentage and of her liberty. For this purpose, under pretence that ihe had been born in servitude, and that she had been stolen away in hei infancy, he suborned a person to claim her as his slave. The Decemvir himself being judge in this iniquitous suit, gave judgment againfi the helplefr party, and ordered her to be removed to the house of the person by whom ihe was claimed. In thi, affecting scene, the father, under pretence of bid. ding a last farewel to his child, came forward tc embrace her; and, in the pretence of the multi, tude, having then no other means to preserve hei honour, he availed himself of the prerogative of Roman father, and itabbed her to the heart with knife. A general indignation instantly arose frorr this piteous fight, and all parties concurred, as a: the expulsion of the Tarquins, to deliver the repub. U. C. 34.lie from so hateful a tyranny (d).
The Senate and Patrician adminiitration being re-eftablilhed by the chearful concurrence of th( Plebeians, and the former government restored with the consent of all parties, a tide of mutua confidence ensiled, which led to the choice of the most popular persons into the office of Consul, anc procured a ready afient from the nobles to ever) measure which tended to gratify the people.
The danger which had been recently experiencec from the exercise of uncommon discretionary pow. ers, produced a resolution to forbid, under the fe
(d) Lir. lib. iii. c. 37. Dionyf. Hal. sic.
veref
vereft penalties of confiscation and death, any per- c H A P. son ever to propose the granting of any such pow- " _ ers. The consecration of the persons of the Tri- bunes, which, under the late usurpation, had al- most loll its effet, was now renewed, and extend- ed, though in a meaner degree, to the Ediles and inferior officers, who were supposed to as un- der the Tribunes in preserving the rights of the people.
The Patricians likewise consented to have the a&s of the Senate formally recorded, placed in the temple of Ceres, and committed to the care of the Ediles (e). This was in fa& a considerable dimi- nution of the power of the Consuls, who had been hitherto confidered as the keepers and interpreters of the Senate's decrees, and who had often suppress- ed or carried into execution the ads of this body at pleasure.
But the most striking effect, ascribed to the pre-u. c. 30A. sent unanimity of the citizens, was the ease with which the Plebeian assemblies were permitted to extend the authority of their ats to all the different orders of the commonwealth.
The Comitia, or assemblies of the Roman peo- ple, as may be colleced from the pait obfervati- ons, were now of three denominations; that of the Curiae, the Centuries, and the Tribes. In assem- blies of the first and second denomination, all citi- zens were supposed to be present; and laws were enated relating to the policy of the slate in gene- ral, as well as to particular departments, and fepa- rate bodies of men. The Centuries disposed of ci- vil offices, and the Curiae of military commands (f). In the assembly of the Tribes, composed of Ple- beians alone, the Tribunes were eleted; and ats were passed to regulate the proceedings of their (e) Liv. lib. iii. (f) Lib. v. c. 51; Lib. ix. c. 38. Cic. ad Famil. lib. i. ep. 9. LiT. lib. vi. c. ,i.
own
o o K own order, beyond which, in the antient times o0
the republic, their authority did not extend. Bul ~1"'v"' as the Senate denied the right of the Tribes to enacl
laws that mhould bind the community, the Plebeians in their turn,'difputed the legislative authority o the Senate. The Centuries alone were fuppofec to enjoy the right of enacting laws for the corn monwealth (g).
This distribution, however, was partial, anc tended to lodge the sovereignty of the State in th( hands of the Patricians, who, though no more thar a part of the people, were enabled, by their un doubted majority in the assemblies of the Cen turies as well as in the Senate, to,give law to the whole.
Equity and found policyrequired that the Pie- beians should have a voice in the. legislature of i commonwealth of which they made so confiderabl a part. This privilege appeared to be necessary, in order to secure them againit the partial influence ol a separate order of men. They accordingly ob- tained it; but in a manner that tended to disjoin, rather than to unite into one body, the collateral members of the State. Instead of. a deliberative voice, by which they might concur with the Senate and Coniitia of the Centuries, or. by which they might controul and amend their decrees, they ob- tained for themselves a separate and independent power of legislation, by which, as a counterpoise to the Patrician acs, which might pass in the Cen- turies without their concurrence, they could,, on their part, and without the presence or consent of the nobles, make Plebeian ats that could equally u. c. sc4. bind the whole community (h);
This rude and artless manner of communicating a share of the legislature to the inferior order of the (i) These were t ermed L is; the resolutions of the Senate were term- ec Strr eL C:r J, and thlole of the T, ibes, Pleloita. V] Diunyf. Hal. p. 306. Li;. lib. ii. c. 55.
people,
people, tended greatly to increase the intricacy ofc A P. this singular constitution, which now opened, in faCt, _ three diftin& sources of legislation, and produced v laws of three different denominations; decrees of the Senate (i), which had a temporary authority; acts of the Centuries (k); and resolutions of the Tribes (1); and by these means undoubtedly made way for much intefrine division, diitraction, and tumult.
So far animosity to the late usurpation had united all orders of men in the measures that followed the I expulsion of the Decemvirs; but the spirit of cor- diality did not long survive the sense of those in- Ijuries, and that resentment to a common enemy from which this transient unanimity arose. The Plebeians had removed some part of the eflablifl- meat, in which the Patricians were unequally fa- voured; but they bore with the greater impatience the inequalities which remained, and by which they were still condemned to aCt a subordinate part in the commonwealth. They were fRill excluded from the office of Consul, and from that of the priel- hood. They were debarred from intermarriage with the nobles by an express law, which had been enacted, left the sexes, from paflion, forgetting diffintions, should in this manner unite their diffe- rent ranks; but being now, in some measure, by the late act in favour of the Comitia of the Tribes, become joint or rival sovereigns of the State, they could not long acquiesce in there unequal con- ditions. A few years after the restoration of the common-v. c. 30o. wealth, Canuleius, a Plebeian, being one of the Tribunes, moved the celebrated aft which bears his name (mn), to repeal the clause of the Twelve Tables which prohibited the intermarriage of Pa-
(i) Senatfls Confulta. (k) Legea. (1) Plebifcitt. (m) Lex Caauleia. Liv. lib. iv. c. i.
tricians
B o o ., tricians and Plebeians. The other nine Tribunes
-. joined at the fame time in a claim of more impor-
tance-that the office of Consul should be laid open to all the different orders of the commonwealth, and might be held by Plebeians, as well as Patri. cians (n). The Senate, and the whole order ol nobles, having for some time, by delays, and by involving the State, as usual, in foreign wars, en- deavoured to suspend the determination of theft questions, were at length obliged to gratify the peop!e in the less material part of their pretensions, respecting the intermarriage of different ranks, in order, if poflible, to pacify them on the refusal of the more important claim, which related tc their capacity of being eleted into the office ol Consul.
To elude their demands on this material point, it was observed, that of the sacrifices and other du- ties belonging to the priefihood, which, by the fa- cred laws of religion, could be performed only by persons of noble birth, many were to be performed by the Consul, and could not, without profanation, be committed to any person of Plebeian extraction; and that, by this consideration alone, the Plebeians must be for ever excluded from the dignity of Consul. Superstition, for the molt part, being founded on custom alone, no change can be made in the custom, without appearing to defiroy the religion that is founded upon it. This difficulty accordingly put a flop, for a while, to the hasty pace with which the Plebeians advanced to the Con- fulate: but this obfirntiion was at length removed, as many difficulties are removed in human affairs, by a flight evasion, and by the mere change of a name. The title of Consul being changed for that c 30. of' Military Tribune, and no sacerdotal funtion
being included in the duties of this office, Ple-
(c) Dionyf. Hal.
beians,
beians, though not qualified to be Consuls, werec H A p. allowed to offer themselves as candidates, and to "* be elected Military Tribunes with consular power. In this manner the supposed profanation was avoid- ed, and Plebeians were allowed to be qualified for the highefi office of the State. The mere privilege, however, did not for a considerable time, enable any individual of that order to attain to the honour of first magifrrate of the commonwealth. The Plebeians in a body had prevailed against the law which excluded them; but as separate candidates for office, fiill yielded the preference to the Patri- cian competitor; or, if a Plebeian were likely to prevail at any particular election of Military Tri- bunes, the Patricians had credit enough to have the nomination of Consuls revived in that instance, in order to d 'appoint their antagonists.
Together with the separation of the military and sacerdotal functions, which took place on this oc- cafion, another change, more permanent and of greater moment, was effeced. Ever since the in- fiitution of the Census, or mutter, the inrolment of the people was become a principal object of the executive power. In the first ages it belonged to the King, together with all the other functions of itate. In the sequel, it devolved on the Consuls; and they accordingly, at every period of five years, by the rules of this office, could dispose of every citizen's rank, assign him his class, place him in the rolls of the Senate, or on that of the Knights, or frike him off from either; and, by charging him with all the burdens of a fubjeEt, while they fiript him of the privileges of a citizen, deprive him at once of his political consequence (o), and of his fate as a Roman (p). () I.iv. ti. iv. c. z4. fp) The citizens who came under this predicament were termed rarli.
These
B o o. T.efe regulations were accordingly enforced,
"- not held up into public view merely to awe the ccy " ppeople. Tle magistrate acually took an account
of every citizen's estate, inquired into his charac. ter, and afiigned him his place; promoted him to the Senate or to the Knighthood ; degraded or disfranchised, according as he judged the party worthy or unworthy of his freedom, of the rank which he held, or of that to which he aspired in the commonwealth (q).
So important a trust committed to the discretion of an officer elected for a different purpose, took its rife in the simplicity of a rude age but continued for a considerable period without any flagrant ex- amples of abuse. It was, nevertheless, that branch of the consular magistracy which the Patricians were least willing to communicate or to Ihare with the Plebeians. While they admitted them, there- fore, to be eleted Tribunes with consular power, they flipulated, that the cha.ge of presiding in the Census, or musters, should be disjoined from it; and that, under the title of Censors, this charge should remain with persons of Patrician birth (r). They contended for this reparation, not with a professed intention to reserve the office of Censor to their own order, but under pretence that persons invefied with the consular power, being so fre- quently employed in the field against the enemies of the commonwealth, could not attend to the as- fairs of the city, or perform all the duties of Cen- for at their regular periods.
But whatever may have been the real motive for separating the department of Censor from that of Consul, the change appears to have been sea- fonably made, and may be confidered as a striking example of that singular felicity with which the Romans, for some time, advanced in their policy,
() Liv. lib. ir. c. a4. (r) Ibid. c. 8.
as
as well as in their fortunes. Hitherto the Romanc H A p. Consul, being a warrior, was chiefly intent on the .L glory he was to reap in the field, and to gain at the expence of the enemies of the State. He dif- dained to seize the advantages which he had in his power, in the capacity of a clerk or accountant en- trulted with the Census, or inrolment of his fellow- citizens; nor does it appear that any peculiar at- tention was given to the choice of Consuls on the year of the Census, as being then veiled with any dangerous measures of power. But confidering the height at which party disputes were then ar- rived, and the great consequence of a citizen's rank and place on the rolls, it was no longer safe to en- trust in the fame hands the civil rights of the People, and the executive powers of the State. The Consul, being frequently raised to his fation by party intrigues, and coming into power with the ardour of private ambition and of party zeal, might have easily, in the manner of making up the rolls of the people, gratified his own resentments, or that of his faction. The office of Consul, in his capacity of military leader, was naturally the pro- vince of youth, or of vigorous manhood ; but that cf Censor, when disjoined from it, fell as naturally into the hands of persons of great authority and ex- perienced age; to whom, in the satiety of brighter honours, the People might safely entrust the efli- mate of their fortunes, and the aflignment of their rank. In such hands it continued, for a confider- able period, to be very faithfully discharged; and by connecting the dignities of Citizen, and the ho- nours of the State, with private as well as public virtue, had the happiest effects on the manners of the People.
The number of Censors, like that of the Con- fuls, was limited to two; but that of the Consular Tribunes was left undetermined, and at fucceflive eletions was augmented from three to eight.
VOL. I. E This
B o 0 K This has given occasion to some hiflorians, who are
"q uquoted by Livy, to ascribe the institution of this
omce, not to the importunity of the Plebeian par- t-, but to the exigencies of the State; which being assailed by numerous enemies, and not having as vet devised the method of multiplying comman- ders, under the tities of Proconsul, were led to fubfiitute officers of a different denomination, whose numbers might be increased at discretion. It is indeed probabie, that, in the progress of this government, new inliitutions, and the reparation of departments, were luggeiled no less by the multiplicity of growing affairs, than by the pre- tensions of party, or by the ambition of separate pretenders to power. in the first of those ways, we are led to account for the institution of the Plebeian Ediles, already mentioned; for that of the Praefec- tns Annonh, or Infpetor of the Markets, together with the additions that were, in the courle of there changes, continually made to the number of Qua ftors.
The Quaestors had been long efiablifhed al Rome; they had charge of the public funds, and followed the Kings and the Consuls as commiflaries or provifors in the field. During the bury period which we have been now confidering, their num- ber was augmented from two to four; and the places were filled, for the most part, with Patri- '. C. 333. cians, though not limited to perbons of this rank.
The Praefeftus Annona, or Infpetor of the Markets, was an officer occasionally named, on a profpec of scarcity, to guard againls famine, anc to provide for the wants of the people. Rome was in fact a place of arms, or a military station often depending as much for subsistence on the foresight and care of its officers, as on the course o its ordinary markets. Without a proper attentioi to this particular on the part of the State, the People were exposed to susser from scarcity. On the ap
proache
proaches of famine, they became mutinous andc HA P. disorderly, and were ready to barter their fieedom, 1. and the constitution of their country, for bread.u.c -3 During the famine which first suggested the fepara- tion of this trust from that of the ordinary officers of State, Sp. Maelius; a Roman Knight, being pof- sessed of great wealth, engrossed great quantities of corn; and having it in his power to ftpply the wants of the poor, endeavoured to form a dange- rous party among them, and, by their means, to raise himself to the head of the commonwealth. The Smnate took the alarm, and, as in the most dangerous crisis of the liate, had recourse to the nomination of a Dictator. Melius being cited to appear before him, and having refused to answer; was put to death.
The care of iupplying the people with corn, which had been at this time committed to L. Minucius, was from thenceforward entrusted to citizens of the first rank, and the ofice itself be- came necessary in the political establishment of the commonwealth.
Hitherto we have confidered the Roman Repub- lic as a scene of mere political deliberations and councils, prepared for contention, and seemingly unable to exert any united strength. The State, however, presented itself to the nations around it under a very different afpeLt, as a horde of warri- ors, who had made and prefcrved their acquifi- tions by force, and who never betrayed any signs of weakness in the foreign wars they had to maintain.
In their transition from monarchy to republic, indeed, there seems to have been a temporary in- termillion of national exertions. Private citizens, annually raied to the head of the republic, did not with their elevation acquire the dignity of princes; they did not command the fame refpeat from their fellow-citizens at home, nor had the fame confider-
E 2 ation
B o o K ation from rival nations abroad. The frequent
dissentions of the people seemed to render them an l '"^ easy prey to their enemies. During the life of
Tarquin many powers united against them in be- half of the exiled king. They were firipped of their territory, confined to the walls of their city, and deserted by their allies (s). The fortune of the State seemed to fall with its monarchy. The event, however, belied there appearances, and the power of the annual Magiiiracy soon became more for- midable abroad, though iels awful at home, than that of the Monarch. The republican government fought for respite from domeflic trouble in the midst of foreign war, and the forces of the State, inflead of being refirained, were impelled into action by intestine divisions. The ambition with which the lower ranks of the people endeavoured to watch their superiors, the solicitude with which the higher order endeavoured to preserve its distinction, the exercise of ability which, in this contest, was common to both, enabled them to as againfi so- reign enemies with a spirit that was whetted, but not worn out, in their domeflic quarrels.
The consuls annually eleced, brought to the helm of affairs a frefl vigour of mind. and conti- nual supplies of renewed ambition. Every officer, on his accellion to the magistracy, was in hafe to ditinguifh his administration, and to merit his tri- umph; and numerous as the enemies of the Re- public appeared, they were not sufficient to furnish every Roman Consul, in his turn, with an oppor- tunity to earn this envied diitinaion. It was given only to those who obtained a&ual victories, and who killed a certain number of their enemies (i).
In this nursery of warriors, honours, tending to excite ambition or to reward military merit, were not confined to the leaders of armies alone: The
(s) Diony. fal. lib. v. (t) Five thousand in one field.
vitorious
vitorious soldier partook in the triumph of hisc H A P. leader, and had ufbordinate rewards proportioned to the proofs le had given of his valour. " I bear " the scars," said Dentatus (while he pleaded for a share in the conquered lands to himself and his fellow-foldiers), " of five and forty wounds, of
which twelve were received in one day. I have " carried many prizes of valour. Fourteen civic
crowns bestowed upon me by those I had saved " in battle. Three times the mural crown; hav- "ing been so often the first to scale the enemies
walls. Eight times the prize of diftinaion in battle. Many tokens of esteem and gratitude "from the hands of generals. Eighty-three chains
of gold, sixty bracelets, eighteen lances, and "twenty-five sets of horfe-furniture, from pri- " vate persons, who were pleated to approve of " my services (l)."
Under the influence of councils so fertile in the invention of military diftindions, and in armies of which the soldier was roused by so many incentives to military ambition, the frequent change of com- manders, which is commonly impolitic, proved a perpetual renovation of the ardour and spirit with which armies were led. In public deliberations on the fubje& of war, the vehement ambition of indi- viduals proved a continual incentive to vigorous re- solutions, by which the State not only soon recover- ed the consequence which it seemed to have loft in its transition from Monarchy, but was speedily en- abled to improve upon all its former advantages, as head of the Latin confederacy; frequently to vanquish the Sabines, the Hernici, the Volsci, and Etrulcans, and, in about a hundred years after the expulsion of Tarquin, to extend its dominion great- ly beyond the territories which had been in the possession of that prince. In one direction, from
(u) Dionyf. Hal. lib. x. c. 36. vcl p. 36,'
Faleriunm
B o o K Falerium to Anxur, about sixty miles; and in the
L other, from the summits of the Appenines to the u.c. - siea: And Rome, the metropolis of this little em-
pire, was become, with a few competitors, one of the principal tiates of Italy.
The first and nearest object of its emulation at this period was Veie, an Etruscan principality, of which the capital, situated about nine miles from Rome, was built on an eminence, and secured by precipices.
The Romans, even before the change of their government from the form of a principality to that of a republic, had been in polfellion of the Tiber and both its banks; but on the right of this river were fiill circumscribed by the Veiaentes, with whom they had waged long and desperate wars; and, as may be supposed among rivals in so close a neighbourhood, with imminent danger to both. Veia, according to Dionysius, was equal in extent to Athens, and, like the other Etruscan cantons, was further advanced than Rome in the arts of peace, probably better provided with the resources cf war, but inferior in the magnanimity of its councils and in the courage of its people. The Veiasntes being, after a variety of struggles, beat from the field, they retired within their walls, sus- sered themselves to be inveited, and underwent a siege or blockade of ten years. The Romans, in order to reduce them, continued during those ten years in the field, without any interruption or difiinction of feaions; made secure approaches, fortifying themfeives in the posts which they fuc- ceiively occupied, and in the end entered the place u. c. 57. b storm.
In these operations, we are told, that they learn- ed to make war with more-regularity than they had formerly practised; and having, some little time before, appointed a military pay for such of their people as served on foot, they at this time extended
...-~- .. ~ ~the
the fame eftablilhment to their horsemen or knights; c H A p. imposed taxes on the people in order to defray this __ expence, and made other arrangements, which soon after enabled them to carry their enterprizes to a greater distance, and to conduct them with more order and fyfiem: circumstances which, together with the acceflions of territory and power, gained by the redudion of Veim, rendered this event a re- markable epocha in the history of Rome.
The use which they proposed to make of their conquefi was partly founded in the original policy of the State. The practice of incorporating van- quifhed enemies, indeed, with the Roman people, had been long discontinued: for even Tarquin, it is said, had introduced the cuflom. of enslaving captives, and this fate the citizens of, Veia under- went(x); but their lands, and the city itself, offered a tempting prize to the conquerors. And accord- ingly it was proposed to transplant into those vacant poifeflions and feats one half of the Roman Senate and people y).
This proposal was extremely acceptable to per- sons of inferior condition, who hoped to double their pofielsions, and flattered themselves that they might double the power of the State; but it was firenuoufly opposed by the Senate and Nobles, as tending to divide and weaken the commonwealth, and as more likely to restore a rival than to strength- en themselves. It was eluded by a partial division of the Veiaan territory, in which Ceven jugera, or about four English acres, were afligned as the lot of a family; and by these means the more indigent citizens were provided for, without any.hazard of dismembering the itate,
But while the Romans were thus availing them- selves of the spoils of a fallen enemy, and probably enjoying, on the extintion of their rival, a more
(x) Liv. lib. v. c. .. ) Ibid. lib, v. c. c 4.
.... i than
B O 0 K than common degree of imagined security, they
' became themselves an example of the inftabi.
lity of human affairs; being allailed by a new and unlooked-for enemy, who came like a firoke ol lightning on their settlement, dispersed their people, and reduced their habitations to ashes.
The Gauls, who are said to have passed the Alps in three several migrations about two hundred years before this date, being now masters of all the plains on the Po, and of all the coasts of the Adriatic to the banks of the river Sena, where they had a set- tlement, which, from their name, was called Sena Gallia; and being flill bent on extending their pof- feflions, or shifting their habitations, had passed the Appenines, and laid siege to Clufium, the capital of a small nation in Tufcany(z). The inhabitants of this place made application to the Romans for ficcour; but could obtain no more than a deputa- tion to intercede with the Gauls in their behalf. The deputies who were sent on this business, and commiflioned to ad only as mediators, having ap- peared in arms on the fide of the besieged, the Gauls complained of their conduc as a breach of faith, and as a departure from the neutrality which the Romans professed: And being denied fatisfacion on this complaint, they dropped their design on Clufium, and turned their arms against there mediators, who had violated the laws of war. They advanced on the left of the Tiber, found the Romans polfed to receive them on the Allia, a fniall river which was the limit of the Roman territory, in the country of the Sabines, about ten miles from Rome; and, with the fame impetuosity which hitherto attended them, they passed the Allia on the right of the Roman army, drove them into the angle that is formed by the confluence of the two rivers, put all who withflood them to. the
() Liv lib. v. c. 35, &-c.
sword,
sword, and forced the remainder into the Tiber, c H A P. where numbers perilhed, or, being cut off from their retreat to Rome, were dispersed in the neigh- bouring country.
This calamity is said to have so much fiunned oru. c. 363. overwhelmed the Roman people, that they made no farther attempt to defend their city. All the youth that were fit to carry arms retired into the Capitol. The weak or infirm, whether from sex or age, fled as from a place condemned to defiruc- tion, or suffered themselves to be surprised and cut offin the fireets.
The Gauls, having employed three days in the pursuit and slaughter of those who fled from the field of battle, on the fourth day advanced towards the walls of Rome. But being alarmed at first by the general desertion of the battlements, which they miitook for an ambuscade or an artifice to draw them into a snare, they examined all the avenues with care before they ventured to enter the gates. The more effetually to dislodge every enemy, they set fire to the city, reduced it to ashes, and took post on the ruins, in order to besiege the Ca- pitol, which alone held out (a). In this fate of affairs, the republic, already so formidable to all its neighbours, was supposed to be extinguished for ever. The fame of its ruin reached even to Greece, where Rome began to be confidered at this time as a rising and prosperous commonwealth (b).
The Gauls remained in possession of the ruins for fix months; during which time. they made a fruitless attempt to scale the rock on which the Ca- pitol was built; and being repulsed by Manlius, who, for his vigilance and valour on this occasion, acquired the name of Capitolinus, they continued to invest and block up the fortress, in hopes of be- ing able to reduce it by famine. The Romans,
(a) Plutarch, invit. Camilli. (S) Ibid.
who
B o o K who were shut up in the Capitol, flill preserved the
L forms of their commronwieaith, and made acts in
the name of the Senate and People. Sensible that Camillus, under wvhole au!pices they had reduced the city of Veio, and triumphed over many other enemies, now in exile on the score of an invidious charge of embezzling the Ipoils he had won.at.that place, was the fittelt perion to retrieve their affairs; hsey abbolved him of this accusation, reinflated him in the qualification to command their armies (c); and, in order that he might aflemble their allies and col!ic the remains of their late army, which was d!iperfed in the neighbouring country, veiled him with the power of dictator.. In this extremity of their fortunes, he overlooked his wrongs, pro- cured numbers to retort to his flandard, and hattened to arm for the preservation of his country; He came to the relief of the Capitol at a critical mo- ment, when the besieged, being greatly reduced by famine, had already capitulated, and were pay- ing a ransom for themselves and their remaining es- secs. Before this transaction was completed, he surprised the besiegers, obliged them to relinquilh their prize, and afterwards, in a decisive battle that was fought in the neighbourhood of Rome, reveng. ed the diiaiter which his countrymen had suffered on the banks of he Allia (d)...
Whatever may have been the true account of this famous adventure, the Romans have given it a place in their history, retained a deep impreflion of their danger from the Gauls, and from thence dated the origin of some particulars in their policy, which teem to have arisen from such an imprellion. They set apart particular funds in the treasury, to be spared in all other possible exigencies of. the State, and reserved for a resource in cafe of a Gaulish invasion. They fubijedted the magifirate
(' Lir. Iib. v. c. 3z. (4) Ibid . ib. v.c. 43,'&c.
to
to certain general refiriAions, but allowed an ex-c H A P. ception in cafe of an invasion from the Gauls; and H. it is likely that, in the age in which they took these alarming impreflions, they had not yet acquired those advantages of discipline and military skill, in which they were afterwards so much superior to the Gauls and other barbarous neighbours (e).
Although historians have amply supplied the de- tail of hiltory before this event, they nevertheless acknowledge, that all prior evidence of facts pe- rilhed in the destruction of Rome; that all records and monuments of what the Romans had formerly been, were then to be gathered from the ruins of cottages, which had been for several months trod- den under foot by a barbarous enemy; that the laws of the Twelve Tables, the People's Charters of Right, and the Forms of the Confiitution, were to be collected in fragments of plates which were dug fiom the rubbish of their former habitations; and that nothing remaining to mark the former po- fition of Rome, betides the Capitol, raised on its rock, and surrounded with ruins, the people deli- berated whether they should attempt to renew their settlement on this ground, or transfer it to Veia. It had been formeily proposed to remove to that place one half of the Senate and people. It was then proposed, that they should chufe that as the proper ground on which to restore the name and the feat of their commonwealth. " Why," said the promoters of this design, " attempt at a great ex- " pence, and with so much labour, to clear out "the wretched ruins of a fallen city, while we (e) The establishment of the Legion, and the improvement made in the choice of its weapons and manner of array, are mentioned as l'ubfequent to this date: And the Romans, it is consflcd, madle lss progiels in every other art than in that of war. Their goncial, Camillus, at his triumph ser the vicory obtained over the Gauls, made his entry into Rome, having his visage paintcd with red; a pracice, lfys Pliny, which is yet to be found among nations of Africa, who remain in a ltate of barbarity, and :which this natural hittorian was inclined to confider as a charaleriftic of kaibarous manners.
"' have
B o o K" have another, provided with private and public
L buildings of every fort, yet entire for our recep. '-'" " tion? To this specious argument might have
been opposed the consideration of many advan- tages in their former fiuation; its place on a navi. gable river, its command of the pafage from La- tium to Etruria, and of the navigation of the Tiber from the descents of the Appenines to the sea. But motives of superstition and national pride were sup- posed to be of greater weight. " Would you," said Cami!lus, " abandon the feats of your ancef- " tors? Would you have Veia restored, and Rome " to periih for ever ? Would you relinquish the al- " tars of the Gods, who have fixed their shrines in " these sacred places; to whose aid you are in- " debted for 1o many triumphs, and to whom you " owe the conquest of those habitations for which " you now propose to forsake their temples ?"
Convinced by this argument, the Romans deter- mined to remain in their antient situation, pro- ceeded to reflore their habitations, and, in the course of a year, accomplished the work of re- building their city. An .Era from which, as from a second foundation, may be dated the rife of the commonwealth, and the beginning of a period, in which its history, though still controverted in rome particulars, is less doubtful than before, or less dif- figured with fable (f). tf) Somre parts, evn of the hiflory that follows, are doubtful. The ^-mcts of Dictators and of Consuls, the reality of entire campaigns, as well a of tingle za ion; are controverted (Liv. lib. i. c. 5. & z6. lib. v. c. 55. lib. viii. c. 38. lib. ix. c. 15.): But that which preceded this date refts al- mol on tradirion alone (Liv. lib. vi. c. i.). It serves, however, to inform us what the Romans themf-rIvs believed; and is therefore the bet com- ment we can ha'e on the genius and tendency, as well as the origin, Qs Li-cir c :l;tical ;iiilugtion;.
CHAP.
C H A P. III. Scene of foreign War and donmeflic Dispute opened with
reviving Rome.-Faction or Conspiracy of Manlius. -Condemnation.-Plebeians eleted into the Office of Coifilar Tribunes.-lAfpire to the Conftlate.- i'he sift Plebeian Confil.-Eftablijhment of the Prcetor.-Patrician Ediles.-T-he Plebeians qualified to hold all the Offices of State.-The Meafiure of Roman Magistracy complete.-Review of the Con- Jiitutioz.-Its feminzg Defets.--But great Suc- ceffes.-Policy of the State refpetfiig foreigni or van- qui/hed Nations.-Formation of the Legion.-Series of Jars.--With the Samnnites, Campaniazns.-'he Tiarentilnes.-Pyrrhius.-Sovereignty of Italy.-Dif- ferent Footing on which the Inhabitants flood.
H E Romans were not allowed to reflorec H A P their community, nor to rebuild their habi- Il. tations, in peace. They were invaded by the Equi, .ct the Volsci, the Hernici, the Etruscans, and some of their own Latin confederates (g); who dreading the re-eliablifhment of a commonwealth, from which they had already suffered so much, and whose power was so great an object of their jealousy, made every effort to prevent it. During a period of one hundred and seventeen years which followed, they accordingly had to encounter a fuc- cefflion of enemies, in subduing of whom they be- came the sovereigns of Italy; while they continued to undergo internal convulsions, which, as former- ly, proved the birth of political institutions, and filled up the measure of their national establish- ment.
(Z) Liv, lib. vi. c. 2, & 16.
During
B o o K During this period, the Plebeians, far from being
i_ satisfied with their past acquisitions, made continual
efforts to extend their privileges. The Tribunes, by traducing the Senate, and by displaying, in their harangues, the severities of the Patrician creditor, and the sufferings of the Plebeian debtor, still en- flamed the animosity of their party. The republic itself was so feebly eftablilhed, that ambitious citi- zens were encouraged, by means of faftion raised among persons of the lower class, to have thoughts of filbverfing the government. In this manner Manlius, the famous champion of the Capitol, who, as has been observed, by his vigilance and valour, preserved that fortress from the Gauls, formed a design to usurp the sovereignty. Presuming on his merit in this and other services, he thought himself above the laws; and endeavouring, by his intrigues with the populace, to form a party againfi the State, he incurred, what was at Rome of all impu- tations the most detested, that of aspiring to be King. In opposition to this conspiracy, whether real or fictitious, the republic was committed to the care of a Dictator; and Manlius being brought be- fore him, endeavoured to turn the suspicion of ma- lice and envy against his accusers. He produced four hundred citizens, whom he had redeemed from their creditors and released from chains. He pro- duced the spoils of thirty enemies slain by himself in battle; forty badges of honour conferred on him by generals under whom he had served; many ci- tizens whom he had rescued from the enemy, and in the number of those he had saved, he pointed at Caius Servilius, second in command to the Dicta- tor, who now carried the sword of the State against the life of a person who had saved his own. And in the conclusion of his defence, " Such were the treasons," he said, " for which " the friends of the People were to be sacrificed to "the Senate."
His
His merits in the public service were great, andc H A p. intitled him to any reward from the people, except I1l a surrender of their liberties. His liberality to the more indigent citizens, if it proceeded from huma- nity, was noble; but if it proceeded from a design to alienate their affections from the public, or tranf- ser them to himself, was a crime; and the most splendid services, confidered as the artifices of a dangerous ambition, were the objects of punish- ment, not of reward.
The people, it is said, while they had in their view the Capitol, which had been saved by the vi- gilance and bravery of this unfortunate criminal, hesitated in their judgment; but their meeting be- ing adjourned to the following day, and to a diffe- rent place, they condemned him to be thrown from the rock on which he had so lately signalized his valour (h).
Such alarms to the general fiate of the common- wealth, had -their temporary effec in suspending the animosity of parties; but could not reconcile their interelis, nor prevent the periodical heats which continually arose on the return of disputes. The Plebeians had been now above forty years inu. . 366. poffeflion of a title to hold the office of Consular Tribune, but had not been able to prevail at any election (i). The majority of the Centuries were ilill composed of Patricians; and when candidates of Plebeian rank were likely, by their personal consideration, to carry a majority, the other party, in such particular initances, had influence enough, as has been observed, to revive the election of con- fuls, a title from which the Plebeians, by Law, were tiill excluded.
The Plebeians, however, by the zeal of their party, by the afliduity and influence of individuals who aspired to office, by the increase of their num-
(t) Liv. lib, vi. . z7. (i) Ibid lib. vi . c. 37.
bers
B O o K bers in the first and second classes, by their alliance
L with the Patrician families in consequence of mar- 'nriage, at lalt surmounted these difficulties, obtained
the dignity of Consular Tribune for one of their own order, and from thenceforward began to divide the votes of the Centuries with the Patrician candidates. They were accordingly raised in their turn to what was then the firfi office of the State, and in which nothing was wanting but the title of Consul. To this too they were loon led to aspire; and were urged to make the concluding ftep in the rife of their order, by the ambition of a female Patrician; who, being married into a Plebeian family, bore with impatience the mortifications to which she was exposed in the condition of her new relations. She excited her husband, the engaged her own kindred- among the Patricians, she routed the whole Ple- beian party to remove the indignities which yet re- mained affixed to their race, in being supposed un- worthy to hold the consular dignity. V. c. 377. Licinius Stolo, the husband of this lady, and
Publius Sextius, another ative and ambitious Ple- beian, were placed in the College of Tribunes, in order to urge this point. They began the exercise of their office by proposing three very important laws: The first intended for the relief of insolvent debtors; by which all payments made on the score of interest, should be deducted from the capi- tal, and three years be allowed to pay off the re- mainder.
A second law to limit the extent of eflates in land, by which no citizen should be allowed to engross above five hundred Jugera (k), or to have in flock above one hundred bullocks, and five hundred goats and sheep.
A third law to restore the election of Consuls, in place of Consular Tribunes, with an express provi-
(t) About 300 Englifn Acres,
sion
ion that, at least, one of the Consuls hmould be ofc H A P. Plebeian descent. :.
The Patricians, having gained some of the Tri- bunes to their party, prevailed upon them to dilTent from their colleagues, and to suspend, by their ne- gatives, all proceedings on the subjea of there laws. - The Tribunes, Licinius and Sextius, in their turn, suspended the usual eleEtion of magi- itrates, and put a flop to all the ordinary affairs of State. -.
An anarchy of five years enfued(j), during which time the republic, bereft of all its officers, had no magistracy, betides the Tribunes of the People, who were not legally vested with any. de- gree of executive power (m). Any alarm from abroad must have suspended the contest at home, and forced the parties to a treaty: but they are said to have enjoyed, in this fiate of domefiic trouble, uninterrupted peace with their neighbours; a cir- cumflance from which we may infer, that, in most of their wars, they were thenfelves the aggressors, and owed this interval of peace to the vacancy of the Consulate, and to their want of the prompters, by whom they were usually excited to quarrel with their neighbours.
In the several queflions, on which the parties were now at variance, the Patricians contended chiefly for the exclusion of Plebeians from the of- fice or title of Consul; and, as an insuperable bar to their admiifion, ifill infilled on the sacrilegious profanation that would be incurred, by suffering the rites usually performed by the Consuls, to pals into Plebeian hands. This argument, initead of persuading the popular leaders to desist from their claim, only made them sensible that it was necef- fary to remove this impediment by a previous ope- ration, before they attempted to pais through the
(I) Fromi . C. 377 to 3S. (,n) L;V. lib. vi. c. 35. VOL.'I. F way
B 0 K way which it was meant to obftru&. They ap- ,_ peared then for a little to drop their pursuit of the
Consulate; they affected to respect the claim of the Patricians, to retain the pofleffions of places which had always been assigned to their order. But they moved, that the number of ordinary attendants on the sacred rites should be augmented from two to ten; and that of these one half should be named of Plebeian extraction.
While the Patricians continued to rejet this pro- pofal, on account of the effect it was likely to have on their pretensions in general, they gave way fucceflively; and, at the interval of some years, firfi to the acs that were devised in favour of infol- vent debtors; next, to the Agrarian law, or limita- tion of property in land; and last of all, to the new efiablifhment relating to the priesthood, and to the communication of the Consulate itself to persons of Plebeian rank.
The authors of the new regulations, knowing that the majority of the Centuries was composed of Patricians, or was still under the influence of that order, were not satisfied with the mere privilege of being qualified to stand for the Consulate. They insisted, that at least one of the Consuls should be a Plebeian; and having prevailed in this, as in the other contested points, the Plebeian party entered immediately on the poffeflion of their new privilege, v. c. 397. and railed Publius Sextius, the Tribune, who had
been so active in the cause of his constituents, to the office of Consul.
But while the Patricians thus incurred a repeated diminution of their exclusive prerogatives, they en- deavoured, by separating the judicative from the executi.e power of the Consul, and by committing the firfi to a Patrician officer, under the title of Pra- tor, to save a part from the general wreck.
It was intended that the Prator should be fubor- dinate, but next in rank, to the Consul. He was
attended
attended by two Lictors, and had his commiffionc H A p. in very general terms, to judge of all differences "l that should be brought before him, and to hear the-'~ suits of the people until the setting of the fun. This unlimited jurifdidtion, as we fliall have occafi- on to observe, came to be gradually circumscribed by its own precedents, and by the accumulating edits of fuccefive Pretors. One person at firit was supposed able to discharge all the duties of this office; but the number, in order to keep pace with the growing multiplicity of civil affairs, was after- wards gradually increased.
Another political change, by which the Patrici- ans procured some compensation for what they had now surrendered, was made about the fame time. The care of the public shows and entertainments had hitherto belonged to the Ediles of the People. The office of Edile being at its first infiitution ex- pensive, was likely to become gradually more so by the frequent additions which were made to the fefii- vals, and by the growing demands of the people for fh6ws and amusements. The Plebeians com- plained of this charge as a burden on their order, and the opposite party offered to relieve them of it, provided that two officers for this purpose, under the title of Curile Ediles, should be annually ele&ted from among the Patricians(n).
By there institutions the Nobles, while they ad- mitted the Plebeians to partake in the dignity of Consul, reserved to their own order the exclusive right to the.offices of Praetor and Edile: By the lalt of which they had the direEtion of sports and public entertainments; a flation which, in a fiate that was coming gradually under the government of popular assemblies, became, in process of time, a great object of ambition, and a principal access to power.
(n) Liv. lib. vi c. 42.
F 2 The
B o OK ; The design or the effect of this inflitution did
.- not escape the notice of the Plebeian party. They " complained, that while the Patricians affected to
resign the exclusive title to one office, they had engrossed two others, inferior only in name, equal in consideration and influence. But no exclusive advantage could be long retained by one order, while the other was occasionally possessed of the le- giilative and supreme executive power. All the offices, whether of Praetor or Edile, of Dictator or Censor, were, in process of time, filled with per- sons of either rank; and the distinction of Patrician or Plebeian became merely nominal, or served as a monument of the aristocracy which had subsisted in former ages. The only effea which it now had was favourable to the Plebeians; as it limited the choice of Tribunes to their own order, while, in v. c. 17. common with the Patricians, they had access to
every other dignity in the State. R.-,e- of Such is the account which hiflorians have given te co..ai- us of the origin and progress of the Roman confii- ":"'' tution. This horde, in the earliest account of it,
presented a distinction of ranks, under the titles of Patrician, Equefirian, and Plebeian; and the State, though governed by a prince, had occasional or or- dinary assemblies, by which it approached to the form of a republic. Affembliec to which every citizen was admitted were termed the Comitia; those which were formed of the superior ranks, or of a felecE number, were termed the Senate. Among those who had attained the age of man- hood, to be Noble and to be of the Senate were probably synonymous terms. But after the intro- duction of the Census, separate rolls were kept for the Senate, the Equestrian Order, and the People. These rolls were composed by different officers in fucceflive periods of the State. A Senate was composed of a hundred members by
Romu
Romulus(o). This number was augmented orc H A r. diminilhed at pleaufre by his successors. The --- Consuls succeeded in this matter to the prerogative of the Kings; and the Censors were appointed to exercise it, with the other duties of the Census, as a principal part of their functions. It is remarkable, that, notwithfianding the great importance of the Senate in the government of their country, so little precaution was taken to ascertain who were to be its conflituent members, or to fix their legal number. The body was accordingly flucuating. Individuals were placed or displaced at the discretion of the officer entrufied with the muster, and the numbers of the whole increased or diminilhed indefinitely. The officers of State, though not enrolled, had access to the Senate; but their continuing mem- bers, after their year in office expired, depended on the discretion of the Cenolrs. It seemed to be sufficient for the purposes of this constitution, that the Senate ihould be a meeting of the superior class of the citizens.
As the noble and popular Assemblies had theirRe,,,,p,- existence under the Kings, the transition fromion. monarchy to republic in so finall a State, by fublfi- tuting elective and temporary Magistrates in place of the King, was easy. A sufficient occasion was given to it in the abuses which were felt in the last reign of the monarchy. The disorders incident to the Ihock of parties, who were set free from a former controul, required, on occasion, the remedy of a discretionary atithority vefied in Lome person who might be entrufied with the public aIfety, and soon led to the occasional institution of a dictatorial power. The high prerogatives claimed and main-
3) Liv. lib. i. c. g. According to Livy the Senate confiled of no more than a hundred mzmbers at the dlath of Roniulus; but, according to Di- onytiuu, their numbers hadi been augmented by a popular clecion at the ad- . mifion of the Sabincs, iome wvriters lay to Lwo hunor.hd ; others, only to one hundred and fin y. Dionyl' lib. ii. c. 47.
tained
B o o K tained by one party, obliged the other to assume a
,pofiure of defence, and to place themselves under
the conduct of leaders properly authorised to vindi- cate their rights. These rights were underflood by degrees to imply equality, and, in the fucceflive in- ftitutions that followed, put every citizen in posses- sion of equal pretensions to preferment and ho- nours; pretensions which were to be limited only by the great distinction which Nature has made be- tween the capacities, merits, and characters of men, and which are subjet, in every community, to be warped by the effeCts of education and fortune.
New departments of State, or additions to the number of officers employed in them, were conti- nually fuggefied by the increase of civil affairs; and while the territory of the republic was but a small part of Italy, the measure of her political govern- ment was full, and the lift of her officers complete. Fundions which, in the firit or simplest ages, were either unknown or had been committed to the King alone, were now thrown into separate lots or departments, and furnished their several occu- pations to two Consuls, one Prator, two Censors, four Ediles, and eight Qeftors, besides officers of there different ranks, who, with the titles of Proconsul, Propraetor, and ProquaeRor, and with- out any limitation of number, were employed wherever the exigencies of the State required their service.
In this account of the Roman constitution we are come nearly to that state of its maturity(p) at which Poiybius began to observe and to admire the felicity of its institutions, and the order of its ad- minifiration. The Plebeians were now reconciled to a government to which they themselves had ac- cess, and citizens of every rank made great efforts
A; * A.:; 1iao tha i thd an.d sixth ce:ntries of Rome.
of
of industry in a State in which men were allowedc H A '. to arrive at eminence, not only by advantages of ". fortune, but likewise by personal qualities. The v'"' Senate and Assemblies of the People, the Magif- trates and Selet Commissioners, had each their de- partments, which they administered with an ap. pearance of sovereign and absolute sway, and without any interfering of interests orjealoufy of power.
The Consuls were detined to the command of armies; but, while at Rome, seemed to have the highest prerogatives in the administration of all civil and political affairs. They had under their com- mand all the other officers of State, except the Tri- bunes of the People; they introduced all foreign ambassadors; and they alone could move the Se- nate on any subjeA of deliberation, and put their, ats or determinations in writing. The Consuls, too, presided with a similar prerogative in the As- fembly of the Centuries and in that of the Curiae, proposed the question, collected the votes, declared the majority, and framed the at. In all military preparations, in making their levies as well as in the command of the army, they were vested with high degrees of discretionary power (q) over all the troops of the commonwealth, composed of Roman citizens or allies. They commanded the treasury, as far as necessary to the service on which they were employed, and had one of its Commiflioners, or Quaestors, appointed to attend their court, and to receive their orders.
The Senate, however, had the ordinary admini- firation of the revenue, took account of its receipts and disbursements, and suffered no money to be issued without their own decree, or the warrant of the Consul in atual service. Even the money de- (q) Vid. Zonar. N 5o1. Frontini Stragemata, lib. iv. Val. Max. lib. ii. c,7.
creed
o o i creed by the Censors for the repair of public build. _' ings, and the execution of public works, could not
be liued by the Qnaflors without an a't of the Se- nate to authorise it. All crimes and disorders that were committed among the free inhabitants of Italy, or municipal allies of the State, all disputes of a pri- vate or public nature that arose among them, came under the jurisdiction and determination of the Se- nate. All foreign emba!lies were received or dif- patched, and all negociations were conducted, by this bcdy. In such matters tle People did no more than affirm or reverse what the Senate, after mature deliberation, had decreed, and for the most part gave their content as a matter of form; info- much, that while persons, who oblerved the high executive powers of the Consul, confidered the State as monarchical; foreigners, on the contrary, who retorted on public bufinels to Rome, were apt to believe it an ariilocracy vested in the Senate.
The People, notwithfianding, had reserved the tovereignty to themselves, and, in their several as- !emblies, exercised the pow'ers of legislation, and conferred all the offces of State (r). They like- v-ise, in all criminal matters, held the fupremeju- ifdiction. In their capacity of sovereign, they were the sole arbiters of life and death; and, even ,n their capacity of lubjeds, did not submit to re- l:.aints which, in every other State, are found ne- ceilarv to government.
A citizen while accused of any crime, continued at liberty until sentence was given against him, and might s ithdraw from his prosecutors at any stage of the trial, even while the last Century was deli- vering its votes. A voluntary banifllment from the Forum, from the meetings of the Senate, and the :' In l:.e C-rz:- = it-.. ennaRd !aw., cnd c' ed the offcer: of State. '- Cu'i: t .r -" .:.:d ,'. ; o rnEi ' :ry command.
assemblies
assemblies of the People, was the highefi punifh-c H A P. ment, which any citizen, unless he remained to ex- ~". pose himself to the effects of a formal sentence, was obliged to undergo; and it was expressly ftipu- lated, that, even at Tibutr or Pranefte, a few miles from Rome, a conviAt who had withdrawn from judgment should be safe (s).
Parts so detached were not likely to act as one body, nor to proceed with any regular concert; and the State seems to have carried, in all its eftablilhments, the feeds of dissention and tumult. It was long supported, nevertheless, by the un- common zeal of its members in favour of a com- monwealth in which they enjoyed so much free- dom, and in which they were vested with so much personal consequence.
The several members of the conflitution, while in appearance supreme, were in many respects de- pendent on each other.
The Consuls, while in office, had the meetings 'and determinations of the Senate and People, in a
reat measure, in their power; but they received this power from the People, and were account- able for the dilcharge of it at the expiration of their office.
The Senate could resolve, but they could not execute, until they had obtained from the People a confirmation of their ads, and were obliged to solicit the Tribunes for leave to proceed in any matter which these officers were inclined to oppose.
The Senate was confiituted, or formed, at regu- lar periods, at the discretion of the Consuls or Cenr fors, officers named by the People. (!) The lawv of Publilius, which gave the- poer of Iciiiation to the Plebeian AtTemblies, and that of Valerlu-, .:hich fcc::rcd every citizcn in the right of appeal to the People at large, after being pea:rdly r-.enacea, .'are now in full force (Liv. lib. x. . .).
The
B 0 0 The city, nevertheless, was over-awed by the
Senate and officers of State. On great and alarm. ing occasions, the People themselves were no longer sovereigns than they were allowed by the Senate and Consuls to hold this character. The Senate and Consuls having it in their power to name a Dictator, could at once transfer the sovereignty of the State to a single person, and subjet every citizen to his authority. Every individual held his place on the rolls at the will of the Censors, and his pro- perty at the disposal of courts that were composed of Senators; the servants of the Public in general, who aimed at lucrative commissions, depended on the Senate, as administrators of the treasury, and trustees in the collection or disbursements of the public money (t); and every Roman youth, when embodied in the legions, entrufled his honours and his life in the hands of the Consul, or Commander in Chief (u).
The mats, however, was far from being so well compacted, or the unity of power so well eftab- liihed, as I'peculative reasoners Sometimes think ne- ceffary for the order of government. The Senate and the popular Aflemblies, in their legislative ca- pacities, counteracted one another. The numbers required to constitute a legal Assembly of the People, the qualification of a citizen which intitled him to be confidered as a member of the common- ('r The influence which the Senate pofrffed as administrators of the publi. treasury, according to Poiybius, was very great. They had a num- .-r of ccmmiiions to give, in the collection of various duties levied on the .r-igators of river:, the entry to fca-ports, the produce of mines, and de. rref:r or public lodr, chiefly let out for pallurage. They had likewile con- .der2l-: difunfenments on the repair of highwayv and public buildings, and :n :h= erecut.ic of a varitt of other works. In such tranfaclions great :.ntbars of people were concerned, a' contractors, as partners with thole who contrated with &he Senate, or as creditors who advanced money to nsrl'i the cont.racor; to er-form their articles. In all there several capa- citits the parties depended on the : -il of the Senate, and continually at- t -n3ed at the door of thi ar afmbly, soliciting commifionc, pleading for n hS: :erant of fomre con ition, for delay in the execution or Cbme Jjricle .: rlief in the care o. unforcfeen hard'fip or ioft.
i .-) p A..l. ib. Ci . 1c nt; 12.i 3 , 14.
.vealth;
wealth, were fiillundetermined. Aliens fettling at c H A p. 'Rome were admitted on the rolls of'the People, "l. and citizens removing to the colonies were omitted. " Laws, therefore, might be obtained in a clandefiine I manner,,when the People, not sufficiently aware iof the consequence of fuch.laws, did not attend; ior the queftionr might be determined by the voice iof a tingle alien, as often as the division was nearly equal, and a designing magifirate chore to place Iany number of aliens on the rolls for this pur- pose (x). The State took its laws, not only from
the (.) In the settlement of Romulus, recruits of every quality, whether outlawv, fugitives, or captives, were received without diRfinOion.-In the firi ates of the republi, aliens fettling at Rome we e admitted as citizens, -nd ieen placed on the rolls of the Senate.-The Taiquinr, and the sirs of ilte Claudian f.amly, were emigrants from the neighbouring cantons.- After the eftablifhmcnt of the Census or periodical muster, the King, the Consuls, and, laRd f all, the Cenlors, made up the rolls of the Senate and People at pleasure. They admitted upon it very readily every inhabitant of the city who claimed to be inrolled ; but when a right of voting in any of , the popular afirmblies at Rome came to be confidered as a privilere of moment, the inhabitants of Latium crowded to Rome in order to obtain it. i They were sometimes put upon the rolls by one Consul, and forbid the city by hi, colleague; and in every such cafe the negative, by a maxim of the R Roman policy, prevailed.-Such as nadually fettled at Rome, sooner or :' later found means to be inserted in the Tribes; and the towns of Latium complained, that they were deserted by numbers of their people, who re- : sotcd to Rome for this purpose, and that they were likely to be d-popu- laced. They obtained a law, by which Latin emigrants were excluded from the rolls of the Roman People, except they had left ofs'.pring to replace them in the country towns they had left. And this seems to have been the firfe law enactie at Rome to regulate or reStrain the naturalization of aliens. Some authors have affirmed, that, even while aliens were so easily admitted on the rolls of the People, Roman citizens, accepting of settlements in the colonies, forfeited their political rights. In this, however, it is probable, that the effets of mere absence have been miltaken for an express and for- : mal exclusion. Whoever ccafed to give in his name at the Census, or
h.oever left his ward or tribe in the city to reftde at a dillance, was not in- rolled in the ward, nor placed in any class. It did not follow, however, that he had forfeited his right, or might not claim it as often as he attended the Census. In this cafe he was upon a foot of equality with every other citizen, and in the fame manner received or rejected at the will of the Cen- for, or other officer who took the muster. In this account of the Roman colonies, writers have followed the account of Sigonius, whose opinion, in every circumfrance relating to the Roman hiolry, is of great authority. . In this particular, however, it happens, that i the principal passage he has quoted in support of his opinion, is by some accident strangely perverted. Livy relater, lib. xxiv. c. 4z. that the people of Ferentinum, in the year of Rome five hundred and fifty-feven, ila,-ted a new pretension, by which all Latins who gave their names to be inlfribed . in any Roman colony should be conllidred asRomoan citizens; but that the
Senate
Bo o >K the Assemblies, which were held, howver irT-.
gulariv, within the capital, but from mirit;ry detachments and armies, when abroad in the field (y). Yet, under all there defets, as we have repeated occasions to observe, they enjoyed the mrof envied difiinftion of nations, continual prof. perity, and an almost uninterrupted fucceflion of Ssnr:e rejcred this claim when offered by persons who were annexed to teS cu!'nic of Putcoli, Salernum, and Buxentum. Nv:remjors er anrsa Freerr:r.sasi=sr t:cr'-, ut Latini. qu in ee:lcniam Rcmar.arm namina dedrisen-, c;..r R.:rai e:re:. P:.ire:l:-, Saclerur.que et Buxentum adfcripti car.i, y.: n:ir.-- d:d:r'-= -ir. rb id pftr: Cidsii-s Rrnaris ferrent ; Senatus jidtca:sil r= {:i:s cs.:- e R:-r.r-. There was a dillindlion between Roman coloncs iid tuln.nics of Romrn citizens. The firit might be Latins, or other allii pianted unter the authority of the Roman State. The second were pro. babiv iitirens. And the whole amount of this passage was to prove, that Lain:' w\rce not to be confidercd as Roman citi:ens, merely because they rsfided in frme colony of Roman cilizen'. But the quotation of Signniu; is as follow.. and rives a wonderful t ,ervcrlion to the passage in quellion: D: a.-;iu; 'C-L I-ei al, iib. ii. c. 3. " Quare afcripti coloni nomine qui. ' dm crant cis-c Rn -ani, re vcro co!oni. Tellem poftulatis ? non longe * :biero. Prcio cfl l-'vius qui fcribit, lib. xixiv. Puteolos, Salernumtt *' Bcxtr.Cm cr:3' i R:r-ar. Adfcripsi coloni, qui nomina dedelant cum bo " id ec pro ciribum ecrrcnt; Srna!ls ijdicaffc non tfTe cos cires Romano-; " ct al.: l:c. nrrzt Fcr-ntinatc nInvum jus tentiffe, ut L.atini, qui in colo- "L nIzm Romanr- nos-.:n: ddch'icnt ivrcRomani efnot-" The perversion of tL-; oun:sir.r s: remarkable. Different clufee of th fame senten c arc quo:-d 'a- 1'.-l-..r p:sliage in different parts of the an. thor. The o o fr the c:2ulf i- so piaced, that the u!s of the sirs in ey- rlainig the iecond ir i!'i:, ar.i th- xorls e::ur. R:r.an. are infelted. The pra'a-e in Liv-. aiTclt;ng that rv.n .Lai., pleaded to be admitted a cili. z-cn, bhca *f- ther reni.icd in fomr c, lon; of citizen-, proves the revcrfe 9: .vsi- Sinn:nus rar.ait-inr. t. that citizen' removing to colenies w.ere di1. franch:l-d. The f ct .t tt, ina tcrne t ni .ivy and other hi'torianF, the diflinfli- con lbctvcn Ronm-n citi na, swhether of th city or of the colonies, anil th other inhabitrnt of Italy, wva become a matter of antiquity and of mcre urlrfi: ; s end tshereore is not b) tl-.m so fully and diftinthl ll ated, as no t.) a;m! o as dlsputc. The col.enil ccaling to attend at clecions, or in thi A-ff.!l:r o of the i'eopli, and! not giving in their names at the multcr, :r,-'' :d th':rnml-l-vs to tthe errses o:' politive cxclufion, although it i r'.o:.!!.. n fu:h cxci;'.h:)n had taken place; for even aliens were not ex cluj!ed by an3) .olsti'Ce 1-w, and might he admitted on the rolls at the dil ;-rtiion of the o!icc:r v.!o prccidcl over the mulier. Antiquarian', i rart-h of ancient conlitution, fiomntimes fuppnfe that rules mutl har ex;rie.i, in ordr to have tbh pleasure of conlccuiing what they were. (_ ) oThe Cn C. M.arciu-, U. C. 39gS, being encamped at Suarium i Erruria, arTembled his army in their Tribes, and psaiTed a law to railc th :.r--r:Tith prnny on the p-ice of every Slave that (hould- be manumitte. The Senite, being pI-aled with the tax, confirmed the act; but the Tr bunes, alarmed : t the pr-cedcnt, obtained a resolution, by which it w: -iclired for the fultr e te be'capitr! for any person to propose any la'/ I '.ch -iJetchcd or pjrt,.! Afnemblics of the P'copl. (Liv. lib. vii. c. 16.).
ftatefmes
statesmen and warriors unequalled in the hirtory ofc H A p. mankind. .H
In about one hundred years after they began tout. c. 45. reitore their city from the ruins in which it was laid by the Gauls, they extended their sovereignty from the farthetl limits of Tuscany on the one fide, to the sea of Tarentum and the firaits of Meflina on the other; and as the contelt of parties at home led to a succession of political eftablilhments, their fre- quent wars fuggefied the policy which they adopt- ed refpeating foreign nations, and the arrangement of their national force.
They had for some time discontinued the prac- tice of admitting captives into the number of their People; but continued that of extending and fe- curing their acquisitions, by colonies of their own citizens, or of such allies as they could most fe- curely trust. They exacted from the cantons of Italy which they vanquished, contributions of sub- fifence and cloathing for the benefit of their ar- mies; and they generally imposed some condition of this fort as a preliminary to every negociation or treaty of peace (z).
Their forces confined of native Romans, and ofu. c. 45. their allies in Italy, nearly in equal parts. The le- gion, lays Livy, had been formerly arrayed in a continued line, or compacted column (a) but, in the course of the wars which led to the conquest of Italy, came to be formed in divisions, and had dif- ferent orders of light and heavy-armed infantry, as well as cavalry. The light-armed infantry were called the Velites, and were supposed to ply in the front, on the flank, or in the rear of the army; and their service was, to keep the heavy- armed foot undisturbed by mifliles till they came into close action with the enemy. (z) I.iv. lib. viii. c. i. & 2. Lib, ix. c. 43. Lib. x. c. 5. & 37. (a) Liv. lib. viii. c. 8.
The
B O O Ki The heavy-armed foot confiled of three orders,
called the Hailati, Principes, and Triarii; of whom '"a-- each had its separate divisions or manipules; and
those of the different orders were placed in three different rows, and at diflances from each other, equal to the front of the division. By this difpofi. tion the manipules of the first and second row could either at separately, or, by mutually filling up their intervals, could complete the line, leaving the Tri- arii, in time of adion, as a body of reserve, to sup- port the line, or fill up the place of any manipule that might be forced by the enemy. And, in or- der to facilitate occasionally this change of difpofi. tion, the divisions of one row faced the intervals of the other (b). They were armed with the pilum,
which (S) This account of the Roman legion is not without its difficulties. It appears irrational to break and disperse the Itrength of a body in this man- ner; and Cwfar makes no mention of any such diltincion of orders, of the mznipule% of the rows in which they were formed, or of the intervals at v:hich they fought. Hi, legion consisted of ten cohorts, formed from right to left on a continued front. Polybius, however, one of the best military hifiorians, and himself an eye-witness of the dilpofition of the Roman le- gon in acion, as well as on the parade, is very explicit in this account of it; refers to it in the description of the Roman march (Polyb. liv. vi. c. 38), in the refcriFtion of every battle (Polyb. lib. iii. c. 1, 2, 3, 4), and(Po- !yb. lib. xv. c. xo.) in ttating the comparative advantages of the Roman le- gion and Macedonian phalanx (Polyb. lib. xvii. c. a8.). The phalanx be- in: a column of indefinite depth, close ranks, and a continued front, with lances or spears, it was impregnable to the fhert sword and loose order of ite Romans, so long as it preferred its front entire, and the spear-man made no opening for the Roman soldier to enter within the point of his weapon. It is observed that the Romans made their attack in separate divifioon and at inactrrra! in order to-bring on some irregularity in the frontof the pbtaanx, and in order to make some openings by which the Roman foldicr could enter with his sword, and, once within the point of his enemy's sp:ar, could perform great slaughter with little resistance (Plutarch in vit. P. Emiiii. Li. i ib. xliv. c. 4r. Neque ulla evidentior caufa viaoria fu;t qnam quod mula pzffim pralia erant qnu fuclauantes; turbarant pri- mo, deinde disjcerunt phalanges). From this account then it is probable, that the Romans did not divide their legion into orders and manipules, nor sigh t t interval, until after they adopted the short stabbing sword, which ia said to have been originally from Spain; and that they continued to make this disposition so long only as they had to do with enemies who used the fpiar and continued front; that after the social war in Italy and their own civil wars began, they discontinued the separate manipules, and fought to tlrergthen themselves againll an army like their own, by pre- senting a continu-.i front. Livy accordingly marks the time at which the formation o. man:pl-.1s, at intervals, was adopted. Polybius marks the
continuance
which was a heavy javelin or spear to be cast at the c H A p. enemy, and with a short and massy sword fitted to . firike or to thrust. They bore an oblong shield, four feet high by two and a half feet broad, with a hel- met, breastplate, and greaves.
In the ftruaure of there weapons and this defen- five armour, the Romans consulted at once both the principal causes of courage in a soldier, his con- fcioufnefs of the means to annoy his enemy, and of a. power to defend himself. And with these ad- vantages they continued for ages to prevail in motl of their conflicts, and were the model which other nations' endeavoured to imitate (c) in the form of their armies, and in the choice of their weapons.
It is understood in the antiquities of this People, that when they were assembled for any purpose, whether of state or of war, they were termed the Army. In their musters a Plebeian was a foot fol- dier, the Knight a horseman, and the Legion a mere detachment of the whole, draughted for the year, or embodied for a particular service. The men, as well as the officers, in the first period of the History of the Republic, were annually re- lieved or exchanged; and even after it ceased to be the pratice thus annually to relieve the private men, and after the fame legions were employed during a succession of some years, yet the People, to the. latest period of the commonwealth, conti- nued to form the armies of their country; and the officer of Rate wasftill understood to command in virtue of his civil magiitracy, or in virtue of a mi- continuance of it, and Crefar evidently marks the discontinuance of it. It is extremely probable, that the last change was one of those made by Ma- rius, and was introduced into the Roman armies in the social war. The three orders of Hatati, Principes, and Triarii, were extremely pro- per to mark the distinction of cla(fes fubfilting among Roman citizens, who were, nevertheless, all of them equally bound, on occasion, to serve in the condition of private soldiers: And this may be one rcafon to incline us to aferibe the discontinuance of this distribution to Marius, who was a great leveller of ranks.
(c) Polyb. lib. vi. c. 17, 18, 19x o0, , zi2, 23, 24.
litary
B o O K litary qualification which never failed to accompany _,. it. No citizen could aspire to any of the higher
offices in the commonwealth, until he had been in- rolled in the Legions, either ten years if on horse- back, or sixteen years if on foot; and, notwith. standing the special commifiions that were occafi- onally given for separate objects of Rate or of war, civil and military rank were never disjoined. Equal care was taken to furnish the rising itatefman and warrior with the technical habits of either profef- sion; or rather to inftrunt him, by his occasional application to both, not to mistake the forms of of- fice in either for the business of frate or of war, nor to reft his pretensions to command on any accom- plifhment short of that superior knowledge of man- kind, and those excellent personal qualities of pe- netration, sagacity, and courage, which give the person poffefled of them an ascendant, as a friend or as an enemy, in any scene or department of hu- man affairs. It may be difficult to determine, whe- ther we are to confider the Roman eitablifhment as civil or military; it certainly united, in a very high degree, the advantages of both, and conti- nued longer to blend the profelfions of state and of war together, than we are apt to think confitent with that propriety of character which we require in each: but to this very circumfiance, probably, among others, we may safely ascribe, in this dif- tinguifhed republic, the great ability of her coun- cils, and the irresistible force with which they were executed (d).
During a period of about one hundred and twenty years after the rebuilding of Rome, the Ro- mans were engaged in a continual series of wars; first with the Latins and with their own colonies, who wished to disengage themselves from so une. qual an alliance; afterwards with the Etruscans or
(d) Polyb. lib. vi c. 17.
tll(
the one hand, and with the Samnites, Campanians,c H A ip. and Tarentines on the other. They quarrelled with the Samnites first in behalf of the Campanians, who, in order to obtain their protection, made a surrender of themSelves and of all their poffefiori's This aft of surrender they afterwards had occasion to enforce againfi the Campanians themnfelves, who endeavoured, whet too late, to recover their liber- ties.
The Samnites were a fierce nation, inhabiting that trat ofithe Appenines which extends from the confines of Latium to those of Apulia; and who, to the advantages of their' mountainous fitua- tion, joined some iingular and even romantic infli- tutions (e), which enabled them, during above forty years, from the time at which their wars with the Romans began, to maintain the contetl (f), and to keep the balance of power in fufpence.
During the dependence of this quarrel, the Ro- inan armies frequently penetrated into Lucania and Apulia, and before they had reduced the Samnites, were known as protectors and allies, or had forced their passage as conquerors to the southern extremi- ties of Italy. And the State itself, under a variety of titles, was in reality the head, 'or held a species of sovereignty over all the nations who occupied that part of the peninsula.
The city of Tarentum, the molt powerful of the Greek settlements in this quarter, having ne- gleAed her military establishments in proportion as she advanced in the arts of peace; was alarmed at the near approach of tle Romans, and applied for protetion to Pyrrhus the king of Epirus, atu c..4i3 (e) Of this fort it is mentioned, that ten of the fairet of ore sex were annually fcleacd as prizes to be won by the braved and most deserving of the other. Strabo, lib. v. fin. The Samnites furnished Roman generals With the fabjea of tweity-four triuniphs, but.mixed with checks and dif graces more remarkable than any they had received in the course of their wara with any other nation. Florus, lib. i. c. 16.
(f) Liv, lib. x. c. 3i. VOL. I. G that
B OO Kthat time greatly ditinguifhed among the military
adventurers of Macedonia and Greece. They "e'-"wifhed to employ the military skill of this prince,
without being exposed to fall a prey to his ambi- tion; and invited him to come, without any army of his own, to take the command of their people, whose numbers they magnified, in order to induce him to accept of their offer. But, like most foreign military protectors, he appears to have had, toge. ther with many schemes of ambition against those on whom he made war, some designs likewise on the State he was brought to defend. With this double intention he did not rely on the forces of Tarentum, but passed into Italy at the head of a numerous army, formed on the model of the Ma. cedonians, and accustomed to service in the wars of that country and of Greece.
This is the first enemy whose forces can be con- fidered as a known measure, with which to com- pare, or by which we can estimate, the power and military attainments of the Romans. They had been vitorious in Italy, 'but the charater and prowess of the enemies they had vanquished are unknown. This prince knew the arts of war as they were pratifed in Macedonia and in Greece, and was reputed one of the first captains of that or any other age (g). He accordingly prevailed over the Romans in some of their first encounters; but found that partial victories did not subdue this peo- ple, nor decide the contest. Having vast schemes of ambition in Sicily and Africa, as well as in Italy, he suddenly suspended his operations against the Romans, to comply with an invitation he received from Syracuse, to possess himself of that kingdom (g) Pyrrhnu, it is said, was trruck with the military afpeCf of the Ro ans, and admired in particular the form of their encampments. Th Greeks always endeavoured to avail themselves of natural strengths, an accommodated the disposition of their camp to the ground; but the Ro mans, truioing only to their artificial works, pitched on the plain, and al ways encamped in the fame form. Plutarch in vit. Pyrrhi.
iI
in behalf of his son, who had some pretensions to itc H A p. in the right of Agathocles; .from whom he was de- scended.
In order to pursue this object, he endeavoured to obtain a peace or cessation of arms in Italy; but was told, that, in order to treat with the Romans, lie must evacuate their country and return to his own (h). With this answer he passed into Sicily; and after some operations which were successful, though not sufficiently supported by:his partizans in that country to obtain the end of his expedition, he returned again into Italy for the defence of Ta- rentum; but found that during his absence the Ro- mans had made a considerable progress, and were in condition to repay the defeats they had suffered in the beginning of the war. Having brought this matter to the proof in several encounters, he com- mitted the defence of Tarentum to one of his offi- cers; and after this fruitless attempt to make con- quefis beyond the Ionian Sea, in which he had em- ployed fix years, he returned to his own country.
The Romans continuing the.war against Taren-u.c. 4a8. turn, in about two years after the departure of Pynhus from Italy, made themselves masters of the place. Here, it is mentioned, they found, for the firfi time, the plunder of an opulent city, con- taining the models of elegant workmanship in the fine arts, and the apparatus of an exquisite luxury.
In former times," fays Florus, " the vitorious generals of Rome exhibited in their triumphs "herds of cattle driven from the Sabines and the
Volsci, the empty cars of the Gauls, and broken " arms of the Samnites: but in that which was
"hewn for the conquest of Tarentum, the pro- " ceflion was led by Theflalian and Macedonian captives, followed with carriages loaded with " precious furniture, with pitures, itatutes, plate,
(b) L.iv. Epitome, lib. xiii. Plutarch in.vit. Pyrrb.
G2 G and
\
B o K " and other ornaments of silver and gold (i)."
1- Spoils which, we may guess, in the firfi exhibition
of them, were valued at Rome more as the public trophies of victory, than felt as the baits of pri- vate avarice, or the objects of a mean admiration. The Roman citizen as yet lived content in his cot- tage, filrniflied in the rudest manner; and he sub- filled on the fimpieit fare, the produce of his own labour. Curius Dentatus, the Consul who obtain- ed this triumph, having the offer of fifty jugera as a reward from the public for his services, would accept of no more than seven. This, he laid, is the ordinary portion of a citizen, and that person must be an unworthy member of the common- wealth who can with for more (k). 5. c. 45. From the reduction of Tarentum the Romans
may be confidered as the sovereigns of Italy, al- though their dominion was extremely ill defined, either in respect to its nature or to its extent. They but in a few instances laid claim to absolute fove- reignty, and least of all over those who were mofl fubmiflive to their power. It was their maxim to spare the obsequious, but to crush the proud (/); an artful profeflion, by which, under the pretences of generosity and magnanimity, they flated them- selves as the sovereign nation. Under this pre- sumptuous maxim their friendship was to be ob- tained by fubminfion alone; and was, no less than (i) Flous, lib. i. c. 18. (k) A Roman citizen in thit period might, by the Law of Licinius, have Fn elrate of Tve hundred jrgera, or about three hund.ed acres; but the ordinary patrimony of a noble family was probably far below this mea- frre; and the lot of a citizen in the new colonies fcidom exceeded fcrcn j-,erv. The people were lodged in cottages and lept on Craw (Ilin. lib. xviii. c. 3. Cicer. pro Roflio, Val. Max. lib. iv. c. 3.). The Ro- manz till a htt!- tbefore the ficge ofTarentum, had no coin but copper, and climzrtcd confidcrable fums more commonly by the head of cattle tha by moncy. They coined filvcr for the sirs time U. C. 3z5. Gold wa known as- p, cious material, and was rometimes joined with oxen in thi resward o: diftinguilied services. Liv. lib. iv. c. 3o. Ibid. Epitomrn I h. -.a: (i) Parcere fubjcAcs S& debellare fuperbos.
their
their enmity, fatal to those who embraced it. Thec H A P. title of ally was, for the most part, no more than a specious name, under which they disguised their dominion, and under which they availed them- selves of the tfrength and resources of other nati- ons, with the least poflible alarm to their jealousy or pride.
With the Latins they had early formed an alli- ance offensive and defensive, in which the parties mutually fiipulated the number of troops to be fur- nilhed by each; the respective shares which each was to have in the spoils of their common enemies, and the manner of adjufling any disputes that might arire between them. This was the league which the Latins were fbppofed to have so fre- quently broken, and of which the Romans so often exacted the observance by force (in).
In the first iruggles 'which they made to restore their settlement deltroyed by the Gauls, and in the subsequent wars they had to maintain, during a hundred years, in support of their new establish- ment, different cantons of there original confede- rates, as well as many of their own colonies, had taken very different parts, and in the treaties which ensued, obtained, or were sentenced to different conditions; some were admitted to the freedom of Rome, and partook in the prerogative of Roman citizens. A few were, by their own choice, in pre- ference to the charafter of Roman citizens, per- mitted to retain the independency of their towns, and were treated as allies. Others, under pretence of being admitted to the freedom of Rome though without the right of suffrage, were deprived of their corporation eftablilhments, and with the ti- tle of Citizens, treated as fubjeds. A few were governed in form by a military power, and
(m,) Dionyf. Hal. lib. vi. p. 415. Liv. lib. vi. c. xo. lib. ix. c. 43.
by
s o o K by a PrafeCt or Magistrate annually sent from
Rome(n).
From this unequal treatment arose the variety of conditions by which the natives of Italy were dif- tinguifhed, as Colonies, Municipal Towns, Allies, Prafeetures, or Provincial Governments, until about 18 years after this date, when, as will be mentioned in the sequel, the whole was put upon the fame foot- ing by the general admission of all the Italians upon the rolls of the Roman People. (=) The city of Capna, together with its diftria of Campania, was the first example of a provincial govemment eftablilhed by the Romans in any of their conquetrs. The Campanians, in order to be proteted againlt the Samnites, had delivered themselves up to the Romans. But they soon after became fenfble or their folly, in trutting their defence to any force but their own, or in resigning their power as a State, with a view to preserve any thing else. When they perceived this error, they endeavoured, in conjunc- tion with some of their neighbours, to form a party againlt their new matters; and being defeated in their attempts to recover their independence, were treated with the severity that is commonly employed against rebel fabject. Their fente and popular assembly, under pretence of fupprefing seminaries of action, were abolished, and a Przfect or Governor annually appointed (Liv. lib. ix. c. za.). A similar course, ynder the fame pretence, was soon after taken with Antiam (Liv. lib. ix. c. at.). This had been the principal ea-port of the Volsci, and along the head of many formidable c.ambinations againll the Romans.
CHAP.
C H A P. IV. Limits of Italy.-Contiguous Nations.-Ligurians.-
Gauls.-Greek and Phaenician Colonies of Gaul and Spain .--Nations of Illyricum.--Of Greece.--- Achsean League.--Thebans.-Athenianls.-Afatic Nations.-Pergamuls.--Syria.-Egypt.-Carthage. -'he Matmertines of Mefina.-Occafion of the sir/s War with Carthage.-Loffes of the Parties.- Peace.-State of the Romanas.-Political or Civil Inftitutions.--Colonies.--MuJferss.-Operation on the Coin.-Increafe of the Slaves.-Gladiators.- Different Re flts of the PWar at Rome and Carthage. -Mutiny and Invasion of the Mercenaries at Car- thage.-End of this Jar.-Ceflon of Sardinia.- W(ar with the Illyrians.-Fifit Correspondence of Rome with Greece.
S the Romans, at the time to which our last c H A P. [A observations refer, were become the fove- _ . ,~ reigns of Italy, or, by their ascendant info pow-u.c. 4s8. erful a country, were enabled to act a distinguished part among the nations around it; it is proper in this place to carry our observations beyond the boundaries of that Peninsula, and enumerate the powers that were then eftab'ifhed on different fides of it, or beyond the narrow seas by which it was- surrounded.
Italy was not then supposed to comprehend the whole of that trat which has in later times been known under this name. Being bounded, as at present, on the South and Ealt by the seas of Sicily and the bay of Tarentum, it extended no further to the North-west than to the Arnus on the one hand, and to the Rubicon on the other. Beyond
lhclfe
o o K these limits the western coafis were inhabited by a , number of tribes, which, under the name of Ligu-
rians, occupied the descents of the Appenines and the South of the Alps quite to the sea-shore. On the other fide of the Appenines, from Senegallia to the Alps, the rich and extensive plains on both fides of the Po were in the poffe4iion of Gaulish nations, wvho were said, some centuries before, to have pas- fed the mountains, and who were then actually spread over a fertile trat of more than twelve hundred miles in circumference. They consisted of nine different hordes, that were supposed to have pased the Alps at different times. Of there the Laulebecii, Infubres, Cenomani, and Veneti occu- pied the northern banks of the Po, including what are now the states of Milan, Venice, and other parts of Lombardy on that fide of the river. The Anianes, Boii, -Egones, and Senones, were fettled to the southward, from the Po to the descents of the Appenines, and on the coafis of the Hadriatic to Senegallia, over what are now the states of Par- ma, Modena, Bologna, and Urbino. In this favour- able fituaticn they appear to have abated much of their native ferocity, though without acquiring, in any considerable degree, the arts that improve the conveniencies of life. They fed chiefly on the milk or the flesh of their cattle, and were occupied en- tirely in the care of their arms and of their herds. By these, and the ornaments of gold, of which they were extremely fond, they efimated their riches. They wele divided into Tribes or Cantons, and lived in cottages huddled together, without any form'of towns or of villages. The leader of every horde was distinguished by his retinue, and valued himself chiefly on the number of his followers. They had made frequent encroachments on the fiates of Etruria and Umbria, but were met at last, and flopped in their progress, by the Romans. Such of them as were fettled within the Rubicon,
and
and fromi thence to- Senegallia, had, about threec H A P. years before the arrival of Pyrrhus in Italy, been obliged to acknowledge the authority of the Roman State (a).
The coafis of the Mediterranean, to the wePt- ward of Italy, had been known to the nations of Greece and of Asia, and had received many colo- nies from. thence, which formed trading settlements, and remained altogether distinct from the natives. Such were the Greek colonies at Marseilles, Empo- ria, Saguntum, and the Tyrian colony at Gades on the coafl of the ocean. On the other fide of Italy, and round the Hadriatic, were fettled a number of small nations, the Iftrians, Dalmatians, and Illyri- ans; of which, at the time when the Romans be- came acquainied with the navigation of this gulf, the Illyrians, being the chief or principal power, extended eaitward to the confines of Macedonia.
Alexander the Great had finithed the career ofu. c. 411. his victories about sixty years before this date. His hereditary dominions, as well as his personal con- quests, were dismembered, and become the patri- mony of officers, who had learned under him to affect the majesty and the power of kings. Mace- donia was governed by Antigonus Dozon, who, together with the principality of Pella, held under his dependence Epirus, Thessaly, and Greece, to the isthmus of Corinth. He had contended with with Pyrrhus, the late invader of Italy, for part of this territory ; and, by the death of this adventurer, was now in possession of the whole.
On one part of the coast of the lonian Sea, and on the Gulf of Corinth, were fettled the Etolians, who, during the prosperity of Greece, had been an obscure and barbarous horde; but had now, by lth confederacy of a number of cantons, laid many diffrits around them under contribution, and acfed
(P) Polyb. lib. ii. c, 17. 19. z9.
a diflin-
n o o s a distinguished part in the wars and tranfaaions that
L followed. '-/- On the other fide of the Gulf of Corinth a fimi-
lar confederacy was formed by the Achean league. The name of Achaa, in the fabulous ages, was the moli general denomination of Greeks. When other names, of Dorians and Ionians, of Athenians and Spartans, became more diftinguilhed, the name of Achaans was appropriated to the tribes who occu- pied the sea-coast, or the Gulf of Corinth, from Elis to Sicyon. On this tract twelve little cantons, Dymae, Phara, Tritaea, Rhipes, Thafium, Patra, Pellene, )Egium, Bura, Carynia, Olenos, and Hellice(b), having changed their government from principalities to republics, formed themselves into a league for their common defence. Hellice had been, from time immemorial, the feat of their as- fembly; but this place having been overwhelmed by an inundation of the sea, their meetings were transferred to IEgium.
In the more famous times of Sparta, Athens, and Thebes, these little cantons being situated on a poor and rocky Ihore, without shipping and without har- bours (c), were of no consideration in the hiltory of Greece; they took no part in the defence of that country from the invasions of Darius, or of Xerxes, or in the divisions that followed under the hofiile banners of Sparta and of Athens. They began, however, to appear in support of the liber- ties of Greece against Philip the father of Alexan- der, and partook with the other Greeks in the de- feat which they received from that prince at Cha- ronea, and in all its consequences. Their league was accordingly difiolved by the conqueror, and some of their cantons Separately annexed to the Macedonian monarchy. But about the time that Pyrrhus invaded Italy, Dyma, Patr:, Phara, and
;a, P nfa-Liu, !b- . vii. c. 6. 'r) Phutarch, in Vit. Arat. p. 321.
Tritxa
Tritxa found an opportunity to renew their ancientc H A p. confederacy. They were joined in about five Iv. years afterwards by :the canton of 2Egium, and fuc- ~v ceflively by those of Bura and Carynia. These, during a period of about twenty years, continued to be the only parties in this famous league. They had a general congress, at which they originally eleaed two annual officers of fate, and a com- mon secretary. They afterwards committed the executive power to one officer; and, under the famous Aratus of Sicyon, united that republic, together with Corinth and Megara, to their league (d).
About the time when the Romans became maf- ters of Tarentum, this combination was become the most considerable power of the Peloponnefus, and affected to unite the whole of it under their banners; but Sparta, though greatly fallen from the splendor of her ancient discipline and power, was fill too proud, or too much under the direti- on of her ambitious leaders, to susser herself to be absorbed in this upstart confederacy; ihe conti- nued for rome time its rival, and was at last the cause, or furnished the occasion, of its fall.
The Thebans and Athenians, though still pre- tending to the dignity of independent nations, were greatly reduced, and ready to become the prey of any party that was sufficiently powerful to reach them, by breaking through the other barriers that were itill opposed to the conquest of Greece.
In Asia, a considerable principality was formed round the city of Pergamus, and bore its name. Syria was become a mighty kingdom, extending from the coafis of lonia to Armenia and Peria. This kingdom had been formed by Seleucus Nicanor, a principal officer in the army of Alex-
(d) Polyb. lib. ii. c. 3. and PaufauiaE, lib. vii.
ander,
B o K ander, and it was now in the possession of his son,
J Antiochus Sorer.
Egypt, in the fame manner, had passed from the first Ptolemy to his son Philadelphus, who, upon the expulsion of Pyrrhus from Italy, had entered into a correspondence with the Romans. This kingdom included the island of Cyprus, and, having some provinces on the continent of Asia, extended from Celo-Syria, of which the dominion was still in contest with Antiochus, to the defarts of Lybiat on the weft and on the south. Beyond these defarts, and almost opposite to the island of Sicily, lay the famous republic of Carthage, which was now poffefied of a considerable territory, fur- rounded by the petty African monarchies, out of v.hich the great kingdom of Numidia was after- vwards formed.
The city of Carthage is said to have been found- ed about a hundred years earlier than Rome, and was now unqueflionably farther advanced in the commercial and lucrative arts, and superior in every resource to Rome, besides that which is derived from the national character, and which is the confe- quence of public virtue.
In respect to mere form, the constitution of both nations was nearly alike. They had a senate and popular assemblies, and annually elected two offi- cers of state for the supreme direction of their civil and military affairs (e); and even at Carthage the departments of state were so fortunately balan- ced, as to have flood for ages the shock of corrupt factions, without having suffered any fatal revolu- tion, or without falling into either extreme of anar- chy or tyrannical ufiirpation. The frequent prof- pedt indeed, which the Carthaginians had, of in- curring there evils, joined to the influence of a bar- barous superstition, which represented the gods as
I') AriRob. P:lit. lib. ii. c. tl.
delighted
delighted with human sacrifices, probably rendered c H A P. their government in so high a degree inhuman and 'V cruel. Under the sanguinary policy of this slate, officers were adjudged, for miflakes or want of ca- pacity, as well as for crimes, to expire on the cross, or were condemned to some other horrible punish- ment equally odious and unjuti (f).
The Carthaginians being like Tyre, of which they were supposed to be a colony, fettled on a peninsula, and at firit without sufficient land or ter- ritory, to maintain any considerable numbers of people, they applied themselves to such arts as might procure a subsistence from abroad; and be- came, upon the deftru&ion of Tyre, the principal merchants and carriers to all the nations inhabiting the coafis of the Mediterranean Sea. Their fitua- tion, so convenient for shipping, was extremely fa- vourable to this pursuit; and their success in it soon put them in poffeflion of a territory by which they became a landed as well as a naval power. They visited Spain, under pretence of giving support and afliftance to the city of Gades, which, like them- selves, was a colony from Tyre. They became maflers of Sardinia, and had considerable poffeffi- ons in Sicily, of which they were extremely desirous to seize the whole. From every part of their ac- quifitions they endeavoured to derive the profit of merchants, as well as the revenue of sovereigns.
In this republic, individuals had amassed great fortunes, and eitimated rank by their wealth. A certain estate was requisite to qualify any citizen for the higher offices of slate; and, in the canvas for elections, every preferment, whether civil or mili- tary, was venal (g). Ambition itself, therefore, became a principle of avarice, and every Cartha- ginian, in order to be great, was intent to be rich. Though the interefis of commerce should have in-
(f) Orofius, lib. iv. c. 6. (g) Polyb. lib. vi. c. 54.
culcated
B Oo o culcated the desire of peace, yet the-inflience of a
i__ - few leading men in the fiate, and even the spirit of
rapacity which pervaded the people, the necessity to which they were often reduced' of providing set- tlements abroad for a populace who could not be easily governed at home, led them frequently into foreign wars, and even engaged them in projects of conquest. But notwithstanding this circum- liance, the community stifled or neglected the mi. litare character of their own citizens, and had per- petual recourse to foreigners, whom they trusted with their arms, and made the guardians of their wealth. Their armies, for the most part, were composed of Numidians, Mauritanians, Spaniards, Gauls, and fugitive slaves from every country around them. They were among the few nations of the world who had the ingenuity, or rather the misfortune, to make war without becoming mili- tary, and who could be victorious abroad, while they were exposed to be a prey to the meanest in- rader at home.
Under this wretched policy, however, the first offices or trufi and command being reserved for the natives, though the character of the people in ge- neral was mean and illiberal, yet a few, being de- scended of those who had enjoyed the higher ho- nours of the fiate, inherited the characters of fiatef- men and warriors; and, instead of suffering by the contagion of mercenary chara&ers, they derived tome additional elevation of mind from the con- traft of manners they were taught to despise. And thus, though the State, in general, was degene- rate, a few of its members were qualified for great affairs. War, and the other objects of state, natu- rally devolved on such men, and occasionally ren- dered them necessary to a sedentary or corrupted people, who, in ordinary times, were disposed to flight their abilities, or to difiruft their power. 1 hey became unfortunately a party for war in the
councils
councils of their country, as those who were jealous c H A P. of them became, with fiill less advantage to the Iv public, a party for peace; or, when at war, a party who endeavoured to embarrass the condu&t of it; and, under the effe&s of misfortune, were ever ready to purchase tranquillity by the most shame- ful and dangerous conceflions.
Carthage being mistress of the sea, was already long known on the coasts of Italy: she had treaties subsisting with the Romans above two hundred years, in which they mutually fettled the limits of their navigation, and the regulations of their trade. And the Romans, as parties in these treaties, ap- pear to have had intercourse with foreign nati- ons by sea, earlier than is stated in the other parts of their history.
In the first of those treaties, which is dated in v.c. 244. the consulate of L. Junius Brutus and M. Hora- tius, the firit year of the commonwealth, the Ro- mans engaged not to advance on the coast of Africa,. unless they were forced by an enemy, or by firess of weather, beyond the Fair Promontory, which lay about twenty leagues to the westward of the Bay of Carthage.
It was agreed, that, even in these circumstances, they should remain no longer than five days, and supply themselves only with what might be necef- fary to refit their veflels, or to furnish them with victims for the usual sacrifices performed at sea. But that in Sardinia, and even in Africa, to the weft of this boundary, they should be at liberty to trade and to dispose of their merchandize without paying any duties besides the fees of the crier and clerk of sale; and that the public faith should be pledged for the payment of the price of all goods fold under the infpeEtion of there officers.
That the ports of Sicily should be equally open to both nations.
That
-. o o That the Carthaginians, on their part, should
L not commit any hostilities on the coast of Latium,
nor moieft the inhabitants of Ardaea, Antium, Lau. rentium, Circeii, Terracina, or of any other place in alliance with the Romans; that they should not attempt to ere&t any fortress on that coast; and that, if they Ihould land at any time with an armed force, they should not, upon any account what- ever, remain a night on shore.
By a subsequent treaty, in which the flates of Utica and Tyre are comprehended as allies to both parties, the former articles are renewed with addi- tional limitations to the navigation and trade of the Romans, and with some extension to that of the Carthaginians. The latter, for instance, are per- mitted to trade on the coast of Latium, and even to plunder the natives, provided they put the Ro- mans in poffefiion of any firong-holds they should seize on shore; and provided they should release, without ransom, such of the allies of the Romans as became their prisoners. t. c. 474. Upon the arrival of Pyrrhus in Italy, with an ar-
mament which equally alarmed both nations, the Romans and Carthaginians again renewed their treaties with an additional article, in which they agreed mutually to support each other against the designs of that prince, and not to enter into any separate treaty with him inconsistent with this de- fenfive alliance: and further fiipulated, that, in the wars which were expe&ed with this enemy, the Carthaginians, whether as principals or auxiliaries, should furnith the whole shipping, both transports and armed gallies; but that the expence of every armament fnould be defrayed at the charge of that party in whose behalf it was employed (h).
In oblervance probably of the last of these trea- ties, and by mutual concert, though with confider-
(,') P ,'',lb. !Ib. iii c. 3.
able
rablejealoufy and distrust of each other, the forcesc H A P. of there nations combined in reducing the garrison i. which Pyrrhus had left at Tarentum. Each had their separate designs on the place; and when its fate was determined, from thenceforward confi- dered the.other as their molt dangerous rival for dominion and power. Pyrrhus, even when they were joined in alliance against himself, .is said to have foreseen their quarrels, and to have pointed at the island of Sicily as the first scene of their con- test.
The Carthaginians were already in poffeflion of Lylibaeum, and of other pofls on this island, and had a design on the whole. The Romans were in fight of it; and, by their poffeflion of Rhegium, commanded one fide of the Straits. The other fide was occupied by the Mamertines, a race of Italian extraaion, who; beirig placed at Messina by the kingof Syracufe.to defend that fRation, bar- baroufly niurdered the.citizens, and took poffeflion of their habitations and effecs.
This horrid ation was; afterwards imitated by a Roman legion p6fRed at Rhegium during the late wars in Italy; these likewlfe murdered their hosts, and seized their poffeflions; but were punished by the Romans,. for this a& of cruelty and treachery~ with the moll exemplary rigour... They. were. con- duted. in chains to Rome, fcourged, and behead- ed by fifties at a time. 'he crime' of the Mamer- tines was resented by the Sicilians in general with a like indignation; and the authors-of it were pursued by Hiero ling of Syraoufe in particular, with a ge- nerous and heroic revenge. They were, at length, reduced, to' such! diitrefs,.;that they were resolved to surrend'er themselves to the firt power that could afford them, protection. ,But', ibeing divided in their choice, one party made A .offer:of their fubmifion to the Carthaginians, the other to the Romans. The latter scrupled to protea a- crime of which
VOL. I. H they
B o o K they had so lately punished an example in their
. own people (i). And, while they hesitated on the "-'proposal, the Carthagini'ans, favoured by the de-
lay of their rivals, and by the neighbourhood of their military fiations, got the rart of their com- petitors, and were received into the town of Messina.
This unexpeted advantage gained by a power of which they were jealous, and the danger of sus- fering a rival to command the passage of the Straits, removed the scruples of the Romans; and the ofli- cer who commanded their forces in the contiguous parts of Italy, had orders to assemble all the ship- ping that could be found on the coast from Taren- tum to Naples, to pats with his army into Sicily, and endeavour to dispossess the Carthaginians from the city of Meflina.
As soon as this officer appeared in the road with a force so much superior to that of his rivals, the party in the city, that favoured the admission of the Romans, took arms, and forced the Carthaginians to evacuate the place (k).
Here commenced the sirs Punic war, about ten years after the departure of Pyrrhus from Italy, eight years after the surrender of Tarentum, and in the four hundred and ninetieth year of Rome. In this war, the firfi object of either party was no more than to secure the possession of Messina, and to command the passage of the Straits which fe- parate Italy from Sicily; but their views were gra- dually extended to obje&s of more importance, to the sovereignty of that island, arid the dominion of the seas.
The contest between.them'was likely to. be ex. t-remely unequal. -On the one fide'appeared the re' sources of a great nation, colleced from extensive dominions, a great naval force, fianding armies,
() Polyb, ib. i. c. o, (A) Ibid. lib. i. c. %z.
and
and the experience of diftartt operatiots. On 'thed:f- A P. other, the ferocity or valour of a small State, hi- l". therto exerted only against their rieighbours' of Italy, who, though subdued, were-averfe to subjec- tion, and in no condition to furnish the necessary supplies for a distant war.; without commerce or re-- venue, without any army but what was annually formed by detachments from the people,.and with- out any officers besides the ordinary magiltrates of the city; in short, without any naval force, or ex- perience of naval or distant operations. ."-i :: . :-
Notwithlsanding thefe-unpromifing .appearances on the fide of the Romans, the commanding afpeEt of their first descent upon Sicily procnred::them not only the poffeflion of Meflina, but soon after deter- mined Hiero, the king of Syracuse, hithertoiin al1 liance with the Carthaginians, to efpoUfe':their cause, to supply their army with provifiohs; and afterwards to join them with his own. Being thus reinforced by the natives of Sicily, they were en- abled to recal part of the- force with which they began the war; continued, though at a less ex- pence, to aft on the offensive; and drove.the Car- thaginians from many of their important stations in the island (1).
While the arms of the Romans and of Hiero were victorious on shore, the Carthaginians conti- nued to be masters of the Tea, kept possession of all the harbours in Sicily, overawed the coafis, ob- ftruCted the military convoys from Italy, and alarmed that country itself with frequent defeents; It was evident, that, under these disadvantages, the Romans could neither make nor preserve any ma- ritime acquisitions; and it was necessary, either.to drop the contest in yielding the sea, or to endea- vour, on that element likewise, to cope with their rival. -Though not altogether, as historians repre-
(/)-Polyb. lib. i.
H 2 lent
B 0 K sent them, unacquainted with (hipping, they were
, certainly inferior to the Carthaginians in the art of navigation, and altogether unprovided with ships of force. Fortunately for them, neither the art of failing, nor that of conftruting (hips, was yet ar- rived at such a degree of perfection as not to be easily imitated by nations who had any experience or practice of the sea. Vessels of the belt con- ftrution that was then known were fit to be navi- gated only with oars, or in a fair wind and on a smooth sea. They might be built of green tim- ber; and, in cafe of a itorm, could run ashore un- der any cover, or upon any beach that was clear of rocks. Such ships as there the Romans, without hesitation, undertook to provide. Having a Car- thaginian galley accidentally itranded at Messina for a model, it is said, that, in sixty days from the time that the timber was cut down, they fitted out and manned for the sea one hundred gallies of five tier of oars, and twenty of three tier. Vessels of the firit of there rates carried three hundred rowers, and two hundred fighting men.
The manner of applying their oars from so many tiers, and a much greater number which they sometimes employed, has justly appeared a great difficulty to the mechanics and antiquari- ans of modern times, and is confessedly not well underfiood.
The Romans, while their gallies were building, trained their rowers to the oar on benches that were erected on the beach, and placed in the form of those of the real galley (mi). Being sensible that the enemy muit be itill greatly superior in the manage- ment of their ships and in the quickness of their motions, they endeavoured to deprive them of this advantage, by preparing to grapple, and to bind their vessels together. In this condition the men
(in) Polyb. lib. i. c. toi It.
might
might engage on equal termts, fight from their c H A P. fitaes or decks as on solid ground, and the. v. Roman buckler and sword have the faime effeEt as oi shore.
With an armament so conitriited, fill inferior to the enemy, and even unfortunate in its firit at- tempts, they learned, by perseverance, to vanquish the matters of the Tea oi their own element; and not only proteced the coafls of Italy, and sup- potted their operations in Sicily, but, with a pow- erful fleet of three hundred and thirty fail, overcame at Tea a superior number of the enemy, and carried the war to the gates of Carthage (n).
On this occasion took place the famous adven- ture of Regulus; who being successful in his first operations, gave the Romans rome hopes of con- quest in Africa: but they were checked at once by the defeat of their army, and the captivity of theiru. c. 491. general. This event removed the feat of the war again into Sicily; and the Romans, fiill endea- vouritig to maintain a naval. force, fuffeied so many lofles, and incurred so many difalfers by storms, that they were, during a certain period of the wat, disgusted with the service at sea, and seemed to drop all pretensions to power on this element. The experience of a few years, however, while they endeavoured to continue their operations by land without any support from the sea, made them sensible of the necelfity they were under of re- storing their (hipping; and they did so with a re- solution and vigour which enabled them once more to prevail over the superior skill and experience of their enemy.
In this ruinous conteit both parties made the ut- noft efforts, and the most uninterrupted exertion of their forces. Taking the forces of both fides, in one naval engagement, five hundred gallies of five
(n) Polyb. lb. i. c. 17.
tier
B o K tier of oars, with two hundred and fifty thousand
men, and in another, seven hundred gallies, with three hundred and fifty thousand men, were brought into action (o); and in the course of there iiruggles the Romans loft, either by tempelts or by the hands of the enemy, seven hundred gallies; their antagonifis, about five hundred (p). In the result of there detructive encounters, the Cartha- ginians, beginning to balance the inconveniencies which attended' the continuance of war against the concessions that were necessary to obtain peace, '.c. S,:. came to a resolution to accept of the following
terms:
That they should evacuate Sicily, and all the islands from thence to Africa:
That they should not for the future make war on Hiero king of Syracuse, nor on any of his allies:
That they should release all Roman captives without any raniom:
And within twenty years pay to the Romans a lum of three thousand Euboic talents (q).
Thus the Romans, in the result of a war, which wvas the firfi they undertook beyond the limits of Italy, entered on the poffeflion of all that the Carthaginians held in the islands for which they con- tended; and, by a continuation of the fame policy which they had so successfully pursued in Italy, by applying to their new acquisitions, instead of the alarming denomination of Subject, the softer name of Ally, they brought Hiero, who was sovereign of the greater part of Sicily, into a irate of dependence on themselves.
Their manners, as well as their fortunes, were a perfect contrast to those of the enemy they had vanquilhed. Among the Romans, riches were of no account in constituting rank. Men became
(i) Po!yb. lib. i. c. 26. (p) Ibid. c. 63. (q) Ibid. c. 62, &c.
eminent
eminent by rendering signal services to their coun- c H A P. try, not by accumulating wealth. Persons of the .v firfi distinction subsisted. in the capacity of husband- men by their own labour; and, with the fortunes of peasants, role to the command of armies, and the first offices of State. One Consul, of the name of Regulus, was found, by the officer who came to announce his election, equipped with the sheet or the basket, and sowing the feed of his corn in the field. Another, better known, of the fame name, while he commanded in Africa, desired to be recalled, in order to replace the infsruments of husbandry, which, to the great distress of his fa- mily, and the hazard of their wanting food, a fu- gitive slave had carried off from his land. The Senate refused his requefi, but ordered the farm of their general to be tilled at the public ex- pence (I).
The association of pomp and equipage with-rank and authority, it may be thought, is accidental, and only serves to difirat the attention which man- kind owe to personal qualities. It nevertheless ap- pears to be in some measure unavoidable. Superio- rity is difRinguifhed, even in the rudeRt nations, by some external mark. Duillius had his piper and his torch, in honour of the first naval victory ob- tained by his country (s); and the Romans ac- knowledged the external ensigns of Rate, although they were flill rude in the choice of them.
At this time, when the nation emerged with so much lufire beyond the boundaries of Italy, the parties which divided the State, and whose animo- fity Sharpened so much the pangs which preceded the birth of many of its public establishments, had no longer any objec of contest. The officers of (r) Valer. Maxim. lib. iv. c. 4. Liv. Epitom. lib. xviii. Seneca ad Albilnam. c. li. Au&tor de verfibus illu!tribus. (s) Liv, ELpitom. lib. xvii. xviii.
State
B o K State were taken promiscuously froin either class of i_ , the people, and the diffinaion of Plebeian and
Patrician had in a great measure loft its effect. A happier species of aristocracy began to arise from the lufire of personal qualities, and the honours of family, which devolved upon those who were de- scended from citizens who had borne the higher offi- ces of Sta':, and were distinguished in their coun- try's service.
The different orders of men in the common- wealth having obtained the infiitutions for which they severally contended, the number of oficers was increased, for the better adminiitration of as- fairs, which were fast accumulating. Thus a fe- cond Prator was added to the original eiablifh- ment of this office ; and, as the persons who held it were destined to at either in a civil or military capacity, to hear causes in the city, or to command armies in the field. They were affiited in the first of there functions by a new inflitution, that of the Centumvirs, or the Hundred, who vyere draughted from the Tribes, and appointed, during the year of their nomination, under the dire&tion of the Prxtors, to take cognizance of civil disputes. The number of Tribes being now completed to thirty-five, and three of the Centumvirs being draughted from each, made the whole amount to a hundred and five (t).
The city, during the late defiruaive war, sent abroad two colonies, one to Cafirum Innui, a vil- lage of the Latins, the other to Firmium in the Picenum, on the opposite fide of the peninsula, intended rather to guard and protet the'coaft, than to provide for any superabundance of the peo- ple, whome numbers at this time underwent a con-
(:) Liv. Epitom. lib. xx.
fiderable
fiderable diminution (u); the rolls having decreased c H A P. in the course of five years, from two hundred and IV. ninety-feven thousand two hundred and twenty- seven, to two hundred and fifty-one thousand two hundred and twenty-two (x). The revenue, to which citizens who were accuiomed to pay with their personal service, had little to spare from their effets, and which was at all times probably scanty, being often exhausted by the expences of the late war, brought the community under the neceflity of acquitting itself of its debts, by diminishing the weight, or railing the current value of its coin. The ass, which was the ordinary measure of valua- tion, being the libra, or pound of copper fiamped, and hitherto containing twelve ounces, was reduced in its weight to two ounces (y).
The contribution now exaAted from Carthage amounting to about two hundred and feventy-nine thousand pounds, together with the rents to be col- le&ed in Sicily, were likely to be great acceflions of wealth to such a State. The spoils of their enemies, for the most part, consisted of prisoners who were detained by the captor as his slaves, or sent to market to be fold. They had made a prize of twenty thousand captives in their first descent upon Africa and the number of saves in Italy was already become so great as to endanger the State (z). (a) Livy, In different places, mentions between thirty and forty Roman colonies fubfiling in Italy in the time of the second Punic war (Liv. lib. xxvii. c. 9 & 3.). Velleius Paterculus reckons about forty planted in Italy after the recovery of Rome from its deltrudion by the Gauls (Lib. i. c. xv.). And Sigonius, colle.ing the names of all tdhcolonies mentioned by say Rcman writer as planted in Italy, has made a lift of about ninety. But this matter, which so much interelts this very learned antiquarian and many others, was become, as we have mentioned, a fubjcft of mere cu- rifity, even in'the times of the writers from whom our accounts are col- leccd; as all the Italians were by that time admitted on the roll of Roman citizens by the law of L. Julius Cafar, and in consequence of the MarGc war. U C. 663. (x) Liv. Epitom. lib. xix. (y) Plin Hill. Nat. lib. xxxiii. c. S. (a) Zonar. lib. ii. Orofiuc, lib. i. c. 7.
The
a o o K The favourite entertainments of the People were
combats of armed slaves, known by the name of gladiators, derived from the weapons with which they most frequently fought. Such exhibitions, it is said, were first introduced in the interval between the first and second Punic war, by a son of the family of Brutus, to solemnize the funeral of his father. Though calculated rather to move pity and cause horror, than to give pleasure; yet, like all other scenes which excite hopes and fears, and keep the mind in fufpence, they were admired by the multitude, and became frequent on all solemn oc- cafions or festivals.
In the circumstances or events which immediately followed thl peace between Rome and. Carthage, those nations shewed the different tendency of their institutions and manners. The Romans, in the very Itruggles of a seemingly destructive contest, had acquired firength and security, not only by the reputation of great victories; but fiill more by the military spirit and improved discipline and skill of their people by sea and by land. Although their subjects in Italy revolted, and their allies with- drew their support, yet both were soon reduced, at the first appearance of those veteran soldiers who had been formed in the service of the preceding wvar.
The Carthaginians, on the contrary, had made war above twenty years without becoming more warlike; had exhaufied their resources, and con- fumed the bread of their own people in maintaining foreign mercenaries, who, inltead of being an ac- cejiion of strength, were ready to prey on their weakness, and to become the most formidable ene- mies to the slate they had served. Their army, composed, as usual, of hirelings from Gaul, Spain, and the interior parts of Africa, estimated their ser- vices in the war which was then concluded at a higher value than the State was dilpofed to allow,
and
gnd attempted to take by force what was refused toc H A P. their representations and claims. Being assembled IV. in the neighbourhood of Carthage to receive the arrears of their pay, the Senate wildly proposed, in consideration of the difireffed condition of the pub- lic revenue, that they should make some abatement of the fums that were due to them. But the State, instead of obtaining the abatements which were thus proposed, only provoked men with arms in their hands to enter into altercations, and to mul- tiply their claims and pretensions. The mercena- ries took offence at the delays of payment, rose in their demands upon every conceflion, and marched at last to the capital, with all the appearances and threats of an open and victorious enemy. They ilfued a proclamation on their march, inviting all the provincial fubjets of the commonwealth to as- fert their freedom, and, by the numbers that flocked to them from every quarter, became a mighty host, to which the city had nothing to op- pose but its walls. To effeduate the reduction of Carthage, they invested Tunis and Utica, and submitted to all the discipline of war from the officers whom they themselves had appointed to command.
In this crisis, the republic of Carthage, cut off from all its resources and ordinary supplies, attack- ed with that very sword on which it relied for de- fence, and in a situation extremely deplorable and dangerous, having still some confidence in the abi- lity of their Senators, and in the magnanimity of officers tried and experienced in arduous and peri- lous situations, was not altogether reduced to de- fpair. Although the people had committed their arms into the hands of strangers, the command of armies had been fill reserved to their own citizens; and now, by the presence and abilities of a few great men, they were taught to alrume a necessary courage, to put themselves in a military posture,
and
F o and to maintain, during three years, and through a
. scene of mutual cruelties and retaliations, unheard
of in the contests of nations 'at war, a struggle of the greatefi difficulty. In this firuggle they pre- vailed at last by the total extirpation of this vile and ou.rageous enemy (a).
During the dependence of this odious revolt, in which a mercenary army endeavoured to subdue the State which employed them, the Romans pre- served that character for generosity and magnani- rnity of which they knew so well how to avail them- selves, without losing any opportunity that offered for the secure advancement of their power. They refrained from giving any countenance even againfi their rival to such unworthy antagonifis. They affeced to disdain taking any advantage of the present difireffes of Carthage, and refused to enter into any correspondence with a part of the rebel mercenaries, who, being Rfationed in Sardinia, of- sered to surrender that island into their hands. They prohibited the traders of Italy to furnish the rebels with any supply of provisions or stores, and abandoned every vessel that presumed to transgress there orders, to the mercy of the Carthaginian crui- sers which plied before the harbours of Tunis and Utica. Above five hundred Roman prisoners, feiz- ed by there cruizers, were detained in the jails of Carthage. At the termination, however, of thi, war, when the Carthaginians were far from being diipofed to renew any quarrel whatever, the Ro- mans fixed on this as a ground of dispute, corn plained of piracies committed against the traders ol Italy, under pretence of intercepting supplies to the rebels; and, by threatening immediate war upor this account, obtained from the State itself a fur- render of the island of Sardinia, which they had refused to accept from the rebels, and got an ad.
(.) Polb. lib. i. c. 67.-fine.
ditior
dition of two hundred talents to the fum fiipulatedc H A i. in the late treaty of peace, to make up for their pre- iv. tended lolles by the utppofed unwarrantable capture,""' of their ships (b).
Upon this surrender the Sardinians bore with some discontent the change of their sovereigns; and, on the first prohibition of their usual com- merce with Carthage, to which they had been long accustomed, took arms, and endeavoured for some time to withstand the orders which they were re- quired to obey.
Soon after the Romans had reconciled these new acquired subje&s to their government, had quelled a revolt in Tuscany, and vanquished some can- tons of Liguria, whom it is said they brought to submit as fast as the access to that country could be opened, they found themselves at peace with all the world (c); and, in token of this memora- ble circumstance, shut the gates of the temple of Janus; a ceremony which the continual fuccellion of wars, from the reign of Numa to the present time, had prevented, during a period of four hun- dred and thirty years; a ceremony,which,when per- formed, marked a situation as transient as it was firange and uncommon.
Frelh disturbances in some of the possessions recently seized by the republic, and a quarrel of some importance that carried her arms for the firit time beyond the Hadriatic, embroiled her anew in a fucceflion of wars and military ad- ventures.
The Illyrians had become of late a confider- able nation, and were a party in the negotiations and quarrels of the Macedonians and the Greeks. Having convenient harbours and retreats for ship- ping, they carried on a piratical war with most (q) Polyb. lib. i. c. 88. lib. iii . xc . Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 4. (c) Florus, lib. ii. . 3. Eutrop. lib. ii.
of
E o of their neighbours, and, in particular, commit.
ted depredations on the traders of Italy, which it concerned the Romans, as the sovereigns of this country, to prevent. They accordingly sent de- puties to complain of there practices, to demand a reparation of past injuries, and a security from any such attempts for the future. The Illyrians at this time were under the government of Teuta, the widow of a king lately deceased, who held the reins of government as guardian to her son. This princess, in answer to the complaints and representations of the Romans, declared, that in her kingdom no public commiflion had ever been granted to make war on the Italians; but she ob- served, that the seas being open, no one could answer for what was tranfated there; and that it was not the cufRom of kings to debar their sub- jects from what they could seize by their valour. To this barbarous declaration one of the Roman deputies replied, that his country was ever go- verned by different maxims; that they endeavour- ed to restrain the crimes of private persons by the authority of the State, and (hould, in the present cafe, find a way to reform the pracice of kings in this particular. The queen was incensed; and re- 1enting there words, as an insult to herself, gave or- ders to waylay and affalfinate the Roman deputy on his return to Rome (d).
In revenge of this barbarous outrage, and of the former injuries received from that quarter, the Remans made war on the queen of Illyricum, ob- liged her to make reparation for the injuries she had done to the traders of Italy, to evacuate all the towns (he had occupied on the coast, to restrain her subjects in the use of armed (hips, and to forbid them to navigate the Ionian Sea with more than tvwo veffies in company.
(d) Polyb. lib. ii, C. S.
The
The Romans, being desirous of having theirc H A P. conduct in this matter approved of by the nati- 'v. ons of that continent, sent a copy of this treaty, together with an exposition of the motives which had induced them to cross the Adriatic, to be read in the assembly of the Achaean league. They soon after made a like communication at Athens and .at Corinth, where, in consideration of the signal service they had performed against the Illy- rians, then reputed the common enemy of civi- lized nations,:,they had an honorary place assigned them at the :fthmian games; and in this manner made their first appearance in the councils ofr. c. 5s. Greece (e).
(c) Polyb. lib. ii. c. ic. Appiaa in Illyr.
CHAP.
C H A P. V. Prcgrls of the Romans within the Alps.-Origin
of the fecord Punic rAar.-Mlarch of Hannibal iiito Italy.-Progrefs.-AElion on the fecinus.- On the Frebia.--On the Lake Thraflmenus.- Battle of Cannm.-Hannibal not flipported from Carhkag.-Sequel of the War.-In Italy.-And Africa.-Scipi9's Operations.-Battle of Zama.- Erin of the War. E oo0 K T HE city of Rome, and most of the diftrits
T-^ J| of Italy, during the dependence of the lali enumerated wars which were waged at a distance and beyond the seas, began to experience that un. interrupted tranquillity in which the capital and in. terior divisions of every considerable nation remain. even during the wars in which the slate is engaged They had indeed one source of alarm on the sids of Cifailpine Gaul, which they thought it neceffar3 to remove, in order to obtain that entire security to which they aspired. The country of the Se nones, from Sena Gallia to the Rubicon, they hac already subdued, even before the arrival of Pyrrhu! in Itay ; but the richest and most fertile tracts or the Po were itill in the poffeflion of the Gaulifi rations; and it had been proposed, about fou years after the conclusion of the firit Punic war to erect a barrier against the invasions of this peo pie, by occupying with Roman colonies the coun try of the Senones, from Sena Gallia to the Rubi con. Although the inhabitants to be removes to make room for these settlements had beei fnbjet to the Romans above forty years, ye their brethren on the Po confidered this act c
violenc
violence as an insult to the Gaulish name, re-c H A p. solved to avenge it, and invited their country- V. men from beyond the Alps to take part in the quarrel.
In consequence of their negotiations and con- certs, in about eight years after the Romans were fettled on the Rubicon, a great army of Gauls ap- peared on the Roman frontier. These nations used to make war by impetuous assaults and invasions, and either at once subdued and occupied the coun- tries which they over-ran, or, being repulsed, abandoned them without any farther intention to perfiit in the war. Their tumultuary operations, however, were fubjets of the greatest alarm at Rome, and generally produced a suspension of all the ordinary forms of the commonwealth. On a profpe& of the present alarm from that quarter, the Senate, apprehending the necessity of great and sudden exertions of all their flrength, ordered a general account to be taken of all the men fit to carry arms, whether on foot or on horseback, that could be assembled for the defence of Italy; and they mustered, on this famous occasion, above seven hundred thousand foot and seventy thousand horse (f). From this numerous return of men in arms, the State was enabled to make great detach- ments, which they Rtationed under the Consuls and one of the Prators separately, for the defence of the commonwealth. The Gauls, having pene- trated into Etruria, where the Prator was fiation- ed, attacked and obliged him to retire. The Consuls, however, being arrived with their several armies in different directions to support the Pra- tor, renewed the conflit with united force, and put the greater part of the Gaulish invaders to the sword.
(f) Polyb. lib. ii. c. 2..-24, &c. Liv. Epitom. lib, xxi. VOL. I. I In
B 0 o K In the year following, the Romans carried the
' war into the enemy's country; and, in about three u. C. .9.years more, passed the Po, and made themselves
matters of all the plains on that river quite to the foot of the Alps. To secure this valuable acquifi- tion they projected two colonies of fix thousand men each, one at Cremona and the other at Pla. centia, on the opposite fides of the Po; but were disturbed in the execution of this project, firit, by a revolt of the natives, whojuftly confidered there settlements as military fiations, intended to repress and keep themselves in subjection; and afterwards, by the arrival of a successful invader, who, by his conduEt and implacable animosity, appeared to be the moil formidable enemy that had ever attempted to ihake the power, or to limit the progress, of the Roman State.
The republic had now enjoyed, during a period of twenty one years from the end of the firfr Punic war, the fruits not only of that ascendant she had acquired among the nations of Italy, but those likewise of the high reputation she had gained, and of the great military power she had formed in the contest with Carthage. The wars that filled up the interval of peace with this principal antagonist, were either trivial or of short duration: and the city itself, though still rude in the form of its buildings and in the manners of its people, probably now began to pay a growing attention to the arts ol peace. Laws are dated in this period which have a reference to manufacture and to trade. Clothier! are directed in the fabric of cloth (g), and carrier! by water are directed in the size of their vessels e c- 5'3.Livius Andronicus and Navius introduced some
species of dramatic entertainment, and found a fa vourable reception from the people to their farcica productions (h). (g) Lex Metilia de Fulionibus. Lex Claudia. () Ciccr. in Brto, p. 35. A Gall. lib. xvii. c. 2a.
Bu
But whatever progress the people were now in-c H A p. dined to make in the useful or pleasurable arts of vt peace, they were effectually interrupted, and ob- liged to bend the force of their genius, as in former times, to the arts of war, and to the defence of their settlements in Italy.
The Carthaginians had been for some time em- ployed in Spain, making trial of their firength, and forming their armies. In that Country Hamilcar, an officer of diflinguifhed fame in the late war with the Romans, and in that which ensued with the rebel mercenaries, had fought refuge from that disgust and those mortifications which, in the late treaty of peace, he felt from the abject councils of his country. And having found a pretence to levy new armies, he made some acquisitions of terri- tory, to compensate the losses which Carthage had fultained by the surrender of Sardinia and of Sicily.
Spain appears to have been to the trading na- tions of Greece, Asia, and Africa, what America has been, though upon a larger scale,, to the mo- dern nations of Europe, an open field for new set- tlements, plantations, and conquefis. The natives were brave, but impolitic, and ignorant of the arts of peace, occupied entirely with the care of their horses and their arms. These, fays an historian, they valued more than their blood (i). They paint- ed or stained their bodies, affected long hair with gaudy ornaments of silver and of gold. The men were averse to labour, and subsisted chiefly by the industry es their women. Their mountains abounded in mines of copper and of the precious metals; insomuch that, on some parts of the coast, it was reported that the natives had vessels and utensils of silver employed in the most common uses (k). A fatal report ! such as that which after-
(i) Juftin, lib. xliv. c. 2. (k) Strabo, lib. iii.
I z wards
o o 0 wards carried the posterity of this very people,
with so much deftrudtive avidity, to visit the new ~'" world; and is ever likely to tempt the dangerous
visits of strangers, who are ready to gratify their avarice and their ambition, at the expence of nati- ons to whose poffeflions they have no reasonable or just pretension. The Spaniards were at this time divided into many barbarous hordes or finall prin- cipalities, which could neither form any effectual concert to prevent the intrusion and settlement of foreigners, nor poteffled the necessary docility by which to profit by foreign examples, whether in the form of their policy or the invention of arts.
The Carthaginians had made their first visits to Spain under pretence of supporting the colony of Gades, which, like themselves, was sprung from Tyre. They made a settlement under the name of new Carthage, in a situation extremely favour- able to the communication of Spain with Africa, and in the neighbourhood of the richest mines. Hamilcar, after a few successful campaigns, in extending the bounds of this settlement, being killed in battle, was succeeded by his fon-in-law, Hasdrubal, who continued for some years to pursue the fame designs.
The Romans, in the mean while, were occupied on the coast of lilyricum, or amused with alarms from Gaul. They were sensible of the progrefi made by their rivals in Spain; but imagining that any danger from that quarter was extremely re- mote, or while they had wars at once on both fidel of the Hadriatic, being unwilling to engage at the fame time with so many enemies, were content with a negotiation and a treaty, in which they fti pulated with the Carthaginians that they thoulc not pass the Iberus to the eastward, nor molest the city of Saguntum. This they confidered as proper barrier on that fide, and professed for tb
inhabitant
inhabitants of that place the concern of allies.c H A P. Trusting to the effec of this treaty, as sufficient v. to limit the progress of the Carthaginians in Spain, they proceeded, in the manner that has been men- tioned, to contend with the Gauls for the domi- nion of Italy, which hitherto, under the frequent alarms they received from this people, was fill in- secure (1).
Hasdrubal, after nine years service, being as- faflinated by a Spanish slave, who committed this desperate action in revenge of an injury which had been done to his mafler, was succeeded in the command of the Carthaginian troops in Spain by Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar. This young man, tlln of five and twenty years of age, had, when a child (m), come into Spain with his father, seem- ed to inherit his genius, and preserved, probably with increaling animosity, his aversion to the Ro- mans. Being reared and educated in camps, and from his earliest youth qualified to gain the confi- dence of soldiers, he, on the death of Hasdrubal, by the choice of the troops, was raised to the com- mand of that army, and afterwards confirmed in it by the Senate-of Carthage.
The Carthaginians had now for some time ceased to feel the defeats and the lufferings which had in- duced them to accept of the late disadvantageous conditions of peace, and were sensible only of the lasting inconveniencies to which that treaty expoled them. They had long felt, from the neighbour- hood of the Romans, an insurmountable bar to their progress. They had felt, during above seven- teen years from the date of their laii treaty of peace, the loss of their maritime settlements, and the de- cline of their navigation. They had felt the load of a heavy contribution, which, though refirited to a particular fum, had the form of a tribute, in
(I) Polyb. lib. ii c. 13. 1 () At nine years of age.
being
B 0 K being exacted by annual payments; and they en.
_ tertained sentiments of animosity and aversion to
the Romans, which nothing but the memory of re- cent sufferings and the apprehension of danger could have so long suppressed.
Hamilcar) together with a considerable party of the Senate, were supposed to have borne with the late humiliating peace, only that they might have leisure to provide for a fublequent war. " I have " four sons," this famous warrior had been heard to fay, " whom I shall rear like so many lions " whelps againfi the Romans." In this spirit he set armies on foot to be trained and accuflomed to ser- vice in Spain, and had already projecred the inva- sion of Italy from thence.
Whatever may have been the military services which the Carthaginians devised, the execution of them was secured by the coming of Hannibal to the head of their army. He was well formed for great enterprise, and professed an hereditary aver- sion to the Romans. In the firfi and second year of his command he continued the operations which had been begun by his predecessors in Spain; but during this time, although he made conquests beyond the Iberus, he did not molest the city of Saguntum, nor give any umbrage to the Romans. Bur, in the third year after his appointment, his progress alarmed the Saguntines, and induced them to fend a deputation to Rome to impart their fears.
At the arrival of this deputation from Sagun. tum, the Romans had fitted out an armament un- der the command of the Consul L. Emilius Paulus, defined to make war on Demetrius, the prince of Pharos, a small island on the coast of Illyricum. This armament, if directed to Spain, might have secured the city of Saguntum againit the designs of Hannibal; but the Romans flill confidered any danger from that quarter as remote, and continued
to
to employ this force in its first destination. Theyc H A P. paid so much regard, nevertheless, to the repre-. v fentations of the Saguntines, as to fend deputies into Spain, with orders to observe the pofiure of affairs, and to inform the Carthaginian officer on that flation, of the engagements which had been entered into by his predecessor, and of the concern which the Romans must undoubtedly take in the (afety of Saguntum. The return which they had to this message gave sufficient intimation of an ap- proaching war; and it appears that, before the Roman commissioners could have made their re- port, the siege of Saguntum was actually com- menced by Hannibal. He had already formed his design for the invasion of Italy, and, that he might not leave to the Romans a place of arms and a powerful ally in the country from which he was about to depart, determined to occupy or destroy that place. He was impatient to reduce Sagun- tum before any succours could arrive from Italy, or before any force could be collected againfl him, so as to fix the theatre of the war in Spain. He pressed the siege, therefore, with great impetuosity, exposing his person in every assault; and exciting, by his own example, with the pickaxe and spade, the parties at work in making his approaches (n). Though abundantly cautious not to expose himself on flight occasions, or from a mere oflentation of courage, yet in this siege, which was the founda- tion of his hopes, and the necessary prelude to the farther progress of his enterprize, he declined no fatigue, and ihunned no danger, that led to the at- tainment of his end. He was, nevertheless, by the valour of the besieged, which they exerted in hopes of relief from Rome, detained about eight months before this place, and deprived at lait of great part of its spoils by the desperate resolution of the citi-
t(-) Polhb. lib. iii. c. 17.
zens,
s o o Kzens, who chore to perish, with all their effe&s,'
,_ rather than fall into the enemy's hands. The U. c. 53-booty, however, which he saved from this wreck
enabled him, by his liberalities, to gain the affetion of his army, and to provide for the execution of his design against Italy.
The siege of Saguntum, being an infraction of the late treaty with the Romans, was undoubtedly an act of hostility; and this people incurred a cen- sure of remissness, uncommon in their councils, by suffering an ally, and a place of such impor- tance, to remain so long in danger, and by susser- ing it at last to fall a prey to their enemy, without making any attempt to relieve it, It is probable, that the security they began to derive from a fron- tier, far removed from the feat of their councils, and covered on every fide by the Tea, or by imper- vious mountains, rendered them more negligent than they had formerly been of much fighter alarms. They expected to govern by the dread of their power, and proposed to punish, by exemplary vengeance, the insults which they had not taken care to prevent.
The attention of the Romans, during the de- pendence of this event, had been fixed on the set- tlements they were making at Cremona and Pla- centia, to keep in fubjetion the Gauls, and on the naval expedition which they had sent under the Consul iEmiiius to the coast of Illyricum. This cfficer, about the time that Hannibal had accom- plifhed his design on Saguntum, and was retired for the w.inter to his usual quarters at New Car- thage, had succeeded in his attack on Demetrius prince of Pharos, had driven him from his ter- ritories, and obliged him to seek for refuge at the court of Macedonia, where his intrigues proved to be of some consequence in the sequel of these trt.z..nladtions.
The
The people at Rome being amused with thefec H A p. events, and with a triumphal procefion, which, as - usual, announced their vitory, proceeded in the affairs of Spain according to the usual forms, and agreeably to the laws which they had, from time immemorial, prescribed to themselves in the cafe of injuries received, sent to demand satisfaction; complained at Carthage of the infiracion of trea- ties; and required that Hannibal with his army should be delivered up to their messengers; or, if this were refused, gave orders to denounce imme- diate war. The Roman commiflioner, who spoke to this effect in the senate of Carthage, having made his demands, held up the lappet of his gown, and said, " Here are both peace and war, chufe ye." -He was answered, " We chufe that which " you like best."-" Then it is war," he faid;u. c. 535. and from this time both parties prepared for the contest.
Hannibal had been long devising the invasion of Italy, probably without communicating his design even to the councils of his own country. The war being now declared, he made his dispositions for the safety of Africa and Spain; gave intimation to the army under his command, that the Romans had required them to be delivered up, as a beast which commits a trespass is demanded in reparati- on for the damage he has done (o). If they felt a proper resentment of this indignity, he warned them to prepare for an arduous march. He was in the eight and twentieth year of his age when he entered upon the execution of this design; an un- dertaking which, together with the conduct of it, has raised his reputation for enterprize and ability to an equal, if not to a higher pitch, than that of any leader of armies whatever. (s) Velut ob noxam fibi dedi pollularct populus Romanus. Liv. lib. II. c, 30.
The
n o o s The Romans, a few years before, had mustered
near eight hundred thousand men, to whom the use of arms was familiar, to whom valour was the most admired of the virtues, and who were ready to as- femble in any numbers proportioned to the service for which they might be required: the march from Spain into Italy lay across tremendous moun. tains, and through the territory of fierce and bar- barous nations, who might not be inclined tamely to susser a firanger to pass through their country, or lose any opportunity to enrich themselves with his spoils.
From such topics as there, hifiorians have mag- nifed the courage of this celebrated warrior at the expence of his judgment. It is probable, how- ever, that both were equally exerted in this memo- rable service. In the contest of nations, that coun- try, which is made the feat of the war, for the most part labours under great comparative disadvantage, is obliged to subsist the army of its enemy as well as its own, is exposed to devastation, to hurry, confusion, and irresolution of councils; so much that, in nations powerful abroad, invasions often betray great incapacity and weakness, or at least fix the whole sufferings of the war upon those who are invaded. Hannibal, besides this general con- fideration, had with great care informed himfelfof the real frate of Italy, and knew, that though the Roman musters were formidable, yet much of their f3ppofed firength consisted of discordant parts; a number of separate cantons recently united, and any of them dilaffected to the power by which they were cemented together. Mofl of the inhabi- tants of that country, being the descendants of different nations, and-diftinguifhed by various lan- guages, still retained much animosity to each other, and mods of all to their new mafiers. Those who had longeii borne the appellation of Roman allies, even the colonies themnllves, as well as the con.
quered
quered nations, had occasionally revolted, andc H A P. were likely to prefer separate establishments to their v present dependance on the Roman State. The" Gauls and Ligurians, even the Etruscans, had been recently at war with those supposed matters of Italy, and were ready to resume the sword in con- cert with any successful invader. The Gauls on the Po were already in arms, had razed the fortifi- cations which the Romans had begun to erect at Cremona and Placentia, and forced the settlers to take refuge at Mutina. Every ftep, therefore, that an invader should make within this country, was likely to remove a support from the Romans, and to add a new one to himself. The Roman power, composed of parts so ill cemented, was likely to dissolve on the slightest touch. Though great when employed at a diltance, and wielded by a tingle hand, yet broken and disjointed by the pretence of an enemy, it was likely to lose its firength ; or, by the revolt of one or more of its diitri6ts, might furnish a force that could be successfully employed against itself. A few itriking examples of success, therefore, for which he trusted to his own conduct, and to the superiority of veterans hardened in the service of many years, were likely to let loose the discontents which fublifled in Italy, and to flake the fidelity of those allies who composed so great a part of the Roman ilrength. Even with a less fa- vourable profped of success, the risk was but small, compared to the chance of gain. A single army was to be flaked against a mighty State; and a few men, that could be easily replaced, were to be sacrificed in an enterprize, which, if successful, was to make Carthage the mitrefs of the world ; or even if it should miscarry, might inflict her enemy with a deeper wound than she herself was likely to susser from the loss.
Hannibal collected together for this expedition ninety thousand foot and twelve thousand horse.
In
EO o K In his march to the Iberus, he met with no inter,
L ruption. From thence to the Pyrenees, being op- * "'-"apofed by the natives, he forced his way through
their country; but apprehending some inconveni- ence from such an enemy left in his rear, he fiati- oned his brother Hanno, with ten thousand foot and one thousand horse, to observe their motions, and to keep th:m in awe. After he had begun to as- cend the Pyrenees, a considerable body of his Spa- nifh allies deserted him in the night, and fell back to their own country. This example, he had rea- son to believe, would prove contagious; and as the likeliest way to prevent its effects, he gave out, that the party which had left him, being no longer wanted for the purposes they served on the march, were returned by his orders to their own country. That he meant to spare a few more of the troops of the fame nation, as being unnecessary in the remaining parts of the service; and actually dif- miffed a considerable body to confirm this opinion. By there separations, or by the swords of the enemy, his numbers, in descending the moun- tains, were reduced from ninety to fifty thousand foot and nine thousand horse, with seven and thirty elephants (p).
This celebrated march took place in the year of t- c. 4c. -Rome five hundred and thirty-four, and in the con-
fulate of Publius Cornelius Scipio and Tiberius Sempronius Longus. The Romans, as usual on such occasions, raised two consular armies, and pro- posed, by immediate armaments directed to Spain 2nd to Africa, to fix the scene of the war in the ene- my's country.
Sermproni.s afFemb!ed an army and a fleet in the por!s of Sicily, and had orders to pass into Africa. Scipio embarked with some legions for Spain, and, * :'ching cn the coafi of Gaul, first learned, that a
f!) Polbb. lib. ii;. c. 35-42.
Cartha-
Carthaginian army was marching by land intoc H A p. Italy. This intelligence determined him to land V. his troops at Marseilles, and to fend out a detach- ment of horse to observe the country, and to pro- cure farther and more particular information of the enemy.
Hannibal had arrived on the Rh6ne at some dif- tance above its reparation into two channels, and about four days march from the sea. In order to effec the passage of the river, he instantly col- leted all the boats that could be found on its ex- tensive navigation. At the fame time, the na- fives, being unacquainted with firangers in any other capacity than that of enemies, assembled in great numbers to dispute his farther progress in their country.
Finding so powerful a resistance in front, he de- layed the embarkation of his army on the Rh6ne, and sent a detachment up the banks of the river to pass it at a different place, and to make a diver- sion on the flank or the rear of the enemy who op- posed him.
The division employed on this service, after a march of twenty-five miles, found the Rh6ne fepa- rated into branches by small islands, and at a con- venient place got over on rafts to the opposite shore; and being thus in the rear, or on the right of the Gaulish army, hastened towards them, in order to give an alarm on that quarter while Hannibal should pass the river in their front.
On the fifth day after the departure of this party, Hannibal, having intelligence that they had succeeded in pafling the Rh6ne, made his difpofiti- on to profit by the diversion they were ordered to make in his favour. The larger vessels, which were defined to transport the cavalry, were rang- ed towards the fiream, to break the force of the current and many of the horses were faflened to the ilern of the boats. The smaller canoes
were
3 o o x were ranged below, and were to carry over a body
of foot. ~'"'-" The Gauls, feeing these preparations, left their
camp, and advanced to meet the enemy. They were drawn up on the banks of the river, when the Carthaginian detachment arrived on their rear, and lighted fires as a signal of their approach. Hannibal observing the smoke, notwithfianding the posture which the enemy had taken to refifi his landing, inflantly put off from the (hore: both ar- mies shouted; but the Gauls being thrown into great consternation by the report and effe&s'of an attack which they little expected on their rear, with- out resistance gave way to the Carthaginians in front, and were speedily routed. Hannibal, hav- ing thus lodged himself on the eafiern banks of the Rh6ne, in a few days, without any farther interruption or loss, passed that river with his elephants, baggage, and the remainder of his army.
Soon after the Carthaginian general had fur- mounted this difficulty, intelligence came that a Roman army had arrived on the coafi, and was disembarked at Marseilles. To gain further and more certain information of this enemy, he, nearly about the fame time that Scipio had sent a detach- ment on the fame design, direeted a party of horse to examine the country. These parties met; and, after a smart engagement, returned to their several armies with certain accounts of an enemy being near.
Scipio advanced with the utmost dispatch to fix the scene of the war in Gaul; and Hannibal haflen- ed his departure, being equally intent on removing it, if poflible, into Italy. The last, in order to keep clear of the enemy, directed his march at a dif- tance from the sea coafi, and took his route by the banks of the Rh6ne. After four days march from .he place where he had passed this river, he came
to
to its confluence with another river, which was pro-c H A p. bably the Ifere, though by Polybius himself, who v. visited the trac of this march, the place seems to be mistaken for the confluence of the Rh6ne and Saone (q). Here he found two brothers contend- ing for the throne of their father, and gained an useful ally by espousing the cause of the elder. Being, in return for this service, supplied with arms, shoes, and other necessaries, and attended by the prince himself, who with a numerous body covered his rear, he continued his march during ten days, probably on the Ifere, and about a hundred miles above the place where he had passed the Rh6ne, began to make his way over the summit of the Alps; a labour in which he was employed with his army during fifteen days (r).
The (q) In the manuscripts of Polybius, the river which falls into the Rhane at this place was called by a name unknown in that country. The first editor, to corret the mistake, changed this unknown name for that of the Arar. But it is extremely probable, that they ought to have made it the Ifara, as the confluence of the Ifere and the Rhane corresponds much bet- ter with the distances and marches mentioned by Polybius. Four marches, for instance, from the place at which Hannibal had palsed the Rhdne, and four more from thence to the sea. (r) This famous route has been a subjet of different opinions, and of some controversy. In a country that is railed into vati mountains, round which the way mutl be found by narrow valleys, and the channels of ri- vers, it is impoflible to decide any question of this fort from the map. Po- lybius vificed the ground, in order to satisfy himself on the tract of this fa- mous route; and, from this circum(tance, as well as from his general knowledge of war, is undoubtedly the belt authority to whom we can have recourse in this question. By his account, Hannibal, after four marches from the place at which he had palsed the Rhsne, came to the confluence of this with another river, which is evidently the Ifere. From thence, having continued his route ten days on the river,and marched about a hund- red miles, he began to ascend the summit, and was employed in that diffi- cult work fifteen days. This account may incline us to believe, that Han- nibal followed the courfc of the Ifere from its confluence with the RhSne to about Conflans; that, having surmounted the summit, he descended in- to Italy by the channel of another river, or the Vale of Aolfe. such are the paf(agcs by which ridges of mountains, in every instance, are to be tra- versed. It is indeed affcrted, or implied in the text of Polybius, that Han- nibal marched ten days on the Rhone after its confluence with the lrar or Illra; but it is probable, that, in visiting a barbarous country, in whkh the Romans had yet no pofeflions, and with the language of which he was un- acquainted, he may have mitlaken the Ifere for the RhOne, and conl - quently the Rh6ne for the Arar or Saone. The RhBne and Ifere take their rife from the fame ridge, and run nearly in the fame directions, In this
account
B 0 K The natives, either fearing him as an enemy, or
Ls ^ propoiing to plunder his baggage, had occupied
every post at which they could obftrut his march; assailed him from the heights, endeavoured to over- whelm his army in the gorges of the mountains, or force them over precipices, which frequently fink perpendicular under the narrow paths by which they were to pass.
Near to the summits of the ridge, at which he arrived by a continual ascent of many days, he had his way to form on the fides of frozen mountains, and through mafes of perennial ice, which, at the approach of winter, were now covered with recent snow. Many of his men and horses, coming from a warm climate, perished by the cold; and his army having firuggled, during so long a time, with extremes to which it was little accuflomed, was re- duced, from fifty thousand foot and nine thousand horse, the numbers which remained to him in de- scending the Pyrenees, to twenty thousand foot and fix thousand cavalry, a force, in all appearance, ex- tremely disproportioned to the service for which they were defiined (r).
The Roman Consul, in the mean time, had, in search of his enemy, diredted his march to the Rh6ne; and, in three days after the departure of Hannibal, had arrived at the place where he had account of the course of the supposcd Rhane which he visited, he menti- ons nothing of thi Like of Geneva, which is scarcely pollible, if he bad f .en it. Polyb. Ib. iii. c. 47. According to this conjetiure, Hannibal, having marched by the vale of f7ere, Grenoble, Ch2mberry, and Mountmclinn, and descended by the vale of AoRe, munf have passed the Irnmmit at or near the lesser abbey of St. Be!nard. As monntains are penctrated by the channelc of rivers, it is probable that Hannibal, if he were himself to explore his palfage, would try the course of the first considerable river he found on his right descending from the Alp, which was the Ifere: but if, as is extremely probable, he had well. inftrucred go-fes, it is not likely that they would lead him so long a cir- cuit as he mull have made hy the course and sources of the Rhone, when, in fia, he had one equally practicable, and much nearer, by the Ifere on :=c f:de of the Alps, and the Dorea Baltea on the other.
(r) Polyb. lib. iii . c. 55Liv. lib. xxi.
passed
pasted that river; but was f.ltisfied that any further c H A P. attempts to purfiue him in this dire&ion, would only V. carrv himself away from what was to be the scene of the war, and from the ground he must occupy for the defence of Italy; he returned therefore without loss of time to his Ihips; fei:t his brother, Cneius Scipio, with the greater part of the army, to pursue the object of the war in Spain; and he himself, with the remainder, set fail for Pisa, where he landed and put himself at the head of the legions which he found in that quarter; and which had been appointed to rel'ore the fettlecents of Cre- mona and Placentia. With these forces he patled the Po, and was arrived on the Tecinus, when Hannibal came down into the plain country at tome distance below Turin.
The Carthaginian general, at his arrival in those parts, had moved to his right; and, to gratify his new allies the Infubres, inhabiting what is now the dutchy of Milan, who were then at war with the Taurini or Piedmontefe, he laid siege to the capital of that country, and in three days reduced it by force. From thence he continued his march on the left of the Po; and, as the armies advanced, both generals, as if by concert, approached with their cavalry, or light troops, mutually to observe each other. They met on the Tecinus with some de- gree of furprize on both lides, and were necessarily engaged in a conflit, which served. as a trial of their refpecive forces, and ir which the Italian ca- valry were defeated by the Spanish and African horse. The Roman Consul was wounded, and with much difficulty rescued from the enemy by his son Publius Cornelius, afterwards so confpi- cuous in the hifiory of this war, but then only a youth of seventeen years of age, entering on his military service (s).
(0 Polyb. lb. x. c. 3. Vo ,. I. K The
B o o K The Roman detachment, it seems, had an easy
l- retreat from the place of this encounter to that of
their main army, and were not pursued. Scipio, disabled by his wound, and probably, from the check he had received, sensible of the enemy's fu- periority in the quality of their horse, determined to retire from the plains; repassed the Po, marched up the Trebia, and, to Itop the progress of the Car- thaginians, while he waited for infirutions or rein- forcements from Rome, took poRt on the banks of that river. While he lay in this position, an alarm- ing effect of his defeat, and of the difaffeaion of some Gauls who professed to be his allies, appeared in the desertion of two thousand horsemen of that nation, who went over to the enemy.
The Roman Senate received these accounts with furprize, and with some degree of consternation. An enemy was arrived in Italy, and had obliged the Consul, with his legions, to retire. The forces which they had lately mustered were numerous, but consisted in part of doubtful friends, qr of de- clared enemies. They supposed all their late van- quifhed subjects on the Po to be already in rebel- lion, or to be mustered against them in the Car- thaginian camp. And, notwithstanding the nu- merous levies that could have been made in the city, and in the contiguous colonies; notwithftand ing the expediency of carrying the war into Africa, as the surest way of forcing the Carthaginians to withdraw their forces from Italy for the defence ol their own country, they, with a degree of pufilla nimity uncommon in their councils, ordered the other Consul, Sempronius Longus, to desist frorr his design upon Africa; they recalled him with hi: army from Sicily, and direted him, without de lay, to join his colleague on the Trebia, and, i polTible, to stop the progress of this daring and im petuous enemy.
Th
The Consul Sempronius, therefore, after he hadc H A P. net and defeated a Carthaginian flret on the coast v, of Sicily, and was preparing for a descent on Africa, suddenly changed his course, and, having turned the eastern promontories of Sicily and Italy, tteered for Ariminum, where he landed; and, having performed this voyage and march in forty days, joined his colleague, where he lay opposed to Hannibal on the Trebia.
By the arrival of a second Roman Confal, the balance of forces was again restored, and the na- tives still remained in ilifpence between the two parties at war. Instead of a deliverance from ser- vitude, which many of them expected to obtain from the arrival of foreigners to balance the force of the Romans, they began to apprehend, as usual in lucb cafes, a confirmation of their bonds, or a mere change of their mailers. When the conteit should be ended, they wished to have the favour of the victor, and not to share in the fortunes of the vanquished. They had, therefore, waited to lee how the scales were likely to incline, and had not repaired to the standard of Hannibal, in the manner, it is probable, he expected; and this, with every other circumrtance of the war, forced him to rapid and hazardous coun(els. Being too far from his resources to continue a dilatory war, he hafened to secure the necetfary poffeiTions on the Po; and, by the reputation of victory, to deter- mine the wavering inhabitants to declare on his fide. For thele realons he ever preifed on the enemy, and fought for occasions to draw them into acion. He had been, ever since the encoun- ter on the Tecinus, cautiously avoided by Scipio; who, even after he was reinforced by the other consular army, endeavoured to engage his col* league likewise in the fame dilatory measures; but Sempronius, imputing this caution to the impref- n on which Scipio had taken from his late defeat,
K 2 and
s o o K and being confident of his own firength, discover-
ed to the Carthaginian general an inclination to meet him, and to decide the campaign by a gene- ral ation. Sempronius was farther encouraged in this intention by his success in some encounters of foraging parties, which happened soon after he had arrived on this ground; and Hannibal, feeing this disposition of his enemy, took measures to bring on the engagement in circumfiances the moit favour- able to himself.
He had a plain in his front, through which the Trebia ran, and parted the two armies. He wish- ed to bring the Romans to his own fide of the river, and to fight on the ground where his army was ac- customed to form. Here, betides the other advan- tages which he proposed to take, he had an oppor- tunity to place an ambuscade, from which he could attack the enemy on the flank or the rear, while they should be engaged in front. It was the middle of winter, and there were frequent show- ers of snow. The enemy's infantry, if they should ford the river, and afterwards remain any time in- active, were likely to surfer considerably from the effeas of wet and cold. Hannibal, to lay them under this disadvantage, sent his cavalry across the fords, with orders to parade on the ground before the enemy's lines; and, if attacked, to repass the river with every appearance of flight. He had, in the mean time, concealed a thousand chosen men under the shrubby banks of a brook, which fell into the Trebia beyond the intended field of bat- tle. He had ordered his army to be in readinels, and to prepare themselves with a hearty meal for the fatigues they were likely to undergo.
When the Carthaginian cavalry, passing the river as they had been ordered, presented them- feives to the Romans, it was but break of day, and before the usual hour of the first meal in the Roman camp. The legions were, nevertheless,
hastily
haflily formed; and pursued the enemy to where c H A P. they were seen in disorder to pass the river; and , there, by the directions of their general, who sup- poled he had gained an advantage, and with the ardor which is ullal in the pursuit of victory, they palled the fords, and made a display of their forces on the opposite bank. Hannibal, expecting this event, had already formed his troops on the plain, and made a shew of only covering the retreat of his cavalry, while lie knew that a general atiori could no longer be avoided. After it began in front, the Romans were attacked in the rear by the party which had been potied int ambush for this purpose; and this being added to the other. difad- vantages under which they engaged, they were de- feated with great slaughter.
The legions of the centre, to the amount often thoutand men, cut their way through the enemy's line, and escaped to Placentia. Of the remainder of the army, the greater part -either fell in the field, perished in attempting to' repass the river, or were taken by the enemy. In this adior;, al- though few of the Africans fell by the sword, they suffered considerably by the cold and asperity of the season, to which they were not accuflomed; and of the elephants, of which Hannibal had brought a considerable number into this country, only one survived the distress of this day (t).
In consequence of this vicory, Hannibal secured his quarters on the Po; and, by the treachery of a native of Brundufium, who commanded at Clafti- dium, got pofieflion of that place, after the Ro- mans had fortified and furnished it with confidera- ble magazines for the supply of their own army. In his treatment of the prilbners taken at this place, he made a diftintion between the citizens of Rome and their allies: the first he used with severity, the
others (t) Polyb. lib. iii. c. 74.
B o o c others he difmilTed to their several countries, with
assurances that he was come to make war on the Romans, and not on the injured inhabitants of Italy.
The Roman Conifl, Sempronius, was among those who escaped to Placentia. He meant, in his dispatches to the Senate, to have disguised the amount of his loss; but the difficulty with which his meflenger arrived through a country over-run by the enemy, with many other consequences of his defeat, soon published at Rome the extent of that calamity. The people, however, rose in their ardour and animosity, instead of being funk. As awakened from a dream of pusillanimity, in which they had hitherto seemed to confine their views to the defence of Italy, they not only commanded fresh levies to replace the army they had loll on the Trebia, but they ordered the Consul Scipio to his first destination in Spain, and sent forces to Sar- dinia, Sicily, Tarentum, and every other station where they apprehended any defection of their allies, or any impreflion to be made by the enemy (u).
The unfortunate Sempronius, being called to the city to hold the elecion of magistrates, escaped, or forced his way through the quarters of the ene- my. He was succeeded by Caius Flaminius and Cn. Servilius; the first, being of obscure extrac- tion, was chosen in opposition to the Nobles, to whom the people imputed the disasters of the pre- sent war. He was ordered early in the spring to take post at Arretium, that he might guard the paiLes of the Appenines and cover Etruria, while the other Consul was stationed at Ariminum to flop the progress of the enemy, if he attempted to pals by the eastern coast.
Hannibal, (-) ,lyjb. lib. iii. c. 7j.
Hannibal, after his first winter in Italy, tookc Hi A P. the field for an early campaign; and being in- V dined to counsels the most likely to furprize his enemies, took his way to Etruria, by a palfage in which the vales of the Appenines were marshy, and, from the effects of the season, itill covered with water. In a'firuggle of many days with the hardships of this dangerous march; he loit many of his horses and much of his baggage; and himself, being seized with an inflammation in one of his eyes, loft the use of it. Having appeared, how- ever, in a quarter where he was not expected, he availed himself of this degree of furprize with all his former ativity and vigour.
The charater of Flaminius, who was raised by the favour of the people in opposition to the Senate, and who was now disposed to gratify his conflitu- ents by some action of fpiendor and success, en- couraged Hannibal to hope that he might derive some advantage from the ignorance and prefump- tion of his enemy. He therefore endeavoured to provoke the new Consul, by destroying the coun- try in his presence, and to brave his resentment, by seeming, on many occasions, to expose himself to his attacks. He even ventured to penetrate into the country beyond him with an appearance of contempt. In one of there movements he marched by the banks of the Lake Thrafimenus, over which the mountains rose with a sudden and steep ascent. He trusted that the Roman Consul would follow him, and occupied a poll from which with advantage to attack him, if he should venture to engage amidst the difficulties of this narrow way. On the day in which his design was ripe for execu- tion, he was favoured in concealing his position on the ascent of the mountains by a fog which covered the brows of the hills; and he succeeded in draw- ing the Roman Consul into a snare, in which he perished, with the greater part of his army.
The
B o o a The loss of the Romans in this acion amount-
'_^. ed to fifteen thousand men who fell by the sword,
or who were forced into the lake and drowned. Of those who escaped by different ways, some con- tinued their flight for fourscore miles, the distance of this field of battle from Rome, and arrived in the city with the news of this disastrous event. On the sirs reports great multitudes assembled at the place from which the People were accuflomed to receive a communication of public dispatches from :he cfficers of State; and the Praetor, who then commanded in the city, being to inform them of what had passed, began his account of the action with thele words: " We are vanquished in a great " battle; the Consul, with great part of his army, " is slain." He was about to proceed, but could not be heard for the contfernation and the cries which arose among the people: insomuch, that perlbns who had been present in the ation con- sessed, they heard these words with a deeper im- pression, than any they had received amidst the bloodshed and horrors of the field; and that it was then only they became sensible of the whole extent of their lots.
To encreafe the general affliction, farther ac- counts were brought, at the fame time, that four thousand horse, which had been tent, upon hearing that Hannibal had paited the Appenines, by the Consul Servilius, to support his colleague, were intercepted by the enemy and taken. The Senate continued their meeing.s for many days without interruption, and the People, greatly affected with the weight of their mortifications and difappuint- ments, committed themselves with proper docility to the conduct of this refpethable body. In confi- dering the cause of thei: repeated defeats, it is pro- bable that they imputed them more to the differ- ence of personal qualities in the leaders, than to any d4ference in the arms, discipline, or courage of
the
bhe troops. In refpe&t to the choice of weapons,c H A 1'. Hannibal was so much convinced of the fuperio- v. rity of the Romans, that he availed hirmr.if of his '"" booty on the Trebia and the Lake Thrafi.menus, to arm his African veterans in their manner (w). In refpet to discipline and courage, although mere detachments of the Roman people were likely, in their firfi campaigns, to have been inferior to ve- terans, hardened in the service of many years un- der Hamilcar, Hasdrubal, and Hannibal himself; yet nothing is imputed by any historian to this point of dilparity. They are not said to have been backward in any attack, to have failed their gene- ral in the execution of any plan, to have disobeyed his orders, to have been seized with any panic, or, in any instance, to have given way to the enemy, until, being caught in some snare by the fuperio- rity of the general, they fought with disadvantage, and perilhed in great numbers on the field.
The refuit of the Senate's deliberations was to name a Ditator. This measure, except to dif- penfe with iome form that hampered the ordinary magistrate, had not been adopted during an inter- val of five and thirty years. The choice fell upon Quintus Fabius Maximus, who seemed to polFefs hle vigilance, caution, and vigour which were wanted in this arduous itate of affairs. In proceed- ing to name him, the usual form vhich, perhaps, in matters of ilate, as well as in matters of religion, Ih6uld be supposed indifpenfible, could not be ob- served. Of the consuls, of whom one or the other, according to antient pracice, ought to name the Dictator, one was dead; the other, being at a difiance, was prevented by the enemy from any communication with the city. The Senate, there- fore, to elude the supposed neceflity of his presence, resolved that not a Dictator, but a Pro-dicator,
should ('W) PuLh l~b. i;;; c. 115.
oo K should be named; and that the people should
_ themselves chufe this officer, with all the powers
that were usually entrusted to the Dicator him- self. Fabius was accordingly elected Pro-ditator, and in this capacity named M. Minutius Rufus for his second in command, or general of the horse.
Wh.ile the Romans weie thus preparing again to collect their forces, Hannibal continued to pur- sue his advantage. He might, with an enemy more easily subdued or daunted than the Romans, already have expeted great fruit from his vi&o- ries, at leali he might have expected offers of con- ceflion and overtures of peace: but it is probable that he knew the character of this people enough, not to flatter himself so early in the war with there expectations, or to hope that he could make any impreiifon by a nearer approach to the city, or by any attempt on its walls. He had already, by his pretence, enabled the nations of the northern and wefiern parts of Italy to shake off the dominion of Rome. He had the fame measures to pursue with refpet to the nations of the South. The capital, he probably supposed, might be deprived of the support of its allies, cut off from its resources, and even detiroyed; but while the State existed, could never be brought to yield to an enemy.
Under there impreflions the Carthaginian general, leaving Rome at a great ditiance on his right, re- paflfed the Appenines to the coast of Picenum, and from thence diredOed his march to Apulia. Here he proceeded, as he had done on the fide of Etru- ria and Gaul, to lay waste the Roman settlements, and to detach the natives from their allegiance to Rome. But while he pursued this plan in one ex. tremity of Italy, the Romans took meafilres to recover the pofleflions they had loft on the other, or at leafr to prevent the disaffected Gau;s from making any considerable diversions in favour of their enemy.
For
For this purpose, while Fabius Maximus was af-c H A P. fembling an army to oppose Hannibal in Apulia, V. the Praetor, Lucius Pofthumius, was rent with a proper force to the Po. Fabius having united the troops that had served under the Consul Servilius, with four legions newly raised by himself, followed the enemy. On his march he issued a proclamati- on, requiring all the inhabitants of open towns and villages in that quarter of Italy to retire into places of safety, and the inhabitants of every diftrit to which the enemy approached, to set fire to their habitations and granaries, and to destroy whatever they could not remove in their flight (x). Though determined not to hazard a battle, he drew near to the Carthaginian army, and continued from the heights to observe and to circumscribe their moti- ons. Time.alone, he trusted, would decide the war in his favour, against an enemy who was far re- moved from any supply or recruit, and in a country that was daily wasing by the effect of their own depredations.
Hannibal, after endeavouring in vain to bring the Roman Dicator to a battle, perceived his design to protrat the war; and confidering ination as the principal evil he himself had to fear, frequently ex- posed his detachments, and even his whole army,. in dangerous situations. The advantages he gave by there aats of temerity were sometimes effeatu- ally seized by his wary antagonist, but more fre- quently recovered by his own singular conduc and unfailing resources.
In this temporary fiagnation of Hannibal's for- tune, and in the frequent opportunities which the Romans had, though in trifling encounters, to measure their own Itrength with that of the enemy, their confidence began to revive. The Public re- fumed the tranquillity of its Councils, and looked
txJ Liv. lib. xxii. c. Iz.
round
o o o Kround with deliberation to colledt its force. The a__4 , people and the army recovered from their late con-
iternation, and took advantage of the breathing- time they had gained, to censure the very conduct to which they owed the returns of their confidence and the renewal of their hopes. They forgot their former defeats, and began to imagine that the ene- my kept his footing in Italy, by the permission, by the timidity, or by the excellive caution of their leader.
A flight advantage over Hannibal, who had too much exposed his foraging parties, gained by the general of the horse in the absence of the Dicta- tor, confirmed the army and the people in this opinion, and greatly funk the reputation of Fabius. As he could not be fiperfeded before the utual term of his office was expired, the Senate and Peo- ple, though precluded by law from proceeding to an actual deposition, came to a reiblution equally violent and unprecedented, and which they hoped might induce him to resign his power. They railed the general of the horse to an equal com- mand with the Dictator, and left them to adjust their pretensions between them. Such affionts, under the notions of honour, which in modemn times are annexed to the military chara&er, would have made it impoflible for the Dictator to remain in his fiation. But in a commonwealth, where, to put any perlbnal consideration in competition with the public, would have appeared abfiurd; seeming injuries done by the State to the honour of a citi- zen, only furnished him wish a more splendid oc- canion to diftplay his virtue. The Roman Ditator continued to fnrve under this diminution of his rank and command, and overlooked with magna- nimity the inflts with which the people had re- quited the ,iervice h was rendering to his country.
MIinutiun
Minutius being now associated with the Diaator, c H A P. in order to be free from the refiraints of a joint command, and from the wary counsels of his col- league, desired, as the propereft way of adjusting their pretensions, to divide the army between them. In this new situation he soon after, by his rashness, exposed himself and his division to be entirely cut off by the enemy. But being rescued by Fabius, he too gave proofs of a magnanimous spirit, con- fefled the favour he had received, and committing himself, with the whole army, to the conduct of his colleague, he left this cautious officer, during the remaining period of their joint command, to pursue the plan he had formed for the war (y).
At this time, however, the People, and even the Senate, were not willing to wait for the effect of such seemingly languid and dilatory measures as Fabius was inclined to pursue. They resolved to augment the army in Italy to eight legions, which, with an equal number of the allies, amounted to eighty thousand foot and seven thousand two hun- dred horse; and they intended, in the approaching election of Consuls, to chufe men, not only of re- puted ability, but of decisive and resolute counsels. As such they elected C. Terentius Varro, tuppofed to be of a bold and dauntless spirit; and, in order to temper his ardour, joined with him in the com- mand L. Emilius Paulus, an officer of approved experience,. who had formerly obtained a triumph for his victories in llyricum, and who was high in the confidence of the Senate, as well as in that of the People.
In the autumn before the nomination of these officers to command the Roman army, Hannibal had surprised the fortress of Cannar on the Aufidus, a place to which the Roman citizens of that quar- ter had retired with their effets, and at which they
()9 Plutarchi in vit. Fab. Ma.,
had
B oo sK had colleCted considerable magazines and flores.
This, among other circumfiances, determined the Senate to hazard a battle, and to furnish the new Consuls with inftruEtions to this effect.
These officers, it appears, having opened the campaign on the banks of the Aufidus, advanced by mutual content within fix miles of the Cartha- ginian camp, which covered the village of Cannas. Here they differed in their opinions, and, by a itrange defect in the Roman policy, which, in times of less virtue, mut have been altogether ruinous, and even in there times was ill fitted to produce a consistent and well supported series of operations, had no rule by which to decide their precedency, and were obliged to take the com- mand each a day in his turn.
Varro, contrary to the opinion of his colleague, proposed to give battle on the plain, and with this intention, as often as the command devolved upon him, still advanced on the enemy. In order that he might occupy the paflage and both fides of the Aufidus, he encamped in two separate divisions on its opposite banks, having his larger division on the right of the river, opposed to Hannibal's camp. Still taking the opportunity of his turn to com- mand the army, he passed with the larger division to a plain, supposed to be on the left of the Aufidus, and there, though the field was too narrow to receive the legions in their usual form, he prefled them together, and gave the enemy, if he chore it, an opportunity to engage. To ac- commodate his order to the extent of his ground, he contracted the head, and the intervals of his manipules or columns, making their depth greatly to exceed the front which they turned to the enemy(z).
(2) [IT)! CT ,e:Zc; E> TUB;t5 :;C'|SI nOivj. .C) I TO HE'l~slrO
Vid. Polyb. I~ ~Heo
He placed his cavalry on the flanks, the Roman c H A P. knights on his right towards the river, and the'_ , horsemen of the allies on the left.
Hannibal no sooner saw this movement and dif- position of the enemy, than he hastened to meet them on the plain which they had chosen for the field of aftion. He likewise passed the Aufidus, and, with his left to the river and his front to the south, formed his army upon an equal line with that of the enemy.
He placed the Gaulith and Spanish Cavalry on his left facing the Roman knights, and the Nu- midians on his right facing the allies.
The flanks of his infantry, on the right and the left, were composed of the African foot, armed in the Roman manner, with the pilum, the heavy buckler, and the stabbing fvord. His centre, though opposed to the choice of the Roman le- gions, consisted of the Gaulish and the Spanish foot, variously armed and intermixed together.
Hitherto no advantage seemed to be taken on either fide. As the armies fronted south and north, even the Sun, which rose soon after they were formed, shone upon the flanks, and was no difad- vantage to either. The superiority of numbers was greatly on the fide of the Romans; but Han- nibal refted his hopes of vicory on two circum- stances; first, on a motion to be -made by his cavalry, if they prevailed on either of the enemy's wings; next on a position' he was to take with his centre, in order to begin the aftion from thence, to bring the Roman legions into some disorder, and expose them, under that disadvantage, to the attack which he was prepared to make with his veterans on both their flanks.
The ation accordingly began with a charge of the Gaulilh and Spanish horse, who, being fupe- rior to the Roman knights, drove them from their ground, forced them into the river, and put the
greater
B o greater part of them to the sword. By this event
L the flank of the Roman army, which might have -'-vbeen joined to the Aufidus, was entirely unco-
vered.
Having performed this service, the vicorious cavalry had orders to wheel at full gallop round the rear of their o.-.n army, and to join the Numi- dian horse on their right, who were flill engaged with the R-.man allies. By this unexpeted junc- tion, the left wing ot the Roman army was like- wife put to flight, and pursued by the African horse; at the faime time the Spanish cavalry pre- pared to attack the Roman infantry, wherever thev flhouid be ordered on the flank, or the rear.
While these important events took place on the wings, Hannibal amuscd the Roman legions of the main body with a singular movement that was made by the Gauls and Spaniards, and with which he proposed to begin the adion. These came forward, not in a ftreight line abreast, but swelling out to a curve in the centre, without disjoining their flanks from the African infantry, who re- mained firm on their ground.
By this motion they formed a kind of crescent convex to the front. The Roman manipules of the right and the left, fearing, by this singular disposition to have no share in the action, hastened to bend their line into a corresponding curve, and, in proportion as they came to close with the enemy, charged them with a confident and impetuous courage. The Gauls and Spaniards refilled this charge no longer than was necessary to awaken the precipitant ardour with which vitorious troops often blindly pursue a flying enemy. And the Roman line being bent, and fronting inwards to the centre of its concave, the legions pursued where the enemy led them. Hurrying from the flanks to share in the victory, they narrowed their space as they advanced, and the men who were accustomed
to
to have a square of fix feet clear for wielding their c H A P. arms, being now prefled together, so as to pre- V. vent entirely the use of their swords, found them- selves firuggling against each other for space, in an inextricable and hopeless confusion.
Hannibal, who had waited for this event, or- dered a general charge of his cavalry on the rear of the Roman legions, and at the fame time an attack from his African infantry on both their flanks; by these dispositions and joint operations, without any considerable loss to himself, he effeced an almost incredible slaughter of his enemies. With the loss of no more than four thousand, andU. c. s57. these chiefly of the Spanish and Gaulish infan- try, he put fifty thousand of the Romans to the sword.
The Consul, Emilius Paulus, had been wound- ed in the [hock of the cavalry; but when he saw the condition in which the infantry were engaged, he refused to be carried off, and was flain(a). The Consuls of the preceding year, with others of the fame rank, were likewise killed. Of fix thousand horse only seventy troopers escaped with Varro. Of the infantry three thousand fled from the carnage that took place on the field of battle, and ten thousand who had been potled to guard the camp were taken.
The unfortunate Consul, with such of the firagglers as joined him in his retreat, took polt at Venufia; and with a noble confidence in his own integrity, and in the resources of his country, put himlelfin a posture to refill the enemy, till he could have instructions and reinforcements from Rome (b). (a) He has received from the poet the following honourable grave: Animzque magno prodigum Paulum fuperance Poeno. Hor. Car. lib. i. Ode iz.
(b) Liv. lib. xxii. VoL. I. L This
B o o K This calamity which had befallen the Romans A_, in Apulia, was accompanied with the defeat of
the Praetor Poithumius, who, with his army, on the other extremity of the country, was cut off by the Gauls. A general ferment arose throughout all Italy. Many cantons of Grecian extraction, having been about sixty years subject to Rome, now declared for Carthage. Others, feeling them- selves released from the dominion of the Romans, but intending to recover their liberties, not mere- ly to change their mailers, now waited for for an opportunity to stipulate the conditions on which they were to join the victor. Of this number were the cities of Capua, Tarentum, Locri, Me- tapontus, Crotona, and other towns in the south- east of the peninsula. In other cantons, the peo- ple being divided and opposed to each other with great animosity, severally called to their afliftance filch of the parties at war as they judged were molt likely to support them againfi their antago- nifis. Some of the Roman colonies, even within the diftrifs that were open to the enemy's incur- lions, still adhered to the metropolis; but the pofieffions of the republic were greatly reduced and scarcely equalled what the State had acquired before the expulsion of Pyrrhus from Italy, or even before the annexation of Campania, or the conquelt of Samnium. The allegiance of he ufbjects and the faith of her allies in Sicily wer greatly shaken. Hiero, the king of Syracuse who had some time, under the notion of an al liance, cherished his dependance on Rome, bein! now greatly funk in the decline of years, could no longer answer for the conduc of his own court and died soon after this event, leaving his sic ceffors -to change the party of the vanquished fc that of the viEtor.
Hitherto the nations of Greece and of Asia ha taken no part in the contest of those powerful r
va!
vals. But the Romans having already interfered c H A P. in the affairs of Greece, and made their ambition v, be felt beyond the Adriatic and the lonian'fea, the " ' news: of their supposed approaching- fall: was re- ceived there with attention: it awakened the hopes of many who had suffered from the':effects of their pawer.:. Among there Demetrius, the exile'd king of Pharos, being fill.at.. the court of Macedonia, and much in the confidence of Philip, who :.had recently mounted !the throne of that kingdom, urging.that: it was impoflible to reniain an indif- ferent!;fpetator in,' the c6nteft of'fuch powerful nations, persuaded the king to prefer the'alliance of Carthage to that of. Rome, and.to. join with Hannibal in the redu&ion'of the Roman power; observing;: that with.the merit of declaring: himself while the event .was yet.in any degree uncertain, the king, of Macedonia:would be juiily entitled to a proper share of the advantages to be reaped in tlie conquet. .
Philipaccordingly endeavoured to accommodate the. differences which he had to adjust with the Grecian States, and' sent 'an officer into Italy to treat with Hannibal, and with the Carthaginian deputies who attendedthe camp. In the negoci- ation which followed it was agreed, ;that .the king of Macedonia and the republic: of Carthage fhbuld confider the Romans as common .enemies; that they should pursue the war in Italy with their for- ces united,and make no peace but on terms mfitu- ally agreeable to both. In this treaty the interest of the prince-of Pharos was particularly attended to; and his reftoration-to the kingdom from which he had been expelled by the Romans,. with the recovery. of the hostages which had been exated from .him, were made principal articles:(c).:
Hannibal, from the time of his arrival in Italy, after having made war for three years in that coun-
(c) Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 33.
L try,
B o ox try, had received no supply from Africa, and x-. seemed to be left to pursue the career of his fate
with such resources as he could devise for himself; but this alliance with the king of Macedonia, pro. mifed amply to make up for the deficiency of his aids from Carthage; and Philip, by an easy pas. sage into Italy, was likely to furnish him with every kind of support or encouragement that was necessary to accomplish the end of the war.
The Romans were apprised of this formidable accession to the power of their enemy, as well as of the general defetion of their own allies, and of the revolt of their subjeCts. Though taxes-were accu- mulated on the people, and frequent loans obtained from the.commiffaries and contrators employed in the public service, their expences began to be ill supplied. There appeared not, however, in their councils, notwithstanding all there circumstances of distress, the fnalleft disposition to purchase safety by mean concelions of any fort. When the vanquish- ed Consul returned to the city, in order to attend the nomination of a person who, in this extremity of their fortunes, might be charged with the care of the commonwealth, the Senate, as conscious that he had ated at Cannae by their own inflruei- ons, and had, upon the fame motives that animated the whole Roman People, disdained, with a fupe- rior army, to stand in awe of his enemy, or to re- fuse him battle upon equal ground, went out in a kind of proceflion to meet him; and, upon a noble idea, that men are not answerable for the firokes of fortune, nor for the effeas of superior address in an enemy, they overlooked his temerity and his mif- conduct in the a&ion; they attended only to the undaunted afpe& he preserved after his defeat, re- turned him thanks for not having despaired of the commonwealth(d); and from thence forward con- (4) In the famous and admired cxpreffion, Quiz de republica non def-
tinued
tinued their preparations for war, with all the dig- c H A P. nity and pride of the most prosperous fortune. v. They refused to ransom the prisoners who had been&-'-" taken by the enemy at Canne, and treated with fullen cpntempt, rather than severity, those who by an early flight had escaped from the field; being petitioned to employ them again in the war, " We " have no service," they said, " for men who " could leave their fellow citizens engaged with an " enemy." They seemed to rife in the midfi of their difirefs, and to gain firength from misfortune. They prepared to attack or to resist at once, in all the different quarters to which the war was likely to extend, and took their measures for the support of it in Spain, in Sardinia and Sicily, as well as in Italy. They continued their fleets at sea; not only observed and obftru&ed the communications of Carthage with the feats of the war, but having in- tercepted part of the correspondence of Philip with Hannibal, they sent a powerful squadron to the coast of Epirus; and, by an alliance with the States of Etolia, whom they persuaded to renew their late war with Philip, found that prince sufficient em- ployment on the frontiers of his own kingdom, es- feEtually prevented his fending any supply to Han- nibal, and, in the sequel, reduced him to the hu- miliating neceltity of making a separate peace.
In the ordinary notions which are entertained of battles and their consequences, the last viEtory of Hannibal at Cannae, in the sequel of so many others that preceded it, ought to have decided the war; and succeeding ages have blamed this general for not marching direcly to the capital, in order to bring the contest to a speedy termination by the reduction of Rome itself. But his own judgment is of much more weight than that of the persons who censure him. He knew the character of the Romans and his own firength. Though vicorious, he was greatly weakened by his viAories, and at a
distance
B O o K distance from the means of a reinforcement or sup.
n ply. He was unprovided with engines of attack; and, so far from being in a condition to venture on the siege of Rome, that he could not undertake even that of Naples, which, after the battle of Canna:, refused to open its gates; and, 'indeed, soon after this date he received a check from Mar- cellus in attempting the siege of Nola (e).
The Romans, immediately after their disaster at Cannae, prepared again to act on the offensive, formed a frelh army of five and twenty thousand men, which they sent, under the Dictator.Junius Pera, to colle& the remains of their late vanquished forces, and to annoy the enemy wherever they might find them exposed.
Hannibal kept in motion with his army to pro- tect the cantons that were inclined to declare on his fide; but, together with the extent and multiplica- tionr of his new poffefions, which obliged him to divide his army in order to occupy and to secure them, he became sensible of his weakness; and, with the accounts sent to Carthage of his victories, he likewise sent representations of his losses, and de- manded a supply of men, of ltores, and of money. He was indeed in his new situation so much in want of there articles, that, having in the three first years of the war apparently raised the reputation of Car- thage to the greatest height, and procured to his country more allies and more territory in Italy than were left in the power of the Romans, together with Capua, and other cities, more wealthy than Rome itfeif, and surrounded with lands better cul- tivated, and more full of. resources, yet his affairs from thenceforward began to decline.
Armies are apt to susser, no less from an opinion that all the ends of their service are obtained, thar they do from defeats, and from despair of success
(:) Liv. lib. xxiii. c. 14, 15, i6.
The
The soldiers of Hannibal, now elated with vitory, c H A P. perhaps grown rich with the plunder of the coun- v. tries they had over-run, and of the armies they , had defeated; and presuming, that the war was at an end, or that they themselves ought to be reliev- ed, or sent to enjoy the rewards of so glorious and so hard a service, became remiss in their discipline, or indulged themselves in all the excesses, of which the means were to be found in their present fituati- on. Being mere soldiers of fortune, without a country, or any civil ties to unite them together, they were governed by the sole authority of their leader, and by their confidence in his singular abi- lities. Although there is no instance of their openly mutinying against him in a body, there are many initances of thei- separately and clandefiinely de- serting his service. The Spanish and Numidian horse, in particular, to whom he owed great part of his victories, upon some disappointment in their hopes, or upon a difguf, taken at the mere flagna- tion of his fortune, went over in troops and fqua- drons to the enemy (f). His hopes from the fide of Macedonia were entirely disappointed, the pow- er of that nation having full employment at home (g). He found himself unable, without di- viding his forces, to preserve his recent conquefis, or to protect the Italians who had declared for him. Some of his polieffions, therefore, he abandoned or destroyed ; and the natives of Italy, become the victims of his policy, or left to the mercy of the Romans whom they had offended, became averse to his cause, or felt that they could not rely on his power to protect them (h). Moved by there con- fiderations, he made earnest applications at Car- thage for reinforcements and supplies, to enable him to continue the war. But the councils of that (f) Liv. lib. xxiii. c. 46. (X) Ibid; lib. xxvi. c. 2S-- 9. Lib. xxviii. c. 4. 4/) Ibid. lib. xxvii. c. I and 16.
repullic,
B 0 K republic, though abje& in misfortune, were in- a_1 solent or remits in prosperity. Being broken in-
to fations, the projeAs of one party, however wife, were frustrated by the opposition of the other. One faction received the applications of Hannibal with scorn. " Do vitories," they said, " reduce armies to the want of reinforcements and " of supplies, even againit the very enemies they " had vanquished ? And do the acquisitions of " Hannibal require more money and men to keep " them than were required to make them ? Other "viEtorious generals are proud to display the " fruits of their conquefis, or bring home the " spoils of their enemies to enrich their own " country, intfead of draining it to support a ca-
reer of vain and unprofitable vitories." These invectives concluded with a motion, which, on the supposition that the advantages gained by Hannibal were real, was well-founded in wisdom and found policy: that the occasion should be seized to treat with the Romans, when the State had reason to expect the mofi advanta- geous terms. But this council either was, or ap- peared to be, the language of fadion; and no measures were adopted, either to obtain peace, or effecually to support the war.
The friends as well as the enemies of Hannibal, contributed to the neglet with which he was treated. In proportion as his friends admired him, and gloried in his fortune, they acted as if he alone were able to surmount every difficulty; and they accordingly were remits in supporting him. The republic, under the effects of this wretched policy, with all the advantages of her navigation and of her trade, suffered her navy to decline, and permitted the Romans to obfirut, or molest, all the paifages by which she could com- municate with her armies in Spain and Italy,
QT
or her allies in Sicily and Greece (i). They voted c H A p. indeed to Hannibal, on the present occasion, a re- v. inforcement of four thousand Numidian horse, forty elephants, and a fum of money. But this resolution appears to have languiihed in the exe- cution; and the armament, when ready to fail, was suffered to be diverted from its purpose, and ordered to Spain infiead of Italy (k).
Notwithfianding there mortifications and dif- appointments, Hannibal still kept his footing in Italy for sixteen years; and so long gave sufficient occupation to the Romans, in recovering, by flow and cautious steps, what he had ravi(hed from them in three years, and by a few daring exam- ples of ability and valour. When the war had taken this turn, and the Romans, by the growing skill and ability of their leaders, as well as by the unconquerable spirit of their people, began to prevail, Hannibal, receiving no support dire&ly from Africa, endeavoured to procure it from Spain by the junction of his brother Hasdrubal, to whom he recommended a second pafTage over the Alps, in imitation of that which he himself had accomplished. Every attempt of this fort, however, had been defeated, during fix years, by the vigour and abilities of the two Scipios, Cnaeus and Publius, and afterwards by the superior ge- nius of the young Publius Scipio, who, succeeding the father and the uncle, as will be seen in the sequel, supported, with fresh lultre, the cause of his country.
The two Scipios, after rome varieties of fortune, though, while they acted together, they were ge- nerally successful, having, in the seventh year of this war, separated their forces, were both, within the space of forty days, betrayed or deserted by (i) Liv. lib. xxviii. c. 4. (A) Ibid. lib. xxiii. c. z3. and-Xz.
their
B o o their allies, and cut off by the superior force of
the enemy.
The natives of Spain had, by their want of union and military skill, as has been mentioned, suffered many foreign eflablifhments to be made in their country,; they had permitted the Cartha- ginians, in particular, to possess themselves of a considerable territory; but afterwards, in order to remove them from thence, accepted of the pro- tel;con of the Romans; and, in the sequel, occa- fionallv applied to either of these parties for aid against the other, being, during the greater part of this war, the unstable friends, or irresolute enemies of both.
A service of so much danger, so little in public view, and at a distance from the principal scenes of the war, was not fought for as an opportunity to accumulate fame. The young Scipio, fired with the memory of his father and of his uncle, who had fallen in that service, and, intfead of be- ing deterred by their fate, eager to revenge their fall, courted a command, which every other Ro- man is said to have declined. This young man, as has been observed, had begun his military ser- vices, in the firit year of this war, on the Tecinus, where he had the good fortune to rescue his father. He was afterwards present at the battle of Canne, and was one of the few, who, from that disastrous field, forced their way to Canufium. Being cho- fen commander by those who escaped to this place, he prevented the effect of a desperate refo- lution they had taken to abandon Italy. Many of the feverer forms of the commonwealth having been dilpenfed with in the present exigencies of the State, Scipio had been chosen Edile, though under the legal standing and age, being only turned of twenty-four, one year younger than Hannibal was when he took the command of the
army
army in Spain, and four years younger than he c H A p. was when he marched into Italy. v. Such particulars relating to men of superior -' genius and virtue, are in the highest degree inter- eftingto mankind. It is even pleating to know, that this young man was, according to Livy, tall and graceful in his person, with a beautiful coun- tenance, and engaging aspect.
The Romans had been hitherto preserved in all the extremities of their fortune by the' superiority of their national charater, and by means of poli- tical establishments, which, although they do not inspire men with superior genius, yet raise ordinary citizens to a degree of elevation approaching to heroism; enabling the flates they compose to sub- sift in great dangers, and to await the appearance of superior men. They had not yet opposed to Hannibal an officer of similar talents, or of a like superiority to the ordinary race of mankind. Sci- pio was the first who gave indubitable proofs of his title to this character. (1). Upon his arrival in Spain, with a fleet of thirty gallies, and ten thou- sand men, he found the remains of the vanqui(hed Romans retired within the Iberus, where, under the command of T. Fonteius and Lucius Marcius, they had scarcely been able to withstand the fur- ther progress of the enemy (m). There he ac- cordingly landed, and fixed his principal quarters for the winter at Tarragona. By his information of the pofRure of the enemy, it appeared, that they had placed all their magazines and flores at New Carthage; and that, thinking this place sufficiently secured by a garrison of a thousand men, they had separated their army into three divisions, and were gone into different diretions to extend their possessions, or to cover the terri- tories they had acquired. Of there divfions, none (J) LiT. lib. xxvi. c. I8, g1, &c. (m) Ibid. lib. xxvi. c. 19. anld o2
tories
s o o K were nearer to their principal fiation than ten days
_ march.
Upon these informations, Scipio formed a pro. jea to Curprize the town of New Carthage, though at a distance from Tarragona of above three hun- dred miles. He refied his hopes of success on the security of his enemies, and on the profpet of be- ing able to accomplish the greater part of his march before his design should be suspected, or before any measures could be taken to prevent him. For this purpose, he disclosed it to Lelius alone; and gave him orders to steer for that place with his fleet, while he himself made hasty marches by land. This city was situated, like Old Car- thage, on a peninsula, or neck of land, surround- ed by the sea. Scipio took post on the Ifithmus, fortified himself towards the continent, from which he had reason to expedt some attempt would be made to relieve the place, and secured himself on that fide, before he attacked the town.
In his first attempt on the ramparts he was re- pulsed, but observing, that at low water, the walls were accessible at a weaker place than that at which he had made his aftault; and having en- couraged his men, by informing them, that the God of the sea had promired to favour them, which they thought to be verified by the seasonable ebb which ensued, he there planted his ladders, and forced his way into the town. Here he made a great booty in captives, money, and ships (u).
In this manner Scipio conducted his-firft exploit in Spain; and having carried on the war with equal ability and success for five years, he obliged the Carthaginians, after repeated defeats, to abandon that country. He himself, while Hasdrubal at- tempted to join his brother Hannibal in Lucania, and Mago to make a diversion in his favour in Li-
-; Pec!7y:. . l. 9-:;-;7. A.Fpila de :.. H.fpan.
guria,
guria, returned to Rome. He was yet under thirty c H A p. years of age, and not legally qualified to bear the v office of Consul. But having an unquestionable title to the highest confidence of his country, the services which he had already performed procured a dispensation in his favour. He was accordingly raised to the Consulate; and when the provinces came to be assigned to the officers of slate, he moved that Africa should be included in the num- ber, and be allotted to himself: " There," he said, " the Carthaginians may receive the deepest "wounds, and from thence be the fooneil obliged " for their own safety to recal their forces from " Italy."
This motion was unfavourably received by the greater part of the Senate; it seemed to be a mat- ter of furprize, that, while Rome itself lay between two hostile armies, that of Hannibal in Brutium, and that of Mago in Liguria or Gaul, the Consul Ihould propose to-i rip the republic of so great a force as would be necessary for the invasion of Africa (o). The fatal miscarriage of Regulus on that ground in a former war, the unhappy effects of precipitant counsels in the beginning of the present, were cited against him; and the desire of so arduous a station was even accounted prefump- tuous in so young a man.
Among the difficulties which Scipio met with in obtaining the consent of the Senate to the execution of his plan; is mentioned the disinclination of the great Fabius, who, from a prepossession in favour of that dilatory war, by which he himself had ac- quired Co much glory; and by which, at a time when procraitination was necelary, he had retriev- ed the fortunes of his country, obstinately opposed the adopting of this hazardous projet.
(o) Appian de Bell. Punic p. 4.
It
B o O rK It had been, for the most part, an established
l maxim in the counsels of Rome, to carry war,
when in their power, into the enemy's country. They had been prevented in the present cafe only by the unexpected appearance of Hannibal. in Italy, and were likely to return to the execution of their first design as foon:as their affairs at home thould furifh them with a'fufficient respite. We may, therefore, conceive what they felt of the dif- ficulties of the present war, from this and other circumstances; that even after fortune: had so great- ly inclined in their favour,: they did .not yet think themselves in condition to retaliate on the.enemy-; or safe against the designs which Hannibal might form in Italy, if they should divide their forces, or detach so great a part of them as might be necessary to execute the project of a war in Africa.
They concluded, however, at last, with forne hesitation, that Scipio, while the other .Consul should remain opposed: to Hannibal in Italy, might have for his province the island of Sicily, dispose of. the forces that were frill there, receive the voluntary supplies of men and of money, which he himself. might be able to procure; and if he found, upon mature deliberation, a proper op- portunity, that he might make a descent upon Africa. Agreeably to this resolution, he set out for the province afligned him, having a confidera- ble fleet equipped by private.contribution, and a body of seven thousand volunteers, who embarked in high expee.ation of the service in which he pro- posed to employ them (p).
WVhile Scipio, by his exertions in Spain,- was rising to this degree of eminence in the councils of his country, the war, both- in Sicily and in Italy, had been attended with many signal events, and funiihed many proofs of difiinguifhed ability in the
(p) Appian de Bell. Punic.
courle
course of its operations, highly interefiing to thofec H A p. who are qualified to receive infirution from such --. examples of condut, and from the experience of great events. But in the summary account of the iteps by which the Romans ascended to empire, we can only point out the tradt by which they ad- vanced; and, with a few general observations on the means, haften to contemplate the end which they attained.
The fortunes of Hannibal, as we have already remarked, had been some time on the decline. Capua and Tarentum, notwithfianding his utmost efforts to preserve them, had been taken by the Romans. While the first of these places was be- fieged, he endeavoured to force the enemies lines; and being repulsed, made a feint, by a haify march towards Rome itself, to draw off the besiegers. By this movement he obtained a fight of that famQus city; but again retired without having gained any advantage from this intended diversion. His al- lies, in Sicily, were entirely overwhelmed by-the reduction of Syracuse; but that which chiefly as- sected his cause, by cutting off all hopes of future supplies or reinforcements, was the fall of his bro- ther Hasdrubal. This officer had found means to elude the forces of Scipio in Spain; and attempt- ed, by pursuing the trac of his brother into Italy, to join him in that country. In this design he ac- tually surmounted all the difficulties of the Pyre- nees and of the Alps, had passed the Po and the Rubicon, and advanced to the Metaurus before he met with any considerable check. There, at lafi, he encountered with the Roman Consuls, M. Claudius Nero and M. Livius Salinator, and was defeated with the lots of his whole army, amounting to fifty thousand men, of whom not one escaped being taken or slain (q).
(q) Liv. lib. ximii. c. 49.
On
B o o K On this occasion, the Romans, who had so long
left their poffeflions in the country a prey to the enemy, began to enjoy tome degree of security, returned to their ruined habitations, and resumed the labours of the field. Hannibal, as overwhelm. ed with despair or affliction, confessed, that he could no longer be in doubt of the fate that await. ed his country (r). From this time he contracted his quarters, withdrew his posts from Apulia, gave intimation to all his allies in Italy, who had much to fear from the resentment of the Romans, that they should retire under the covert of his army in Brutium. Here he himself remained on the defen- five; and, as if sensible that his career in Italy was nearly at an end, ereEted those curious monuments which are cited by Polybius, and on which were recorded the particulars of his march from Spain to Italy, and the numbers of his army at different pe- riods of the war (s).
In the following year, Mago, as we have ob- served, being unable to effect any considerable service in Spain, had orders to make fail for Italy, and once more endeavour to reinforce the army of Hannibal. But, having loft some time in a fruit- less attempt on New Carthage, and a report in the mean time having spread of Scipio's intention to invade Africa, he received a second order to land at Genua; and, that he might difirad or employ the forces of the Romans at home, endeavour to rekindle the war in Liguria and Gaul.
Such was the state of affairs when Scipio pro- posed to invade Africa, passed into Sicily, and em- ployed the whole year of his Consulate in making preparations. In this interval, however, having access by sea to the coatIs which were occupied by Hannibal in Italy, he forced the town of Locri, (r) Agofcere re fortunam Cardthginai Liv. lib. xxvii. fine. (.) Liv. lib. xxviiL fine.
and
and poRed a garrison there, under the commandc H A p. of Pleminius, an officer, whose singular abuses of v. power became the fubjeas of complaint at Rome, ' and drew some censure on Scipio himself, by whom he was employed, and supposed to be counte- nanced. Scipio was said, on this occasion, not only to have connived at the outrages committed by Ple- minius, whom he had Rationed at Locri, but to have been himself, while at Syracuse, abandoned to a life of effeminacy and pleasure, unworthy of a person entrufied with so important a command. It may appear firange, that this censure should arise from his having fhewn.a disposition at Syracuse to become acquainted with the learning of the Greeks. His. enemies gave out, that he affeced the man- ners of that people; that he passed his time among books, and in public places of conversation and exercise. Upon these surmises, a commission was granted to the Prateor of Sicily, with ten Senators, two Tribunes of the People, and one of the Ediles, who had orders to join the Proetor in that island. To there instructions were given, that if they found Scipio accessary to the disorders committed at Lo- cri, or reprehensible in his own condu&, they should fend him in arrest to Rome: but that, if they found him innocent, he should continue in his command, and be suffered to carry the war wherever he thought most expedient for the good of the commonwealth. The members of this formidable court of in- quest, having landed at Locri, in their way to Si- cily, ordered Pleminius, with thirty of his officers, in chains to Rome: and from Locri, proceeding to Syracuse, they reported from thence, that Scipio was no way accessary to the crimes com- mitted by the troops in garrison at Locri: and that within the diflriEt of his own immediate com- mand the allies were fully proteted, and the VOL. I. M troops
B o o K troops, preserved in such order and discipline (t),
L as, whenever they should be employed, gave the
most encouraging profpet of viEtory.
Such was the report in favour of this young man, who appears to have been the sirs Roman statesman or warrior, who shewed any considerable disposition to become acquainted with the literature and ingenious arts of the Greeks. In this particu- lar, his Carthaginian rival is said to have advanced before him, having long fludied the language and learning of those nations; and having in his retinue some persons from Greece to aid him in the use of their writings.
Scipio, while he commanded the Roman army in Spain, having already conceived his design upon Africa, had with this view opened a correspondence with Syphax, king of Numidia; and had actually made a viilt in person to this prince, who, being at variance with Carthage, was easily prevailed upon to promise his support to the Romans, in cafe they should carry the war into that country. The Roman general, now ready to embark with a considerable army, sent Laelius with the first divi- sion, probably to examine the coast, to chufe a proper fation at which to fix the assembling of his fleet, and to call upon the king of Numidia to-per- form his engagements.
This division of the fleet, at its first appearance, was supposed to bring the Roman Proconsul, with all his forces, from Sicily; and the Carthaginians, whatever reason they might, for some time, have had to expea this event, were, in a great measure, unprepared for it. They had their levies to make at home, and troops to hire from abroad; their fortifications were out of repair, and their stores and magazines unfurnished. Even their fleet was not in a condition to meet that of the enemy.
(t) Lir. lib. xxil .c. zo.
They
They now haitened to supply these defects; and,c H A p, though undeceived with refped to the numbers v. and force of the firit embarkation, they made'"'""" no doubt that they were soon to expect another i accordingly they continued their preparations, and took every measure to secure themselves, or to avert the form with which they were threat- ened.
They had recently made their peace with Sy- phax, king of Numidia; and, instead of an enemy in the person of this prince, had obtained for them- selves a zealous ally. He had broke off his en- gagements withScipio and the Romans,tempted by his passion for Sophonifba, the daughter of Hafdru- bal, a principal citizen of Carthage, who refused to marry him on any other terms. But this trarnf- action, which procured to the Carthaginians one ally, loft them another: for this high-minded wo- man, who, instead of a dower, contraated'for ar- mies in defence of her country, had forrfnrly cap- tivated Massinissa, another Numidian prince, that, being deprived of his kingdom by Syphax, had received his education, and formed his attachments, at Carthage (u). Massinissa, while he had hopes of an alliance with the family of Hasdrubal, engaged all his partizans in Numidia in behalf of the Car- thaginians; and he himself fought their battles in person. But, Rung with his disappointment, and the preference which was given to his rival, he determined to court the favour of their enemies; had made advances to Scipio, before his depar- ture from Spain; and now, hearing of the arrival of the Roman fleet, hastened to Hippo, where Laelius had come to an anchor, and made offer of his assistance, with that of his friends in the kingdom of Numidia.
(a) Appiau de Bell. Hifpan. p. 275.
M 2 Such
B o o K Such was the slate of parties in Africa, when this
country was about to become the scene of war. The Carthaginians, till in hopes of diverting the storm, sent earnest inftrudtions to both their gene- rals to press upon the Romans in Italy, and to make every effort to difiraCt or to occupy their forces, and to leave them no leisure for the invasion of Africa. They sent, at the fame time, an em- baffy to the king of Macedonia, to remind him of the engagements into which he had entered with Hannibal, and to represent the danger to which he and every other prince must be exposed from a people so ambitious as the Romans, if they were suffered to unite, by a conqueR, the resources of Carthage with those of Rome.
Philip, at the earnest intreaty of many Grecian flates, who were anxious that the Romans (hould have no pretext to embroil the affairs of Greece, had, in the preceding year, made a separate peace, firii with the Etolians, and afterwards with the Romans themselves (w); and was now extremely averse to renew the quarrel. The occasion, how- ever, appeared to be of great moment; and he lifened so far to the remonfirances of the Carthagi- nians, as to furnish them with a body of four thou- sand men, and a supply of money.
By such measures as these, hastily taken on the approach of danger, the Carthaginians endeavoured to make amends for the former remissness of their counsels. Hitherto they appear to have confidered the war with little concern, and to have left their exertions to the ambition of a single family, by whom the State was engaged in this quarrel (x). They neglected their firength at home, in propor- tion as they believed the enemy to be at a diitance; and were indifferent to national objeas, while their private interefis were secure.
(c,) Liv. lib. xxix. c. {. () The fonr of Harilcar.
The
The harbour of Hippo, about fifty miles weft c H A P. from Carthage, and under the Fair Promontory, _ being seized by Laelius, furniihed a place of recep- tion for Scipio's fleet. This officer accordingly fail- ed from Sicily with fifty armed galleys, and four hundred transports. As be had reason to expect, that the country would be laid waste before him, great part of this shipping was employed in carry- ing his provisions and stores. The numbers of his army are not mentioned. His first object was to make himself matier of Utica, situated about half way between Carthage and Hippo, the place where he landed. He accordingly,'without loss of time, presented himself before it; but loon found himself unable to execute his purpose. The coun- try, to a considerable distance, was laid waste or deserted by the natives, and could not subsist his army. The Carthaginians had a great force in the field, confifing of thirty thousand men, under Hasdrubal the son of Gifgo, together with fifty thousand foot and ten thousand horse, under Syphax king of Numidia, who now advanced to the relief of Utica.
Scipio, on the juncion and approach of there numerous armies, retired from Utica, took poffefli- on of a peninsula on the coast, fortified the isthmus which led to it, and in this station having a safe re- treat, both for his fleet and his army, continued to be supplied with provisions by sea from Sardinia, Sicily, and Italy. But being thus reduced to a& on the defensive in the presence of a superior ene- my, and not 'likely, without some powerful rein- forcements from Italy, to make any further im- preflion on Africa, he had. recourse to a firatagem which, though amounting nearly to a breach of faith, was supposed to be allowed in war with an African enemy.
The combined armies of Carthage and Numidia lay in two separate encampments, and, it being
winter,
B o o K winter, were lodged in huts covered with brush-
L wood and the leaves of the palm. In these cir-
cumftances the Roman general formed a design to set fire to their camp, and, in the midst of the con- fusion which that alarm might occasion, to attack them in the night. In order to gain a sufficient knowledge of the ground, and of the ways by which his emiflaries must pass in the execution of this design, he entered into a negotiation, and asset- ed to treat of conditions for terminating the war. His deputies, under this pretence, being freely admitted into the enemy's station, brought him minute information of their position, and of the avenues which led to different parts of their camp.
Scipio being pcffeffed of these informations, broke off the treaty, advanced with his army in the night, and, in many different places at once, set fire to Hasdrubal's camp. The flames, being easily caught by the dry materials, spread with the great- eft rapidity. The Carthaginians, supposing that these fires were accidental, and having no appre- henfion of the presence of an enemy, ran without arms to extinguish them: And the Numidians, with still less concern, left their huts to gaze on the scene, or to lend their affifiance. In this slate of security and confusion Scipio attacked and dif- perfed them with great slaughter (y); and being, in consequence of this action, again master of the field, he returned to Utica, and renewed the siege or blockade of that place.
In such a furprize and defeat as the African ar- mies had now received, they were likely to have loft their arms and their baggage, and to have no where sufficient numbers together to withstand an enemy; on this supposition, it had been already proposed at Carthage to have recourse to their last
(j) Po!yb. lib. iv. c. 5. Liv. lib. xxx. c, 6.
retort,
resort, the recalling of Hannibal from Italy. But c H A p. this motion, upon a report from Hasdrubal and Sy- v. phax, that they were again arming and aifembling their forces, and that they were joined by a recruit of four thousand men newly arrived from Spain, was for some time laid aside. These hopes, how- ever, were speedily blasted by a second defeat which the combined army received before they were fully assembled, and by a revolution which ensued in the kingdom of Numidia, where Syphax, pursued by Maffinifia and Lalius, was vanquished and driven from his kingdom, which from thence- forward became the polTeflion of his rival, and a great accefion of strength to the Romans. On this calamity Hasdrubal being threatened by the popu- lace of Carthage with vengeance for his repeated miscarriages, and being aware of the relentless and sanguinary spirit of his countrymen, durst not trull himielt in their hands; and in a species of exile, with a body of eight thousand men that adhered to him, withdrew from their service.
In this extremity there was no hope but in the pretence of Hannibal; and expresses were accord- ingly sent both to Mago and himself, to haften their return into Africa, with all the forces they could bring for the defence of their country.
Hannibal, it is probable, had for some time been prepared for this measure, having transports in rea- diness to embark his army; yet he is faid'to have received the order with Come expreilions of rage. "They have now accomplished, he said (speaking
of the opposite facion at Carthage), what, by withholding from me the necelfary supports in " this war, they have long endeavoured to effect.
They have wilhed to destroy the family of "Barcas; and rather than fail in their aim, are "willing to bury it at last under the ruins of their "country (z)."
(z) L'v. lib. xxx. c. 2o.
VWhilc
B o O K While the Carthaginians were thus driven to
. their last resource, Scipio advanced towards their <' tcity, and invested at once both Tunis and Utica,
which, though at the difiance of above thirty miles from each other, may be confidered as bastions on -the right and the left, which flanked and com- manded the country which led to this famous place. His approach gave the citizens a frelh alarm, and seemed to bring their danger too near to susser them to await the arrival of relief from Italy. It appeared necessary to itay the arm of the victor by a treaty; and thirty Senators were accordingly de- puted to sue for peace. These deputies, in their address to the Roman Proconsul, laid the blame of the war upon Hannibal, supported, as they al- leged, by a desperate faction who had adopted his wild designs. They intreated that the Romans would once more be pleated to spare a republic which was again brought to the brink of ruin by the precipitant counsels of a few of its mem- bers.
In answer to this abject request, Scipio menti- oned the terms upon which he supposed that the Romans would be willing to treat of a peace. t cessation of arms was agreed to, and a negotiation commenced; but it was suddenly interrupted and prevented of its final effec by the arrival of Han- nibal. This general, after many changes of for- tune, having taken the necessary precautions to fe- cure his retreat, in cafe he should be called off for the defence of Carthage; now in the seventeenth year of the war, and after he had supported him- self sixteen years in Italy, by the sole force of his nerfonal character and abilities, against the whole weight, insiitutions, resources, discipline, and na- *c. cs.',tional character of the Romans, transported his
army from thence, landed at Hadrumetum, at a distance from any of the quarters occupied by the Romans, and drew to his itandard all the remains
of
of the lately vanquished armies of Carthage, andc H A P. all the forces which the republic was yet in a state V to supply.
This event produced a change in the counsels of Carthage, and inspired the people with fresh pre- fumption. They now flighted the faith which they had lately engaged to Scipio, and seized on all the Roman vessels, which, trusting to the cef- fation of arms, had taken refuge in their bay. They even insulted the messenger whom the Ro- man general sent to complain of this outrage; and thus hostilities, after a very Lhort truce, were re- newed with redoubled animosity and rancour on both fides.
The people of Carthage, under dreadful appre- henfions of becoming a prey to the Romans, sent a melfage to Hannibal, then at Hadrumetum, to haften his march, requefiing him to attack the enemy, and at any hazard to relieve the city from the dangers and hardships of a siege. To this mef. sage he made answer, That in affairs of State the Councils of Carthage must decide; but in the con- dut of war, the general who commands must judge of his opportunity to fight.
The forcing of Hannibal to evacuate Italy was a victory to Scipio; as this was the firif fruit which he ventured to promise from the invasion of Africa. With this enemy, however, in his rear, it was not expedient to continue the attack of Tunis or Utica. He withdrew his army from both there places, and prepared to contend for the poffeflion of the field.
The Carthaginian leader, having colleced his forces at Hadrumetum, marched to the westward, intending to occupy the banks of the Bagrada, and from thence to observe and counteract the opera- tions of his enemy. Scipio, intending to prevent him, or to occupy the advantageous ground on the Upper Bagrada, took his route to the fame
country;
E oo : country; and while both direted their march t,
- Sicca, they met on the plains of Zama.
When the armies arrived on this ground, neithe party was in condition to protract the war. Han nibal, whose interest it would have been to avoic any hazardous measures, and to tire out his enerm by delays, if he were in possession of his own coun try, or able to protect the capital from insult, wa: in reality obliged to risk the whole of its fortunes in order to rescue it from the hands of the enemy or to prevent their renewing the blockade.
Scipio was far advanced in an enemy's country, which was soon likely to be defcrted by its natives, and exhaufied of every means of subsistence; he was far removed from the sea, the principal and only secure bource of any lasting supply; surround. ed by enemies; a great army under Hannibal in his front; the cities of Utica, Carthage, and Tu- nis, with all the armed force that defended them, in his rear.
In ilch circumfiances, both parties probably saw the necellity of immediate action; and the Carthaginian general, sensible of the unequal fltake he was to play, the fafcty of his country against the fortune of a tingle army, whose loss would not materially assed the State from whence they came, chose to try the effect of negotiation, and for this purpose desired a personal interview with Scipio.
In compliance with this request, the Roman ge- neral put his army in motion, and the Carthagini- ans advancing at the fame time, they halted at the diitance of thirty stadia, or about three miles, from each other. The generals, attended by a few horse, met on an eminence between their lines. Hannibal began the conference, by exprelling his regret that the Carthaginians should have aimed at any conquefls beyond their own coasts in Africa, or the Romans beyond those of Italy. " We be-
" gan,"
gan," he said, " with a contell for Sicily; wec H A P. proceeded to dispute the poffefflon of Spain, and v. "we have each in our turns seen our native land
over-run with firangers, and our country in dan- "ger of becoming a prey to its enemies. It is "time that we should distrust our fortune, and
drop an animosity which has brought us both to " the verge of defirution. This language indeed " may have little weight with you, who have been " successful in all your attempts, and who have
not yet experienced any reverse of fortune; but I pray you to profit by the experience of others. "You now behold in me a person who was once "almotl mafier of your country, and who am now
brought, at lair, to the defence of my own. I encamped within five miles of Rome, and of- sered the poffeflions round the Forum to sale. Urge not the chance of war too far. I now of- ser to surrender, on the part of Carthage, all "her pretensions. to Spain, Sardinia, Sicily, and every other island that lies between this conti- nent and yours. I with only for peace to my country, that she may enjoy undifiurbed her an- tient poffeflions on this coast; and 1 think, that "the terms I offer you are sufficiently advan- "tageous and honourable to procure it." To this address Scipio replied, " That the Ro- mans had not been aggressors in the present or preceding wars with Carthage: that they firove "to maintain their own rights, and to proteEt their
allies; and that, suitably to there righteous in- tentions, they had been favoured by the juflice of the gods: that no one knew better than him- " self the infiability of human affairs, nor should "be more on his guard against the chances of
war. The terms," he said, " which you now propose might have been accepted of, had you "offered them while yet in Italy, and had pro-
posed, as a prelude to the treaty, to remove
" from
B o K from thence; but now, that you are driven
_ " from every poll, you propose to surrender, and
' are forced not only to evacuate the Roman ter.
ritory, but are firipped of part of your own. There conceflions are no longer sufficient; they " are no more than a part of the conditions al.
ready agreed to by your countrymen, and  which they, on your appearance in Africa, so " basely retraced. Besides what you now offer, ' it was promised on their part, that all Roman "captives should be reltored without ransom; that " all armed ships should be delivered up; that a ': fum of five thousand talents should be paid, and "hostages given by Carthage for the performance " of all there articles.
" On the credit of this agreement we granted a " cessation of arms, but were shamefully betrayed " by the councils of Carthage. Now to abate any " part of the articles which were then flipulated, " would be to reward a breach of faith, and to in- " Itrut nations hereafter how to profit by perfidy. " You may therefore be assured, that I will not so " much as transmit to Rome any proposal that " does not contain, as preliminaries, every article "formerly tfipulated, together with filch additi- " onal concetifons as may induce the Romans " to renew the treaty. On any other terms than " there, Carthage must vanquish, or submit at dif- "cretion (a)."
From this interview both parties withdrew with an immediate profpet of c.tion; and on the fol- lowing day, neither having any hopes of advan- tage from delay or furprize, came forth into the plain in order of battle.
Hannibal formed his army in three lines with ;heir elephants in front.
(a) Polyb. lib. rv. c. 6. 7, 8
Scipio
Scipio drew forth his legions in their usual divi- c H A P. sions, but somewhat differently disposed. v. Hannibal had above eighty elephants, with which he proposed to begin the aAion. Behind there he formed the mercenary troops, composed of Gauls, Ligurians, and Spaniards. In a fe- cond line he placed the Africans and natives of Carthage; and in a third line, about half a quar- ter of a mile behind the first, he placed the vete- rans who had shared with himself in all the dan- gers and honours of the Italian war. He placed his cavalry in the wings, opposite to those of the enemy.
Scipio pofled Lxelius with the Roman cavalry on his left, and Massinissa with the Numidian horse on his right. He placed the manipules, or divi- lions of the legions, not as usual, mutually co- vering their intervals, but covering each other from front to rear. His intention in this disposition was to leave continued avenues or lanes, through which the elephants might pass without disordering the columns. At the- head of each line he placed the Velites, or irregular infantry, with orders to gall the elephants, and endeavour to force them back upon their own lines; or if this could not be es- fe&ed, to fly before them into the intervals of the heavy-armed foot, and, by the ways which were left open between the manipules, to conduEt them into the rear. It being the nature of there animals, even in their wild state, to be the dupes of their own resentment, and to follow the hunter by whom they are galled into any snare that is pre- pared for them (b); the design thus formed by Scipio to mislead them, accordingly proved fuc- cefsful. As soon as the cavalry began to skirmish on the wings, Hannibal gave the signal for the elephants to charge. They were received by a
(6) Vid. Buff. HiR. Not.
shower
B O O shower of miflile weapons from the Roman light
L infantry, and, as usual, carried their riders in
different directions. Some broke into their own line with considerable disorder, others fled be- tween the armies and escaped by the flanks, and many, incited with rage, as Scipio had foreseen, purlued the enemy that galled them through the intervals of the Roman divisions quite out of the action; and in a little time the front of the two armies was cleared of there animals, and of all the irregulars who had skirmished between them in the beginning of the battle.
In the mean time the first and second line of Hannibal's foot had advanced, to profit by the impression which the elephants were likely to make. The Third line still remained on its ground, and seemed to Itand aloof from the action.
In this poflure, the first line of the Carthaginian army, composed of Gauls and Ligurians, engaged with the Roman legions; and, after a short re- finance, were forced back on the second line, who having orders not to receive them, nor allow them to pars, presented their arms. The fugitives were accordingly massacred on both fides, and fell by the swords of their own party, or by those of the enemy.
The second line, consisting of the African and native troops of Carthage, had a similar fate; they perished by the hands of the Romans, or by those of their own reserve, who had orders to receive them on their swords, and turn them back, if possible, againfi the enemy.
Scipio, after so much blood had been shed, find- ing his men out of breath and spent with hard la- bour, embarrassed with heaps of the slain, scarcely able to keep their footing on ground become flip- pery with mud and gore, and in these circum- liances likely to be instantly attacked by a fresh enemy, who had yet borne no part in the contest;
he
he endeavoured, without loss of time, to put him- c H A P. self in a posture to renew the engagement. v. His cavalry, by good fortune, in there hazard-'-v ous circumfiances, were victorious on both the wings, and were gone in pursuit of the enemy. He ordered the ground to be cleared; and his co- lumns, in the original form of the action, having been somewhat displaced, he ordered those of the firlf line to close to the centre; those of the second and third to divide, and, gaining the flanks, to form in a continued line with the front. In this manner, while the ground was clearing of the dead, probably by the Velites or irregular troops, he, with the least poflible loss of time, and without any interval of confusion, completed his line to receive the enemy. An acion ensued, which, be- ing to decide the event of this memorable war, was likely to remain some time in fufpence; when the cavalry of the Roman army, returning from the pursuit of the horse they had routed, fell on the flank of the Carthaginian infantry, and ob- liged them to give way.
Hannibal had refted his hopes of victory on the disorder that might arise from the attack of his elephants, and if this should fail, on the steady va- lour of the veterans, whom he reserved for the last effort to be made, when he supposed that the Ro- mans, already exhausted in their conflict with the two several lines whom he sacrificed to their ardour in the beginning of the battle, might be unable to contend with the third, yet fresh for action and in- ured to victory. He was disappointed in the effect of his elephants, by the precaution which Scipio had taken in opening his intervals, and in forming continued lanes for their paflage from front to rear; and of the effeEt of his reserve, by the re- turn of the enemy's horse, while the action was
yet
B o O K yet undecided (c). Having taken no measures to
secure a retreat, nor to save any part of his army, he obstinately fought every minute of the day to the last; and when he could delay the victory of his enemy no longer, he quitted the field with a small party of horse, of whom many, overwhelmed with hunger and fatigue, having fallen by the way, he arrived with a few, in the course of two days and two nights, at Hadrumetum. Here he embarked and proceeded by sea to Carthage. His arrival convinced his countrymen of the extent of their loss. Seeing Hannibal without an army, they believed themselves vanquished; and, with minds unprovided with that spirit which supported the Romans when overthrown at Thrafimenus and Canna, were now desirous, by any concessions, to avert the supposed necefTary consequences of their fate.
The riotous populace, that had so lately pursued with vengeance, and threatened to tear asunder the supposed authors of peace (d), were now silent, and ready to embrace any terms that might be prescribed by the enemy. Hannibal, knowing how little his countrymen were qualified to con- tend with misfortune, confessed in the Senate, that he was come from deciding, not the event of a tingle battle, but the fate of a great war, and advised them to accept of the vi&or's terms (e). They accordingly determined to file for peace.
In the mean time the Roman army, in pursuit of its victory, was returned to the coast; and having received from Italy a large supply of flores and military engines, together with a reinforce- ment of fifty galleys, was in a condition, not only to resume the siege of Utica and Tunis, but like- (c) Polyb. lib. xr. c. 16. (d) Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 31. (c) Polyb. lb. xv. c. 4-17. Liv. lib. Xxr. c. 31.
wife
wife to threaten with a fiorm the capital itself; and, H A P. for this purpose, began to invefi the town and block v,;. up the harbour. Scipio being himself embarked, and conduc- ing the fleet to its flation, was met by a Carthagi- nian vessel that hoisted wreaths of olive and other ensigns of peace. This vessel had ten commission- ers on board, who were authorised to declare the submission of Carthage, and to receive the vitor's commands.
The ambition of Scipio might have inclined him to urge his vicory to the utmost, that he might car- ry, inflead of a treaty, the spoils of Carthage to adorn his triumph at Rome. But the impatience with which the Consuls of the present and of the preceding year endeavoured to snatch from his hands the glory of terminating the war, may, with other motives, have induced him to receive the submission of the vanquished upon the first terms that appeared sufficiently honourable, and suited to the object of the commission with which he had been entrusted.
In allusion to this circumflance, he was heard to fay, that Claudius, by his impatience to supplant him in this command, had saved the republic of Carthage (f). But men seldom adt from any fin- gle consideration ; and Scipio is, in all probability, jufily supposed to have had other and nobler motives than thisjealoufy of a successor. He is even said to have spared the rival of his country, in order to maintain the emulation of courage and of national virtue. This motive Cato, who had served under him in the capacity of Quaftor, and who was not inclined to flatter, did him the honour to aflign in a speech to the Senate (g).
Scipio, having appointed the Carthaginian com- miRffoners to attend him at Tunis, prescribed the following terms:
(f) Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 36. (g) Ibid. VOL. I. N That
B 0 0 K That Carthage should continue to hold in Africa
L all that she had poffiffed before the war, and be go-
verned by her own laws and institutions:
That she should make immediate reititution of all Roman ships or other effecs taken in violation of the late truce:
Should release or deliver up all captives, defer- ters, or fugitive slaves taken or received during any part of the war:
Surrender the whole of her fleet, saving ten gal- lies of three tier of oars:
Deliver up all the elephants the then had in the stalls of the republic, and refrain from taming or breaking any more of those animals:
That she should not make war en any nation whatever without content of the Romans:
That she should indemnify Mafliniffa for all the losses he had fuitained in the late war:
And, to reimburse the Romans, pay a fum of ten thousand talents (h), at the rate of two hun- dred talents a-year for fifty years:
That the State should give hoflages for the per- formance of these several articles, such as Scipio should fele& from the noblest families of Carthage not under fourteen, nor exceeding thirty years of age:
And that, until this treaty should be ratified, they should supply the Roman forces in Africa with pay and proviiions.
When these conditions were reported in the Se- nate of Carthage, one of the members arose, and, in terms of indignation, attempted to dissuade the acceptance of them: but Hannibal, with the tone of a master, interrupted and commanded him si- lence. This action was relented by a general cry of di'pleafure; and Hannibal, in excuse of his rash- ness, informed the Senate, that he had left Carthage
(:') Near two millions flrl:l;.
while
while yet a child of nine years old; that he wasc H A p. now at the age of forty-five; and, after a life spent iv in camps and military operations, returned for the first time to bear his part in political councils; that he hoped they would bear with his inexperience in matters of civil form, and regard more the tenden- cy than the manner of what he had done; that he was sensible the proposed terms of peace were un- favourable, but he knew not how else his country was to be rescued from her present difficulties; he wished to reserve her for a time in which she could exert her resolution with more advantage. He hoped that the Senate would, in the present extre- mity, accept, without hesitation, and even without consulting the people, conditions which, though hard, were, notwithstanding, less fatal to the com- monwealth than any one could have hoped for in the night that followed the battle of Zama (i).
The conditions were accordingly accepted, and deputies were sent to Rome with concessions, whichu c. .5. in some measure stripped the republic of her fove- reignty. The ratification of the treaty was remitted to Scipio, and the peace concluded on the terms he had prescribed.
Four thousand Roman captives were instantly released: five hundred gallies were delivered up and burnt: the first payment of two hundred ta- lents was exaaed, and, under the execution of this article, many members of the Carthaginian Senate were in tears. Hannibal was observed to smile, and being questioned on this insult to the public distress, made answer, That a smile of scorn for those who felt not the loss of their country, until it affected their own interest, was an expression of sorrow for Carthage.
(i) Polyb. lib. xv.. c i. I . . lib. xx. c. 37.
N2 CHAP,
C H A P. VI. State of Rome at the Peace with Carthage.-Fiars
with the Gauls.-With the Macedonians.-Battle of CynocephaLe.-Peace.-Freedom to Greece.- Preludes to the War with Antiochus.-Flight of Hannibal to that Prince.-Antiochus passes into Eu- rope.-Difpofitions mrade by the Romans.-Flight of Antiochus to Afia.-His defeat at the Mountains of Sipylus.-Peace and Settlement of fia.-Courfe of Roman Affairs at Home, &c. B o o T N the course of the war, which terminated in so
1. J distinguished a superiority of the Roman over '-,, the Carthaginian republic, the vitors had experi-
enced much greater distress than had, even in the last stage of the confli&, fallen to the share of the vanquished. The greater part of their territory, during a series of years, lay waste; was ruined in its habitations, plundered of its slaves and its cattle, and deserted of its people. The city itself was reduced to a scanty supply of provisions that threat- ened immediate famine (a). Among other modes of taxation devised at this time, the monopoly of salt was eiablifhed or renewed; but every public fund that was constituted in the ordinary way be- ing insufficient, the State had recourse to the volun- tary'contribution of its members, and called for their plate and other ornaments of silver and gold to defray the expences. They debated their silver coin by a great mixture of alloy, and farther re- duced the copper As from its late coinage at two ounces to one (b). The numbers of the people on the rolls, either by desertion or by the sword of the (a) Po!yb. Excerpt= Legationes. (b) Pli. Nit. Hiht. lib. iii. c. iii.
enemy,
enemy, uncommonly fatal in such a series of bat- c H A P. ties, were reduced from two hundred and seventy vl. thousand to nearly the half (c).
In the musters and levies, no less than twelve colonies at once withheld their names, and restsed their support. Yet,-proof againit the whole of these sufferings, the Romans maintained the conflit with a resolution, which teemed to imply, that they con- fidered the smallest concession as equivalent to ruin. In the farther exertion of this unconquera- ble spirit, when the pressure of this war was re- moved, their fortunes rose to a flood of prosperity and greatness, proportioned to.the low ebb to which they seemed to have fallen in the course of it.
They joined, .in Sicily, to their ;former poffeffi- ons, the city of Syraculle,,and;the whole kingdom of Hiero. In Spain, they succeeded to all the pof- fefions, to all the claims 'and: pretensions of Car- thage, and became maiters of all that had been the subjet of dispute in the war. They brought Car- thage herself under contribution, and reduced her almost to the itate of a province.
On the fide of Macedonia and Illyricum, in their treaty with Philip and his allies, they retained to themselves considerable pledges, not only of fecu- rity, biutof power; and began to be confidered in the councils of Greece, as the principal arbiters of the fortunes of nations.
In Italy, where their progress was still of greater consequence, they became more absolute masters than they had been before the war. The cantons, which, in so general a defetion of their other allies, had continued faithful to .them, were fond of the merit they had acquired, and were confirmed in their attachment by the habits of zeal which they had exerted in so prosperous a cajufe. Those, on (c) These were probably the citizens, fit to carry arms, residing in the city; for it was not yet the pracice to enrol thrfe who did not offer their armes at Rome.
the
o o o K the contrary, who had revolted, or withdrawn their
allegiance, were reduced to a state of fubmiflion more entire than they had formerly acknowledged; and the sovereignty of this whole country being, till now, precarious and tottering, derived, from the very storm which had shaken it, fiability and force.
But, notwithstanding the splendor of such rapid advancement, and of the high military and poli- tical talents which procured it, if by any accident the career of the Romans had been flopt at the present ara, their name, it is probable, would ne- ver have appeared on the record of polished nati- ons, nor they themselves been otherwise known than as a barbarous dynasty, that fell a prey to some more fortunate pretenders to dominion and conquest.
The Romans, being altogether men of the sword, or of the State, made no application to letters, or sedentary occupations. Cato is introduced by Ci- cero as faying, That it had been anciently the fa- Ihion at Roman feaits to sing heroic ballads in ho- nour of their ancestors; but that this custom had been discontinued in his own time; and it is pro- bable, from the great change which their language underwent in a few years, that they had no popular or efiablifhed compositions in writing, or even in vulgar tradition, by which the uniformity of lan- guage has, in other inflances, been longer pre- served. They had hitherto no hifiorian, poet, or philosopher, and it was only now, that any tafie began to appear for the compositions of such au- thors. Fabius, Ennius, and Cato, became the first hifiorians of their country, and raised the firfi lite- rary monuments of genius that were to remain with posterity (d).
(d) In the fxth century of Rome.
The
The inclination which now appeared for thec H A v. learning of the Greeks was, by many, confidered V' as a mark of degeneracy, and gave rife to the ne-'" ver-ending dispute, which, in this as in other nati- ons, took place between the patrons of ancient and modern manners. The admirers of ancient times, being attached to what they received from iheir an- ceflors, were disposed to reject every new improve- ment, and seemed willing to flop the progress of ingenuity itself. The gay and the faihionable, on the other hand, liked what was new; were fond of every change, and would ever adopt the latest invention as the model of propriety, elegance; and beauty.
To the frmplicity of the Roman manners in other refpeas, and to the ability of the molt ac- complifhed councils of State, was joined a very gross superstition, which led to many acts ofabfur- dity and cruelty. In this particular it appears, that the conceptions of men are altogether unconnected with their civil and political, as well as military charader; and that the rites they adopt, even when innocent, and the most admissible expreflions of worship, do not deserve to be recorded for any other purpose, than to shew how far they are arbi- trary; and how little, in many infiances, they-are direced, even among nations otherwifethe most accomplished by any rule of utility, humanity, or reason.
A little time before the breaking out of the late war, the Roman Senate, upon the report of a pro- phecy, that the Gauls and the Greeks were to pof- fess the city, ordered a man and a woman of each of those nations to be buried alive in the market- place; supposing, we may imagine, that, by this at of monRftrous injustice and cruelty, they were to fulfil or elude the prediction (e). They attended
(.) Plutaich. in Vit. bMtlcell.
to
B o o K to the numberless prodigies that were annually col-
..leted, and to the charms that were suggested to
avert the evils which those prodigies were supposed to presage, no less than they did to the most feri- ous affairs of the Commonwealth (f). They fre. quently seemed to impute their diftrefres, more to the neglect of fluperflitious rites, than to the mif- conduEt of their officers, or to the superiority of their enemies. Fabius, who, by perseverance and fleadinefs, had the merit of reitoring their affairs, was no less celebrated for his diligence in averting the effect of prodigies and unhappy presages, than he was for the conduEt and ability of a cautious and ficcefsful commander (g). Even Scipio is said to have been influenced by his dreams, and to have pretended to special revelations.
From such examples as these, we may learn the fallacy of partial representations of national charac- ter, and carefully to guard against drawing any in- ference from the defects or accomplishments which a people may exhibit of one kind, to eflablilh those of another.
The peace with Carthage was introduced with some popular acts in favour of those who had sus- sered remarkably in the hardships and dangers of the war. Large quantities of corn that had been seized in the magazines of the enemy, were fold in the city at a low price, and a considerable diftribu- iion of land was made to numbers of the people in reward of their long and perilous services.
These precedents, however reasonable in the circumstances from which they arose, were the sources of great abuse; private citizens, in the fe- quel, were taught to rely on public gratuities, and were made to hope, that, in the midst of sloth and riot, they might subsist without care, and without industry. Soldiers were taught to expect extraor-
-s) V:1e Liv. pfi;rn. (S) Plutarch. in Vit. Fb. Mas.
dinary
dinary rewards for ordinary services; and ambiti-c H A P- ous leaders were. inftruaed how to tiansfer the as- V feaion and the. hopes of the legions from the re- public to themselves. The treaty with Carthage, while it terminated the principal war in which the Romans were en- gaged, left them at leisure to pursue a variety of quarrels, which till remained on their hands, rather than bestowed entire peace. The Infubres, and other Gaulish nations on the Po, although they had not taken the full advantage, which the pretence of Hannibal in Italy might have given them against the Romans, were unable to remain at peace, and were unwilling to acknowledge the sovereignty of any nation over their own. Having a Carthaginian exile, of the name of Hamilcar, at their head, they attempted again to dislodge the colonies of Cre- mona and Placentia; and, on that fide, with vari- ous events for some years, furnilhed occupation to the arms of the republic.
Philip, notwithstanding the treaty of peace, which, about three years before, he had concluded with the Romans, had lately supplied the Cartha- ginians with an aid of four thousand men, and a fum of money. Of the men he had sent to the as- fiflance of Carthage, many had been taken at the battle of Zama, and detained as captives. Trust- ing, however, to the authority of his crown, he sent, during the dependance of the treaty between the Romans and Carthaginians, a meflage to de- mand the enlargement of those Macedonian cap- tives. To this message the Senate replied with dif- dain, that the king of Macedonia appeared to de- fire a war, and should have it.
The People, nevertheless, wearied and exhault- ed with the late contest, engaged in this war with uncommon reluctance. The Senate, they thought, was direted by the ambition of a few members, who never ceased to seek for new fubjeAs of tri-
umph,
s o o K umph, and for fresh occasion of military honours.
,' But n(,twithfianding their aversion to enter into a
war upon these motives, they were persuaded to give tieir content upon a representation of the great progrels which was making by the king of Macedonia, and the supposed neceflity of carrying the war into his own country, in order to check or prevent his designs upon Italy.
Philip, from being the head of a free confede- racy, in which the Achaans, and many other fates of Greece, were united, aspired to become the def- potic Sovereign of that country; and, either by insinuation or force, had made himself master of most places of consequence round the ]Egean sea, whether in Europe or Asia. Upon the death of Ptolemy Philopater, and the fucceflion of an infant son of that prince to the throne of Egypt, Philip had entered into a treaty with Antiochus, king of Syria, to divide between them the possessions of the Egyptian monarchy; and, in order to be ready for his more difiant operations, was busy in re- ducing the places which still held out againfl him in Greece, and in its neighbourhood.
For this purpose he sent an army with orders to take pofeifflon of Athens, and was himself employed in the siege of Abvdos. The Athenians sent a message to Rome to sue for protecion. " It is no longer a " question," said the Consul Sulpicius, in his ha- rangue to the people, " whether you will have a
war with Philip, but whether you will have that " war in Miacedonia or in Italy. If you flay until "Philip has taken Athens, as Hannibal took Sa- " guium, you may then fee him arrive in Italy, "not after a march of five months, and after the " Datfage of tremendous mountains, but after a "voyage of five days from his embarkation at " Corinth."
These considerations decided the resolution of the Roman People for war; and the officers, yet
remaining
remaining in Sicily at the head of the sea and thec H A P. land forces that had been employed against Car- s . thage, had orders, without touching on Italy, to make fail for the coalt of Epirus. The Consul Sulpicius was destined to command u. c. ssz. in that country. He found, upon his arrival, that Attalus, the king of Pergamus, and the republic of Rhodes, had taken arms to oppose the progress of Philip. In concert with these allies, and in con- junction with the Dardanians and other cantons who joined him on the frontiers of Macedonia, the Roman Consul was enabled to relieve and to pro- tect the Athenians. But the other flates of Greece, though already averse to the pretensions of Philip, and impatient of his usurpations; even the Etoli- ans, though the most determined opponents of this prince, seemed to be undecided on this occasion, and deferred entering into any engagement with the Romans. The reputation of the Macedonian armies was still very high; and it was doubtful, whether there Italian invaders, confidered as an upfiart and a barbarous power, might be able to protect the flates that declared for them against the vengeance of so great a king (h).
The two first years of the war elapsed without any decisive event. Philip took post on the moun- tains that separate Epirus from Thessaly, and es- fetually prevented the Romans from penetrating any farther. But, in the third year, Titus Quin- tius Flamininus, yet a young man under thirty years of age, being Consul, and destined to this command; brought to an immediate issue a con- test which, till then, had been held in furpence.
The Roman legion, except in its firfi encoun- ters with Pyrrhus, had never measured its force, or compared its advantages with any troops formed on the Grecian model, and, to those who reasoned
(6) Plutarch. in Vit. Flamin. p. 407.
on
B 0 o K on the fiubjet, may have appeared greatly inferior
to the Macedonian phalanx. One prefiniption indeed, had appeared in favour of the legion, that both Pyrrhus and Hannibal thought proper to adopt its weapons, though there is no account of their having imitated the line-of battle, or form of its manipules.
The phalanx was calculated to present a firong and impenetrable front, supported by a depth of column, which might be varied occasionally to suit withthe ground. The men were armed with spears of twenty-one or twenty-four feet in length. 'The five first ranks could level and carry their points to the front of the column. The remainder refled their spears obliquely on the shoulders of those that were before then; and, in this pofiure, formed a kind of shed to intercept the miftiles of the enemy; and, with their pressure, supported, or urged, the front of their own column.
In the shock of the phalanx and legion, it is computed, that every tingle man in the front of the legion, requiring a square space of fix feet in which to ply his weapons, and acing with his buckler and sword, had ten points of the enemy's spears opposed to him: (h) nevertheless, the strength of the phalanx being entirely collected in front, and depending on the c!ofenefs of its order; when at- tacked on the flank or the rear, when broken or taken by furprize, and unformed, it was easily routed, and was calculated only for level ground, and the defence of a flation acceflible only in one direction.
The Roman legion could act on its front, its flank, or its rear. Each division, or manipule, and even the men that cornpofed it, could aft apart; and, if they hid space enough to ply their weapons, couJd fcarce:y be taken by furprize, or
be made to susser for want of a determinate order.c H A P. It was serviceable therefore, upon any ground, and, except on the front of the phalanx, had an un- doubted advantage over that body. In its ordinary form, the legton made its attack by separate divisions, at considerable intervals; and this mode of attack had a tendency to break and disjoin the front of the phalanx. The divisions of the second line were made to face the intervals of the firif, in order to take advantage of any dif- order that might arise from the impreflion made on the enemy, whether they repulsed and pursued, or gave way to the divisions that attacked them. Such are the reasonings which occurred to mi- litary men, at least after the events of the present war. In the mean time the Romans, in whatever degree they comprehended this argument, had sus- ficient confidence in their own weapons, and in their loose order, to encounter the long spear and compaced force.of their enemy: When Flamininus arrived in Epirus, Philip re- ceived him in a rugged pass, where the A6us burfis from the mountains that separate Epirus from Thef- faly. This poll was strong, and could be de- fended even by irregular troops; but the phalanx, in this place, had none of its peculiar advantages; the Romans got round it upon the heights, and obliged the king of Macedonia to retire. He fledU. c. sss- through Thelfaly; and, to incommode the enemy in their attempts to pursue him, laid wafie the country as he passed. The flight of Philip determined the Etolians to take part in the war againfi him; and the Roman general, after the operations of the campaign, be- ing to winter in Phocis on the gulph of Corinth, found, that the greater part of the Achaean flates were likewise disposed to join him. He took ad- vantage of this disposition, and got possession of all the towns in the Peloponnefus, except Corinth
and
B 00 K and Argos, which hitherto had been in alliance
with the enemy.
in the following spring, Philip, having with great industry colleEted and disciplined the forces of his kingdom, received Flamininus in Theflaly. The armies met in the neighbourhood of Phere; but the country, being interspersed with gardens, and cut with plantations and hedges, the king declined a battle and withdrew. Flamininus, knowing that he had magazines at Scotufa, supposed that he was gone towards that place, and followed by a route that was separated from that of the king by a ridge of hills. In the first day's march, the Ro- mans and Macedonians were hid from each other by the heights; on the second day they were co- vered by a thick fog, which hindered them from feeing difiintly even the different parts of their own armies.
The scouts and advanced parties on both fides, had, about the fame time, ascended the heights to gain some observation of their enemy. They met by surprise, and could not avoid an engagement. Each party sent for support to the main body of their refpe.ive armies. The Romans had begun to give way, when a reinforcement arrived, that enabled them, in their turn, to press on the enemy, and to recover the height from which they had been forced. Philip was determined not to hazard his phalanx on that unfavourable ground, broken and interspersed with little hills; which, on ac- count of their figure, were called the Cynoce phale (1). He lent, nevertheless, all his horse and irregular infantry to extricate his advanced party, and to draw them off with honour. Upon their arrival, the advantage came to be on the fide of the Macedonians; and the Roman irregulars were forced from the hills in the utmost disorder. The r;, - .'i.m: ;m. p! :;, that th:'e hills refemblSd the head Qs a dog.
cry
cry of victory was carried back to the camp of the c H A P. king. His courtiers exclaimed, that now was the V, time to urge a flying enemy, and to complete his advantage. The king hesitated; but could not resist the general voice. He ordered the phalanx to move; and he himself at the head of the right wing, while his left was marching in column, had arrived and formed on the hill. On his way to this ground, he was flattered with recent tracts of the victory which had been gained by his troops. Flamininus, at the fame time, alarmed at the defeat of his light infantry, and feeing a kind of panic likely to spread through the legions, put the whole army in motion, and advanced to receive his flying parties. In that point of time the fog cleared up and shewed the right of the Macedonian phalanx already formed upon the height. Flamininus hafiily attacked this body, and, being unable to make any impreflion, gave up the day, on that quarter for loft. But observing that the enemy opposite to his right were not yet come to their ground, he instantly repaired to that wing, and, with his elephants and light infantry, sup- ported by the legions, attacked them before the phalanx was formed, and put them to flight.
In this fate of the ation, a Tribune of the vic- torious legion, being advanced in pursuit of the enemy, as they fled beyond the flank of their own phalanx on the right, took that body in the rear; and, by this fortunate attempt, in so critical a mo- ment, completed the vitory in all parts of the field.
Thus Philip, if his phalanx had any advantage over the legion of the Romans, had not, in two successive encounters, been able to avail himfeif of it; and it may well be luppofed, that in the movements of armies, which often require them to adt on varieties of ground, the chances were greatly in favour of the more versatile body (k).
(A) Polyb. lib, xvii, c. az.
From
o o K From this field the king of Macedonia fled with
_ a mind already dilpofed not to urge the fate of
the war any farther. He retired to-the passes of the mountains that surround the valley of Tempe, and from thence sent a message to the Roman ge- neral with overtures of peace.
It was a fortunate circumfsance in the manners and policy of the Romans, that the fame motives of ambition which urged the rulers of the slate to war, likewise, on occasion, inclined the leaders of armies to peace, made them admit from an enemy the firfi offers of fubmiflion, and embrace any terms on which they could for themselves lay claim to a triumph.
The prayer of the republic, in entering on a war, included three objects, safety, victory, and and enlargement of territory (1). Every general endeavoured to obtain these ends for his country; but, in proportion as he approached to the com- pletion of his wishes, he became jealous of his fuc- ceflor, and desirous to terminate the war before any other should come to snatch out of his hands the trophies he had won. This people ap- peated, therefore, on most occasions, willing to spare the vanquished, and went to extremities only by degrees, and urged by the ambition of successive leaders, who, each in his turn, wished to make some addition to the advantages previously gained to his country. At the fame time, the State, when furnished with a fair pretence for reducing a pro- vince to subjection, made the most effectual ar- rangements to accomplish this purpose.
Flamininus, on the present occasion, encouraged the advances that were made to him by Philip, granted a cessation of arms, gave him an opportu- nity to continue his applications for peace at Rome, and forwarded the messenger whom he sent on this
(I) Liv. Lb. xxxi. c , b f
business.
bufineft; The Senate, on beinginformed that the i A P. king of Macedonia cast hinfelf entirely on the ,.'_, mercy and juitice of the Romans, named ten com- millioners to be joined with Flamininus, and tou. . 557. determine, in presence of the other parties con- cerned in the war, What were to be the terms on which peace should be granted. The time was not yet come for the Romans to lay hold of any poffeflions beyond the sea of lonia. They had passed into that country as the protecors of Athens, were now satisfied with the title of Deliverers of Greece; and, under pretence of set- ting the republics of that quarter free, detached them from the Macedonian monarchy; but, in this manner, made the firt ftep towards conquefl, by weakening their.enemy, and by: firippi.ng him .of great part of that power with which he had -beea able to resist them in the late war.
They obliged the king iof Madedonia 0to with- draw his garrisons from every fortress in Greece and to leave every Grecian city, whether of -Etn- rope or Asia, to the full enjoyment of its own in- dependence and separate laws.
To secure the effecs of this treaty, they obliged him to surrender all his ships of war, eXcept one galley, on which, it was saids were mounted fix- teen tier of oars, requiring a height above the wa- ter, and dimensions in every parts more fitted for ostentation than wieldinefs or use. They made him reduce his ordinary military efiablifhment to five hundred men, and forbade him entirely the use of elephants. Forthemfelves, they desired only to have the Roman captives restored, deserters delivered up, and a fum of one thousand talents to reimburse the expenceof the war (m).
(m) Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 31' VoL.I. 0 By
o 0 o K By this treaty the Romans not only weakened
their enemy, but acquired great acceflions of re- putation and general confidence. They announced themselves as prote&ors of all free nations; and in this character took an ascendant, which, even over the states they had rescued from foreign ufur- pations, by degrees might rife into sovereignty and a formal dominion.
To give the greater solemnity to the gift of li- berty which they made to the Grecian ltates, they had this at of splendid munificence proclaimed at the Ifithmus of Corinth, in presence of great mul- titudes from every part of Greece met to solemnize the ordinary games; and, in return, were extolled by the flatterers of their power, or the dupes of their policy, as the common restorers of freedom to mankind.
The Romans hastened the completion of the treaty, by which they disarmed the king of Mace- donia, upon having received information, that An- tiochus, king of Syria, was in motion with a mighty force, and, without declaring his intentions, made fail towards Europe. This prince succeeded to the kingdom of Syria a few years before Ptolemy Phi- lopater began to reign in Egypt, or Philip in Greece; and was nearly of the fame age with tlofe princes. In his youth he waged war with the king- dom of Egypt for the poffeflion of the Calo-Syria, and with the Satraps or governors of his own pro- vinces, who attempted to- render themselves inde- pendent, and to dismember his kingdom. His success in re-uniting all the members of his own monarchy, put him in- possession of a great empire, which reached from- the extremities of Armenia and Persia to Sardis and the seas of Greece. The fplen- dor of his fortunes procured him the title of Antio- chus the Great. The crown of Egypt had been, for some time, the principal objet of his jealousy and of his ambition. He had made an alliance with
Philip,
Philip, in which the common objet of the partiese H A P. was to avail themselves of the minority.of Ptolemy: .VL. but he was not aware; in times how.riuch.the king of Macedonia stood in need. of his support against the.Romans; or how much it was his interest to preserve that kingdom. as a barrier.againfi the in- croachments of an ambitious people; ;who now be- gan to dire& their views to the, East. . He ad- vanced,- however, though now too late, by the .coast of Asia to the.Hellefpont, with-a fleet and an army:rather deflined for observation, than :for. any decided- part in a war: which was. brought to a conclusion about the:time of his arrival in those parts. . .. At Lyfimachia, the Roman deputies, who were charged. with the adjufiment and execution of the late treaty, met with Antiochus, and. tem.onfirated against some of his proceedings on the coast of Asia,; as affecting the possessions both of.Philip:and of Ptolemy. They complained of his present in- vafion of Europe with a hofiile force, " The Ro- ." mans," they said, "had rescued the Greeks from " Philip, not to deliver them over to Antiochus." They demanded a restitution of all the towns he had taken from Ptolemy, and enjoined him to refrain from any attempts on the freedom of Greece,
To there remonfirances and requisitions the king of Syria with scorn replied. That he knew the extent of his rights, and was not to be taught by the Romars: that they were busy in setting bounds to the ambition of other states, but set no bounds to their own; advised them to confine their views to the affairs of Italy, and to leave those of Asia to the parties concerned.
During the conferences which were held on these fubjets, each of the parties, without communi- cating what they heard to the others, received a report of the death of Ptolemy, the. infant king of
0 2 Egypt;
B 0o K Egypt; and they separated from each other, in-
, tent on the evils to be apprehended, or the benefits to be reaped, from this event.
This report, in which both parties were soon after undeceived, occasioned the return of Antio. chus into Syria, and suspended for some time the war which he was disposed to carry into Eu. rope (n).
Under pretence of observing the motions of this prince, the Romans, although they had professed an intention to evacuate the'Greek cities, till kept poffeflion of Demetrias, a convenient sea-port in Theifaly, and of Chalcis on the straits of Eubaea; and Flamininus, under pretence of refiraining the violence of Nabis, the tyrant of Lacedemon, and of reitoring the tranqiuillity of that country (a), fill remained with an army in the Peloponnefus.
While the Romans were carrying their fortunes with so high a hand in this part of the world, and defeating armies hitherto deemed invincible, they received a considerable check in Spain.
That country had been recently divided into two provinces; and, though now possessed by the Romans, without the competition of any foreign rival, it continued to be held by a very difficult and precarious tenure, that of force, opposed to the impatience and continual revolts of a fierce and numerous people.
Spain had already furnished to Italy its principal supplies of silver and gold. At every triumph ob- tained in that country, the precious metals were brought in considerable quantities to the treasury of Rome; but were purchased for the most part with the blood of her legions, and led her into a fuccef- sion of wars, in which she experienced defeat as well as viatory. About the time that Flamininus had terminated the war in Macedonia; the Pro-
() Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 41. (o) Ibid. c. 43.
consul
consul Sempronius, in the nearer province ofc H A p. Spain, was defeated with the loss of many officers VL. of rank. He himself was wounded in the aCtion, and soon after died.
Even the Roman possessions in Italy were not yet fully recovered from the troubles that had arisen in the time of the late war with Carthage. The Gaulish nations on the Po still continued in a fRate of hoffility. The slaves, of which the numbers had greatly increased in Etruria, and other. parts of the country, being moilly captives taken from enemies enured to arms and to violence, interrupt- ed ther servitude with frequent and dangerous in- furrecions. Having persons among them, who had been accustomed to command as well as to obey, they often deserted from their masters, form- ed into regular bodies, and encountered the armies of the republic in battle (p).
The ridge of the Appenines beyond the confines of Etruria and the Roman frontier, fill harboured fierce and numerous tribes known by the name of Ligurians and Gauls, who not only often and long defended their own mountains and woods, but likewise frequently invaded the territory of the Ro- mans. Here, or in Spain, during the recess of other wars, there was a continual service for the Consuls and Praetors, and a continual exercise to the legions. The State, nevertheless, though still occupied in this manner with petty enemies and desultory wars, never loft fight of the great objects of itsjealoufy, from whom were to be apprehend- ed a more regular opposition, and better concerted designs against its power. Among these, the Car- thaginians were not likely to -continue longer at peace than until they recovered their firength, or had the profpet of some powerful support. Anti- ochus, possessed of all the resources of Asia, was
(o) Liv. lib, xxviii. c. 36,
ready
B o K ready to join with this or any other slate that was
._ inclined to check the advancement of the Roman
power. U. c. 538. About a year after the conclusion of the war
with Philip, the Romans received intelligence, that the Carthaginians had entered into a correspond- ence with Antiochus; and as their supposed impla- cable enem. Hannibal, was then in one of the first offices of Itate at Carthage, it was not doubt- ed, that the secret intrigues of those parties were hostile to Rome. It was determined, therefore, to fend a proper commission into Africa, under pretence of an amicable mediation, in some dif- ferences that fubfifed between Massinissa and the people of Carthage; but with injuntions to the commiffloners to penetrate, if possible, the designs of the Carthaginians; and, if necessary, to demand that Hannibal, the supposed author of a dangerous conspiracy againfi the peace of both the republics, should be delivered up.
This great man, from the termination of the late war, had acquitted himself in the political de- partments, to which he had been appointed, with an integrity and ability worthy of his high reputa- tion as a soldier; but his reformations in a corrupt- ed state had procured him enemies at home, not less dangerous than those he had encountered abroad (q). Upon the arrival of the Roman de- puties, he fufpe&ed that the commission regarded himself, and made no doubt that a facion whose ambition he had restrained, and many particular persons whom he had recently incensed by the re- formation of certain abuses in which they were in- terefled, would gladly seize that opportunity to rid themselves of a powerful enemy, and from fear or some other motives, prevail on a corrupted pea- pie to deliver him up to the Romans. It is said,
(q Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 46.-4.
that
that he had been long prepared for an emergencec E A p. of this fort, and, without any embarrassment, ap- v peared upon the arrival of these messengers, in all the funcions of his public character; 'but at night withdrew to the coatl, and set fail for Asia (r). He was received by Antiochus at Ephesus, and treated as a person worthy to direA the councils of a great king; an office too much exposed to envy for the favourites of a court, or even for the prince himself long to endure.
From this time forward the king of Syria, sup- posed to be governed by the counsels of Hannibal, became the principal obje& of attention and of jealousy at Rome; and though he seemed to re- main in tranquillity during about three years after the acquisition of this formidable counsellor, yet it was notdoubted that the first violent storm was to burRt from that quarter.
Flamininus had, during the greater part of this interval, remained in Greece; had been occupied in fettling the affairs of that country, and in ob- serving the Etolians, who, being dissatisfied with the late peace, endeavoured to raise a spirit of dif- content against the Romans. He made war at the fame time against Nabis the tyrant of Lacedemon; and though he failed in his attempt to force this fa- mous usurper in his own capital, he obliged him to evacuate Argos, and to cede all his possessions on the coast. By these means he removed all the dangers with which any of the States of the Achaan league had been threatened, and restored them to the full poffeflion of their freedom.
To leave no ground of jealousy or distrust in Greece, Flamininus persuaded the Roman com- missioners to evacuate Demetrias, Chalcis, and Corinth, which they were disposed to retain in the profpe& of a war with Antiochus; and having
,r) Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 46-49.
thus
s oo K thus concluded the affairs that were entrufled to
.him, he returned into Italy, and made his entry at Rome in a triumphal proceflion, which lasted three days, with a splendid dilplay of spoils, captives, and treasure (s).
All the troubles of Greece, at the departure of Flamininus, seemed to be composed; there ap- pearances, however, were but of short duration. Nabis was impatient under his late concessions; and flattering himself that the Romans would not repass the sea merely to exclude him from the pof- feflion of a few places of little consequence on the coast of the Peloponnefus, began to employ infi- nuation, corruption, and open force, in order to recover the towns he had loft. In this design he was encouraged by the Etolians, who flattered him with the hopes of support, not only from them- selves, but likewise from Antiochus, and even from Philip; all of whom had an evident interest in re- pressing the growing power of the Italian republic. The Etolians had expected, at the close of the war with Philip, to come into the place of that prince, as the head of all the Grecian confederacies, and to have a principal (hare in the spoils of his king- dom. They urged the Roman cormmiir.oners to the final fuppreflion of that monarchy; and, being disappointed in all their hopes, complained of the Romans, as bestowing upon others the fruits of a victory which had been obtained chiefly by their means, and as having, under the pretence of set- ting the Greeks at liberty, reduced that country into a weak and disjointed itate, which might in any future period render it an easy prey to them- selves.
Flamininus accordingly had, in all his measures for the settlement of Greece, found from this peo- ple a warm and obfiinate resistance. He found
(:) i.;v. lib. xxxiy. c, 5.
themr.
them endeavouring to form a powerful confede- c H A P. racy againit the Romans, and for this purpose en-_ -. gaged in intrigues with Nabis, Philip, and Antio- chus; applying to each of them in terms suited to the supposed injuries they had severally received in the late war, or in the negotiations that followed. At the conclusion of the peace with Philip, An- tiochus thinking himself by the effecs of that treaty aggrieved, in refpeE to the freedom granted to tome cantons in Thrace, on which he derived a claim from his ancestors, sent an embassy to Rome with remonfirances on that fubjeEt. The Romans made answer, In the capacity which they had as- fumed of the deliverers of Greece, that they would oppose every attempt to enslave any Grecian set- tlement; and as they had no designs on Asia, they expected that the king of Syria would not inter- meddle in the concerns of Europe. While they gave this answer to the Ambassador of Antiochus, they resolved, under pretence of treating with the king, to fend commilfioners, in their turn, to ob- serve his motions.
The famous Scipio Africanus is mentioned by some hifiorians as having been of this commission, and as having had some conversations with Hanni- bal, which are recorded to the honour of both. Livy, however, seems to reject there particulars as fabulous, while he admits that the apparent inti- macy of Hannibal with the Roman commiflioners, very much diminilhed the part which this for- midable counsellor held in the confidence of the king (t).
At this time it became known that Antiochus was meditating the invasion of Italy as well as of Greece; that the firfi of these objects was to be committed to Hannibal, who undertook to prevail on the republic of Carthage to take a principal
(t) Liv. lib. sxxv. c. 14.
share
O o K share in the war; and that, for this purpose, he had
sent a proper person to concert measures with his party at Carthage; but the intrigue being discover. ed, the Carthaginians, in order to exculpate them- selves, sent an account of it to Rome.
Before this intelligence had been received, the Roman commissioners were set out for Asia, and, according to their inftrutions, passed through Per- gamus to consult with Eumenes the sovereign of that kingdom, who, having reason to dread the power of Antiochus, employed all his credit to en- gage the Romans in a war with that prince. They had an audience of the king of Syria at Apamea, and a conference afterwards, on the objet of their commiflion, with a principal officer of his court at Ephesus. This minister made no scruple to charge the Romans with the real designs of ambition, which they endeavoured to disguise under the pre- tence of procuring the liberties of Greece. " Your " conduct," he said, " where you are in condition "to ac without disguise, is a much better evidence "of your intention, than any profelflons you may "think proper to make in Greece or in Asia, where, "by assuming a popular character, you have so "many parties to reconcile to your interest. Are "not the inhabitants of Naples and of Rhegium "Greeks, as well as those of Lampafcus and
Smyrna ? You are extremely desirous to set the " Greeks at liberty from the dominion of Antiochus " and Philip, but have no remorse in fubjeting " them to your own."
The deputies of the cities whose interest was in question were present at there conferences, and each pleaded the cause of his country, but without any other effect than that of convincing the parties con- cerned, that a war could not long be avoided. The Romans, alarmed by the intelligence received from Carthage during the dependance of this conference, 'Iad already begun to prepare for hostilities: and,
upon
upon the report of their commissioners from Afia,c H A P. fiill continued to augment their forces by sea and by V' land. Under pretence of repressing the violences committed by Nabis, they ordered one army into Greece, and fationed a second on the coast of Cala- bria and Apulia, in order to support the operations of the first. The Romans had reason to confider the Etolians as enemies, and even to diflruft the intentions of many of the republics lately restored to their liber- ty, who began to surmise, that, under the pretence of being relieved from the dominion of Philip, they were actually reduced to a state of dependence on Rome. To obviate the difficulties which from these fur- mises might arise among the Grecian republics, the Roman Senate sent a fresh commission into that country, requiring those who were named in it to at under the direction of Flamininus, the late de- liverer of Greece. These commiflioners found the principal cities of that country variously affected: a general meeting of the States being called to re- ceive them at Demetrias, they were, by some of the parties present at this meeting, reproached with a design, under pretence of restoring the Greeks to their liberties, of separating them from every power that was fit to protect them; and they were likewise reproached with a design of efiablifhing their own tyranny, under pretence of opposing that of every other State.
This species of blasphemy, uttered against a power which the majority of those who were pre- sent affected to revere, railed a great ferment in the council; and the persons who had thus ventured to insult the Romans being threatened with violence, were forced to withdraw from Demetrias, and to take refuge in Etolia. The remaining deputies of Greece endeavoured to pacify the Roman com- pilfioners, or at leaf entreated them that they
would
B o K would not impute to so many different nations,
what was no more than the frenzy of a few indivi. duals.
The Etolians had already invited Antiochus to pass into Europe. The measure was accordingly under deliberation in the council of this prince. Hannibal warmly recommended the invasion of Italy as the most effectual blow that could be itruck at the Romans. " At home," he said, " their " force is still composed of disjoint materials, which " will break into pieces when assailed by the im. " mediate touch of an enemy; and the most es- " fecual power that can be raised up against
them, is that which may be formed from the ruins of their own empire. But if you allow them to remain in quiet poffeflion of Italy, and to firetch " out the arms of that country to a distance, their " resources are endless, and their tfrength irrefifli- " ble." He made an offer of himself for this ser- vice, demanding a hundred gallies, ten thousand foot, and a thousand horse. With this armament he proposed to present himself on the coafi of Africa, and, from what further reinforcements or supplies he could derive from Carthage, to effe& his descent upon Italy.
These councils, however, were given in vain. Hannibal, as a person likely to reap all the glory of every service in which he bore any part, was be- come an object of jealousy to the court of Antio- chus, and to the king himself. His advice being received with more aversion than refpet, served to determine the king against every measure he pro- posed. " Such a monarch," it was said by the courtiers, " could not be under any neceflity to " employ foreign aid or direction :---his own force
was sufficient to overcome the Romans in any "part of the world :---the recovery of Greece "must be the si.ft object of his arms :--the people ' of that country, whenever his galleys appeared,
'" wold
.( would crowd to the shores to receive him:-the c H A P. "the Etolians were already in arms for this pur- v." ' pofe:-Nabis was impatient to recover the pof- " feflions of which he had been itripped by the " Romans:-Philip must eagerly fly to his fland- " ard, and embrace every opportunity to revenge " the indignities which had been lately put upon "himself and his kingdom (u)."
Flattered with these expectations, Antiochus set fail for Europe with ten thousand foot, some ele-u. c. 5s; phants, and a body of ho-se. He was received at Demetrias with acclamations of joy; but soon as- ter, in the feqiel, came to understand that his al- lies in that country had sent for him to bear the burden of the war, and were devising how they fhoiuld' reap for tihemfelves tle 'advantages that might be mtade to ~arise from it.
The Etolians, at whose ihfiance Antiochus had come iiro Greeee, were still divided. One party among them contended for peace, and alleged that the p'resence of the king of Syria was a fortu- hate ci'rcumftance,:as it might give them an op- portunity to negoiate with greater advantage. Another party contended for immediate war; in- sising, that force alone could obtain any equi- table -terms froim such a party as that they had to do with. ;
Flanlininus was prefiet -in the assembly of Etolia when thee 'debates took place relating to the refo- lution for peace or war with the Romans. He ob- served to the party who contended for war, that, before they proceeded to this extremity, they ought to have made their representations at Rome, and to have waited for an answer from thence. "We shall make our representations, and demand " our a'nswer," said a principal person in the assem- bly, still thinking of a descent upon Italy, to be
(u) Liv. lib. xxxv. c. rS & 42.
effeAed
B O o K effected by Hannibal, " perhaps where we are lealt
L" expected, on the banks of the Tiber (w)." - ' The resolution for war with the Romans was ac-
cordingly taken in this assembly, and Antiochus was declared head of the confederacy to be formed for mutual support in the conduc of it. This prince endeavoured to obtain a declaration to the fame effe& from the Achaans and Beotians; bet being disappointed in his application to those States, he left part of his forces at Demetrias, and he him. self having negociated his admission at Chalcis on the Straits of Euboea, retired, as if he had come to aft upon the defensive, behind the Euri- pus, and eftablilhed his court at that place for the winter.
Mean time the Romans prepared themselves as for a ltruggle of great difficulty, and probably of long duration (x). They confidered the abilities of Hannibal, employed to conduc the forces of Asia, as a sufficient ground of alarm. Their sirss object was to guard Italy and their other poffeffi- ons. An army of observation was for this purpose stationed at Tarentum. A numerous fleet wasor- dered to protect the coast. The Pretors and other officers of State, with proper forces under their command, had charge of the different difiricts of Italy that were fufpeated of inclining to the enemy, or of being difaffeaed to the commonwealth. The initrutions given to there officers, were to observe what was pafling in the several quarters to which they were sent, but to avoid every occasion of ani- mofity or tumult that might open a way for the ad. minion of an enemy, or shew an invader where to diret his attack.
Having made there dispositions for their own fe. curity, they proceeded to form an army which was to act offensively, and to fix the scene of the war in
(o) Liv. lib. xxxv. c. 33. (x) Appian Syriaca, p. 95.
their
their enemy's country. Baebius, a Praetor of the c H A p. preceding year, under pretence of opposing Na- V` . his, who had renewed the war in the Peloponnefus, had already passed into Epirus with a considerable force. Acilius Glabrio, one of the Consuls of the present year, to whose lot this province had fallen, was underflood to have in charge the farther pre- parations that were making for a war in that coun- try, and hatiened the assembling of an army and fleet sufficient to disconcert the measures of the par- ties that were fuppcfed to be forming against the Romans.
The usual tithes of corn were ordered from Sar- dinia, and double tithes from Sicily, to supply the army in Epirus. Commiffaries likewise were sent to Carthage and Numidia, in order to purchase supplies from thence. And with such a sense of its importance did the Romans enter on this war, that the Consul Cornelius issued an edi&, prohibit- ing all Senators, and all those who were intitled to be admitted into the Senate, to absent themselves from Rome above one day at a time, and requiring that no more than five Senators should on the fame day be absent from the city.
The equipment of the fleet was retarded by a dispute that arose with eight of the maritime colo- nies or sea-ports, who pretended to a right of ex- emption from the present service. But their plea, upon an appeal to the Tribunes, and a reference from them to the Senate, was over-ruled.
Antiochus passed the winter at Chalcis in a man- ner too common with princes of a mean capacity, who put every matter of personal caprice on the fame footing with the affairs of State. Being en- amoured of a Grecian beauty, he employed the attention of his court on feafis and proceflions, de- vised for her entertainment, and to enhance hia pleasures. His reputation declined, and his
forces
B o 0 K forces made no progress either in numbers or dif-
aI cipline.
In the spring he loft some time in forming con- federacies with petty States, which are ever under the neceflity of declaring themselves for the pre- vailing power, and who change their fide with the reverses of fortune. Having traversed the country from Beotia to Acamania, negotiating treaties with such allies as these, he had passed into Thessaly, and had besieged Lariffa, when the Roman Prator be- gan to advance from Epirus.
After the contending parties had thus taken the field, and the armies of Rome and of Syria were about to decide the superiority on the frontiers of Macedonia, Philip seemed to remain in fufpence, having yet made no open declaration to which fide he inclined. He had felt the arms of the Romans, and had reason to dread those of Aritiochus.
The princes who divided the Macedonian em- pire were not only rivals in power, they were in some degree mutual pretenders to the thrones which they severally occupied; Philip, probably confidering Antiochus, in this capacity, as the principal object of his jealousy, took his resolution to declare for the Romans; and having according- ly joined the Prator on the confines of Thessaly, their vanguard advanced to observe the pofi- tion and motions of the enemy.
Antiochus, upon the juntion of these forces, thought proper to raise the siege of Lariffa. From this time forward he seemed to have dropped all his sanguine expe&ations of conquest in Europe, was contented to act on the defensive, and when the Roman Consul arrived in Epirus, and directed his march towards Thessaly, he took post at the Straits of Thermopyla, intending to shut up this palfage into Greece; but being dislodged from thence, his army was routed, the greater part of it perished in the flight, and he himself, with no
more
more than five hundred men, escaped to Chalcis, C H.A P. his former retreat in Euboea, from whence he soon vl after set fail for Asia. Upon the flight of Antiochus, the Etolians alone remained in the predicament of open enemies to the Romans. They were yet extremely irrefohlte and diltrated in their councils. After having brought the king of Syria into Europe, they -had not supported him with a sufficient force; aud-now, upon his departure, being sensible of their danger from the Romans, a powerful enemy whom they had greatly provoked, they endeavoured to per- fuade the king to return,;: representing to him how much he was concerned to. furnish that arrogant people with a sufficient occupation in Greece, to prevent their. pafling into Asia.. They at the fame time made offers of pacification and of fubmifion to the Romans, but were feceived in a mainer, which gave them no hopes of being able to palliate the offence they had given. The Consul advanced into their country, laid siege to Naupatus, and having reduced that place and the whole nation to great distress, agreed to a cessation of arms, only while they sent deputies to Rome to implore forgiveness and to make their peace with the Se- nate. Such was the posture of affairs when Lucius Cornelius Scipio, being eleced one of the Consuls for the ensuing year, was destined to succeed Acilius Glabrio in Etolia; and, with his bro- ther Publius, the victor in the battle of Zama, who was to;ad as second in command, had orders to prosecute the war againfi the kingdom or Syria. These leaders being arrived in Greece, and intent on the removal of the war into Asia, willingly ac- cepted of the submission of all the towns that had incurred any suspicion during the flay of Antiochus in Europe; and leaving the difference which re- mained to be fettled with the Etolians in a slate otf
VOL. I. P negociation,
B o negociation, they proceeded without delay, by
the route of Macedonia and Thrace, towards the Hellespont.
In pafling through these countries, they were conducted and furnished with all the necessary sup. plies of provisions and carriages by Philip.
The fleets of Asia and Europe, during this :march of the Roman army, contended for the command of the seas. That of Europe, which was joined by the navy of Rhodes, and even by that of the Carthaginians, who, to vindicate them- selves from any blame in the pretent war, had -taken part with their rival, after various encoun- ters, obtained the viEtory in a decisive battle, which made them entire masters of the sea, and opened all the ports of Asia to the shipping of the Romans. -
The king of Syria had fortified Sestos and Aby- dos on the Hellespont, and -Lyfimachia on the isthmus of Cherfonefus, with an apparent refolt- tion to dispute the march and palfage of the Scipios at all these different fiations. But on the total de- feat of his navy, he either confidered those places as loft, or, fearing to have his forces separately cut off in attempting to defend them, he withdrew his garrisons from Lyfimachia, Sestos, and Abydos; and while he thus opened the way for his enemies . to reach him, gave other. signs of despondency, or of a disposition to fink under' adversity, making overtures of peace, and offering to yield every point which he had formerly disputed in the war. In reply to these offers he was told, That he must do a great deal more; that he must submit to such terms as the Romans were intitled to expect from victory. Bat as he continued to assemble his forces, he chore rather to flake his fortune on the :decilion of a battle; and having in vain endea- voured to make himself master of Pergamus, the :-apital of Eumenes, he fell back on Thyatira, and
**~~~-- r-z~.-~ ~from
from thence proceeded to take post on the moun-c H A P. tains of Sypylus, where he meant to contend for v'. the empire of Asia. In the mean time the Scipios advanced to the Hellespont, and without any refinance passed the Strait. This was the first time that any Roman army set foot on Asia; and being met by the de- puties of the king with the overtures of peace that have been mentioned, sent accounts to Rome of their arrival; and made a halt for some days.
This descent was confidered by the Romans as an epoch of great renown; and the messenger who brought the accounts of it was received with processions and solemn rites. Supplications and prayers were offered up to the gods, that this firit landing of a Roman army in Asia might be prof- perous for the comrnonwealth. u. . 561.
Publius Scipio, the famous antagonist of Han- nibal, soon after his arrival in Asia, was taken ill; or, what may be supposed for his honour, being desirous not to rob his brother of any share in the glory which he perceived was to be easily won againfi the present enemy, he affected indisposition, and remained at a distance from the camp. Lu- cius, thus left alone to command the Roman army, advanced upon the king, attacked him in the polt he had chosen, and, in a decisive vitory, dif- perfed the splendid forces of Asia, with 'all their apparatus of armed chariots, horses, and elephants, harnessed with gold.
The king himself fled with a few attendants, passed through Sardis in the night, and continued his flight to Apamea in Pifidia, where he expected to be out of the reach of his pursuers.
Thyatira, Sardis, and Magnesia soon after opened their gates to the Romans; and the king himself by a messenger from Apamea, again made haste to own himself vanquished, and to sue for peace.
P2 The
B o o X The Romans, to display a moderation which
_ they frequently affected in the midst of their vic.
tores, renewed the fame conditions which they had prescribed on their arrival in Asia; and a cessation of arms being granted, officers from Antiochus, and from all the other parties concerned in the approaching treaty, repaired to Rome, in order to receive the final decision of the Senate and People, on the future fettlernent of their affairs.
Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, on this occa- sion, attended in person, and, together with the republic of Rhodes, who had distinguished them- selves by their zeal and faithful services in the late war, became the principal gainer in the treaty.
It was agreed by the Senate, that the prelimi. nary articles already prescribed by the Consul flould be confirmed:
That, according to there articles, Antiochus should resign all his pretensions in Europe, and contract the boundaries of his kingdom in Asia within the mountains of Taurus:
That he should pay to the Romans, at successive terms, five thousand talents to reimburse the ex- pence of the war:
To Eumenes four hundred talents on the score of a debt that had been due to his father.
And, for the performance of these conditions, Mould give twenty hostages, such as the Romans should name.
In the farther execution of this treaty, the Ro- mans again appeared to be solicitous only for the interest of their allies, and required no more than indemnification for themselves. They appointed ten commissioners to repair into Asia, and there to determine the several questions that might arise re- lating to the settlement of that country. In the mean time they published to all parties the follow- ing inftrutions, as the basis on which the commis- fioners were to proceed:
That
That the preliminaries of the peace with Anti- H A P, ochus already offered should be ratified: vl. That all the provinces which he was to evacuate, except Caria and Lycia, were to be afligned to Eumenes:
That there provinces, bounded by the Meander on the east, should be given to the republic of Rhodes; That all the Greek cities which had been tri- butary to Eumenes should continue so, and all which had been tributary to Antiochus should be set free (z). A settlement was accordingly soon after made in Asia in these terms; and the Romans, while they were haitening to universal dominion, appeared to have no object beyond the prosperity of their allies: they were merciful to the vanquished, and formidable only to those who presumed to resist their arms. In the midst of their conquests, they reserved nothing to themselves betides the power of giving away entire kingdoms and provinces; or, in other words, they reserved nothing but the power of seizing the whole at a proper time, and for the present, the supreme ascendant over all the conquered provinces that were given away, and over those who received them. The Etolians were now the only parties in Greece who pretended to hold their liberties, or their possessions, by any other tenure than that of a grant from the Romans.
During the dependance of the war in Asia, the Etolians were making continual efforts to recover their own losses, and to preserve the city of Am- bracia, then besieged by the Romans; but, upon the defeat of Antiochus, the Ambraciots furren- dered at discretion, and the Etolians rued for peace.
(z) Polyb. Excerpa Legationes, c. 35.
Ambracia
B o o K Ambracia had been the capital of Pyrrhus, and
I. now furnished the captor with a plentiful spoil of -"-- fatues, pictures, and other ornaments to adorn
his triumph. The Etolians, at the intercession of the Athenians, were allowed to hope for peace on the following terms (a).
That they should not allow to pass through their country the troops of any nation at war with the Romans:
That they should confider the allies of Rome as their allies, and the enemies of Rome as their enemies:
That they should make instant payment of two hundred talents in silver, the standard of Athens; and of three hundred more at separate infialments within fix years:
That if they chore to make there payments in gold rather than silver, the proportion should be one of gold to ten of silver; and that they should give hollages for the performance of there several articles (b).
While the Etolians were on there terms conclud- ing a peace, or rather obtaining a pardon, the Confil Manlius, who had succeeded the Scipios in Asia, willing, if possible, to bring back into Italy, together with the victorious legions, some pretence of a triumph for himself, led his army against the Galatians. These were the descendants of a bar- barous horde, which had, some ages before, mi- grated from the north of Europe, visited Italy and Greece in their way, and flopped on the Halys in the Lesser Asia, where they made a settlement, round which they levied contributions quite tothe Ihores of the Euxine, the Mediterranean, and Eu- gean Seas. Their forces had lately made a part in the army of Antiochus, and they had not yet acceded to the peace which that prince had ac-
(.) Polyb. Ercerpt; Legationes, c. l8. (b) Ibid.
cepted.
cepted. By there means they furnished the Ro-c H A P. man Consul with a pretence for invading their V.. country; and being unable to resist him, sub- - mitted at discretion. In thus extinguishing the re- mains of every hostile combination, the Romans took care to satisfy the world that it never was safe to take part against them in any confederacy, and that, while they never abandoned any ally of their own, they were in condition to compel the powers, with whom they were at war, frequently to aban- don theirs. Thus ended the first expedition of the Romans into Asia; in the result of which, without seeming to enlarge their own dominions, they had greatly reduced the powers both of the Syrian and Macedonian monarchies; and by restoring, whe- ther from inclination or policy, every State to its independence, they had balanced a multi- tude of parties against each other, in such a manner, as that no formidable combination was likely to be formed against themselves; or if any one, or a few parties, should presume to with- stand their power, many others were ready to join in the cry of ingratitude, and to treat any op- position that was made to them as an unworthy re- turn to those who had so generously espoused the cause of mankind.
The pacification of Asia and Greece left the re- public at leisure to manage its ordinary quarrels with nations unfubdued on the opposite frontier. In the well, hostilities had subsisted without inter- ruption, during the whole time that the State was intent on its wars in the East , and triumphal pro- cessions were exhibited by turns from those opposite quarters.
In Spain the commanders were, for the most part, annually relieved, and the army annu- ally recruited from Italy. The variety of events which are mentioned, and the continuance of
the
B o o : the war itself are sufficient to evince that no
' decisive victories were obtained, or conquefis ,-'-- finally made. On the coast of Spain there were
many Greek or African settlements established for commerce. Of there the Romans, either as having supplanted the Carthaginians, former. ly their masters, or as having subdued the na- tives, were fill in poffeflion. But the interior parts of the country were occupied by many hordes, who appear to have been colleted in townships and fortified flations, from which they aflembled to oppose the Roman armies in the field, or in which they defended themselves with obstinate valour. Though often defeated, they still renewed the contest. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, in the year of Rome five hundred and feventy-four, about ten years after the peace with Antiochus, is said to have received the fubmilion of one hundred and three towns of that country (c). The troubles of Spain were nevertheless, renewed under his fuccefors, and continued to occupy the Roman arms with a re- petition of similar operations, and a like variety of events.
The war in Liguria was nearly of the fame description with that in Spain; continued still to occupy a certain part of the Roman force; and, both before and after the late expedition to Greece and Asia, was for some years the prin- cipal employment of both the Consuls. Here, however, the Romans made a more sensible progress towards an entire conquelt than they made in Spain. They facilitated their accels to the country by highways across the moun- tains; they reduced the numbers of the enemy by the sword and by the ordinary difireffes of aar; and, after the experience of many pre-
(:) .iv. Iib. Cl. c . 50, & paflim
tended
tended submissions, and repeated revolts of that c H A P. people, who seemed to derive the ferocity of V. their spirit, as. well as the security of their pofleflion, from the rugged and inacceflible na- ture of their country, it was determined to tranf- plant the natives to some of the more acceflible parts of Italy,- where the lands, being waite from the effect, of former wars, were Iill unoccupied and at the disposal of the republic (d).
id) .,iv. lib. xl. c. 18,
C H A P.
C H A P. VII State of Italy.-Charafler of the Roman Policy,.
Death of Scipio and of Hannibal.-Indulgence of the Romans to the King of Macedonia.-Complaints againfi Philip.-Succeffion of Per eus, and Origin of the Ytar.--Alion on the Peneus.-Overtture of Peace.-Progrefs of the W'ar.-Defeat of Per. feus at Pidna, by Pauius Emilius.-His Flight and Captivity.-Settlement of Macedonia and Illyricum. -AManners of the Romans. BOO K Y the methods above related the Romans
L DJ proceeded to extend their dominion over all
the diliricts around them, and either brought to their own fiandard, or disarmed, the several nati- ons who had hitherto resifted their power. While they were about to accomplish this end, the Tranf- alpine Gauls, itill having their views direted to the southward of the mountains, made rome attempts at migration into Italy, in one of which they fettled a party of their people at Aquileia. The Romans wvere alarmed, and ordered there firangers to be difiodged and reconduaed across the Alps.
This circumfiance suggested the design of fe- curing the frontier on that fide by a colony; and for this purpose a body of Latins was accordingly sent to Aquileia, a settlement which nearly com- pleted the Roman establishments within the Alps. The country was now, in a great measure, occu- pied by colonies of Roman and Latin extraftion, who, depending on Rome for protection, served, wherever they were fettled, to carry the deepest impreflions of her authority, and to keep the na- tives in a hiate of fubjecion to her government.
The
The domestic policy of the State, during thisc H A P. period, appears to have been orderly and wife be- Vl. yond that of any other time. The diftintion be- " tween Patrician and Plebeian was become altoge- ther nominal. The descendants of those who had held the higher offices of Rate, were, in consequence of the preferments of their ancestors, confidered as noble. niftead of a title of nobility, the son named his father and grandfather, who had been vested with public honours. And as the Plebeians now found no difficulty in obtaining the offices of State, they were continually opening the way of their poflerity to the rank of Nobles. " Thus I," said Decius Mus, while he pleaded to have the priest- hood (a), joined to the other honours which the different orders of the People enjoyed in common, "can cite my father in the rank of Consul; and "my ton can cite both his grandfather and "me (b)." The Plebeians were intitled by law to claim one of the Consul's feats, and frequently oc- cupied both.
The authority of the Senate, the dignity of the Equestrian Order, and the manners of the People in general, were guarded, and, in a great mea- sure, preserved, by the integrity and firit exercise of the Censorial power. The wifefi and the molt refpeted of the citizens, from every condition, were raised into office; and the assemblies, whether of the Senate, or the People, without envy, and without jealousy, suffered themselves to be go- verned by the counsels of a few able and virtuous men. It is impoflible otherwise to account for that f)lendor with which the affairs of this republic, from the time of the first Punic war to that of the last wars with Macedonia and Carthage, though committed to hands that were continually chang-
(a) Vid. B. i. c. 3. (D) Lib, lib. x. c, 8.
ing,
B o K ing, were, nevertheless, uniformly and ably con.
c. ducaed. t'-.'.. The spirit of the People was in a high degree
democratical; and though they suffered themselves to be governed by the silent influence of personal authority in a few of their citizens, yet could not endure any species of uncommon pre-eminence; even that which arose from the lustre and well- founded pretensions of dilinguifhed merit.
The great Scipio, with his brother Lucius, on their return from Asia, encountered a prosecution, unworthily supported by a popular clamour; which brought them to trial on a formal charge of secret- ing part of the treasure received from Antiochus. It is likely, from the manner in which Publius Sci- pio disdained to answer this charge, that he carried his personal spirit too high for democratical govern- ment, which can allow no private merit to come in competition with the rights of the people to so. vereignty, and of individuals to equal attention in the State. At his firfl citation on the libel which was brought against him, teeming not to hear the person who accused him, he reminded the people, that this was the anniversary of that day on which they had gained the victory at Zama; and desired that they would follow him to the temples, in which he was to return thanks to the Gods for that important event. He was followed accordingly by :he whole multitude, and the accuser for that time was deserted. At his second citation, he called for !he paper of accounts, on which he had entered all the unms he had received in Asia; and, while the people expected, that he was to satisfy them by a slate of particulars, he tore the scroll in their pre- tence; and, taking the privilege of a Roman citi- zen, retired, without deigning to give any answer, and went as an exile into a country village of Italy, where he soon after died.
The
The fame year likewise terminated the life ofc H A P. his antagonist Hannibal. This great man, him- VII- self a sufficient objet of jealousy to nations, was, by an article in the late treaty of peace with Anti- ochus, to have been delivered up to the Romans; and had, in order to avoid that danger, retired into Crete. From thence he took refuge with Prufias, king of Bythinia, where the enmity of Rome fRill pursued him, and where an embafly was .ent to demand that he should be delivered up. As soon as he knew that this demand was actually made, and that the avenues to his dwelling were secured in order to seize him, he took poison, and died. The Romans had been so well satisfied with the part which was taken by Philip in the late war with Antiochus, that they released his son Demetrius, then at Rome, an hostage for payment of the fa- ther's tribute, of which they likewise remitted a part. They even connived at his recovering some of his former possessions, and made no inquiry into the numbers of his troops, in which he greatly ex- ceeded the establishment prescribed by the last treaty. They continued in this disposition during four years after the late peace with the king of Sy- ria; and, in this interval, permitted the kingdom of Macedonia, by the improvement of its revenue, and the increase of its people, in a great measure to recover its former firength. These circumstances of prosperity, however, did not fail to excite apprehension in the minds of all those who, holding independent possessions in that neighbourhood, were exposed to be the first victims of this reviving power; and reprefentati- ons, to awaken the attention of the Romans on this fubjecl, were accordingly made at Rome, from Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, and from all the petty princes and small communities on the frontier of Macedonia.
On
B o o K On receiving there admonitions,'the Senate, in
I. their usual form, sent to the country from whence
-they were alarmed a select number of their mem-
bers to make inquiry into the real slate of affairs. Before a tribunal thus contfituted, the king of Ma- cedonia was cited to appear as a private party, first at Tempe, to answer the charge of the Theflalians, and afterwards at Theffalonica, to answer that of Eumenes. After a difcufiion, sufficiently humbling to a sovereign, he received sentence, by which he was required to evacuate all the places he had oc. cupied beyond the ancient limits of his kingdom. This sentence he received with indignation and resentment, which were too unguardedly expref- fed, and which rendered him from thenceforward an object of continual attention and of jealousy to the Romans.
A-fecond' commilTion was granted to'Tee the fen- tence'of the firif put in execution'; and as soon as it became publicly known, that the Romans were willing to receive complaints against Philip, and were disposed to protect every person who incurred his displeasure, ambassadors from the princes of Asia, and persons of every condition, from all the cities of Greece, and from all the diitrits in the neighbourhood of Macedonia, retorted to Rome with complaints against the king, rome of a pri- vate, and others of a public nature. The city was -crowded with itrarigers, and the Senate was oc- cupied, from morning to night, in hearing the re- presentations that were made by their allies on the subje&t of the usurpations and oppreflions they had flufered.
Philip, to divert the form, had sent his younger Ton, -Demerrius, to answer the several charges which were expected to be brought against him; and, in the end, obtained a resolution of the Se- nate to accommodate matters on an amicable foot- ing. This resolution was grounded on pretence of
the
the favour which the Romans bore to Demetrius, c H A r. wliohad long resided as an holtage in their city. " The king will please to know," they said, " that " he has done one thing extremely agreeable to " the Romans, in trusting his cause to an ad- " vocate so well established in their eiteem and " regard (c)." This language of the Roman Senate refpeting Demetrius,' together with dangerous suggestions from some of his own confidents, probably inspired the young man with thoughts, or rendered him fufpeAed of designs, injurious to the rights of Per- feus, his elder brother. This prince took the alarm, and never ceased to excite the suspicions al- ready formed in the breait of the father, until he prevailed in securing his own succession by the death of his younger brother (d).
Philip, having ordered the execution of one son to gratify thejealoufy of the other, lived about three years after this aftion, suffering part of the punish- ment that was due to him on that: account, in the most gloomy:apprehenfions of danger from his fur- viving son, and died in great solicitude for the fate of his kingdom. Perseus, nevertheless, in ascending the throne of Macedonia, 'gave hopes of a better and happier reign than that of his predecessor. He was imme- diately acknowledged by the Romans; and, during a few years after his acceflion, appeared to have no cause of disquietude from this people.  Although he had adopted.the measures of his father, and en- deavoured, by attention to his revenue, his army, and magazines; and by forming alliances with some of the warlike Thracian hordes in his neigh- bourhood, to put his kingdom in a posture of de- fence, and in condition to assert its independence;
(c) Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. c. 46. Liv. lib. xxxix. 46-47. (d) Liv. lib. xl. c. 24.
yet
s o o xyet he appears to have excited less jealousy in the
L minds of his neighbours. The progress which he
made seems to have escaped the attention of the Romans; until, at last awakened by the report of a secret corretpondence which :he carried on with the republic of Carthage, they thought proper to fend a deputation into Macedonia, in order to ob- serve his motions.
By the deputies employed in this service, the Rb. mans obtained intelligence, that Perseus had made advances to the Achmans as well as to the Carthagi- nians, and to other flates and was likely to form a powerful party among the Greeks.
From this time forward the leaders of the Roman councils seemed to have taken a :resolution to re- move this subjet of jealousy,- and to.fupprefs the Macedonian monarchy. They renewed their at- tention to the slate of parties in Greece, and en- deavoured to reconcile all the differences that might incline any of those republics to oppose them in the execution of their design. They encouraged the king of Pergamus, who afterwards appears to have repented of the part which he took in that matter, to state his complaints. They brought him to Rome in person, and cited him before the Senate to give a complete detail of the circumfian- ces that were alarming in the policy of Perseus. Eumenes, having been thus brought forward as a formal accuser, and being to return through Greece, in order to offer his devotions at the tem- ple of Delphi, was assaulted and wounded by a party who meant to assassinate him; and this de- sign, with some other aas of violence, being im- puted to Perseus, served as a pretence for the war which followed.
The Roman Senate had already granted two fe- parate commissions, the one of a deputation to visit Macedonia, and to observe the motions of Perseus; the other of an embassy into Egypt, to confirm
their
their alliance with Ptolomy. On hearing of the at- c H A p. tempt that had been made to affaflinate Eumenes, vn . they dire&ed one of the Praetors, Caius Sicinius, ' with a proper force to pass into Epirus; and, in or- der to secure their access into that country, to take po0feflion of Apollonia, and other towns on the coast. But a misunderstanding then subsisting be- tween the Consuls, and other principal men of the Senate, caused some obftruation in the farther im- mediate prosecution of the war. Perseus however, alarmed by the arrival of a Roman force in his neighbourhood, sent an em- baffy to Rome with expostulations on the subjet, and with offers, by every reasonable concession that the Senate or the People could require, to avert the itorm which threatened him. But the Romans, as- fe&ing resentment of the injuries they pretended to have received, ordered his ambassadors, without de- lay, to depart from Italy; and give intimation, that, if for the future he should have any thing to offer, he might have recourse to the commander of the Roman army in Epirus. The interview, which Perseus soon after had with the Roman commiflioners, terminated with the strongest signs of hofiility on both fides (e). The king, however, having taken minutes of what passed at their conference, sent copies to all the neighbouring flates, in order to exculpate himself from any guilt in the approaching war; and as the event afterwards showed how much it was the inte- reft of every state to support him, he being the only power that could give them any protection against the Romans; so numbers, already moved by this apprehension, were inclined to favour his cause. The Rhodians, then a formidable naval power, though refrained by fear from an open breach with the Romans, yet gave sufficient evidence of this difpofi-
(r) Liv. lib. Ixii. c. a5. VOL. I. Q tion.
B o o K tion. Eumenes likewise, though a principal inflru-
ment in fomenting the present quarrel, soon be- came averse to its consequences. The Beotians and Epirots, as well as the Illyrians, openly declared for the king of Macedonia (f).
These circumfrances were fiated at Rome as ad- ditional grounds of complaint againit the king; and his endeavours to vindicate the part he had aded, were confidered as attempts to form a hostile con- federacy against the republic.
Additional fleets and armies were accordingly as- fembled, and direted towards Epirus; and a de- claration of war was issued in the form of an aft of the Roman people.
The Romans had now, during about twenty-five years, borne a principal part among the nations that surrounded the Mediterranean sea. The as- cendant they had gained in all their wars or trea- ties, had made them common objects of fear or re- spect to all the contiguous powers of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The Macedonians, however, as the latest conquerors of the world, still retained a very high reputation for military skill and valour. The events of the late war rather furprized mankind, than convinced them of any deciaed superiority on the part of the Roman arms. The novelty of a new enemy, the mistakes or misconduct of the late king, might have accounted for his ill success. The kingdom had now been above twenty years exempted from any signal calamity, had re-eflab- lifhed its armies, and filled its magazines and its coffers. The military efiablifhment amounted to forty thousand men; the greater part formed and disciplined upon the plan of the phalanx, and sup- ported with numerous troops of irregulars from the warlike cantons of Thrace. The king himself) in the vigour of manhood, sensible that the storm could
(f) Polyb. Excerptx Legationes, c. 64-67.
not
not be diverted, affeaed rather to desire than to c H A p. decline the contest; and, under all there circum- Vi. fiances, nations seemingly least interested in the'" consequences were intent on the scene that was about to be opened before them. Eumenes, supposed to be incited by inveterate animosity to Perseus, and by recent provocations, prepared to fulfil his profeflions in behalf of the Romans. Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, equally in- clined by policy to wish for a counterpoise to the Macedonian power, but having recently formed an alliance by marriage with the family of Perseus, de- termined to be neutral in the war. Ptolomy Philomater, who then filled the throne of Egypt, was a minor. Antiochus Epiphanes, who had lately succeeded his brother Seleucus, in the kingdom of Syria, having been some time an hofiage at Rome, asseted in his own court the manners of a Roman demagogue; but was chiefly intent on his pretensions to Celefyria, which he hoped to make good under favour of the ap- proaching conjuncure formed by the minority of Plolomy, and by the avocation of the Roman forces in Greece. The Carthaginians, and the king of Numidia, while they severally preferred their complaints against each other before the Roman Senate, vied likewise in their professions of zeal for the Roman republic, and in their offers of supply of men, horses, provisions, or (hips. Gentius, the king of Illyricum, had incurred the jealousy of the Romans; but remained undeter- mined what part he should take. Cotys, a Thracian king, declared openly for Perseus. The people of Greece, in their several republics were divided among themselves. The popular parties in general, being desirous to ex- change the government of their own ariftocracies
Qa2 for
s oo cfor that of a monarchy, favoured the king of Ma. !. - cedonia. The leading men were either inclined
to the Romans, or wilhed to balance the rival powers, so as to have, in the protecion of the one, some security against the usurpations of the other (g).
The Romans had committed an error by fending a small force into Epirus, which the king of Mace- donia might have cut off before it could be properly supported from Italy ; but their commifioners then in that country, had the address to amuse the king with a negociation, and to divert him, during the sirss year of the war, from any attempt on Apollo- nia, or on any other station then in possession of the Roman troops.
In the following summer, about seven years after the accession of Perseus to the throne of Macedo- nia,' the war in that kingdom being committed to the Consul Licinius, this general followed the ar- my which had been transported to the coast of Epirus; and while the Roman fleet, with their al- lies, assembled in the firaits of Euboea, the armies on both fides began their operations. The Mace- donians encamped at Sycurium on the declivity of mount Offa. The Roman Consul penetrated into Thessaly; and, having pafied the river Peneus, took post at Scea, twelve miles from the camp of the enemy. Here he wasjoined by Attalus, brother to the king of Pergamus, with four thousand men, and by smaller bodies collected from different tfates of Greece.
Perseus endeavoured to lay waste the kingdom of Phera, from which the Romans drew the greatest part of their fubfillence; and an action ensued, in which the whole cavalry and light infantry of both armies being engaged, the Romans were de- feated; and the Consul, no longer able to sup-
(g) Liv. lib. xlii. c. 29-30.
port j
port his foraging parties on that fide of the Peneus c H A p. against a superior enemy, decamped in the night, V. and repassed the river.
Although this victory had a tendency to raise the hopes of the king, 'it was by him wifely con- fidered as a fit opportunity to renew the overtures of peace; and, in order to bring on a negociation, it was resolved, that the conditions which, under the misfortune of repeated defeats, had been of- sered by his father, should be made the preli- minaries of the present treaty.
It appeared to the king, and to those with whom he consulted, that, in the sequel of a victory, this would appear an at of moderation, not of fear that all neutral powers, who dreaded the confe- quences of a decided superiority on either fide, would favour the person who should propose to have peace re-established on moderate terms; and that the Romans, being induced to terminate the war under the effects of a defeat, would from thenceforward refpet the Macedonian monarchy, and be cautious how they difiurbed its tranquil- lity.
But if in this manner the opportunity was per- ceived, and wifely laid hold of by the councils of Perseus, it by no means efcaped.the Roman coun- cil of war, which was assembled to receive the proposals of the: king.
The Romans, whether from national spirit or policy, at all timesdeclinedenteringon negociations or treaties in consequence of defeats. They spurn- ed the advances of a victorious enemy, while they received those of the vancuifhed with condefcen- sion and mildness. They accordingly, in the present cafe, treated the concessions of Perseus with dif- dain, haughtily answering, that he must submit at discretion (A). (h) In adverfis vultum fecunda fortuna gerere, rnodcrir an;mos in fctundis. Liv. lib. xlii. c. 6z.
This
B o o K This reply was received at the court of Perseus
with extreme furprize. But it produced still far- ther concessions; and infiead of resentment from the king, a repetition of his mefIage with an offer to augment the tribute which had been paid by his father (i).
The remainder of the summer having passed in the operations of foraging parties, without any considerable acion, the Romans retired for the winter into Beotia. On this coaR the fleet, having met with no enemy at sea, had made repeated descents to distress the inhabitants who had de- clared for the king. The consul took poffeflion of his quarters, without any refiltance, in the in- terior parts of the country, and in this, with the progress that was made by the army employed on the fide of Illyricum in detaching that nation from Perseus, confifed the service of the first campaign.
Licinius, at the expiration of the usual term, was relieved by his successor in office, A. Hoftilius Marcius. This commander, being defeated and baffled in some attempts he made to penetrate into the kingdom of Macedonia, appears to have made. a campaign still less fortunate than that of his pre- decefilor and the Senate, at the end of the summer, having ordered him home to preside at the annual elections, sent a deputation to visit the army, and to enquire into the cause of their miscarriages, and the ilovnefs of their progrels.
The Romans, although they had experienced disappointments in the beginning of other wars, particularly in their first encounters with Pyrrhus and with Hannibal; and had reason to expec a similar effet in the opening of the present war, appear to have been greatly mortified and fur- prized at this unpromising afpe& of their enterprize. They were engaged with an enemy renowned for
(i) Polyb. ExCerpt. Legat. c. 69.
difcipllne,
discipline, who had made war a trade, and the c A P. use of arms a profeflion; while they themselves, V". it appears, for a considerable period after the pre- sent war, even during the most rapid progress of their arms, had no military establishment besides that of their civil and political conflitution, no fol- diers besides their citizens, and no officers but the ordinary magifirates of the commonwealth.
If this establishment had its advantages (k), it may have appeared, on particular occasions, like- wife to have had its defeCts. The citizen may have been too much a mafler in his civil capacity to sub- jeat himself fully to the bondage of a soldier; and too absolute in his capacity of military officer to bear with the controul of political regulations. As the obligation to serve in the legions was general and without exception, many a citizen, at least in the cafe of any distant or unpromising service, would endeavour to shun his duty. And the officer would not always dare to enforce disagreeable duty on those by whom he himself was elected, or on whom he in part depended for farther advancement.
At the beginning of this war, the legions were augmented from five thousand two hundred foot and two hundred horse, to fix thousand foot and three hundred horse (1); and probably, to raise the authority of the Consul more effectually into that of a commander in chief, he was commissioned to name the Tribunes, as well as the Centurions of the army, that were to serve under his orders: but, upon a complaint that this extension of the Consul's powers did not, by enforcing the difci- pline of the army, serve the purpose for which it was made, the people resumed their right of elec- tion in the appointment even of inferior officers. The deputies now sent into Macedonia by the Se- nate reported, that the legions employed in that
(k) Vid. E. i. c. 3. (1) Liv. lib. xliii. c. 12.
country
B o K country were extremely incomplete, numbers
I both of the lower officers and private men being, '-r^ by the dangerous indulgence of their leaders, sus-
sered to absent themselves from their colours (mi). This abuse we may apprehend to have been fre- quent in a service that was to be performed by citizens who had the choice of their own com- manders. And from speculative ideas on the sub- jec, if we were not bound to be governed by ex- perience as the preferable tutor, we should be apt to reject, as an improper mode of forming armies, that eftablilhment by which the Romans conquered the world.
It is probable, that not only the defet of sub- ordination in the beginning of every war, but that of skill, likewise, in the use of their peculiar wea- pons, made, in the Roman armies, a great difpa- rity between raw and veteran troops.
The use of the buckler and sword required great fill, agility, and muscular strength; all of them the effect of exercise and of continued practice.
The experience of the soldier who survived ma- ny adtions tended to confirm his courage, because his escape was in a great measure the effeEt of his fk1l1, or of his strength; and upon a return of si- milar dangers, gave him confidence in himself.
In battles the firong and the ikilful escaped, the weak and the awkward were likely to perish; and every action not only exercised the arms of those that survived, but made a feledion of the vigour- ous and skilful to be reserved for future occasions.
Hence probably, in the Roman armies, much more than in those of modem Europe, the praatifed soldier had a great superiority over the novice; and citizens, when brought into the field by ro- tation, had much to learn in the course of every campaign.
pr,) Liv. lib. zl;ii. c. x .
In
In the present contest, the checks of the first andc H A p. the second year of the war, though extremely mor- v-._. tifying to the Romans, were received without any signs of irresolution, or change of their purpose. In the third year after hostilities commenced, the command of the army in Macedonia devolved on QO Marcius Philippus, who, being chosen one of the Consuls, drew his province as uiual by lot. This officer had been employed in one of the late deputations that were sent into Greece; had (hown his ability in the course of negociations which pre- ceded the war; and now, by his condut as a ge- neral, broke through the line with which the king had endeavoured to secure the passes of the moun- tains, and to cover the frontier of his kingdom. But, when he had penetrated into Macedonia, he found himlelf at the end of the season, and for want of proper supplies of provisions on that fide of the mountains, unable to pursue the advantage he had gained. Here, therefore, he staid only to deliver his army to Emilius Paullus, who had been named to succeed him. This was the son of that Paullus, who, being one of the Consuls who com- manded the Roman army at Cannae, threw away his life rather than survive that defeat. The Ton was now turned of sixty (in) ; and by the length of his service, and the variety of his experience in Li- guria and Spain, was well acquainted with the chan- ces of war. Emilius Paullus, upon his election, in order that he might not be liable to answer for the faults of his predecessors, moved, that deputies should be sent into Macedonia to review the army, and to make a report of its itate before he entered upon the command. His speech to the People, when about to depart for his province, carries a striking allusion to the petulant freedom with which, it
(,,) Plutarch. in Vit. Emil. p. 157.
seems,
B o o i seems, unsuccessful commanders were censured, or
traduced in the popular conversations at Rome, and carries a defiance with which he proposed to silence the blame that might afterwards be cast on himself "Let such as think themselves qualified to advice " the general," he said, " now accompany me into "Macedonia. They shall have a passage on board "my ship; and, in the field, be welcome to a " place in my tent and at my table, but if they "now decline this offer, let them not afterwards "pretend to judge of what they neither fee nor " underfiand. Nor let them set up their own " opinion against that of a fellow-citizen, who is
f erving the public to the utmost of his ability, "and at the hazard of his life and of his ho- ' nours."
Emilius, upon his arrival in Macedonia, found the king entrenched on the banks of the Enipeus, with his right and left covered by mountains, on which all the passes were secured. After some de- lay, during which he was employed in observing the enemy's dirpofition, or in improving the difci- pline of his own army, he sent a detachment to dif- possess the Macedonians of one of the flations which they occupied on the heights, with orders to the officer who commanded in this service, that, if he succeeded in it, he should fall down on the plain in the rear of the enemy; he himself, in the mean time, made a feint to attack them in front.
The pots on the heights being forced, Perseus relinquished his preient disposition, and fell back towards Pydna on the banks of the Aliacmon. Here it became necessary for him either to hazard a battle, or, on account of the nature of the country behind him, to separate his forces.
He preferred the firii, and made choice of a plain that was fit to receive the phalanx, and was fiirted
withi
with hills, on which his light troops could aa withc H A P. advantage. Here too the Roman consul continued to press upon him, and was inclined to seize the first op- portunity of deciding the war. Both armies, as by appointment, presented themselves on the plain in order of battle, and Emilius Paullus seemed eager to engage; but, as he himfelf.ufed to confess, having never beheld an appearance so formidable as when the Macedonians levelled their spears, he thought proper to halt (i). Though much difcon- certed, he endeavoured to preserve his counte- nance, would not recede from his ground; and that he might encamp his army where they now flood, ordered the firit line to remain under arms, and ready to attack the enemy, while those who were behind them began to intrench; having in this manner cast up a breast-work of considerable firength, he retired behind it, and under that cover completed the fortifications of a camp in the usual form.
In this position he waited for an opportunity to draw on an engagement, when the enemy should be less prepared to receive him, or not have time to avail themselves so much of that formidable order which conflituted the itrength of the phalanx. This occasion soon afterwards seemed to be of- sered by a fkirmilh which happened in the fields between the two armies. A horse, having broke loose from the camp of the Romans, fled towards that of the Macedonians, was followed by the fol- diers from whom he escaped, and met by their enemy from the opposite camp. These parties en- gaged, and each being joined by numbers from their refpedive armies, brought on at last a general ation. The ground was favourable to the pha- lanx; and the Macedonians, though hastily formed,
(n) Polyb. Fragment. vol. ii. p. 243.
fill
B.o o x fill pofTefed against the Romans the advantage of
' their weapons, and of their formidable order.
They filled up the plain in front, and could not be flanked.' They had only to maintain their ground, and had no occasion to discompose their ranks, in time of the aEtion, by any change of position. They accordingly withstood with ease the firfi shock of the Roman legions; but were broken and disjointed in the sequel by the Seemingly irregular attacks which were made at intervals by the mani- pules, or the separate divisions of the Roman foot. The parts of the phalanx that were attacked, whether they were prelled in, or came forward to press on their enemy, could not keep in an exat line with the parts that were not attacked. Open- ings were made, at whi:h the Roman soldier, with his buckler and short sword, could easily enter. Emilius, observing this advantage, direced his at- tack on those places at which the front of the phalanx was broken; and the legionary soldier, having got within the point of his antagonist's spear, pierced to the heart of the column, and in this position made a havock which foor threw the vhc-le into disorder and general route(o).
Twenty thousand of the Macedonians were killed in the field, five thotU-and were made prisoners in their flight; and fix thousand that shut themselves up in the iown of Pydna were obliged to surrender at discretion P).
After this detear, the king of Macedonia, with a few attendants, fled to Pella, where, having taken up his c'ildren and the remains of his treasure, amounting to ten thousand talents, or about two millions of pounds iterling(q), he continued his flight to Amphipo'is, and from thence to Samothra- cia, where he took reflge in the famous fandcuary of that illand.
(c) Pl,: :rch .- '.i:. Er 3;. r 173, ! .: v Li7. i. ll v. C. 42. .!) so:\a. .. ~ r.xx:i . .-- .,. i.n
Emil is
Emilius pushed on to Amphipolis, receiving thec H A P. submission of all the towns and diftriets as he pass- vJ ed. The Praetor, Oavius, then commanding the Roman fleet, beset the island of Samothracia with his ships; and, without violating the fanetu- ary, took measures that effetually prevented the king's escape. This unfortunate prince, with some of his children, delivered themselves up to the Praetor, and were conduEted to the camp of Emilius. The king threw himself on the ground, and would have embraced the vi&tor's knees, when the Roman ge- neral, with a condescension that is extolled by an- cient historians, gave him his hand, and raised him from the ground, but reproached him as the ag- grelTor in the late contest with the Romans; and with a leflbn of morality, which tore up the wounds of the unfortunate monarch, bid the young men who were present look on this obje& as an exam- ple of the instability of fortune, and of the vicifli- tude of human affairs.
While the war in Macedonia was coming to this issue, that in Illyricum had a like termination, and ended about the fame time in the captivity of the king.
News of both were received at Rome about the fame time, and filled the temples, as usual, with multitudes who crowded to perform the public rites of thanksgiving that were ordered by the Senate. Soon after which, embalfies arrived from all the kings and states of the then known world, with ad- dreifes of congratulation on so great an event. The Senate proceeded to form a plan for the settlement of Macedonia.
It was resolved to extinguish the monarchy, to divide its territory into four diitridts, and in each to eflablifh a republican government, adminiitered by councils and magifirates chosen by the People. This, among the Greeks, could bear the interpre-
tation
Bo o K tation of beflowing absolute liberty. Ten com-
L missioners were named to carry this plan into exe- ~"--'cution in Macedonia, and five were appointed fcr
a similar purpose in Illyricum. Emilius was con. tinued in his command, and the army ordered to remain in Macedonia until the settlement of the province should be completed.
The Commissioners, agreeably to their infiruc- tions, fixed the limits of the several diftrids, and, probably to perpetuate the reparation of them, or to prevent any dangerous communication between their inhabitants, prohibited them to intermarry, or to hold any commerce in the property of land, from one division to another.
To some other refiri6tions, which had more a tendency to weaken or to dismember this once powerful monarchy, than to confer freedom on the people, they joined an at of favour, in confider- ably diminishing their former burdens, reducing their tribute to one half of what they had usually paid to their own kings; and, to facilitate or to secure the reception of the republican form which was devised for them, they ordered all the ancient nobles, and all the retainers of the late court, as being irreconcileable with the equality of citizens under a republic, to depart from the kingdom, and to chufe places of residence for themselves in Italy.
A like plan was followed with refpea to Illyri- cum, which was divided into three diftrints; and the kings both of Macedonia and of this country, with many other captives, were conducted to Rome to adorn the triumph of their conquerors.
Perseus is said to have lived as a prisoner at Alba, about four years after he had been exhibited in this procession. Alexander, one of his sons, had an education calculated merely to procure him subsistence, and was afterwards, as a scribe or a
clerk,
clerk, employed in some of the public offices at c H A p. Rome. VJ While the event of the Macedonian war was yet undecided, and no considerable advantage, either of conduct or fortune, appeared on the fide of the Romans, they still preserved the usual arrogance of their manner, and interposed with the fame im- perious ascendant in the affairs of Greece, Asia, and Africa, that they could have done in confe- quence of the most decisive victory. It was at this time that, by the celebrated message of Popilius Lenas, they put a flop to the conquefis of Antio- chus Epiphanes in Egypt. This prince, trusting to the full employment with which the Roman forces were engaged, had ventured to invade this kingdom, and was in poffeflion of every part of it, except the city of Alexandria. He was occu- pied in the siege of this place when Popilius ar- rived and delivered him an order of the Senate to deists. The king made answer, That he would confider of it. " Determine before you pass this " line," said the Roman, tracing a circle with the rod which he held in his hand. This people, how- ever, had occasion, during the dependance of the Macedonian war, to observe that few of their al- lies were willing to support them in the extremes to which they seemed to be inclined. The Epirots had acually declared for the king of Macedonia. The Rhodians had offered their mediation to nego- tiate a peace, and threatened hostility againit ei- ther of the parties who should refute to accept of it. Even Eumenes was fufpeded of having entered into a secret concert with Perseus, although the fall of that prince prevented any open effects of their treaty.
The Romans, nevertheless, disguised their re- fentment of there several provocations, until their principal enemy, the king of Macedonia, was sub- dued; after they had accomplilhed this end, they
proceeded
o o l; proceeded against every other party, with a feve. _it i1 rity which was then supposed to be permitted in
the law of nations, and no more than proportioned to their supposed offence. They gave orders to Emilius, in passing through Epirus, to lay that country under military execution. Seventy towns were accordingly destroyed, and an hundred and fifty thousand of the people fold for slaves.
The Senate refused to admit the ambafTadors of Rhodes, who came to congratulate the Roman people on their vicory at Pydna. They firipped those islanders of the provinces which had been granted to them on the continent by the late treaty with Antiochus, and ordered them to discontinue some duties levied from ships in paling through their found, which made a considerable part of their revenue.
While Eumenes was coming in person to pay his court to the Senate, they resolved to forbid the concourse of kings to Rome. Their meaning, though exprefled in general terms, was evidently levelled at this prince; and they ordered, that when he should arrive at Brunduium, their refolu- tion should be intimated to him, to prevent his nearer approach.
They in reality, from this time forward, though in the style of allies, treated the Grecian republics as fubjeas.
Such was the rank which the Romans assumed among nations; while their flatefmen Itill retained much of their primeval ruflicity, and did not con- fider the diliinAions of fortune and equipage as the appurtenances of power or of high command. Cato, though a citizen of the highest rank, and vested fuccefiively with the dignities of Consul and of Censor, used to partake in the labour of his own slaves, and to feed with them from the fame dish at their meals (r). When he commanded the armies
(r) Plutarch in Vir, C3:oa D., D. 3oc. *i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,
of the republic, the daily allowance of his household c H A p. was no more than three medimni, or about. as vl. many bushels of wheat for his family, and half a medimnus, or half a bushel of barley for his horses. In Surveying his province he usually travelled on foot, attended by a fingie slave who carried his baggage (s). These particulars are mentioned perhaps as pe- culiar to Cato; but such singularities in the man- ners of a peroln placed so high among the people, carry orne general intimation of the fashion of the times. A spirit of equality yet reigned among the members of the commonwealth, which rejected the diftintions of fortune, and checked the admi- ration of private wealth. In all military donations the Centurion had no more than double the allow- ance of a private soldier, and no military rank was indelible. The Consul and commander in chief of one year-ferved not only in the ranks, but even as a Tribune or inferior officer in the next; and the fame person who had displayed the genius and ability of the general, still valued him- self on the courage and address of a legionary soldier. No one was raised above the glory to be reaped from the exertion of mere perlonal courage and bodily strength. Persons of the highest condition sent or accepted a defiance to fight in single com- bat, in pretence of the armies to which they be- longed. Marcus Servilius, a person of consular rank, in order to enhance the authority with which he spoke when he pleaded for the triumph of Paulus Emilius, informed the People that he himself, full three and twenty times, had fought singly with so many champions of the enemy, and that in each of there encounters he had slain and stripped his
(S) Plat, in Vi, Catonis, p. 335 &338. VOL. I. R antagonist.
B o o K antagoniit. A combat of the fame kind was after-
I- wards fought by the younger Scipio, when serving C'"c'in Spain.
The sumptuary laws of this age were suited to the idea of citizens who were determined to con- tribute their utmost to the grandeur of the State; but to forego the means of luxury or personal dif. tintion. Roman ladies were restrained, except in religious proceflions, from the use of carriages any where within the city, or at the distance of less than a mile from its walls; and yet the space over which they were to preserve their communications extended to a circuit of fourteen miles, and began to be so much crowded with buildings or cottages, that, even before the reduction of Macedonia, it was become necefiary to restrain private persons from encroaching on the itreets, squares, and other spaces reserved for public conveniency. In a place of this magnitude, and so flocked with inhabitants, the female sex was also forbid the use of variegated or party-coloured clothes, or of more than half an ounce of gold in the ornament of their persons. This law being repealed, contrary to the senti- ments of Cato, this citizen, when he came, in the capacity of Censor, to take account of the equi- pages, clothes, and jewels of the women, taxed each of them tenfold for whatever was found in her wardrobe exceeding the value of one thousand five hundred denarii, or about fifty pounds fter- ling (t).
The attention of the legislature was carried into the detail of entertainments or feasts. In one a& the number of the guests, and in a subsequent one the expence of their meals, were limited. By the Lex Tribonia, enaced about twenty years after the reduction of Macedonia, a citizen was allowed on certain high festivals, to expend three hundred
(t) Liv. lib. xxxiv. c. i-6.
ases,
afles, or about twenty (hillings sterling; on other c H A P. festivals of less note, one hundred asses, or about V fix shillings and eight pence; but during the re- mainder of the year, no more than ten asses, or about eight pence; and was not allowed to serve up more than one fowl, and this with a proviso that it (hould not be crammed or fatted (u).
Superitition made a principal article in the cha- ra&er of the people. It subjected them continu- ally to be occupied or alarmed with prodigies and ominous appearances, of which they endeavoured to avert the effects by rites and expiations, as flrange and irrational as the presages on which they had grounded their fears. Great part of their time was accordingly taken up with processions and public (hews, and much of their fubflance, even to the whole annual produce of their herds (w), was occasionally expended in sacrifices, or in the performance of public vows. The first officers of State, in their functions of the priesthood, per- formed the part of the cook and the butcher; and, while the Senate was deliberating on queflions of great moment, examined the entrails of a victim, in order to know what the gods had determined. " You must defifi," said the Consul Cornelius, en- tering the Senate with a countenance pale and marked with afionifhment; " 1 myself have visited " the boiler, and the head of the liver is con- " fumed (x)."
According to the opinions entertained in those times, sorcery was a principal expedient employed by those who had secret designs on the life of their neighbour. It was supposed to make a part in the statutory crime of poisoning; and the fame ima- gination which admitted the charge of sorcery as (U) Plin. lib. x. c. 50. (W) The Ver Sacrum was a general sacrifice of all the young of their herds for a whole year. (x) Liv. lib. xli. c. 15.
R 2 credible,
B O o credible, was, in particular instances, when any
_, person was accused, easily convinced of his guilt;
insomuch that some thousands were at times con- vicled together of this imaginary crime (y).
The manners of the people of Italy were at times subject to firange disorders, or the magifirate gave credit to wild and improbable reports. The itory of the Bachanals, dated in the year of Rome five hundred and fixty-fix, or about twenty years before the conquest of Macedonia, may be confi- dered as an infiance of one or the other (z). A so- ciety, under the name of Bachanals, had been in- rfituted, on the suggestion of a Greek pretender to divination. The desire of being admitted into this society prevailed throughout Italy, and the fed be- came extremely numerous. As they commonly met in the night, they were said at certain hours to extinguish their lights, and to indulge themselves in every practice of horror, rape, incels, and murder; crimes under which no feet or fraternity could pof- sibly subsist, but which, in being imputed to num- bers in this credulous age, gave occasion to a severe inquisition, and proved fatal to many persons at Rome, and throughout Italy.
The extreme fuperflition, however, of those times, in some of its effects, vied with genuine re- ligion; and, by the regard it inspired, more efpe- cially for the obligation of oaths, became a prin- ciple of public order and of public duty, and in many iniiances superseded the use of penal or com- pulfory laws.
When the citizen swore that he would obey the call of the magifirate to enlist in the legions; when the soldier swore that he would not desert his co- lours, disobey his commander, or fly from his ene- my ; when a citizen, at the call of the Censor, re- ported on oath the amount of his effeAts; the State, (r/ Lv. lib. xLxix. . .41. (s) Ibid.c.S . & fcqucn. (.) Venificium.
in
in all those instances, with perfeA confidence reliedc H A p. on the good faith of her fubjeds, and was not de- V1. ceived.
In the period to which these observations refer, that is, in the sixth century of the Roman State, the first dawning of literature began to appear. It has been mentioned that a custom prevailed among the primitive Romans, as among other rude nations, at their feasts to sing or rehearse heroic ballads which recorded their own deeds or those of their ancef- tors(b). This pracice had been some time dif- continued, and the compositions themselves were loft. They were succeeded by pretended monu- ments of hiRfory equally fallacious, the orations which, having been pronounced at funerals, were, like titles of honour, preserved in the archives of eve- ry noble house, but which were rather calculated to flatter the vanity of families, than to record the truth (c).
The Romans owed the earliest compilations of their history to Greeks; and in their own first at- tempts to relate their itory employed the language of that people (d). Naevius and Ennius, who were the first that wrote in the Latin tongue, composed their relations in verse. Livius Andronicus, and afterwards Plautus and Terence, translated the Greek fable, and exhibited in the fireets of Rome, not the Roman, but Grecian manners. The two last are said to have been persons of mean conditi- on; the one to have fubfilted by turning a baker's mill, the other to have been a captive and a slave. Both of them had probably possessed the Greek tongue as a vulgar dialet, which was yet spoken in many parts of Italy, and from this circumstance, became acquainted with the elegant compositions of (b) Cic. de Claris Oratoribus, c. 19. (c) Ibid. p. 394. (d) Dion. Ial. lib. i. p. 5.
Philemon
B O O K Philemon and Menander (e). Their comedies were __, a&sed in the fireets, without any feats or benches
for the reception of an audience. But a nation so little studious of ordinary conveniencies, and con. tented to borrow their literary models from neigh- bours, to whom, being mere imitators, they conti- nued for ages inferior, were, however, in their po- litical and military chara&er, superior to all other a. c. 5Es.nations whatever; and, at this date, had extended
a dominion, which originally consisted of a poor village on the Tiber, to more empire and territory than is now enjoyed by any kingdom or state of Europe. (e) The people of Cumz, abont this time, applied for leave to have their public ach, for the time, expressed in Latin.
T H E THE H I S T o R Y
OF THE pROGRESS AND TERMINATION
O F THE ROMAN REPUBLIC.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. State, Manners, and Policy of the Titnes.-Repeated
Complaints from Carthage.-Hoftile Disposition of the Romans.-Refolution to remove Carthage from the CoaJt.-Meafires taken for this Piurpofe.-Car- thage befieged.--'aken and deflroyed.-Revolt of the Macedonians.-Th'eir Kingdom reduced to the Form of a Roman Province.-Fate of the Achc.an League.-Operations in Spainz.-Condiict of Viria- thus.-State of TNumantia.-Blockade of Nlunantia. -Its deJfrution.--Revolt of the Slaves in Sicily.- Legal Eflablifjiments and Manners of the City. T HE redution of Macedonia was in manyc H A P.
refpets a remarkable era in the history of Rome. Before this date Roman citizens had been ' treated as fubjets, and permitted themselves to be taxed. They were required at every census to
make
B o o r make a return of their effects upon oath, and, b.
fides other stated or occasional contributions to the public, paid a certain rate on the whole value of their property. But upon this event they assumed more entirely thi character of Sovereigns; and, having a treafurV replenished with the spoils of that kingdom, exempted tlemfelves from their for- rer burdens.
The accefion of wealth, said to have put them in this condition, is variously reported. Livy quotes Vaicrius Antias as stating it at miillies ducenties, or about a million sterling ; Velleius Paterculus flates it at douole this fum, and Pliny at somewhat more (a). But the highest or these computations scarcely appears adequate to the effec supposed. It is more likely that the ordinary income of the trea- fury, confilling of the fums so frequently deposited at the triumphs of victorious leaders, the tributes received from Carthage and Syria- the rents of Campania, the tithes of Sicily and Sardinia, with the addition of the revenue recently conflituted in Macedonia, put the Romans at last in condition to exempt themselves from taxation; an effec which ho perishing capital placed at once in their coffers could be supposed to produce. The Roman trea- fiury, when examined about ten years after this date, was found to contain, in bars of gold and silver, and in coin, not much more than half a million sterling (b): a frum which, without a pro- per and regular supply, must have been soon ex- haufied.
From the conclusion of the war with Perseus, the Romans, for twenty years, do not seem to have been engaged with any considerable enemy; and their numerous colonies; now dilperfed over Italy; from Aquileia to Rhegium, probably made great (c) Veilcin-, lib. i. c. 9. Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 3. () 'lin. lb. xxxii. c. 3. In eoldl i6,StoF . in silver 22,070E. and in coin 6zo,854,coo H. S. Arbuthnotof Ancient Coins.
advances,
advances, during this period, in agriculture, com-C H A P. merce, and the other arts of peace. Among their , public works are mentioned, not only temples and fortifications, particulars in which men attain to magnificence even in rude ages, but likewise aque- duets, market-places, pavements, high-ways, and other conveniencies, the preludes or attendants of wealth and commerce. Cato, in pleading againfi the repeated elecion of the fame person into the office of Consul, ex- claimed againit the luxury of the times, and al- leged, that so many citizens could not support their extravagance by any other means than that of draining the provinces by virtue of their repeated appointments to command. " Observe," he said, "their villas how curiously built, how richly fur- "nifhed with ivory and precious wood. Their " very floors are coloured or slained in the Punic " fashion (c)."
The Romans had formerly made laws to fix the Le ,An- age at which citizens might be chosen into the dif- ali;. ferent offices of State (d). And on the occasion on which Cato made this fpecch, they excluded the fame person from being repeatedly chosen. They likewile made those additions to former sumptuary laws which have been already mentioned. The Census, or enrolment of the People, began to be made with more care than formerly: even the La- tin allies, though migrating to Rome, were ex- cluded from the rolls (e) v and the people generally muttered from three to four hundred thousand men. While the Romans had no war to maintain with the more regular and formidable rivals of their (r) Vid. Pompeium Feflum. (d) It appears that, by this law, being Quefiors at thirty-one, they might rife to the conlulate at forty-three. (e) Plutarch, in the life of Flamininur, mentions a law by which the Cenlbrs were obliged to enrol every freeman that offered. The Latins complained, that their towns were depopulated by emigrations to Rome. Liv. lib. xli. c. 8.
power,
B OK power, they till employed their legions on the
, frontier of their.provinces in Spain, Dalmatia, Li.
guria, and on the descents of the Alps. They opened, for the first time, an intercourse with the Transalpine nations, in a treaty of alliance with the republic of Marseilles; in consequence of which, they proteced that mercantile settlement from the attacks of fierce tribes, who infested them from the maritime extremities of the Alps and Ap- penines. They were in general the umpires in the differences of nations, gave audience in all their complaints, interposed with their forces as well as authority, and dilpofed of provinces and kingdoms at their pleasure. They kept a vigilant eye on the condudt and policy of all the different powers with whom they were at any time likely to be embroil- ed, and generally conduced their tranfaCions with independent nations as they adjusted the firit set- tlement of their own acquisitions, by commiflion and deputations sent from the Senate to decide, with the least possible delay, on such matters as might arise in the place to which their deliberations referred.
The number of commifiioners employed in there services, for the most part, was ten. There took incfrmations, formed plans, and made their reports for the final decision of the Senate, and, by the frequency of these appointments, it appears that the members of the Senate, in rotation, had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with that world which they were destined to govern.
The Senate itself, though, from its numbers and the emulation of its members, likely to embarraft affairs by debate, delay, and the rath publication of all its designs, in reality possessed all the advan- tages of decision, secrecy, and dispatch, that could be obtained in the molt feled executive council. This numerous assembly of Roman statesmen ap- pear to have mainta;ned, during a long period, one
series,
series of consistent and uniform design; and kept c H A P. their intentions so secret, that their resolutions, for ' the most part, were known only by the execution. ' The king of Pergamus made a journey to Rome, in order to excite the Romans to a- war with his rival, the king of Macedonia. He preferred his complaints in the Senate, and prevailed on this body to resolve on the war; but no part of the tranfa&ion was public, till after the king of Mace- donia was a prisoner at Rome (f). Duringthe present respite from any.confiderable war, the Romans balanced the kingdoms of Per- gamus, Bithynia; and Cappadocia, againfi each other, in such a manner as to be able, at pleasure, to oppress any of those powers that should become refractory or formidable to their interest. They made the kingdom of Syria devolve on a minor, the son of Antiochus; and, under the pre- tence of this minority, sent a commiflion to take charge of the kingdom. But their commiflioners were, with the connivance of the court, assaulted in a riot at Antioch; some of them were killed, and others forced to fly from the country. Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who ought to have succeeded to his father in the monarchy of Syria, being, at the death of that prince, an hof- tage at Rome, had been supplanted by his young- er brother, the father of that minor prince who was now acknowledged by the Romans. Upon the insult that had been thus offered to the Roman commission at Antioch, Demetrius thought it a favourable opportunity to urge his claim, and to prevail on the Senate to restore him to the succession of his father's crown: but these crafty usurpers, notwithstanding the offence they had received from those who were in poffeflion of the monarchy, preferred the advantages which
(f) Valer. Maxim, lib. ii. c. z.
they
B o o Kthey had over a minor king, to the precarious as- c^__ section or gratitude of an active spirited prince,
educated at Rome, and taught by their own ex. ample to know his interest; and they accordingly denied his requefi.
Demetrius, however, made his escape from Rome, and, by the death of the minor and his tu- tor, got unrivalled possession of the kingdom of Syria. To pay his court to the Romans, as one of the firit acs of his reign, he sent the murderer of their late commissioner, Otavius, in chains, to be punished at their discretion. But the Senate disdained to wreck their public wrongs on a pri- vate criminal; or, having cause of complaint againfi the nation itself, were not to be satisfied with the punishment of a tingle person. They suffered the prisoner, as beneath their attention, to depart.
As patrons of the kingdom of Egypt, they pro- moted the division of that country between the two brothers, who were then joined in the fove- reignty, and rivals for the sole poffeflion of the throne (g).
During the dependence of there tranfations, the Senate had repeated complaints from Africa, which ended in a war that proved fatal at last to the an- tient rivals of their power. In the conduct of this war, being now less dependent than formerly on the opinion of the world, they, contrary to their ufial pretensions to national generosity and libera- lity, sacrificed, without reserve, entire nations to the ambition, or to the meaneftjealoufy, of their own republic (h).
The province of Emporie, a difiria lying on the coast, and the richest part of the Carthaginian territory, had been violently seized by Gala king of Numidia, and father of Maffinifla. It had been
(g).Polyb. Excerpts Legationes. (h) Ibid. No. ,42.
again
again restored by Syphax, when he supplanted thec H A P. family of Gala on the throne of that kingdom; but now again usurped by Mailinifa on recovering the crown by the power of the Romans, to whose fa- vour he trufied; and the Carthaginians, precluded by the late treaty from making war on any ally of the Romans, had recourse to complaints and re- presentations, which they made at Rome, both be- fore and after the redution of Macedonia. The Roman Senate had, for five and twenty years, eluded these complaints, and, during this time, was in the practice of fending commiflioners into Africa, under pretence of hearing the parties in this important dispute, but with inftruations or dif- positions to favour Maflinifa, and to observe, with a jealous eye, the condition and the movements of their antient rival (i). The Carthaginians, yet possessed of ample re- sources, and, if wealth or magnificence could con- flitute firength, fiill a powerful nation; being weary of repeated applications, to which they could obtain no satisfying answer, took their resolution to arm, and to assert by force their claim to the terri- tory in question. They were met in the field by the army of Maffiniifa, commanded by himself, though now about ninety years of age, and were defeated (k). This unfortunate event disappointed their hopes, and exposed them to the resentment of the Romans, who confidered the attempt they had made to do themselves justice, as a contravention of the late treaty, and a departure from the articles of peace between the two nations. The expediency of a war with Carthage had been for some time a fubjedt of debate in the Ro- man Senate. Deputies had been sent into Africa,
(i) Polyb. Excerpta Legationes, c. 11S. Liv. lib. xl. c. 17. (k) Liv. Epitome, lib. ixviii. Appiaa de Bell. Punic, p. 38.
to
B o o K to procure the information that was necessary to __ J determine this question. Among these Cato, be-
ing itruck with the greatness, wealth, and popu. lousne~s of that republic, and with the amazing ser- tility of its territory, when he made his report in the Senate, carried in his lap a parcel of figs which he had brought from thence. " These," he said, " are the produce of a land that is but three days " fail from Rome. Judge what Italy may haveto " fear from a country whole produce is so much " superior to its own. That country is now in " arms; the sword is drawn against Mafliniffa; " but when thrust in his fide, will penetrate to " you. Your boasted victories have not subdued "the Carthaginians, but given them exoerience, ' taught them caution, and inflruded them how " to disguise, under the semblance of peace, a " war which you will find marshalled against you " in their docks and in their arsenals." This, and every other speech on this fubjeat, Cato concluded with his famous faying; " That Carthage should ' be destroyed (/)." Scipio Nafica, another speaker in this debate, contended for peace. He represented the forces of Carthage as not sufficient to alarm the Romans; or, if really greater than there was any reason to suppose them, no more than were requisite to exercise the virtues of a people already, for want of proper exertion, begun to susser tome abatement in their vigilance, discipline, and va- lour.
In this diversity of opinions, it appeared Coon as- ter, that the Senate took a middle course, resolved not to defiroy, but to remove the inhabitants of Carthage to a new situation, at least ten miles from the sea (m). (I) Delenda eft Carthago. (.:) Appian in Punicis. Plutarch in Vit. Catonis. Zonaras, lib. ix. c. 6. Orof. lib. i. c. c. z. Vcllciu', lib. i. c. iz. Pol)b. Excerptx Legationes, No. 4Tz.e
The
The Carthaginians, after their late unfortunate c H A P. adventure with Massinissa, were willing to preserve ' their effeats, and to purchase tranquillity by the lowet conceflions. But as the measure now pro- posed by the Roman Senate, amounted to a de- privation of all that property which is veiRed in houses or public edifices, and an entire fupprefflon of all those local means of fubfiflence which could not be easily transferred, it was not supposed that their consent could be easily obtained, and it was accordingly resolved to keep the design a fe- cret, until effectual means were prepared for its execution. The consuls, without any declaration of war, were inflruted to arm, and to pass with their forces into Sicily. As their arrival on that island, which was then in a slate of profound peace, evi- dently implied a design upon Africa, the people of Utica, that they might have the merit of an early declaration in favour of the Romans, sent a deputation to make them a tender of their port and town, as a harbour and place of arms for the accommodation of their forces. The Carthaginians were diflrated with opposite counsels. They laid the blame of the war with Mafliniffa on Hasdrubal and his abettors, whom they ordered into exile; but, without coming to any other resolutions, sent a deputation, with full powers to conclude as cir- cumftances might seem to require, and agree to whatever they should find most expedient for the commonwealth. These deputies, on their ar- rival at Rome, finding no disposition in the Senate to treat with them upon equal terms, resolved to arrest, by the most implicit fubmiflion, the sword that was lifted up againit their country. They ac- cordingly confessed the imprudence of their late condut, and implored forgiveness. They quoted the sentence of banishment passed upon Hasdrubal and his party, as an evidence of their contrition for
the
B o o K the hostilities lately offered to Massinissa; and they
s- made a formal surrender of their city and its
territory to be disposed of at the pleasure of the Romans.
In return to this act of fubmiflion, they were told, that the Romans approved their behaviour. and meant to leave them in possession of their freedom, their laws, their territory, and of all their effects, whether private or public: but, as a pledge of their compliance with the measures that might be neceflary to prevent the return of former dif- putes, they demanded three hundred hostages, the children of Senators, and of the first families in Carthage. This demand being reported in the city gave a general alarm; but the authors of rhefe counsels were too far advanced to recede. They tore from the arms of their parents the children of the first families in the commonwealth; arid, amidst the cries of affliEtion and despair, embarked those hoflages for Sicily. Upon this island they were delivered over to the Roman Consuls, and were by them sent forward to Rome.
The commanders of the Roman armament, without explaining themselves any further, con- tinued their voyage, and, by their appearance on the coast of Africa, gave a fresh alarm at Car- thage. Deputies from the unfortunate inhabitants of that place went to receive them at Utica, and were told, that they must deliver up all their arms, flips, engines of war, naval and military stores. Even there alarming commands they received as the itrokes of fate, which could not be avoided: " We do not mean," said one of the deputies, " to dispute your commands; but we entreat you " to confider, to what a helpless state you are " about to reduce an unfortunate people, who, " by this hard condition, will be rendered un- " able to preserve peace among their own citizens " at home, or to defend themselves against the
' meanest
" meanest invader from abroad. We have ba-c H A P. " nifhed Hasdrubal, in order to receive you: we " have declared him an enemy to his country, " that you might bs our friends: but when we "are disarmed, who can prevent this exile from "returning to occupy the city of Carthage against "you? With twenty thousand men that follow "him, if he comes into the directionof our go- ' vernment, he will soon oblige us to make war "on you (n). In answer to this piteous expoflu- lation, the Roman generals undertook the protec- tion of Carthage, and- ordered commiffaries to re- ceive the several articles that were to be delivered up, and to fee- the arsenals and the docks destroyed. It is reported, that there were delivered up to these commiffaries forty thousand suits of armour, twenty thousand katapulte, or large engines of war, with a plentiful itore of darts, arrows, and other misfiles. So far the Romans proceeded with caution, well knowing the veneration which mankind entertain for the feats and tombs of their ancestors, with the shrines and consecrated temples of their gods; and dreading the effects of despair, as soon as the Car- thaginians should perceive how much they were to be affected in their private and public property. But now, thinking their object secure, they pro- ceeded to declare their intentions. The Consul called the Carthaginian deputies into his pretence, and beginning with an exhortation, that they should bear with equanimity what the neceflity of their fortune imposed, intimated, as the definitive refo- lution of the Roman Senate, that the people of Carthage should relinquish their present situation, and build on any other part of their territory, not less than eighty fiadia, or about ten miles, re- moved from the sea. The amazement and sorrow
(n) Polyb. Excerpt. Legat c. 142. VOL. 1. S with
B O OK with which these orders were received, justified the
n . precautions which the Romans had taken to secure "~~' the execution of them. The deputies threw them-
selves upon the ground, and endeavoured, from motives of pity, or of reason, to obtain a revo- cation of this cruel and arbitrary decree. They pleaded the merit of their implicit submission, their weakness, their inability any longer to alarm the jealousy of Rome, circumvented, disarmed, bound to their duty by hostages the most precious blood of their commonwealth. They pleaded the faith which was plighted by the Romans, the hopes of protection they had given, and the reputation they had justly acquired, not only for national justice, but for clemency and generosity to all who sued for mercy. They pleaded the refpe&t which all nations owed to the shrines and the consecrated temples of their gods; the deplorable state into which numbers of their people muit be reduced, expelled from their habitations and immoveable pofeflions, the principal articles of their property, and the hopeless condition of others, who, inured to subsist by the advantages of a maritime fitua- tion, were entirely disqualified to support them- selves or their children at a distance from the sea.
The Roman Consul replied by repeating the express orders of the Senate, and bid the Cartha- ginians remember, that the flates were composed of men, not of ramparts and walls. That the Roman Senate had promised to spare and protet the republic of Carthage; and that they had ful- filled this engagement by leaving the people in pofieflion of their freedom and their laws. That the sacred places should remain untouched, and that the shrines of the gods would still be with- in the reach of their pious visits. That the dif- tance to which it was proposed to remove Carthage from the sea was not so great as the diflance at which Rome herself was situated from it; and that
the
the Romans had taken their resolution, that thee H A P. people of Carthage should no longer have under 1 their immediate view that element which opened a way to their ambition, had tempted them first in- to Sicily, afterwards into Spain, and last of ail into Italy, and to the gates of Rome; and which would never cease to suggest projeds dangerous to them- selves, and inconfillent with the peace of mankind. We go then," said the deputies of Carthage, "to certain death, which we have merited by having persuaded our fellow-citizens to resign "themselves into the hands of the Romans. But if " you mean to have your commands obeyed, you " must be ready to enforce themf; and by this " means you may save an unfortunate people from "exposing themselves, by any at ofdefpair, to " worse sufferings than they have yet endured." The deputies accordingly, being followed at a dillance by twenty galleys of the Roman fleet, set fail for Carthage. They were received on the Ihore by muiltitudes, who crowded to hear the re- fult of their negociations; but the silence they pre- served under pretence that it was necessary to make their report first to the Senate, spread a ge- neral dismay. In the Senate their message was re- ceived with cries of despair, which soon conveyed to the people in the itreets a knowledge of the conditions imposed upon them. And this nation, who, about forty years before, had consented to betray their principal citizen into the hands of their enemy, and who had lately resigned all the honours and pretensions of a free itate, now kindled into rage at the thoughts of being obliged to forego so great a part of their wealth, and to remove their habitations. They burst into the place where the Senate was assembled, and laid violent hands on all the members who had advised or borne any part in the late degrading fubmiflions, or who had contributed to bring the state into its present help-
S 2 les
B O O less condition. They took vengeance, as is com-
Ii mon with a corrupted populace, on others, for - ' faults in which they themselves had freely concur-
red; and, as awake to new sentiments of honour, they reviled the spirit of their own commonwealth, ever ready to barter national character for profit, to purchase safety with shameful conceltions, and to remove a present danger, by giving up whatis the only security of nations againti any danger, the reputation of their vigour, and the honour of their arms.
While the multitude indulged themselves in every species of riot, a few had the precaution to Ihut the gates, to firetch the chain which proteced the entrance of the harbour, and to make a collec- tion of stones on the battlements, there being the only weapons they had left to repel the first attacks of the Romans. The remains of the Senate too, without reflecting on the desperate irate of their affairs, resolved on war. Despair and frenzy fuc- ceeded in every breast to dejetion and mean- ness.
Aifemblies were called to reverse the sentence of banishment lately pronounced against Hasdrubal, and against the troops under his command. These exiles were entreated to hafien their return for the defence of a city bereft of arms, ships, military and naval stores. The people, in the mean time, with an ardor which reason, and the hopes of fuc- cess during the prosperity of the republic could not have inspired, endeavoured to replace the arms and the flores which they had so shamefully surrendered. They demolished their houses to supply the docks with timber. They opened the temples and other public buildings to accommo- date the workmen; and, without diflinfion of sex, condition, or age, became labourers in the public works, collected materials, furniihed pro- visions, or bore a part in any labour that was
thought
thought neceflary to put the city in a slate of de-c H A '. fence. They supplied the founders and the ar-__. mourers with the brass and iron of their domeitic utensils; or, where these metals were deficient, brought what they could furnish of silver and gold. They joined, with the other materials which. were used in the roperies, their hair to be spun into cordage for the shipping, and into braces for their engines of war. The Roman Consuls, apprised of what was in agitation, willing to await the returns of reason, and to let these first ebullitions of frenzy subside, for some days made no attempts on the city. But hearing of the approach of Hasdrubal, they thought it necelfary to endeavour, before his arrival, to possess themselves of the gates. Having in vain attempted to scale the walls, they were obliged to undergo the labours of a regular fege ; and though they made a breach, were repulsed in attempting to force the city by itorm.
Hasdrubal had taken post on the creek which separated the penintlla of Carthage from the con- tinent, maintained his communication by water, and supplied the inhabitants with provisions and arms. The Romans, feeing that they could not reduce the city while Hasdrubal retained this post, endeavoured to dislodge him, but were defeated, and obliged to raise the siege. They had already spent two years in this enterprize, changed their commanders twice, but without advancing their fortunes. They began to incur the discredit of having formed against a neighbouring common- wealth an invidious design which they could not accomplish. Enemies in every quarter, Greece, Macedonia, and Spain, were encouraged to de- clare againlt them; and even Mallinifla, unwilling to fee their power fubfiituted for that of Carthage, and jealous of the avidity with which they endea- voured to become maiters in Africa, and to snatch
ftoit
Bo o Kfrom his hands a prey in which he thought himself
_ intitled to share, withdrew his forces, and left them
singly to contend with the difficulties in which they began to be involved.
But the Romans were animated by those morti- fications which are apt to discourage other nations. They imputed the miscarriage of their troops to the misconduct of their generals; and they cla- moured for a better choice. Scipio, by birth the son of Emilius Paullus, and by adoption the grandson of Scipio Africanus, having diftinguifled himself in Spain and in Africa, and being then ar- rived from the army to solicit the office of Edile, was thought worthy of the supreme command; but being about ten years under the legal age, the law was suspended in his favour, and his appoint- ment to the province of Africa, in preference to his colleague, was declared without the usual me- thod of casting lots.
The Carthaginians were now reinflated in their consideration, and in their rank among nations, and had negociations with the neighbouring pow- ers of Mauritania and Numidia, whole aid they so- licited with alarming reflections on the boundlefl ambition, and invidious policy of the Romans. They even conveyed afiurances of support to the Achans, to the pretended Philip, an impostor, who, about this time, laid claim to the throne of Macedonia; and they encouraged with hopes of affiflance the fuiiec-ts of that kingdom, who were at this time in arms to recover the independence of their monarchy.
The mere change of the commander, and better di;fipline in the Roman army, however, soon al- tered the fiate and prolpefts of the war. The first object of Scipio was to cut off the communications es the Carthaginians with the country, and to in- tercept their supply of provisions and other articles recetilry to withfiand a siege.
Carthage
Carthage was situated at the bottom of a fpaci- c H A P. ous bay, covered on the weft by the promontory 1 of Apollo, on the east, by that of Hermes or Mer- cury, at the diflance of about fifteen leagues from each other. The city flood on a peninsula joined to the main land by an ifihmus about three miles in breadth, and covering a baron or harbour, in which their docks and their shipping were secured from storms and hostile attacks. The Byrfa, or citadel, commanded the isthmus, and presented, at this only entrance to the town by land, a wall thirty feet thick and sixty feet high. The whole circumference of the place was above twenty miles (o). .The besiegers, by their shipping, had access to that fide of the town on which the walls were wash- ed by the sea; but were shut out from the harbour by a chain which was stretched across the entrance. Hasdrubal had taken poll on the baron over againfi the town, and by there means fiill preserved the communication of the city with the country. Scipio, to diifodge him from this post, made a feint at a diflant part of the fortifications to scale the walls, acually gained the battlements, and gavre an alarm which obliged the Carthaginian general to throw himself into the city. Scipio, (atisfied with having obtained this end, took polfellion of the poll which the other had abandoned; and be- ing now master of the itihmus, and the whole con- tinental fide of the harbour, advanced to the walls of the Byrfa. In his camp he covered himself ;as usual with double lines; one facing the fortificati- ons of the enemy, confiting of a curtain twelve feet high, with towers at proper intervals, of which one in the centre was high enough to overlook the ramparts, and to afford a view of the enemy' works. The other line secured his rear from litr-
(s) Orolius, lib. . ci . zz. Liv. Ep:tomc, lib. li.
plriz
B1 0 0 K prize on the fide of the country; and both effeau.
" ally guarded the isthmus, and obftruded all access
to the town by land.
The besieged, however, fill received some sup. ply of provisions by sea; their victuallers took the benefit of every wind that blew fresh and right into the harbour, to pass through the enemy's fleet, who durst not unmoor to pursue them; and Scipio, to cut off this resource, projected a mole from the main land to the point of the peninsula across the entrance of the harbour. He began to throw in his materials on a foundation of ninety feet, with an intention to contract the mound as it rose to twenty-four feet at the top. The work, when firlt observed from Carthage, was confidered as a vain undertaking; but dwhen it appeared to advance with a sensible progress, gave a serious alarm.
The Carthaginians, to provide against the evils which they began to foresee from this obftruclion at the entranze of their harbour, undertook a work more difficult, and more vast than even that of the besiegers, to cut across the peninsula within their walts, and to open a new passage to the sea; and lhis they had actal!ly accomplished by the time ti.at the other paiTage was shut. Notwithstanding the late surrender of all their thipping and itores, they had at the fame time, by incredible efforts, a-tembled or constructed a navy of sixty gallies.
itih this force they were ready to appear in the bay, whiie the Roman (hips lay unmanned and unrigged, secure againlt any danger from an ene- .:- wihom the- iilppofed shut up by impenetrable i tr.; and in these circumstances, if they had avail- Cd !iemfe' ves of the furprize with which they might la.ve attacked their enemy, must have done great excc: ion on the Roman fleet. But having spent
r is than two days in clearing their new pafiage .iter it as known to be open, and in preparing : .,; . ;:, ;hey gave the enemy likewise full time
to
to prepare. On the third they engaged, fought thec H A P. whole day without gaining any advantage; and, in 1. their retreat at night, suffered greatly from the ene- my, who pressed on their rear. While the besiegers endeavoured to obftrut this new communication with the sea, the besieged made a desperate attempt on their works by land. A numerous body of men, devoting their lives for the defence of their country, without any arms, and provided only with matchess, crossed the har- bour, and, exposing themselves to certain death, set fire to the engines and towers of the besiegers; and, while they were surrounded and put to the sword, willingly perished in the execution of their purpose. In such operations the summer elapsed; and Scipio, with the loTs of his engines, and a renewal of all the difficulties which he had formerly to en- counter at sea, contenting himself with a blockade for the winter, discontinued the siege. His command being prolonged for another year, he resumed his attack in the tpring; and, finding the place greatly reduced by despair and famine, he forced his way by one of the docks, where he observed that the battlements were low and un- guarded. His arrivalin the itreets did not put him in polfeffion of the towxn. The inhabitants, during fix days, disputed every house and every palfage, and fucceflively let fire to the buildings whenever they were obliged to abandon them. Above fifty thousand persons of different sexes, who had taken refuge in the citadel, at last accepted of quarter, and were led captive from thence in two separate divisions, one of twenty-five thousand women, and another of thirty thousand men. Nine hundred deserters, who had left the Ro- man army during the siege, having been refused the quarter which was granted to the others, took poll in a temple which {food on an eminence, with
a refolu-
B o o Ka resolution to die with swords in their hands, and
'-. with the greatest effusion of blood to their enemies.
To these Hasdrubal, followed by his wife and his children,joined himself; but not having the courage to pelfift in the fame purpose with there deserters, he left the temple, and accepted of quarter. His wife, in the mean time, with more ferocity or mag- nanimity than her husband, laid violent hands on her children, and, together with their dead bodies, threw herfeif into the flame of a burning ruin. The deserters too, impatient of the dreadful ex- petations which they felt, in order to hafien their own fate, set fire to the temple in which they had fought a temporary cover, and perished in the flames.
The city continued to burn during seventeen days; and all this time the soldiers were allowed to seize whatever they could save from the flames, or wrest from the hands of the dying inhabitants, who .ere fiill dangerous to those who approached them. Scipio, in beholding this melancholy scene, is said to have repeated fiom Homer two lines containing a prophecy of the fall of Troy. " To whom do ' you now apply this prediction ?" said Polybius, who happencd to be near him; " To my own
country," he said, " for her too I dread in her ' turn the reverSes of human fate (p)." Scipio's let:er to the Senate is said to have con- tained no more than these words: " Carthageis " taken. The army waits for your further orders." The tidings 'ere received at Rome with unconm- mon demonfirations of joy. The -vitors, recol- lecting all the rpasiages of their former wars, the alarms that had been given by Hannibal, and the irreconciieablc antipathy of the two nations, gave orders to raze the fortifications of Carthage, (;! So- he :.c .:'- ,.: ;:',: ici'r. 'on of Carthage, fee the authorc abo;'
~'~.:- ~ a~.~ ~ -_~::- c.~ _sn!
and even to destroy the materials of which theyc H A P. were built. A commission was granted by the Senate to ten of its members to take poffeflion of territories which were thus deprived of their sovereign, to model the form of this new province, and to pre- pare it for the reception of a Roman governor. And thu% Carthage, the only inflance in which the human genius ever appeared greatly diflinguiflied in Africa; the model of magnificence, the repofi- tory of wealth, and one of the principal states of the antient world, was no more. The Romans, incited by national animosity, and an excess of jealousy, formed a design more cruel towards their lival than at first view it appeared to be, and in the execution of it became ators in a scene of hor- ror far beyond their original intention. By the milder law and pracice of modern nations, we are happily exempted from the danger of ever feeing such horrid examples repeated, at least in any part of the western world.
While the event of this mighty siege was still in dependence, the Romans had other wars to main- tain on the fide of Macedonia and Greece, where ,the natural progress of their policy, suited to the meafiures which they had taken with other nations: now ended in the open and avowed usurpation of a sovereignty which they had long disguised under the specious titles of alliance and protection.
Macedonia being.ili fitted to retain the republican form into which it had been cast by the Romans, after some years of difiraction, and an attempt at lait in favour of a pretended for of the late king, to recover its independence and its monarchy, un- derwent a second conquest.
Andrifcus, an African of uncertain extraction, being observed to resemble the royal family of Mla- cedonia, had the courage, under the name of Phi- lip, to personate a Ion of that unfortunate monarch,
and
B o o s and to make pretensions to the crown. With this $.*, object in view he went into Syria to solicit the aid
of Demetrius, but was, by this prince, taken into custody, and transported in chains to Rome. The Romans paid little regard to so contemptible an enemy, and even allowed him to escape. After this adventure, the fame impotRor appeared a fe- cond time in Macedonia, and, with better fortune than he had in the firfi attempt, drew to his fian- dard many natives of that country and of Thrace. In his first encounter he even defeated Juventius the Roman Praetor, and was acknowledged king; but soon after fell a prey to Metellus, and fur- nifhed the Romans with an obvious pretence for reducing the kingdom of Macedonia to the ordina- ry form of a province.
The fiates of the Achban league, at the fame time, being already on the decline, haflened, by the temerity and difiraftion of their own coun- cils, the career of their fortunes to the fame termi- nation.
The Romans, even while they fiuffered this fa- mous republic to retain the shew of its indepen- dence, had treated its members in many particu- lars as subjects. At the close of the war with Per- feus, they had cited to appear at Rome, or taken into custody as criminals of state, many citizens of Achaia, v.who had, in that conteLf, appeared to be difarfected to the Roman cause. Of there they had detained abot, ?. thou.and in different prisons of Italy, until, as e; a period of seventeen years, about three hundred of thner, who survived their con- finement, we:- fit at liberty, as having already farered enough; or as being no longer in conditi- on to give a.y umbrage to Rome (q). Polybius being of this number acquired, during his flay in Italy, that knowledge of Roman affairs which ap-
' t: m .' a n- ) , : Ashzpcis.
pears
pears so conspicuous in the remains of his hiffory.C H A p. When at liberty, he attached himself to Scipio, the son of Emilius, and being well versed in the active scenes which had recently palt in his own country, and being entirely occupied with reflections on matters of state and of war, no doubt contri- buted by his intiructions in preparing this young man for the eminent services which he afterwards performed. The Romans, while they detained so many Greek prisoners in Italy, in a great measure at- fumed the adminifiration of affairs in Greece, dif- posed of every diftintion, whether of fortune or power, and confined there advantages to the advo- cates of their own cause, and to the tools of their own ambition (r). They received appeals from the judgments of the Achaean council, and encou- raged its members, contrary to the express condi- tions of their league, to fend separate embaflies to Rome. The fleps which followed are but imper- fetly marked in the fragments of hiflory which re- late to this period. It appears that the Spartans, having been forced into the Achaan confederacy, continued refractory in moRt of its councils. By some of their complaints at Rome, they obtained a deputation, as usual, from the Senate to hear par- ties on the spot, and to adjufi their differences. The Achzan council, incensed at this insult which was offered to their authority, without waiting the arrival of the Roman deputies, proceeded to en- force their own decrees againfi the republic of Sparta, marched an army into Laconia, and de- feated with some slaughter, at the gates of Lacede- mon, the inhabitants of that city who ventured to oppose them. The Roman commiflioners arriving after there holtilities had commenced, summoned the parties to assemble at Corinth, and, in name of
(r) polyb. Ercerpt. Legat. c. xo3.
the
o o o K the Senate, gave sentence, that Lacedemon, Co-
l- rinth, Argos, Heraclea, and Orchomenos, not
having been original members of the Achalan con- federacy, should now be disjoined from it; and that all the cities which had been rescued from the dominion of Philip, should be left in full poffellion of their freedom and independency.
Multitudes from all the different states of the league being on this occasion assembled at Corinth, a great riot ensued. The Roman deputies were in- fulted and obliged to leave the place; and in this manner commenced a war in which the Romans, because they hoped to establish their sovereignty in Greece without any convulsion, and had full em- ployment for their forces in Africa, Spain, and Macedonia, engaged with great reluctance. They renewed their commiflion, and named other depu- ties to terminate the disputes in Achaia; but the fiates of the Achaan league, imputing their con- duct in this particular to fear, and to the ill slate of their affairs in Africa, while Carthage was likely to repel their attack, thought that they had found an opportunity to exclude for ever from their councils the overbearing influence of this arrogant nation (s). They were encouraged with hopes of support from Thebes, Eubcea, and other districts of Greece, where the people were averse to the dominion of the Romrans; and they therefore assembled an ar- my to afiert their common rights, and to enforce their authority over the several members of their own confederacy.
Unfortunately for their cause, Metellus had then prevailed in Macedonia, and was at leisure to turn his forces againlt them. He accordiingly moved towards the Peloponnefus, still giving the Achaeans an option to avert the calamities of war, by sub- mitting to the mandates of the Roman Senate.
(:) Fo;yb. Excerpt. Legt, . 144.
These,
These, he said, were no more, than that they c H A p. should desist from their pretensions on Sparta, and L the other cantons who applied for the proteaion of ' Rome. But the Achaeans thought it safer to refitl, than to be disarmed under these fiale pretences; they took the field, passed through the isthmus of Co- rinth, and, being joined by the Thebans, marched to Thermopyla with a view to defend this entry into Greece. In this, however, they were diiap- pointed, being either prevented from seizing the pass, or driven from thence by Metellus. They were afterwards intercepted in their retreat through Phocis, where they loll their leader Critolaus, with a great part of his army (t). Diaus, who fuc- ceeded him as head of the confederacy, alfembled a new force, confiting of fourteen thousand foot and fix thousand horse, took post on the ifihmus of Corinth, and sent four thousand men for the defence of Megara, a place which still made a part in the expiring confederacy of independent Greeks.
Metellus, who after his viEtory had made him- self maiter of Thebes, advanced to Megara, dif- lodged the Achaans from thence, and continued his march to the iithmus. Here he was superseded by Mummius, the Consul of the present year, who, with the new levies from Rome, made up an ar- my of twenty-three thousand foot and three thou- iand five hundred horse. The enemy, having gained an advantage over his advanced guard, were encouraged to hazard a battle under the walls of Corinth, and were defeated. The greater part fled into the town, but afterwards in the night withdrew from that place. Their general Dieus fled from the field of battle to Migalopolis, whither he had sent his family; having killed his wife, to
(t) Orofi u, lib. v. c. 3. Pausanias is Achaicis.
prevent
n o o Kprevent her falling into the hands of the enemy, he
"- himself took poison, and died.
Such are the imperfect accounts which remain of the last efforts made by the Greeks to preserve a freedom, in the exercise of which they had aced so distinguished a part. As they never were fur- passed by any race of men in the vigour with which they supported their republican efiablifhments, so they appeared to retain their ingenuity and their ikill in many arts, after they had loft the military and political spirit which constitutes the strength and security of nations; and in this latter period, which preceded their extinction, as the Achaean league was dissolved on having incurred the resent- ment of the Romans, so the unhappy remnant of the Spartan republic perished in having accepted their protection. The enmity and the friendship of the Romans being equally fatal, these and every other slate or republic of Greece, from this time forward, ceased to be numbered among nations, having fallen a prey to a power, whose force nothing could equal but the ability and the cunning with which it was exerted.
Such at leafi is the comment which we are tempt- ed, by the conduct of the Romans, on the pre- sent occasion, to make on that policy, with which, about fifty years before this date, Flamininus, to detach the Grecian cities from Philip, proclaimed, with so much ostentation at the ifihmus of Corinth, general independence, and the free exercise of their own laws to all the republics of Greece. That People when they meant to ingratiate themselves, furpaiTed every fiate in generosity to their al- lies, they gained intire confidence, and taught nations, who were otherwise in condition to main- tain their own independence, to rely for protection on that very power from which they had most to fear for their liberties; and in the end, under some pretence of ingratitude or affront, fiript of every
right
right those very ilates who had most plentifullyc H A p. shared in their bounty. In this policy there were ' some appearances of a concerted design, which -'" wasat one time liberal and generous beyond ex- ample, at another time cruel and implacable in the opposite extreme, equally calculated to gain Or to terrify, in the cafes to which either species of po- licy was suited. It is however probable, that they were led by the changing tfate of their interefls; and followed the conjuncture without any previous design. In this fort of conduct the paflions are wonderfully ready to ad in support of the judg- ment; and we may venture to admit, that the Romans sometimes felt the generosity which they profelled to employ, and of which the belief was bo favourable to the success of their affairs. In a different conjuncture, in which they were no long- er equally obliged to manage the temper of their allies, they became more impatient of contradic- tion, and gave way to their resentment on any the fighteft occasions, or to their ambition, without controul. Their maxim to spare the fubmifive, and to reduce the proud (w), whether founded in sentiment or cunning, was a principle productive of the extremes of.generofity and arrogance ob- served in their conduct, it led them by degrees to assume a superiority in every tranlaCtion, and as their power increased, rendered this power pro- portionally dangerous to other nations.
On the third day after the action which hap- pened in the isthmus of Corinth, the victorious ge- neral entered the city; and confidering that the inhabitants had a principal part in the late insult offered to the Roman commiflioners, determined to firike a general terror into all the members of the league by the severities to be executed against this people. Mummius, though with the reft of
(m) Parcere fubjeais, & debellare fup-rbos. VOL. II. T his
s o o 0K his countrymen of this age, ill qualified io diflin- _ ,^ guifh the elegant workmanship of the Grecian ar-
tifts (x), of which great collections had been made at Corinth, ordered all the statues and pic- tures to be let apart for his triumph; and with this reserve, gave the town, abounding in all the ac- commodations and ornaments of a wealthy me- tropolis, to be pillaged by the soldiers. He razed the walls, and reduced the city to ashes.
Thus Corinth perished in the fame year with Carthage. The fortifications of Thebes, and of some other towns difaffeaed to the Romans, were at the fame time demolished; and the arrange- ments to be made in the country of Greece were committed to deputies from the Roman Senate. By their order, the Achaean league was dissolved, and all its conventions annulled. The states which had composed it were deprived of their sovereignty, subjected to pay a tribute, and placed under the government of a person annually sent from Rome with the title of the Praxtor of Achaia (y).
The Romans now appeared openly, perhaps for the first time, in the capacity of conquerors. The acquisition of revenue in Macedonia, which, about twenty years before this date, had first taught them to exempt themselves from taxation, excited from thenceforward an insatiable thirst of dominion; and their future progress is marked by the detail of wars which they maintained on their frontier, not in defence of the empire, but for the enlarge- ment of possessions already too great.
In Spain where they fiill met with refiflance, they had acted in all the different periods of their wars, either on the offensive or defensive, accord- (x) He delivered them to the masters of Ihips, with hi. famous threat, that if any of thfe curiosities were loft, they [hould be oblicgd to replace them. ( y) Paufania, lib. vii. c. ;6. Polyb. Excerptz de Vinuilbus & Vitii.s
ing
ing as the Siate, was or was not, at leifire fronm c F A P. the pressure of their enemies, or according as the ._. generals she employed Were ambitious: r pacific.
On the conclusion of the peace with Philip, the Roman territory in Spain had been divided into two provinces, and furnished the fittioris of two separate commanders annually sent from Rome. On the renewal of the war in Macedonia, and du- ring the continuance of it, these provinces were again united under one government. But upon the defeat of Perseus, and the reducion of Ma- cedonia,- they were separated for ever.
From that time the ambition of the Romans seems to have operated in Spain with the fame es- set as in other parts on the boundaries of their empire. They pressed upon the natives, not merely to secure their own territory from inroad and de- predation, but to gain new acceflions'of dominion and wealth. They advanced to the Tagus, en- deavoured to penetrate the mountains beyond the sources of that river; and on that fide involved themselves in a continual firuggle of many years duration with the Lufitanians, Gallicians, and Cel- tiberi.
In there wars the Roman officers were atuated, by their avarice as well as by their ambition, and were glad of occasions to quarrel with an enemy, amongst whom the-produce of rich mines of silver and of gold were known to abound, and where plentiful spoils were so likely to reward their ser- vices.
The theatre of the war in Spain was not so con- fpicuous, nor the conduct of generals so firidtly observed, as they were in Africa, Asia, or Greece and such as were employed in that service, there- fore, the more to haflen their conquests, ventured upon ads of treachery or breach of faith with the cantons around them, Which the Senate did not commonly avow; and they also ventured upon
T a a&td
: o o K ads of extortion and peculation in their own go. n. vernments, which gave occasion to the first com-
plaints of this fort that were brought to Rome.
The Proconsul Lucullus, having accepted of the surrender of a town, and being received into it in consequence of a capitulation, nevertheless put the inhabitants to the sword and carried off their effets. Galba, commanding in Lusitania, or the western province of Spain, soon afterwards circumvented, by a like as of perfidy and cruelty, tome of the inhabitants whom he could not otherwise reduce. These examples probably retarded, instead of for- warding, the progress of the Roman arms, and con- firmed that obstinate valour with which the natives of Spain disputed every post in defence of their country ; and with which they maintained the con- test against a fucceflion of Roman Generals, Pra- tors, or Consuls, who were employed to subdue them. This contest they continued or renewed, at short intervals, with various success, from the first expedition of the Scipios to the last of Augustus.
At the beginning of the lat war with Carthage, the Lufitanians, incensed by the aA of treachery which was committed by the Roman general Galba, re-affernbled in numerous parties under Viriathus, who had himself escaped from the massacre on that occasion, and who entertained an implacable re- fentment to the authors of it. This leader, ac- cording to the Roman. historians, had been origi- nally a herdsman, afterwards a chief of banditti, and last of all the commander of an army which had often defeated the legions of Rome, and threatened their expulsion from Spain. He seems to have known how to employ the impetuous va- lour of a rude people against troops not less va- liant than his own countrymen, though more de- pending on discipline; and to have pofleffed what the Spaniards retained, even down to the days of Cefar, the faculty of turning the want of order to
account
account against an enemy so much accutfomed toc H A P. order, as, in a great measure, to rely upon it in' most of their operations. With him an apparent rout and dispersion of his followers was the ordi- nary prelude to a violent attack; and he common- ly endeavoured, by pretended flights and difor- derly movements, to draw the enemy into rash pursuits or precipitant marches, and seized every advantage which they gave him with irresistible ad- dress and valour. He continued above ten years to baffle all the attempts which the Romans made to reduce Lusitania. He had projected a league and defensive confederacy with the other free na- tions of Spain, when he was affaflinated, as he lay asleep on the ground, by two of his own fol- lowers, supposed to be in concert with the Roman general.
The Romans, upon this event, found the weft- ern and northern parts of Spain open to their in- roads. In little more than a year afterwards a Ro- man army under Brutus passed the Duero (z), and penetrated quite to the coafi of Gallicia, from which they reported, with more than the embellishments and exaggerations of travellers, that the fun was seen from this difiant region, when he set in the evening, to fink and to extinguifl himself with a mighty noise in the Western Ocean.
The natives of this country, however, did not think themselves subdued by being thus over-run. They retired, with their cattle and effeEts, into places of strength; and, when required to pay contributions, replied, That their ancestors had left them swords to defend their poffeflions, but not any gold to redeem them.
Such were the occupations of the Roman arms in the western division of Spain, while they were equally engaged in the eastern province, under
(X) Durius.
Cato
3 o o KCato the Elder, Tiberius Gracchus, and others,
" who endeavoured to secure what the State had al-
ready acquired, or to extend its limits. These ge- nerals obtained their several triumphs, and joined to the Roman poifeflions on the coast considerable acquisitions in the inland part of the country. Their progress, however, on this fide, had been greatly retarded by the obfiinate valour of the Nu- mantians and other cantons of the Celtiberi, who had maintained the contest during fifty years, and at last had formed a general confederacy of all the interior nations of Spain, to be conducted by Viri- athus, when their measures were broken by the death of that formidable leader.
Numantia was the principal firong hold, or, as we may conceive it, the capital of a small nation. Their lodgement, or township, was contained within a circumference of about three miles, situ- ated among the mountains of Celtiberia, or Old Castile, and at the confluence of the Durius with another river, both of which having seep banks, rendered the place, on two of its fides, of very dif- ficult access. It was fortified on the third tide with a rampart and a ditch.
The people could muster no more than eight or ten thousand men; but there were greatly difiin- guifned by their valour, reputed superior in horse- manship to every other nation of Spain, and equal to the Romans in the use of the shield and the fiab- bing fvord. They had already gained many vic- tories over the Roman armies which had been em- ployed to reduce them. They had obliged Pom- pey, one of the Roman generals, contrary to the pracice of his country, to accept of a treaty, while the advantage of fortune was against him. They obliged the Consul Mancinus to save his army by a capitulation (a). Neither of thole
'") Eut-or'i:, lib. iv. c. 8.
treaties
treaties indeed were ratified by the Roman Senate, c H A P. To expiate the breach of the last, the Consul Man- ' cinus, whp concluded it, together with Tiberius Gracchds his Queflor, were ordered to be delivered up to the. hands of the enemy, and to fiffer in their own persons for the failure of engagements which they could not fulfil. Tiberius Gracchus appealed to the people, was saved by their favour, and from this time is supposed to have received that bias which he followed in the fublequent part of his political conduc. Mancinus acquiesced in the lentence of the Senate, was presented naked and in fetters at the gates of Numantia, as a facri- fice to the resentment of that nation, for the breach of a treaty which the Romans determined not. to observe. But the vidlim was nobly rejeced, and the Numantians insisted on the conditions they had fiipulated, faying, that a public breach of faith could not be expiated by the suffering of a private man (b).
These tranfa&ions passed about ten years after the deftruEion of Carthage, and the Romans, mortified -with the length and ill fuccels of the war with Numantia, had recourse again to the services of Scipio,
They had formerly dispensed, in his favour, with the law that required a certain age as a quali- fication for the office of Consul; and now, in order to: employ him a second time, they were obliged to suspend another law, which prohibited the re- eletion of the fame person into that office.
Upon the arrival of Scipio in Spain, it is said .that he found the Roman army, discouraged by repeated defeats, withdrawn into fortified fiations at a diltanc:e from the enemy, detefiing the hard- lhips of a military camp, indulging themselves in all the vices of a disorderly town, and fulbjeEt to
(3) Appian de Bcll. Hif'an. p. 302.
panics
BOOK panics on the slightest alarm. It is said that
" the cries, the aspec&, the painted visage, and the
long hair of the Spaniard were become objets of terror (c).
Among the reformations which Scipio made to restore the vigour of the army, he cleared the camp of its unnecessary followers, amongst whom are mentioned women, merchants, arid fortune-tell- ers; he refiriced the quantity of baggage, reduced the fu. llttre of the kitchen to the spit and the pan; and the tables of officers to plain food, roasted or boiled Hie prohibited the use of bedfleads in camp, and fet'the example himself of sleeping on a straw mat'; likewise restrained the infantry from the use of horses on the march, and obliged them to carry their own baggage.
Though poffefled of superior numbers, he de- clined a battle; and avoided every rout on which the enemy were prepared to receive him ; took ad- vantage of a superior address in managing his re- sources, and'damped the ardour of a fierce people by flow operations; 'he laid waste the country around them, and by degrees obliged them to re- tire within their own ramparts, and' to consume what was raised or provided within the circuit of their walls.
Scipio had been joined on his march to Numan- tia by Jugurtha, 'the grandson of Mafliniffa, who, on this service, made his first acquaintance with the Romans, and brought a reinforcement of twelve elephants, with a considerable body of horse, of archers and fingers. At its arrival the army amounted to sixty thousand men. But Scipio did not attempt to torm the town;' he took a number of polis which he fucceflively fortified',' and, by joining them together, completed'a double line of circumvaliation, equal in firength to the walls
(c) Floras.
which
which were opposed to him. He had his curtains c-H A. P. his towers, his places of arms corresponding tQ ^. those of the place; and he eitablifhed an order of service and a set of signals, in cafe of alarm by day or night, which resembled more the precau- tions of an army, on its defence, than the opera- tions of a siege. His intention was to reduce the Numantians by famine, an operation of time, du- ring which, from so warlike a nation, he might be exposed to surprise, or to the effects of despair. The place besieged being at the confluence of rivers navigable with small vessels, which descend- ed with great rapidity on the fiream, or which could with the. favour of proper winds, even re- mount in the fight of the enemy. The people, for a while, procured some supplies by water. Num- bers of them swimming with great address, and diving at proper places, to avoid being seen by the besiegers, fill passed through the lines, and pre- served a communication with the country, until the rivers also were barred across their channels by timbers, that were armed with sword blades and spikes of iron.
The Numantians were still in hopes of succour from their allies. Five aged warriors undertook, each with his son for a second, to pass through the lines of the enemy, and to sue for relief from the neighbouring nations. They succeeded by night in the sirs part of their attempt, cut down the Ro- man guard, threw the camp into rome confusion, and escaped before the occasion of the alarm was known. But their cause was become desperate, and too likely to involve in certain ruin any friend who embraced it. Their suit, nevertheless, was attended to at Lutia, the head of a small canton, forty miles from Numantia.
The young men of this place took their resolution in favour of the injured Numantians; but Scipio had notice of their intention time enough to pre-
vent
B o o K vent its effect. He hastened to the place, and,
I. having accomplished this march of forty miles in ~"v~- eight hours, surprised the inhabitants, had four
hundred young men delivered up to him, and ordered their right arms to be struck off. By this dreadful at of severity, he secured himself from any danger on that quarter, and impressed the other ilates of that neighbourhood with terror.
The Numantians, in the mean time, were pref- fed with famine, and having no hopes of relief, lent a deputation to try the clemency of their enemy. " What was once a happy fiate," they said, " con- " tent with its own pofeflions, and secure in the " valour of its citizens, is now reduced to great " distress, for no other crime than that of having " maintained their freedom, and of having de- "fended their wives and children.
" For you," they continued, addressing them- selves to Scipio, " who yourself are said to possess " so many virtues, it would become you to es- " poufe the cause of this injured nation, and pro- "cure to them terms which they could with ho- " nour prefer to their present distresses. Their "expectations are moderate, for they have felt "the reverses of fortune. It is now in your pow- "er to receive their fubmiflion under any tolerable "conditions, or to fee them perish in some act of " despair, which may prove fatal to many of their "enemies, as well as to themselves."
Scipio replied, That he could not grant them any terms; that they mufi surrender at discretion.
Upon the return of this answer they resumed their former obiiinacy, and held out until they had consumed every article of provision within their walls; endeavoured to turn their shields and other utenfi!s of leather into food, devoured the dead bodies, and even preyed on each other.
The end of this piteous scene is variously reported By some i is said, that, in the last flage of despair,
ths
the Numantians sallied forth to purchafe'death by c H A P. the laughter of their enemies; that, in the execu- . tion of this purpose, they for some time exposed'd ihemfelves with the most frantic rage, till the great- er'part being slain, a few returned into the town, let fire to the houses, and, with their wives and children, perished in the flames (d). By others it is said, that they agreed to furren- der on a certain day, but that when this day came they begged for another; alleging, that many of their people, yet fond of liberty, had determined to die, and wished for one day more, that they might the more deliberately execute their purpose. Such was the aversion to surrender at diicretion, which the fear of captivity, and that of its ordinary consequences among antient nations, had inspired. The few of this high-minded people who survived the effects of despair, falling into the enemy's hands, were ttripped of their arms. Fifty were re- served, as a specimen of the whole, to adorn the viftor's triumph. The remainder were fold for slaves, and the walls of their firong hold were le- velled with the ground. The prilbners, even after they had laid down their arms and Submitted to mercy, retained the ferocity of their looks, and catl on their victors such glances of indignation and rage, as still kept the animosity of enemies awake, and prevented the returns of pity. As these particulars firongly mark the defects which still subsisted in the supposed law of war among antient nations, the reader will probably bear with the (hock that is given to his feelings of compaf- sion, for the fake of the picture which it is necef- fary to give of the manners.of the times.
If we judge of Numantia from the refinance it made to the Roman arms, it having been one of their most difficult conquefis, we must confider it
!J) Orofins lib. v. c. 7. Florus, lib. ii. c. 18.
as
B o o K as a state of considerable power. Its redustion
gave immediate respite from war in Spain. Scipio and Brutus returned nearly together from their pro- vinces in that country, and had their separate tri- umphs in the fame year.
These operations against Numantia, Carthage, Macedonia, and Greece, were accompanied with a revolt of the slaves in Sicily, and with a number of other wars less considerable in Illyricum, Thrace, and Gaul. Cf there the revolt of the slaves merits the greater attention, on account .of the view it gives of the state of the countries now under the immediate jurisdiction of Rome. The island of Sicily having been the first acquisition which the Romans made beyond the limits of Italy, had been for some time in a fiate of domestic tranquil- lity, and undisturbed by any foreign enemy. Its lands were become the property of Roman citi- zens, who here, as on their estates in Italy, culti- vated plantations to supply with corn, wine, and oil, the markets and granaries .of Rome. The la- bour was performed by laves. These were led in chains to the fields, or confined in vaults and for- tified workhouses at the several tasks they were em- ployed to perform. As the proprietors of land had many reasons to prefer the labour of slaves to that of freemen, who were distracted by their poli- tical engagements, and fubje& to be called upon or pressed into the military service, the number of slaves continually increased. They were, for the most part, prisoners of war; and some of them being even of high rank, unused to fubmiflion, and animated with fierce paflions of indignation and scorn, were ready upon every favourable op- portunity, to take arms against their masters, and often to shake the fiate itself with a storm which was not foreseen until it atually burf.
About ten years after the defirution of Car- t-hage, and four years before that of Numantia,
this
this injured class of men were incited to revoltc H A P. in Sicily by Eunus, a Syrian slave; who, at first, i_. under pretence of religion, and by the fame of miracles he was supposed to perform, tempted many to break from their bondage; traversed the country, broke open the vaults and prisons in which his fellow-fufferers were confined, and acu- ally assembled an army of seventy thousand men. With this force, in four fucceflive campaigns, he made a prosperous war on the Roman Praetors, and often stormed the entrenchments of theRoman camp.
This leader, however, being ill-qualified to im- prove his vicories, and having no concerted plan for the government or fubfiilence of his followers, in a country that was gradually ruined by their own devafiations, was at length, by the caution and superior conduct of Perperna, or Publius Rutilius,. gradually circumscribed in his depreda- tions, defeated, and obliged to take refuge in En- na, a fortified place, where about twenty thousand of his followers were put to the sword, and the re- mainder, as an example to deter slaves from the commiflion of a similar offence, were nailed to the cross near the mofi frequented highways, and in the mod conspicuous parts of the island. .While the Roman armies were thus employed in the provinces, br on the frontier of their extensive conquefis, Italy itself had long enjoyed a perfect security, the lands were cultivated, and the country flocked with people, whether aliens or citizens, freemen or slaves. From about three hundred thousand (e), which, in this period, were the ordina- ry return of the Census, the citizens soon after aug- mented to above four hundred thousand (e); and (e) Three hundred and twenty thousand. (j) Four hundred and twenty-eight thousand three hundred and forty- tv;o.
Scipio,
B o O KScipio, under whose infpeation as Censor this return
n1 . was made, hearing the Crier repeat the prayer
which was ufilal at the closing of the rolls, " That "the republic might increase in the numbers of its ' people, and in the extent of its territory;" bid him pray that it might be preserved, for it was al- ready great enough. It is probable that, in the view of this sagacious observer, the marks of cor- ruption already began to appear in the capital; and a t'r-e, which iiill continued for a century to make fucn vigrous shoots from its branches already bore some marks of decay in its trunk.
The offices of State, and the government of pro- vinces, to which those who had filled them fuc- ceeded, began to be coveted from avarice, as well as from ambition. Complaints of peculation and extortion, which were received about this time from Spain and Macedonia, pointed out the necef- fity of restraining such oppreflions, and fuggefled some penal laws, which were often, and in vain, amended and revived.
An aftion was instituted in favour of the provin- ces, againfi governors, or their attendants, who should be accused of levying money without the authority of the State, and an ordinaryjurildidtion was granted to one of the Praetors, to hear com- plaints on this fibjet. The penalty at first was no more than restitution, and a pecuniary fine; it was gradually extended to degradation, and exile. N 604 These reformations are dated in the time of the LxCul^Pr-laft war with Carthage, and are ascribed to the mo- =dcRcp--. atl:i=p tion of Culpurnius Pifo, then one of the Tribunes. Q.ion-" -Before this time all jurisdiction in criminal matters
belonged to the Tribunal of the People, and was exercised by themselves in their collective capacity, or occasionally delegated to a special commiflion. Few crimes were yet defined by statute, and ordi- nary courts of juffice for the trial of them were not
yet i
yet efiablifhed. In these circumstances criminals c H A r. of slate had an opportunity not only to defend 1 themselves after a prosecution was commenc- ed, but likewise to employ intrigue, or exert their credit with the People, to prevent or evade a trial.
To supply these defecs, a lift of statutory crimes now began to be made, and an ordinary jurifditi- on was eftablilhed. Besides extortion in the pro- vinces, which had been defined by the law of Cul- purnius (g), murder, breach of faith, robbery, as- fault, poisoning, incest, adultery, bribery, faire judgment, fraud, perjury, &c. were fucceflively joined to the lift; and an ordinary jurifdi&ion for the trial of such crimes was vested in ajury of Se- nators, over whom the Praetor, with the title of Qae- fitor, presided.
The number of Prators, corresponding to this and other growing exigencies of the State, was now augmented to fix; and these officers, though destined, as well as the Consuls, to the command of armies and the government of provinces, began, during the term of their magiitracy, to have full occupation in the city. On this account it was not till after the expiration of the year for which they had been eleted, that they drew lots for a pro- vince. A like policy was soon after adopted in the destination of Consuls, and all the other officers of State, who, being supposed to have sufficient occu- pation in Italy and Rome during the year of their appointment, were not destined to any foreign ser- vice till that year was expired.
With these efiablifhments, calculated to secure the funtions of office, the ule of the ballot was in- troduced, firit in elections, and afterwards in col- leaing-opinions of judges in the courts of jus- (g) Parricidium, vis publica, latrocinium, icjuria, venificium, incelhlls adulteriurn; captz pecunie, corrupti judicii, falfi, perjurium.
r:ce
B O O Kice (h): a dangerous form of proceeding in con- _._ ititutions tending to popular licence, and where
justice is more likely to susser from the unawed palflions of the lower people, than from any im- proper influence of superior rank; and where the authority of the wife, and the sense of public shame, were so much required, as principal supports of government.
An occasion for the commission of new crimes is frequently taken from the precautions which are employed agairift the old. From the facility with which criminal accusations now began to be re- ceived, a new species of crime accordingly arose. Calumny and vexatious prosecutions commenced by disappointed competitors againfit perfcns in pub- lic truit, became so frequent as to require the in- terpofition of laws. On this account it was en- aced, upon the motion of Memmius, that all per- sons in office, or appointed to command in the pro- vinces, might decline answering a criminal charge until the expiration of their term, or until their re- turn from the service to which they were deflin- ed (i); and persons of any denomination might have an action of calumny against the author of a false or groundless prosecution. Whoever was con- viced of this offence was to be branded in the face with the initials of his crime.
By these eitablifhments the city of Rome, long resembling a mere military station, made some progress in completing the system and application of her laws. Literary productions, in some of their forms, particularly in the form of dramatic compositions, as hath been already observed, began to be known. The representation of fables was first introduced under pretence of religion, and practised as a sacred rite to avert the plague or some (b) Lex GCbinia Tabllaria. (X) Lex Miefman de reis pQltulandis. Lex Cassia T3bellaris.
public
public calamity. This entertainment was fondlyc H A P. received by the People, and therefore frequently i.. prelented to them by the Ediles, who had the charge of such matters. Literature, however, in some of its less popular forms, was checked, as a fourde of corruption. In the year of Rome fiveu. c. 592. hundred and ninety-two, that is, about eight years after the redu&ion of Macedonia, the Roman Se- nate, upon a report from M. Pomponius, the Prae- tor, that the city was frequented by philosophers and rhetoricians, resolved that this officer, agreeably to hi 'duty to the republic, (hould take care to re- move all such persons in the manner his own judg- ment should direct(k) ; and, in about fix years after this date, an embassy having come from Athens, composed of scholars and rhetoricians, who drew the attention of the' youth by the dif- play of their talents, an uncommon dispatch was given to their business, that they might not have any pretence for remaining too long in the city.
A proposal which was made during this period, to eret a theatre for the accommodation of the fpeEtators, at their public shews, was rejeated with great indignation, as an attempt to corrupt the manners.of the People. The materials which had been collected for this work were publicly fold, and an edict, at the fame time, was published, that no one should ever resume this design, or at- tempt to place any bench or feat for the accom- modation of the fpeEtators at any theatrical en- tertainment in the city, or within a mile of its walls (1).- It was thought an a& of effeminacy, it seems, for the Roman People to be feated; and it is undoubtedly wife, in matters of small mo- ment, however innocent, to forbid what is confider- ed as an evil, and, in remitting established feveri- (k) A. Gellius, lib. xv. c. 1. (1) Val. Maxim. lib. ii. c. 4. VOL.' I. U ties,
B O o K ties, to let the opinion of innocence at least precede ,._ .the indulgence.
The sumptuary laws already mentioned, refpe&t ing entertainments and household expences, were, under the name of Didius, the person who proposed the renewal of them, revived (m); and, with some alterations, extended to all the Roman citizens dif- perfed over Italy.
Such was the antidote which the policy of that age provided, in the capital of a great empire, against luxury and the ofientation of wealth; dif- tempers incident to prosperity itself, and not to be cured by partial remedies. They were by the Romans (who knew better how to accomplish the celebrated problem of Themifiocles, in making a fznallflate a great one, than they knew how to ex- plain the effects of its greatness) commonly im- puted to some particular circumstance, or acciden- tal event. To the spoils of Tarentum, they said, and of Asia (n), to the deftrution of our princi- pal rivals the Carthaginians; to the mighty show of fiatues, pictures, and cosily furniture, which were brought by Mummius from Corinth, we owe this admiration of finery, and so pre- vailing a passion for private as well as for public wealth.
In this manner they explained the effects of progress which they themselves had made in the acquisition of so many provinces; in the grow ing security and riches of a mighty city, frorr which all foreign alarms were far removed; ant to which the wealth of a great empire, either in the form of private fortune or of public trea lure, began to flow with a continued and increafine itream (o). (r) L- Didia. (.) Afi primum devica luxuriam rmfit in Italiam. Plin. lib. mxii. c. II. (,) Liv. lib. xxxix. c. 6. Plin. lib. xxxvii. c. I.
CHAP
C H A P. II. Extent of the Roman Empire.--Political Charaler of its Head.-Facility with which it continued to ad- vance.-Change of Charafler, political as well as moral.-Charatter of the People or Commons.-. Dangerous Humours likely to break olut.-Appear- ance of Tibertis Gracchus.-- is projeit to revive the Law of Liciniuts.-Interceffon of the Tribune Otavius.-T'he Republic divided.-Difputes in the Comitia.-Depofition of the Tribune Ot1avius.- Commissioners appointed for the Division of Lands. Tiberius Gracchus Jtes to be re-eleRted 'Tribune.- His Death.-Immediate Confequences.-Proceed- itgs of Carbo.-Embaffy of Scipio.--Foreign Affaits.-Violence of the Conmmfiioners.-Domeflie Affairs. IN the manner that has been summarily stated inc H A p.
the preceding Chapters, the Romans completed ". their political establishment, and made their firfit and their greatest advances to empire, without de- parting from the policy by which they had been preserved in the infancy of their power. They were become sovereigns of Macedonia, Greece, Italy, part of Africa, Lusitania, and Spain; yet, even in this pitch of greatness, made no diftin&ion between the civil and military departments, nor gave to any citizen an exemption from the public service. They did not despise any enemy, neither in the measures they took, nor in the exertions they made to resist him: and as the fatal effects which they and all the other nations of the antient world were long accultomed to expet from defeats, were no less than servitude or death, they did
U 2 not
B 0 O K not submit to any enemy, in consequence of any
n event, nor under the pressure of any calamity
whatever.
Other nations were accuflomed to rife on vito. ries, and to fink under defeats; to become insolent or mean with the tide of their fortunes. The Ro- mans alone were moderate in prosperity, and arro- gant when their enemies expected to force their fubmilfion.
Other nations, when in difrefs, could weigh their sufferings against the conceflions which they were required to make; and, among the evils to which they were exposed, preferred what appeared to be the least. The Romans alone spurned the advances of a viEtorious enemy; were not to be moved by sufferings; and, though they cautiously avoided difficulties that were likely to surpass their strength, did not allow it to be supposed that they were governed by fear in any cafe whatever. They willingly treated with the vanquished, and were ready to grant the most liberal terms when the conceflion could not be imputed to weakness or fear. By such free and unforced concessions, in- deed, they eflablifhed a reputation for generosity, which contributed, no less than their valour, to fe- cure the dominion they acquired.
With the fame insinuating titles of allies or pro- teaors, by which they had, in the infant slate of their policy, brought all the cantons of Latium to follow their fiandard; they continued to take the ascendant over nations whom they could not have otherwise subdued. But as they were liberal in their friendships, so, after repeated provocations seemed to jufify a different conduct, they were terrible in their resentments, and took ample compensation for the favours they had formerly bestowed.
By their famous maxim in war already menti- oned, That the fitbmilfive were to be spared, and
the
the proud to be humbled, it became necessary forc H A p. them, in every quarrel, to conquer or to perish;, L" and, when these were the alternatives proposed by them, other nations were intitled to confider them as common enemies. No State has a right to make the fubmiflion of mankind a necessary con- dition to its own preservation ; nor are many States qualified to support such pretensions. Some part of this political charaaer, however, is necessary to the safety, as well as to the advancement of nati- ons. No free State or Republic is safe under any other government or defence, than that of its own citizens. No nation is safe that permits any ally to susser by having espoused its cause, or that al- lows itself to be driven, by defeats or misfor- tunes, into a surrender of any material part of its rights.
The measure of the Roman conquests, in the beginning of the seventh century of Rome, though great, was yet far from being full; and the Peo- ple had not hitherto relaxed the indufiry, nor cool- ed in the ardour with which prosperous nations ad- vance, but which they frequently remit in the height of their attainments and of their power.
The conffitution of the commonwealth still as- forded a plentiful nursery of men for both the ci- vil and military departments; and this People ac- cordingly continued for some time to advance with a quick pace in the career of their conquefis. They subdued mighty kingdoms with as great, or greater facility, than that with which they had for- merly conquered villages and single fields.
But the enlargement of their territory, and the success of their arms abroad, became the sources of a ruinous corruption at home. The wealth of pro- vinces began to flow into the city, and filled the coffers of private citizens, as well as those of the commonwealth. The offices of State and the command of armies were become lucrative as well
as
B o o ' as honourable, and were coveted on the former
". account. In the State itself the governing and the '"~' governed felt separate interests, and were at vari-
ance, from motives of avarice, as well as am- bition; and, initead of the parties who formerly strove for diiinEtion, and for the palm of merit in the service of the commonwealth, factions arose, who contended for the greatest share of its spoils, and who sacrificed the public to their party-attach- ments and animofities.
Two hundred and thirty years had elapsed since the animofities of Patrician and Plebeian were ex- tinguifhed by the equal participation of public ho- nours. This diftination itself was in a great mea- fare obliterated, and gave way to a new one, which, under the denominations of Nobles and Commons, or lluftrious and Obscure, without in- volving any legal disparity of privileges, gave rife to an aristocracy, which was partly hereditary, founded in the repeated fucceflion to honours in the fame family; and partly personal, founded in the habits of high fiation, and in the advantages of education, such as never fail to difiinguifl the conditions of men in every great and prosper- ous state.
These circumstances conferred a power on the Nobles, which, though less invidious, was not less real than that which had been possessed by the an- cient Patricians. The exercise of this power was lodged with the Senate, a body which, though by the emulation of its members, too much disposed to war, and ambitious of conquest, was probably never surpassed in magnanimity, ability, or in ftea- diness, by any council of state whatever.
The People had submitted to the Senate, as possessed of an authority which was founded in the prevailing opinion of their superior worth; and even the most aspiring of the Commons allowed *hemfelves to be governed by an order of men,
amongfl
amorigft whom they themselves, by proper efforts c H A P. and suitable merit, might hope to arcend. The '* examples of preferment, and the rife of individu-''' als, from the lowell to the highest ranks of the commonwealth, though for the most part received with some degree of jealousy by those who were already in possession of the higher condition, were nevertheless frequent, and extinguished all ap- pearance of an exclusive pretension to the ho- nours of the State, in any order or class of the People.
The Knights, or the Equefirian order, being persons possessed of estates or effe&s of a certain valuation (a), formed between the Senate and' the People an intermediate rank, who, in consequence of their having a capital, and being less. engaged than the Senators in affairs of State, became traders, contractors, farmers of the revenue, and constituted a species of moneyed interest in the city, and in the provinces.
Such, during the latter part of the period of which the events have been already related, was the distribution of rank in this commonwealthi. But circumstances which appear to be fixed in the poli- tical slate of nations, are often no more than a pas- sage in the shifting of scenes, or a transition from that which a people have been, to what they are about to become. The Nobles began to avail themselves of the high authority and advantages of their tlation, and to accumulate property as well as honours. The country began to be occupied with their plantations and their ilaves. The num- ber of great landed estates, and the multiplication of slaves, kept pace together. This manner of flocking plantations was necessary or expedient in the circumstances of the Romans: for if the Ro- man citizen, who pofleifed so much consequence
(a) 400,000 Roman money, or about 3,o0ol.
in
B o0 Kin his military and political capacity, had been
" willing to become a hireling and a servant, yet it
was not the interest of masters to entrust their as- fairs to persons who were liable to be pressed into the legions, or who were so often called away to the comitia and assemblies of the People.
Citizens contended for offices in the State as the road to lucrative appointments abroad; and when they had obtained this end, and had reigned for a while in some province, they brought back from their governments a profusion of wealth ill acquir- ed, and the habit of arbitrary and uncontrouled command. When disappointed in the purfiits of fortune abroad, they became the leaders of dan- gerous factions at home; or when suddenly pof- sessed of great wealth, they became the agents of corruption to dilreminate idleness, and the love of ruinous amusements, in the minds of the People.
The seclusion of the Equeitrian order from the pursuit of political emolument or honour, and the opportunities they had, by contracts and by farming the revenue, to improve their for- tunes in a different way, confirmed them in the habits of trade, and the attention to lucrative con- fiderations.
The city was gradually crowded with a popu- lace, who, tempted with the cheap or gratuitous difiribution of corn, by the frequency of public shews, by the consequence they enjoyed as mem- bers of the popular assemblies, or perhaps diflodg- ed from the country by the engrossers of land, and the preference which was given to the labour of slaves over that of freemen, flocked from the co- lonies and municipal towns to reside at Rome. There they were corrupted by idleness and indigence, and the order itself was continually debaSed by the frequent acceflion of emancipated slaves.
The
The Romans, who were become so jealous of c H A P. their prerogative as citizens, had no other way of," disposing of a save, who had obtained his freedom, than by. placing him on the rolls of the People; and from this quarter accordingly the numbers of the People were chiefly recruited. The emanci- pated save took the name of his master, became a client, and a retainer of his family; and at funerals and other folemnities, where the pomp was diflin- guifhed by the number of attendants, made a part of the retinue. This class of men accordingly re- ceived continual additions, from the vanity or weakness of those who chore to change their slaves into dependent citizens; and numbers who had been conduced to Rome as captives, or who had been purchased in Asia or Greece, at a price pro- portioned to the pleasurable arts they poffiefed, be- came an acceflion to that turbulent populace, who, in the quality of Roman citizens, tyrannized in their turn, over the mailers of the world, and wrecked on the conquerors of so many nations the evils which they themselves had so freely inflited on mankind (b).
Citizens of this extraction could not for ages ar- rive at any places of trust, in which they could, by their personal defects, injure the commonwealth; but they increased, by their numbers and their vices, the weight of that dreg, which, in great and prosperous cities, ever finks, by the tendency of vice and mifcondut, to the lowest condition. They became a part of that faction who are ever actuated by envy to their superiors, by mercenary views, or by abject fear; who are ever ready to espouse the cause of any leader against the re- ftraints of public order; difopofed to vilify the more refpetable ranks of men; and by their in- difference on the subje&s of justice or honour,
(b) Velleius, lib. ii. c. 4.
to
E o o K to frustrate every principle that may be employed
I. for the government of mankind, besides fear and - comn pulfion.
Although citizens of this description were yet far from being the majority at Rome, yet it is pro- bable that they were in numbers sufficient to con- taminate the whole body of the People; and, if enrolled promiicuoufly in all the tribes, might have had great weight in turning the scale of political councils. This effeet, however, was happily pre- vented by the wife precaution which the Censors had taken to confine all citizens of mean or slavish extraction to four of the Tribes. These were called tle Tribes of the City, and formed but a small pro- portion of the whole (c).
Notwithstanding this precaution, we must sup- pose them to have been very improper parties in the participation of sovereignty, and likely enough to disturb the place of assembly with disorders and tumults.
While the State was advancing to the fove- reignty of Italy, and while the territories fuccef- fively acquired were cleared for the reception of Rorman citizens, by the reduction and captivity of the natives, there was an outlet for the redundancy of this growing populace, and its overflowings were accordingly dispersed over Italy, from Rhegium to Aq-ileia, in about seventy colonies. But the coun- try being now completely fettled, and the property of its inhabitants elfablifhed, it was no longer pof- fible to provide for the indigent citizens in this manner; and the practice of fettling new colonies, v hi ch had been so ulefli in planting, and securing ihe conqueris which were made in Italy, had not et b en extended beyond this country, nor em- c) L,;-.- 12. I. c. 46 'V.hen this precaut;on vas taken by Fali' .'.::: nr., the Tlibce amrJunlm- to thirty-one. See the fuccetivc a'd:: ;.r, *- ,:h;ch tre T :ibe wesre briough: up to rhis number, Liv. :ib. vi. . 5 . : : i, .c. C . i b. .i. c t. :r . 1 r. it . .c. 1 .
ployei!
ployed as the means of securing any of the pro- c H A P. vinces lately acquired. Mere colonization, indeed, i would have been an improper and inadequate mea- sure for this purpose; and in time of the republic never was, in any corifiderable degree, extended beyond sea. The provinces were placed under military government, and were to be retained in fubmiflion by bodies of regular troops. Roman citizens had little inclination to remove their habi- tations beyond the limits of Italy; and if they had, would have been unable, in the mere capacity of civil corporations and pacific settlements, to carry into execution the exations of a government which they themselves now become inhabitants and pro- prietors of land in those provinces, would have soon been interelted to oppose: for there reasons, although the Roman territory was greatly extend- ed, the resources of the poorer citizens were dimi- nifhed. The former discharge for many dangerous humours that were found to arise among them, was in some measure shut up, and there humours began to regorge on the State.
While the inferior people at Rome funk in their characters, or were debated by the circumstances we have mentioned, the superior ranks, by their application to affairs of State, by their education, by the ideas of high birth and family diftindcion, by the superiority of fortune, began to rife in their estimation, in their pretensions, and in their power; and they entertained some de- gree of contempt for persons, whom the laws still required them to admit as their fellow-citizens and equals.
In this disposition of parties so dangerous in a commonwealth, and amidst materials so likely to catch the flame, some sparks were thrown that ofon kindled up anew all the popular animofities which seemed to have been so long extinguished. We have been carried, in the preceding narration, by
the
B o O K the series of events, somewhat beyond the date of
tranfadions that come now to be related. While Scipio was employed in the siege of Numantia, and while the Roman officers in Sicily were yet unable to reduce the revolted slaves, Tiberius Gracchus, born of a Plebeian family, but enno- bled by the honours of his father, by his descent on the fide of his mother from the firit Scipio Afri- canus, and by his alliance with the second Scipio, who had married his sifter, being now Tribune of the People, and poffeifed of all the accomplifll ments required in a popular leader, great ardour, resolution, and eloquence, formed a projeE in it- self extremely alarming, and in its consequences dangerous to the peace of the republic.
Like other young men of high pretensions at Rome, Tiberius Gracchus had begun his military service at the usual age, had served with reputation under his brother-in-law, Scipio, at the siege of Carthage, afterwards as Questor, under Mancinus in Spain, where the credit of his father, well known in that province, pointed him out to the natives as the only person with whom they would negociate in the treaty that ensued. The disgrace he incur- red in this tranfaition, gave him a diftafle to the militarv service, and to foreign affairs. When he was called to account for it, the severity he expe- rienced from the Senate, and the protecion he ob- tained from the People, filled his breast with an animr.fity to the one, and a prepossession in favour of the other (d).
Actuated by these dispositions, or by an idea not uncommon to enlhufiaftic minds, that the in- fq:!al djlribution of property, so favourable to the r:-:c, is an iyjury to the poor; he now proposed in part to remedy or to mitigate this supposed evil, by reviving the celebrated law of Licinius, by
(d) Cicero de Claris Oratoribus, c. Z7.
which
which Roman citizens had been restrained from c A P. accumulating estates in land above the value of ". five hundred jugera (e), or from having more than ~'" one hundred of the larger cattle, and five hundred of the lesser.
In his travels through Italy, he said, he had ob- served that the property of land was beginning to be engrossed by a few of the nobles, and that the country was entirely occupied by slaves to the ex- clufion of freemen: that the race of Roman citi- zens would Coon be extinAt (f), if proper fettle- ments were not provided to enable the poor to support their families, and to educate their chil- dren; and he alleged, that if estates in land were reduced to the measure prescribed by law, the surplus left would then be sufficient for this purpose.
Being determined, however, as much as pofli- ble, to prevent the opposition of the Nobles, and to reconcile the interest of both parties to his scheme, he proposed to make some abatements in the rigour of the Licinian law, allowing every fa- mily, holding five hundred jugera in right of the father, to hold half as much in the right of every unemancipated son; and proposed, that every person who should susser any diminution of his property in consequence of the intended reform, Ihould have compensation made to him; and that the fum necessary for this purpose Ihould be issued from the treasury.
In this manner he set out with an appearance of moderation, acting in concert with tome leading men in the State and members of the Senate, such as Appius Claudius, whose daughter he had mar- ried, a Senator of the family of Crassus, who was then at the head of the priesthood, and Mutius Scaevola, the Consul.
(e) Little more than half as many acres. (f) Plutarch in Tib. Graceh.
To
B o K To complete the intended reformation, and to
prevent for the future the accumulation of eflates in land, the sale or commerce of land was from thenceforward to be prohibited; and three corn- miflioners were to be annually named, to en- sure the execution and regular observance of this law.
This projec, however plausible, it is probable, was extremely unseasonable, and ill' suited to the fiate of the commonwealth. The law of Licinius had paiTed in the year of Rome three hundred and feventy-feven, no more than fourteen years after the city was restored from its deftru&tion by the Gauls, and about two hundred and fifty years be- fore this date; and though properly suited to a small republic, and even necessary to preserve a democracy, was, in that condition of the People, received with difficulty, and was oion trespassed upon even by the person himfelfon whose fuggef- tion it had been moved and obtained: that it was become obsolete, and gone into disuse, appeared from the abuses which were now complained of, and to which its renewal was propafed as a re- medy. It was become in a great measure imprac- ticable, and even dangerous in the present slate of the republic. The dillintions of poor and rich are as neceftary in States of considerable extent, as la- bour and good government. The poor are def- tined to labour, and the rich, by the advantages of education, independence, and leisure, are qua- lified for superior fiations. The empire was now greatly extended, and owed its safety and the or- der of its government to a respeCtable aristocracy, founded on the possession of fortune, as well as personal qualities and public honours. The rich were not, without some violent convulsion, to be itript of eflates which they themselves had bought, or which they had inherited from their anceflors. The poor were not qualified at once to be railed
to
to a itate of equality with persons inured to a betterec A p. condition. The project seemed to be as ruinous to u. government as it was to the security of property, and tended to place the members of the common- wealth, by one rash and precipitate siep, in situ- ations in. which they were not at all qualified to as. .For ihefe reasons, as well, as from motives of private interest affeEting the majority of the nobles, the project of Tiberius was firenuoufly opposed by the Senate; and from motives of envy, interest, or miflaken zeal forjuffice, as warmly supported by the opposite party. At the several assemblies of the People which were called to deliberate on this subjea, Tiberius, exalting the characters of freemen contrasted with slaves, displayed the copi- ous and' pathetic eloquence in which he excelled. All the free inhabitants, of Italy were Romans, or nearly allied to this people. He, observed liow much, being supplanted by the slaves of the rich, they were diminished in their numbers. He in- veighed again t the practice of employing slaves, a class of men that bring perpetual danger, without any addition of strength to the public, and who are ever ready to break forth in desperate infurreEtions, as they had then actually done in Sicily, where they itill occupied the Roman arms in a tedious and ruinous war (g). In declaiming on the mortifications and hard- Ihips. of the indigent citizen, he had recourle to the arguments commonly advanced to explode the in- equalities of mankind. " Every wild beast," he said, -. in this happy land has a cover or place of ' retreat. But many valiant and refpedCable.citi- "zens, who have exposed their lives, and who " have shed their blood in the service of their " country, have not a home to which they may re-
4(g) Appian. de Bell. Cir.
" tire.
B o C" tire. They wander with their wives and their
1. " children, itript of every possession, but that of the ---L, air and the light. To such men the common
"military exhortation, to fight for the tombs of their "fathers, and for the altars of their houfeholdgods, "is a mockery and a lie. They have no altars; "they have no monuments. They fight and they
die to augment the estates, and to pamper the "luxury of a few wealthy citizens, who have en- " grossed all the riches of the commonwealth: As " citizens of Rome, they are intitled the m.flers of " the world, but possess not a foot of earth on which "they may reft (h)."
He asked, " whether it were not' reasonable to apply what was public to public uses ? whether "a freeman were not preferable to a slave, a brave "man to a coward, and a fellow-citizen to a firan- " ger ? He expatiated on the fortune, and stated "the future prolpets of the republic. Much," he said, " she had acquired, and had yet more to " acquire: that the People, by their decision in the "present question were to determine, whether " they were, by multiplying their numbers, to en- " crease their firength, and be in a condition to con- " quer what yet remained of the world ? or, by " suffering the resources of the whole People to get " into the hands of a few, they were to permit " their numbers to decline, and to become unable, " against nations envious and jealous of their pow- " er, even to maintain the ground they already had "gained?
" He exhorted the present proprietors of land, " whom the law of division might asseA, not to " withhold, for the fake of a trifling interefi to "themselves, lo great an advantage from their " country. He bade them confider whether they " would not, by the secure possession of five hun-
(c) Pi:arnh, Ia Vit. Tib. Gracch.
" dred
't dred jugera, and of half as much to each ofC H A F- "their children, be fuffciently rewarded for the."
conceftions now required in behalf of the pub- " lic; put them in in ind that riches were merely "coniparativd and that, in refpec to this advan- tage, they were fiill to remain in the firfti ank of ' their fellow-citizens (?'. By these and similar argurmierts he endeavoured to obtain the consent of one party, and to inflame the zeal of the other. But when he cane to pro- pose, that the law Should be read, he found tlat his opponents had availed therhfelves of their usual defence; had procured M. Otavius, one of his own colleagues, to interpose with his negative, and to forbid any farther proceeding in the business. Here, according to the forms of the constitution, this matter fh6uld have dropped. The Tribunes were instituted to defend their own party, riot tof attack their opponents and to prevent, not to promote innovations. Every single Tribune had a negative on the whole. But Tiberius, thus fud- denly flopped in his career, became the more im- petuous and confirmed in his purpose. Having adjourned the alfembly to another days he pre- pared a motion more violent than the forrer, iri which he erased all the clauses by which he had en- deavoured to soften the hardships likely to fall on the rich. He proposed, that, without expecting any compensation, they should absolutely cede the surplus of their possessions, as being obtained by fraud and injufeice. In this time of fufpence, the controversy began to divide the colonies and free cities of Italy, and was Warmly agitated wherever the citizens had ex- tended their property. The rich and the poor took opposite fides. They colleted their argu,, ments, and they mustered their strength. The first
(i) Appian. de Bell. Civ, VOL. 1. X ,had
B O o o had recourse to the topics which are commonly em.
"- ployed on the fide of prescription, urging that, " 'in some cafes, they had possessed their estates from
time immemorial; and that the lands they possessed were become valuable, only in consequence of the industry and labour which they themselves had em- ployed to improve them; that, in other cafes, they had actually bought their estates: that the public faith, under which they were suffered to purchase, was now engaged to proteEt and secure their pof- session: that, in reliance on this faith, they had ereted, on these lands, the sepulchres of their fathers; they had pledged them for the dowries of their wives and the portions of their children, and mortgaged them as security for the debts they had contracted: that a law regulating or limiting the farther encreafe or accumulation of property might be suffered; but that a law, having a retrofpet, and operating in violation of the rights, and to the ruin of so many families, was altogether unjust, .and even impracticable in the execution. -The poor, on the contrary, pleaded their own indigence and their merits; urged that they were no longer in a capacity to fill the flatiori of Roman citizens or of freemennor in a condition to fettle fa- milies or to rear children, the future hopes of the commonwealth: that no private person could plead immemorial poffeflion of lands which had been acquired for the public. They enumerated tli wars which they themselves, or their anceflors, had maintained in the conquest of those lands. They concluded, that every citizen was entitled to his {hare of the public conquefis; and that the argu- ments which were urged to support the polfeflions of the nobles, only tended to shew how prefump- tuous and insolent such usurpations, if suffered to remain, were likely to become.
This mode of reasoning appears plausible; but it is dangerous to adopt by halves even reason it,
- . self
self. If it were reasonable that eer.y Rdman citi-c H A p. zen should have an equal share ofthe conquered I" lands, it' ws still more reaf6nable; that tlie. origi- nal proprietors, from whom those lands had been unjufily taken, should have them restored. If, in this, the maxims of reason and juflice had been observed, Rome would have iiill been. a. fmll community, and might have ated with safety on the principles of equality which are suited to a small republic. But the Romaris, becoming so- vereigns of a great and extensive territory, muff adopt the disparities, and submit to the fubordina- tions, which mankind universally have found na- tural, and even necessary, to their government in such situations.
Multitudes of people from all parts of Italy; some earnestly desirous to have the law enated, others to have. it set aside, crowded to. Rome to attend the decifioh of the question; and Gracchus, without dropping his intention, as usual, upon the negative of his colleague, only bethought himself how he might surmount, or remove this obftruc- tion. Having hitherto lived in personal intimacy with Otavius, he tried to gain him in private; and having failed in this attempt, he entered into ex- 'pofhulations with him, in pretence of the public as- fembly; desired to know, whether he feared to have his own estate impaired by the effeas of the law; for, if so, he offered to indemnify him fully in whatever he might susser by the execution of it: and being fill unable to.lhake his colleague, who was supported by the countenance of the Senate and the higher ranks of men in the State, he de- termined to try the force of his Triburiitian pow- ers to compel him, laid the State itself under a ge- neralinterdi&, fealed up the doors of the. treasury, suspended the proceedings in the courts of the Pra-
X 2 tors.
B o oK tors, and put a stop to all the functions of office ia
_ the city.
All the nobility and superior class of the People went into mourning. Tiberius, in his turn, en- deavoured to alarm the passions of his party; and believing, or pretending to believe, that he him- seif was in danger of being assassinated, had a number of persons with arms to defend his person.
While the city was in this state of fufpence and confusion, the Tribes were again assembled, and Tiberius, in defiance of the. negative of his col- league, was proceeding to call the votes, when many of the People, alarmed by this intended violation of the sacred law, crowded in before the Tribe that was moving to ballot, and seized the urns. A great tumult was likely to arise. The popular party, being most numerous, were crowd- ing around their leader, when two Senators, Man- lius and Fulvius, both of consular dignity, fell at his feet, embraced his knees, and beseeched him not to proceed. Overcome with the refpet that was due to persons of this rank, and with the sense of some impending calamity, he alked, What they would have him to do? " The cafe," they said, " is too arduous for us to decide; refer it to the Se- nate, and await their decree."
Proceedings were accordingly suspended until the Senate had met, and declared a resolution not to confirm the law. Gracchus resumed the sub- jeCt with the People, being determined either to remove, or to flight the negative of his colleague. He proposed, that either the refractory Tribune, or himself, should be immediately fiript of his dignity. He desired that Octavius should put the queftlon first, Whether Tiberius Gracchus should be degraded ? This being declined as irregular and vain, he declared his intention to move in the as- fembly, on the following day, That Oatavius hould be divested of the character of Tribune.
Hitherto
Hitherto all parties had proceeded agreeably toc H.A p. the laws and conltitution of the commonwealth.; u. but this motion, to degrade a Tribune, by what- ever authority, was equally subversive of both. The person and dignity of Tribunes, in order that they might be secure from violence, whether of- sered by any private person, public magifirate, or even by the People themselves, were guarded by the most sacred vows. Their persons, therefore, during the continuance of their office, were sacred; so long their character was indelible, and, without their own consent, they' could not be removed by any power whatever.
The assembly, however, being met in confe- quence of this alarming adjournment, Tiberius re- newed his prayer to O&avius to withdraw his ne- gative; but not prevailing in this request, the Tribes were direted to proceed. The votes of seventeen were already given to degrade. In taking those of the eighteenth, which would have made a majo- rity, the Tribunes made a pause, while Tiberius embraced his colleague, and, with a voice to be heard by the multitude of the People, beseeched him to spare himself the indignity, and others the regret, of so revere, though necessary, a measure. Of&avius shook: but, observing the Senators who were present, recovered his resolution, and bid Tiberius proceed as he thought proper. The votes of the majority were accordingly declared, and 06Oavius, reduced to a private fiation, was drag- ged from the Tribunes bench, and exposed to the rage of the populace. Attempts were made on his life, and a faithful slave, that endeavoured to save him, was dangerously wounded; but a num- ber of the more refpeetable citizens interposed, and Tiberius himself was active in favouring his es- cape.
This obstacle being removed, the at so long Let Sem depending, for making a more equal division of proana.
lands,
o o K lands, was passed; and three commiflioners, Tibe- i. rius Gracchus, Appius Claudius, his father-in-law, -- - and his brother, Caius Gracchus, then a youth
serving under Publius Scipio at the siege of Nu- mantia, were named to carry the law into execu- tion.
This at, as it concerned the interest of almost every inhabitant of Italy, immediately raised a great ferment in every part of the country. Per- fonsholding'confiderable estates in land were alarm- ed for their property. The poor were elated with the hopes of becoming fdddenly rich. If there was a middling class not to be greatly affected in their own situation, they still trembled for the effects of a contest between such parties. The Senate en, deavoured to delay the execution of the law, with- held the usual aids and appointments given to the commiltioners of the People in the ordinary admi- niftratiori of public trusts, and waited for a fit op- portunity to suppress entirely this hazardous projet. Parties looked on each other with a gloomy and fufpiclous silence. A person who had been aAive in procuring the Agrarian Law, having died in this critical jundure, his death was'alleged to be the etfect of poison administered by the opposite party. Numbers of the people, to countenance a report to this purpose, went into mourning; even Gracchus, affecting to believe a like design to be forming against himself, appeared, with his children and their mother, as suppliants in the streets, and implored the protection of the People. Still more to interest their passions in his safety, he published a lift of the ats which he then had in view, all tending to gratify the People, or to mortify the Se- nate. Attalus, king of Pergamus, having, about this time, bequeathed his dominions and his trea- sure to the Romans, Gracchus procured an aft to transfer the adminifiration of this inheritance from the Senate to the People; and to difribute tbe
money
money found in the treasury of Pergamus to the c H A P. poorer citizens, the better to enable them to culti- If vate and to flock the lands which were now to be~ d given them. He obtained another aft to circum- scribe the power of the Senate, by joining the Equestrian order with the Senators in the nomina- tion to juries, or in forming the occasional tribu- nals of jultice. These, with the preceding attempts to abolish or to weaken the ariltocratical part of the-govern- ment, were jufly alarming to every person who was anxious for the preservation of the State. As the policy of this Tribune tended to fubilitute po- pular tumults for fober councils and a regular ma- giftracy, it gave an immediate profpea of anarchy, which threatened to produce some violent ufurpa- tion. The sacred office which he so much abused, had served, on occasions, to check the caprice of the People, as well as to restrain the abuse of the executive power. The late violation it had sus- sered, was likely to render it entirely unfit for the first of these purposes, and to make the Tribune an infirument to execute the momentary will of the People, or to make the continuance of his trust de- pend upon his willingness to serve this purpose. Tiberius heard himself arraigned in the Forum, and in every public assembly, for the violation of the sacred law. "If any of your colleagues," said Titus Annius (whom he prosecuted for a speech in the Senate), " ihould interpose in my behalf, would " you have him also degraded ?"
The people in general began to be sensible of the enormity they themselves had committed, and Tiberius found himself under a neceflity of plead- ing for the measure he had taken, after it had been carried into execution. The person of the Tribune, he observed, was sacred; because it was confe- crated by the People, whom the Tribunes repre- lented: but if the Tribune, inconfifient with his
character,
B o o K character, mhould injure where he was appointed to
_.. protet, ihould weaken a claim he was appointed
to enforce, and withhold from the People that right of decision which he was appointed to guard, the Tribune, not the People, was to blame for the consequences.
" Other crimes," he said, " may be enormous, " yet may not destroy the essence of the Tribuni. " tian characer. An attempt to demolish the Ca- " pitol, or to bum the fleets of the republic, "' might excite an universal and just indignation, " without rendering the person of the Tribune " who should be accused of them leTs sacred. But " an attempt to take away the power by which " his own office fubfifls, and which is centered in " himself only for the better exertion of that pow- "er, is a voluntary and criminal abdication of " the trulL What is the Tribune but the officer " Of the People ? Strange! that this officer may, :' by virtue of authority derived from the People, " drag even the Consul himself to prison, and yet " that the People themselves cannot depose their " own officer, when he is about to annul the au- " thority by which he himself is appointed.
" Was ever authority more sacred than that of " king? It involved in itself the prerogativesof " every magistrate, and was likewise consecrated ' by holding the priefihood of the immortal gods. " Yet did not the people banish Tarquin? and u thus, for the offence of one man, abolish the ' primitive government, under the auspices of " which the foundations of this city were laid.
" What more sacred at Rome than the persons "of the Vestal Virgins, who have the custody of ' the holy fire Yet are they not for flight of- ; fences Sometimes buried alive ? Impiety to the "gods being supposed to cancel a title which re- ' verence to the gods had conferred, must not
D injuries
5. injuries to the People suppress an authority whichc H A p. ." a regard to the People has constituted ? i
" That person must fall, who himself removes a the base on which he is supported. A majority ." of the Tribes creates a Tribune: Cannot the " whole depose? What more sacred than the "things which are dedicated at the shrines of the (' immortal gods ? yet these the People may em- " ploy or remove at plealiure. Why not transfer "the Tribunate, as a consecrated title, from one " person to another ? May not the whole People,
b' by their sovereign authority, do what every " person in this sacred office is permitted to do, " when he resigns or abdicates his power by a 'simple expression of his will." These specious arguments tended to introduce the plea of necessity where there was no founda- tion for it, and to set the sovereign power, in every .species of government, loose from the rules which itfelfhad enaded. Such arguments accordingly had no effect where the interest of the parties did not concur to enforce them. Tiberius saw his credit on the decline. He was publicly menaced with impeachment, and had given sufficient pro- vocation to make him apprehend that, upon the expiration of his office, some violence might be of- sered to himfelf(k). His person was guarded only by the sacred charater of the Tribune. The firit Itep he should make in the new charater he was to assume, as commissioner for the division of lands, was likely to terminate his life. He resolved, if poflible, to take shelter in the Tribunate another year, and to procure this favour from the People, gave farther expectations of popular afts of one to shorten the term of military service, and of another to grant an appeal to the People from the courts of juflice lately established.
)? Orofius, lib. v. c. 8.
The
B O o K The Senate, and every citizen who professed a _~ regard to the constitution, were alarmed. This
attempt, they said, to perpetuate the Tribunitian power in the fame perion, tends direatly to ty- ranny. The us irper, wth the lawless multitude that supports him, must soon expel from the pub- lic assemblies every citizen who is inclined to mo- deratirn; and together with the property of our lands, to which they already aspire, make them- selves master of the State. Their leader, it seems, like every other tyrant, already thinks that his safety depends upon the continuance of his power.
In tiis feverish state of furpence and anxiety, areat efforts were made to determine the ele&ions. The time of choofing the Tribunes was now fast approaching: Roman citizens, dispersed on their lands throughout Italy, were engaged in the har- vest, and could not repair to the city. On the day of election the assembly was ill attended, efpe-. ciallv by those who were likely to favour Tiberius. He being rejeAed by the firit Tribes that moved to the ballot, his friends endeavoured to amuse the - assembly with forms, and to protrat the debates, till observing that the field did not fill, nor the ap- pearance change for the better, they moved to ad- journ to the following day.
In this recess Tiberius put on mourning, went forth to the streets with his children, and, in be- half of hapless infants, that might already be con- fidered as orphans, on the eve of losing their pa- rent in the cause of freedom, implored the pro- teEtion of the People; gave out that the party of the rich, to hinder his being re-eleted, had deter- mined to force their way into his house in the night, and to murder him. Numbers were affected by these difrral representations: a multitude crowded to his doors, and watched all night in the fireets.
On the arrival of morning and the approach of the assembly, the declining appearance of his as-
fairs
fairs suggested presages; and the fuperfiition ofc H A p. the times has furnished hiflory with the omens, by ". which himself and his friends were greatly dismay- -~ ed. He, nevertheless, with a crowd of his parti- zans, took his way to the Capitol, where the Peo- pie had been appointed to assemble. His attend- ants multiplied, and numbers from the assembly descended the steps to meet him. ' Upon his en- try a (hout was raised, and his party appeared sufficiently firong, if not to prevail in their choice, perhaps by their violence to deter every citizen of a different mind from attending the eledtion.
A chosen body took post round the person of Tiberius, with dire&tion to susser no firanger to approach him. A signal was agreed upon, in cafe it were necessary to employ force. Mean time the Senators, on their part, were haflily assembled in tlie Temple of Faith, in anxious deliberations on the measures to be followed.
When the firfl tribe delivered their votes, a con- fulion arose among the People. Numbers from the more diflant parts of the assembly began to press forward to the centre. Among others, Ful- vius Flaccus, a Senator yet attached to Tiberius, being too far off to be heard, beckoned with his hand that he would speak with the Tribunes. Having made his way through the multitude, he informed Tiberius, that a resolution was taken in the Senate to refill him by force; and that a party of Senators, with their clients and slaves, was arm- ing againit his life. All who were near enough to hear this information, took the alarm, snatched the fiaves fromn the officers that attended the Tribunes, and tucked up their robes as for immediate vio- lence. The alarm spread through the assembly, and, many called out to know the cause, but no diftind accounts could be heard. Tiberius, hav- ing in vin iattempted to :speak, mlad a sign, by
waving
o o K waving his hand round his head, that his life was "- in danger. This sign, together with the hotlile
and menacing appearances that gave rife to it, be- ing infiantly reported in the Senate, and inter- preted as a hint given to the People, that it was necessary he should be crowned, or that he should assume the sovereignty, the Senate immediately re. solved, in a form that was usual on alarming occa- sions, that the Consul should provide for the safety of the State. This resolution was supposed to con- ser a dictatorial power, and was generally given when immediate execution or summary proceed- ings were deemed to be necessary, without even sufficient time for the formalities observed in naming a Diaator. The Consul Mucius Scevola, who had been in concert with Tiberius in drawing up the first frame of his law, but who probably had left him in the extremes to which he afterwards proceeded; on the present occasion, however, de- clined to employ force against a Tribune of the People, or to disturb the Tribes in the midst of their legal assembly. i' If they (hall come," he said, " to any violent or illegal determination, I "will employ the whole force of my authority to "prevent its effects."
In this expreflion of the Consul there did not appear to the audience a proper disposition for the present occasion. The laws were violated: A de- fperate party was prepared for any extremes: All fober citizens, and even many of the Tribunes, had fled from the tumult: The priests of Jupiter had (hut the gates of their temple: The laws, it was said, ought to govern; but the laws cannot be pleaded by those who have set them aside, and they are no longer of any avail, unless they are reitored by some exertion of vigour, fit to coun- terad the violence that has been offered to them. " The Consul," said Scipio Nafica, " deserts the " republic; let those who wilh to preserve it, fol-
. low
" low me." The Senators instantly arose, andc H A P. moving in a body, which encreafed as they went, ". by the concourse of their clients, they seized the ^ shafts of the fasces, or tore up the benches in their way, and, with their robes wound up, in place of shields, on their left arm, broke into the midst of the assembly of the People.
Tiberius, surrounded by a numerous multitude, found his party unable to resist the awe with which they were firuck by the pretence of the Senate and Nobles. The few who refifled were beat to the ground. He himself, while he fled, being seized by the robe, flipped it from his shoulders and con- tinued to fly; but he fiumbled in the crowd, and, while he attempted to recover himself, was slain with repeated blows. His body, as being that of a tyrant, together with the killed of his party, amounting to about three hundred, as accomplices in a treasonable design againfi the republic, were denied the honours of burial, and thrown into the river. Some of the most ative of his partisans that escaped, were afterwards cited to appear, and were outlawed or condemned.
Thus, in the heats of this unhappy dispute, both the Senate and the People had been carried to aas of violence that insulted the laws and constitution of their country. This constitution was by no means too ftrit and formal to contend with such evils; for, betides admitting a general latitude of conduct scarcely known under any other political establishment, it had provided expedients or great and dangerous occasions, which were sufficient to extricate the commonwealth from greater extremi- ties than those to which it had been reduced in the course of this unfortunate contell.
The People, when refirained from their obje& by the negative of one of their Tribunes, had only to wait for the expiration of his office, when, by a new election, they might so model the college as
to
B o o sto be secure of its unanimous consent in the parti,
cular measures to which they were then inclined. The precipitant violation of the sacred law, a pre- cedent which, if followed, mull have rendered the Tribunes mere instruments of popular violence, not bars to reitrain oppreflion, filled the minds of the People with remorse and horror, and gave to the Senate and Nobles a dreadful apprehension of what they were to expect from a party capable of such a profane and violent extreme.
The policy of Tiberius Gracchus on the other hand, the laws he had obtained, his oWn re-elec, tion to secure the execution, and the sequel of his plan, seered to threaten the republic with diftrac- tion and anarchy, likely to end in his own ufurpa- tion, or in that of some more artful demagogue. But even under these gloomy expeEtations, the Se- nate could, by naming a Ditator5 or by the com- mission which they actually gave to the Consul, have recourse to a legal preventive, and might have repelled the impending evil by measures equally decisive and powerful, though more legal than those they employed. But the Consul, it seems, was fufpeEed of connivance with the oppo- site party, had received his own commission coldly, and could not be entrufled with the choice of a Dic- tator.
In these extremities, the violent resolution that was taken by the Senate appears to have been ne- ceffary; and probably for the present saved the re- public; preserved it indeed, not in a found, but in a sickly slate, and in a fever, which, with some intermifflons, at every return of similar disorderss threatened it with the dissolution and ruin of its whole constitution.
The disorders that arise in free States which are beginning to corrupt, generally furnish very diffi- cult questions in the casuistry of politicians. Even the struggles of virtuous citizens, because they do
not
not prevent, are sometimes supposed to haften, the c Hi A. ruin of their country. The violence of the Senate, ". on this occasion, was by many confidered with aversion and horror. The subversion of govern- ment, that was likely to have followed the policy of Gracchus, because it did not take place, was overlooked; and the restitution of order, effee&ed by the Senate, appeared to be a tyranny establish- ed in blood. The Senators themselves were firuck with some degree of remorse, and, what is-danger- ous in politics, took a middle course between the .extremes. They were cautious not to inflame ani- -mofities, by any immoderate use of their:late vic- .tory, nor by any immediate'oppofition to the exe- cution of the popular law. They wifhed'to atone for the violences lately committed againft:the per- son. of its author; they permitted Fulvius Flaccus and Papirius Carbo, two of the most daring lead- ers of the popular faction, to be elected commiffi- -oners for -the execution of the Agrarian law, in *the room of Tiberius and Appius Claudius, of .whom the latter also died about this time; and,.in order to stifle animofities and resentments, consent- ed that, under.pretence of an embassy to Perga- ,mus, Scipio Nafica should be removed from Rome. :In consequence of this commiflion, this illustrious citizen, the lineal descendant of one of the Scipios who perished in Spain in the time of the second Punic war, himself an ornament to the republic, .died in a species of exile, though under an honour- -able.title.
In the midst of such agitations, foreign affairs were likely to be much overlooked. They pro- ceeded, however, under the conduct of the officers to whom they were entrusted, with the usual -fuc- cess; and the Senate, having the reports made nearly about the fame time, of the pacification of Lusitania, the deftrution of Numantia, and the reduction and punishment of the slaves in Sicily,
named
oo- K named commifiioners to at in conjunction with aI the generals commanding in those several services,
in order to fettle their provinces.
Brutus and Scipio had their several triumphs; one with the title of Galaicus, for having re- duced the Gallicians; the other, fill preferring the title of Africanus to that of Numantinus, which was offered to him for the sack of Nu- manfia.
The arrival of this refpeEtable citizen was anxi- oufly looked for by all parties, more to know what judgment he might pass on the late operations at Rome, than on account of the triumph he obtain- ed over enemies once formidable to his country, He was the near relation of Gracchus, and might, under pretence of revenging the death of that de- magogue, have put himself at the head of a formid- able party. He was himself personally refpedted and beloved by numbers of the citizens, who had carried arms under his command, who were recent- ly arrived in Italy crowned with victory, and who might possibly, under pretence of vindicating the rights of the People, employ their arms againfi the republic. But the time of such criminal views on the commonwealth was not yet arrived. Scipio already, upon hearing the fate of Gracchus, had expreffed,.in some words that escaped him, his ap- probation of the Senate's condut. " So may " every person peri'h," he said, " who shall dare " to commit such crimes (1)." Soon after his arri- val from Spain, Papirius Carbo, the Tribune, call- ed upon him aloud, in the assembly of the People, to declare what he thought of the death of Grac- chus. " I must think," he said, " that if Grac- " chus meant to overturn the government of his " country, his death was fully merited." This de- claration the multitude interrupted with murmurs
(I) Plnurch, io Vit. Tiberi Gracchi.
of
of aversion and rage. Upon which Scipio raising c H A P. his tone, expressed the contempt under which it 1'. seems that the populace of Rome had already ~ fallen. " I have been accustomed," he said, " to " the shout of warlike enemies, and cannot be as- " feEted by your dastardly cries." Then alluding to the number of enfranchised slaves that were en- rolled with the Tribes of the city, upon a second cry of displeasure, he continued, " Peace, ye " aliens and flep-children of Italy (i). You are " now free, but many of you I have brought to "this place in fetters, and fold at the halbert for " slaves." Some were abashed by the truth, and all by the boldness of this contemptuous reproach, and shewed that popular aifemblies, though vested with supreme authority, may be sometimes insulted, as well as courted, with success. The part which Scipio took on this occasion was the more remarkable, that he himself was to be reckoned among the poorer citizens, and might have been a gainer by the rigorous execution of the Licinian law. His whole inheritance, according to Pliny, amounted to thirty-two pounds, or three hundred and twenty ounces of silver, which might be now valued at about two hundred and eighty pounds sterling. Papirius Carbo spent the year of his TribunateLexap;,i,. in fomenting the animosity of the People againfteabellara the Senate, and in promoting dangerous innova- tions. He obtained a law, by which the votes of the People, in questions of legislation as well as elecion (n), and the opinions of the judges in de- termining causes, were to be taken by ballot. He was less successful in the motion he made for a law to enable the fame person to be repeatedly chosen into the office of Tribune. He was support-
(1n) Velleius Paterculus, lib: ii. . 4. () Cic. de Legibas, lib. iii. VOL. I. Y ed
Bo o Ked in this motion by Caius Graechus; opposed by
'Scipio, Lxlius, and the whole authority of the Se,
nate (o), who dreaded the perpetuating in any one person a power, which the sacredness of the charac- ter, and the attachment of the populace, rendered almost sovereign and irresistible.
While the interests of party were exerted in these several questions at home, the State was laying the foundation of new quarrels abroad, and opening a scene of depredation and conquest in what was then the wealthiefi part of the known world. Soon after the death of Attalus, king of Pergamus, who had bequeathed his kingdom to the Romans, Ariftoni- cus, his natural brother, being the illegitimate son of Eumenes, made pretensions to the throne of Per- gamus, and was supported by a powerful party among the people. The Romans did not fail to maintain their right: Crassus, one of the Consuls of the preceding year, had been sent with an army Ai. c. 62z.into Asia for that purpose, but in his first encounter
with Ariftonicus was defeated and taken. He was afterwards killed while a captive in the hands of the enemy; having intentionally provoked one of his guards to lay violent hands on him, and thus ended a life which he thought was dishonoured by his preceding defeat.
The following year, the Consul Perperna being sent on this service, and having, with better fortune than Crassus, defeated and taken Arii'onicus, got poflefiion of the treasure and kingdom of Attalus, but died in his command at Pergamus. From this time the Romans took a more particular concern than formerly in the affairs of Asia. They employ- ed Scipio Emilianus, with Sp. Mummius, and 1. Metellus, on a commiflion of observation to that country. We are told that the equipage of Scipio -upon this occasion confied of seven slaves; and
?i) Cic, de Amicitil.
this,
this, as a mark or charateriftic of the times, is per- c H A P. haps more interesting than any thing else we could n' be told of the embassy. The objec of the com- miflion appears to have related to Egypt as well as to Afia(p), though there was not any power in either that seemed to be in condition to alarm the Romans. Ptolemy Euergates had succeeded to the throne of Egypt, but was expelled by the peo- ple of Alexandria. Antiochus, king of Syria, had been recently engaged in a very unsuccessful war with the Parthians ; and it had not yet appeared how far it concerned the Romans to observe the king of Pontus, or to confider of the measures to be taken against him for the security of their pof- feflions in Asia. In whatever degree the Roman embassy found worthy objects of attention in the slate of the Asia- tic powers, matters were hastening in Italy to a fiate of great distraction and ferment, on account of the violence with which the Agrarian law was put in execution by Papirius Carbo, Fulvius Flac- cus, and Caius Gracchus, the commiflioners ap- pointed for this purpose. As the law authorised them to call upon all persons possessed of public lands to evacuate them, and submit to a legal di- vision; they, under this pretence, brought into quefiion all the rights of property throughout Italy, and took from one and gave to another as suited their pleasure; some suffered the diminution of their efrates with silent rage; others complained that they were violently removed from lands which they had cultivated, to barren and inhospitable situ- ations; even they who were supposed to be favour- ed, complained of the lots they received. Many were aggrieved, none were satisfied. Moved by the representations which were made of there abuses, Scipio, at his return from Asia,
(p) Valerius Maximus, lib. iv. c. 3.
Y made
B o o K made an harangue in the Senate, by which lie
drew upon himlclF an invedtive from Fulvius, one of the commilioners. He did not propoue to re- peal the law, but that the execution of it should be taken out of the hands of so pernicious a sati- on, and committed to the Consul Sempronius Tu- ditanus, who remained in the administration of as- fairs in Italy, while his colleague Aquilius had gone to Asia to finiih the transaction in the conduct of which Perperna died.
It is mentioned that Scipio, in this speech to the Senate, complained of insults and threats to his own person, which induced all the members, with a great body of the more refpetable citizens, to attend him in proceilion to his own house. Next morning he was found dead in his bed (q); and, notwithitanding the suspicions of violence tranf- mitted by different authors, nothing certain appears upon record; and no inquefi was ever made to discover the truth of there reports. This illufirious citizen, notwithstanding his services, had incurred so much the dilpieafure of the People, that he had not the honours' of a public funeral: If he had not died at this critical time, the Senate, it was sup- posed, meant to have named him DiCtator, for the purpose of purging the State of the evils with which it was now opprefred.
The occasion, however, was not sufficient to make the Senate persist in their intention to name a Dic- tator; nor is there any thing material recorded as having happened during a few of the following years. QJintus Cacilius Metellus Macedonicus, and Qintus Pompeius, were Censors; both of Plebeian extraction; of which this is recorded as the first example. Metellus, at the Census, made a memorable speech, in which he recommended marriage, the eltabliihment of families, and the
(i) Cic. de Am:citia.
rearing
rearing of children. This speech being preserved, c H A P. will recur to our notice again, being read by Au- _, guftus in the Senate, as a lesson equally applicable to the age in which he lived.
The people who were fit to carry arims, as ap- peared at their enrolment, amounted to three hundred and seventeen thousand eight hundred and twenty-three. But what is moif memo- rable in the tranfafions of this muster, was the disgrace of Cains Attinius Labeo, who, being ftriick off the rolls of the Senate by Metellus, afterwards became Tribune of the People; and, by the difficulty with which the effet of his unjust revenge came to be prevented, showed the folly of making the will of any officer sacred, iworder to refrain the com- miflion of wrongs.
Metellus, in returning fiom the cointry, about noon, while the market-place was thin of people, found himself suddenly apprehend- ed by this vindicive Tribune, and ordered to be thrown immediately from the Tarpeiari Rock. The People afllmbled iri crowds, were sensible of the Tribune's breach of the sacred trust reposed in him; and, accofling Metellus by the name of Father, lamented his fate: but, unless another Tribune could be found to interpose in his favour, there was no other power in the commonwealth that could, with- out supposed profanation, interrupt a Tribune even in the commillion of a crime. Metel- lus struggled to obtain a delay, was overpow- ered and dragged through the streets-' while the violence he suffered made the blood to spring from his nostrils. A Tribune was with difficulty found in time to save his life; but Attinius having, with a lighted fire and other forms of consecration, devoted his estate to
sacred
B o o r sacred uses, it is alleged that he never recovered
IIt.
Such was the weak slate to which the go- vernment was reduced by the late popular en- croachments, that this outrageous abuse of power was never punished; and such the moderation of this great man's family, that though he himself. lived fifteen years in high credit after this acci- dent, saw his family raised to the higherf digni- ties, and was carried to his grave by four sons, of whom one had been Censor, two had tri- umphed, three had been Consuls, and the fourth, then Prator, was candidate for the Consulate, which he obtained in the following year; yet no one of this powerful family chore to encreafe the disturbances of the commonwealth, by attempting to revenge the outrage which their father had sus- sered (s). LteiAt.:t:. Caius Attinius is mentioned as being the
person who obtained the admission of the Tri- bunes, in right of their office, as members of the Senate (t).
The Consul Sempronius, though authorised by the Senate to restrain the violence of the com- mifioners who were employed in the execution of the Agrarian Law, declined that hazardous business, and chose rather to encounter the enemy in the province of Ifiria, where he made some con- quefis and obtained a triumph.
In the fame turbulent times lived Pacuvius, the tragic poet, and Lucilius, inventor of the satire. The latter, if we suppose him to be the fame whose name is found in the lift of Qieftors, was a per- (r) Plin. lii. vi.c. 44. Cicero, in pleading to have his honfe restored to him, though devoted to sacred ufc, ilates the form of consecration in te cafe of Metellnr, but denies the effect of it. Pro domo fua, c-47. (,) Plin . lib. vii. 44 (t) A. Ge.iu, lib. iv. c.S.
son
son of rank, and moved in the line of political pre- c H A P. ferment.
Hillorians mention a dreadful eruption of Mount ]Etna, the effect of subterraneous fires, which shaking the foundations of Sicily and the neigh- bouring islands, gave explosions of flame, not only from the crater of the mountain, but likewise from below the waters of the sea, and forced fud. den and great inundations over the islands of Li- pare and the neighbouring coasts,
CHAP,
C H A P. III. State of the Italian Allies, and the views which now
began to be conceived by them.-Appearance of Caius Gracchuts.-Reolutions to purge the City of Alieins.--Caiflate and factious Motions of Fulvius Flaccus.-Confpiracy of Frigelle fippreffed.-Cains Gracchus returns to Roime.-Offers himself Candi- date for the Tribunate.-Addrefs of Cornelia.-Tri- bunate and AcIs of Caius Gracchus.-Re-elel ion.- Proposal to admit the Inhabitants of Italy on the Rolls of Roman Citizens.-Popular Ails of Grac- chus and Livius.-lhe Senate begin to prevail.- Death of Caius Gracchus and Fulvius. B O K H K H E eruption of Mount Etna, and the other  _ . _ particulars relating to the natural history of
Italy, with the mention of which we concluded our last Chapter, were confidered as prodigies, and as the presages of evils which were yet to afflia the republic. At this time indeed the State of Italy seemed to have received the feeds of much trouble, and to contain ample materials of civil combullion. C. c. 67. The citizens, for whom no provision had been
made at their return from military service, or who thought themselves partially dealt with in the colo- nies, the leaders of tumult and facion in the city, were now taught to confider the land-property of Italy, as their joint inheritance. They were, in imagination, difiributing their lots, and feledting their Shares.
In the mean time, the inhabitants of the Muni- cipia, or free towns, and their diftrits, who, not being citizens, served the State as allies, had rea- son to dread the rapacity of such needy and power-
ful
ful maiters. They themselves likewise began toc H A P. repine under the inequality of their condition. Il They observed, that while they were scarcely al- lowed to retain the poffeflions of their ancestors, Rome, aided by their arms, had gained that ex- tensive dominion, and obtained that territory, about which the poor and the rich were now likely to quarrel among themselves. " The Italian al-
lies," they said, " muff bleed in this contest, no " less than they had done in the foreign or more " distant wars of the commonwealth." They had been made, by the professions of Tiberius Grac- chus, to entertain hopes that every diftinAion in Italy would soon be removed, that every freeman in the country would be enrolled as a citizen of Rome, and be admitted to all the powers and pre- tensions implied in that designation. The confi- deration of this fubjeEt, therefore, could not be long delayed; and the Roman Senate, already itruggling with attacks of their fellow citizens, had an immediate storm to apprehend from the al- lies.
The revolutions of the State had been so fre- quent, and its progress from small beginnings to a great empire, had been so rapid, that the changes to which men are exposed, and the exertions of which they are capable, no where appear so con- fpicuous, or are Co diftindly marked.
In the firit ages the political importance of a Roman citizen appears not to have been felt or un- derllood. Conquered enemies were removed to Rome, and their captivity confifled in being forced to be Romans, to which they submitted with great relucance. It is not to be doubted that every so- reigner was welcome to take his place as a Roman citizen in the assembly of the People; that many were admitted into the Senate (a), and some even (a) The Claudian family were aliens, and an alien from Tarquinii.
on
B o o K on the throne (b). It is likely alfb, that the firfl
colonies confidered themselves as detached from the city of Rome, and as forming cantons apart; for we find them, like the other States of Italy, occasionally at war with the Romans.
But when the sovereignty of Italy came to be established at Rome, and was there actually exer- cifed by the collective body ot the People, the in- habitants of the colonies, it is probable, laid claim to their votes in elections, and presented themselves to be inrolled in the Tribes. They felt their con- sequence and their superiority over the' Municipia, or free towns in their neighbourhood, to whom, as a mark of distinction and an adt of munificence, some remains of independence had been left. Even in this state, the rolls of the People had been very negligently compiled, or preserved. The Kings, the Consuls, the Censors, who were the officers, in different agesof the State, entrufled with the muf- ters, admitted on the rolls such as presented them- selves, or such as they chose to receive. One Con- ful invited all the free inhabitants of Latium to poll in the assemblies of the People; another rejeced them, and in time of ele&ions forbid them the city. But notwithitanding this prohibition, aliens that were brought to Rome on a foot of captivity, were suffered by degrees to mix with the citizens (c). The inhabitants of the free towns, removing to Rome upon any creditable footing, found easy admission on the rolls of some tribe. The towns complained they were depopulated. The Romans endeavoured to shut the-gates of their city by re- peated fcrutinies, and the prohibition of furreptiti- ous enrolments: but in vain. The practice still continued, and the growing privilege, diflintion, and eminence of a Roman citizen made that title (&) Tarquinins Prifcus was of Creek extration. (r} This happened particularly in the cafe of the Campanians.
become
become the great objet of individuals, and of en-c H A p. tire cantons. It had already been beflowed upon difiriAs whose inhabitants were not distinguished by any lingular merit with the Roman State. In this refpea all the allies were nearly equal; they had regularly composed at leaf one half in every Roman army, and had borne an equal lhare in.all the dangers and troubles of the commonwealth; and, from having valued themselves of old on their separate titles and national diftinftions, they began now to aspire to a Ihare in the sovereignty of the empire, and wished to fink for ever their provincial designations under the general title of Romans.
Not only the great power that was enjoyed in the assembly of the People, and the serious privileges that were bestowed by the Porcian law, but even the title of citizen in Italy, of legionary soldier in the field, and the permission of wearing the Roman gown, were now ardently coveted as marks of dig- nity and honour. The city was frequented by persons who hoped separately to be admitted in the Tribes, and by numbers who crowded from the neighbouring cantons, on every remarkable day of assembly, still flattering themselves, that the expec- tations which Gracchus had raised on this important subjet might soon be fulfilled.
In this Itate of affairs, the Senate authorized Ju-u. c. 627-
. Consuls- M. nius Pennus, one of the Tribunes, to move theEm'iliusL- People for an edit to prohibit, on days of eledi-idus, L. oa or public assembly, this concourse of aliens, orue. and requiring all the country towns in Italy to lay claim to their denizens, who had left their own corporations to act the part of citizens at Rome.
On this occasion, Caius Gracchus, the brother of the late unfortunate Tribune, flood forth, and made one of the first appearances, in which he fhbwed the extent of his talents, as well as the party he
was
B o o :was likely to espouse in the commonwealth. This
u." young man, being about twenty years of age when
the troubles raised by his elder brother had so much difiurbed the republic, and when they ended so fatally for himself, had retired upon that cataf- trophe from the public view, and made it uncertain whether the fate of Tiberius might not deter him, not only from embracing like dangerous counsels, but even from entering at all on the line of political affairs. His retirement, however, he spent in such iiudies as were then come into repute, on account of their importance, as a preparation for the bufi- ness of the courts of justice, of the Senate, and of the popular assemblies; and the first appearance he made gave evidence of the talents he had acquired for these several departments. His parts seemed to be quicker, and his spirit more ardent, than that of his elder brother; and the people conceived hopes of having their pretensions revived, and more fuc- cefsfully conduced, than under their former leader. The cause of the country towns, in which he now engaged, was specious, and tended to form a new, a numerous, and a formidable party in Italy, likely to join in every factious attempt which might throw the public into disorder, and make way for the pro- mifcuous admission of aliens on the rolls of the Peo- ple. This cause, however, was fraught with so much confusion to the State, and tended so much to lessen the political consequence of those who were already citizens, that the argument in favour of the resolution to purge the city of aliens prevailed, ar'd an adt to that purpose accordingly was paifed (d) in the assembly of the People.
It deserves to be recorded, that amidst the in- quiries set on foot in consequence of this edid, or about this time, Perperna, the father of a late (d) Sextns Porpeinus Fef'us in voc Republica. Cicero in Bruto ia Of- Eciis lib. iii.
Consul,
Consul (e), was claimed by one of the Italian cor-c H A p. porations, and found not to have been a citizen of ". Rome. His son, whom we have already menti - oned, having vanquished -and taken Ariftonicus, the pretended heir of Attalus, died in his com- mand at Pergamus; and he is accordingly said to have been a rare example of the caprice of fortune, in having been a Roman Consul, though not a Ro- man citizen. This example may confirm what has been observed of the latitude which officers took in condueting the Census.
The fires of sedition which had sometime preyedu. c. 6es. on the commonwealth were likely to break outM. Ph,"- with encreafing force upon the promotion of Ful-M. Fulius vius Flaccus to the dignity of first magifirate.Fla'cu'- This faEtious citizen had blown up the flame with Tiberius Gracchus, and having succeeded him in the commiflion for executing the Agrarian law, never failed to carry the torch wherever matter of inflammation or general combustion could be found. By his merit with the popular party he had attained his present eminence, and was deter- mined to prelerve it by continuing his services. He Legre Ful. began the funcions of his office by proposing a law "v' to communicate the right of citizens to the allies or free inhabitants of Italy ; a measure which tended to weaken the power of the Senate, and to encreafe the number of citizens greatly beyond what could be assembled in one collective body. Having failed in this attempt, he substituted a proposal in appearance more moderate, but equally dangerous, That whoever claimed the right of citizen, in cafe of being cast by the Censors, who were thie pro- per judges, might appeal to the People (f). This would have conferred the power of naturalization on the popular leaders; and the danger of such
(e) Valerius Maximus, lib. iii. c, 4. Ls) Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. I.
a measure
B o K a measure called upon the Senate to exert its
" authority and influence in having this motion also
rejected.
When the Consul appeared to be fairly entered on his career, and, by uniting the power of the fu- preme magiltracy with that of a commissioner for dividing the property of lands, was likely to break through all the forms which had hitherto retarded the execution of the Agrarian law, he was with difficulty persuaded to assemble the Senate, and to take his place. The whole body joined in repre- fentations against these dangerous measures, and in a request that he would withdraw his motions. To there applications he made no reply (g); but an occasion soon offered, by which the Senate was en- abled to divert him from his purpose. A deputa- tion arrived from Marseilles, then in alliance with Rome, to intreat the support of the republic against the Salyii, a neighbouring nation, who had invaded their territories. The Senate gladly embraced this opportunity to find a foreign employment for the Consul, decreed a speedy aid to the city of Mar- feilles, and appointed M. Fuivius Flaccus to that service. Although this incident marred or inter- rupted for the present his political designs, yet he was induced, by the hopes of a triumph, to accept of the command which offered, and, by his ab- fence, to relieve the city for a while from the alarms which he had given. Caius Gracchus too was gone in the capacity of Proquaxftor to Sardi- nia; and the Senate, if they could by any preteu- ces have kept those unquiet spirits at a distance, had iloes of restoring the former order of the common- wealth.
In this interval some laws are said to have passed respecting the office and conduct of the Censors. The particulars are not mentioned; but the objEt
V. Mx. b.. c. probably
probably
probably was, to render the magifirate more cir-c H A p. cumfpe& in the admission of those who claimed to l. be numbered as citizens. Such was likely to be'- the policy of the Senate, in the absence of dema- gogues, who, by proposing to admit the allies on the rolls of the People, had awakened dangerous pretensions in every corner of Italy. It soon ap- peared how seriously there pretensions were adopted by the country towns; for the inhabitants already befiirred themselves, and were beginning to devise how they might extort by force what they were not likely to obtain with consent of the original de- nizens of Rome. A suspicion having arisen of such treasonable concerts forming at Fregelle, the Pretor Opimius had a special commiflion to inquire into the matter, and to proceed as he should find the occasion required. Having filmmoned the chief magifirate of the place to appear before him, he received, upon a promise of doing no violence to his person, full information of the combinations that had been forming against the government of Rome. So inftruted, he assembled such a force as was necessary to support him in asserting the au- thority of the State; and thinking it necessary to give a firiking example in a matter of so dangerous and infetious a nature, he ordered the place to be razed to the ground (h).
By this act of severity, the designs of the alliesu. c. 629. were for a while suspended, and might have beenc .IrSU entirely suppressed, if the fations at Rome hadc.setis not given them fresh encouragement and hopes ofcvi""U-' success or impunity. This tranfation was scarcely pail, when Caius Gracchus appeared in the city to lolicit the office of Tribune; and, by his pretence, revived the hopes of the allies. Having observed, that the Proconsul Aurelius Cotta, under whom he (/) Liv. lib. Ix. Velleius Obfcquens. Cic. lib. ii. De Invention:; 1c 'Finibuc, v. Ibid. thctorius, lib. iv.
served
n o o I fenred as Proquefior in Sardinia, inflead of being
IL recalled, was continued in his command, and fur-
nilhed with reinforcements and supplies of every fort as for a service of long duration ; and fufpet- ing, that this measure was pointed at himself, and proceeded from a design to keep him at a diflance from the popular assemblies, he quitted his fiation in Sardinia, and returned without leave. He was called to account by the Censors for deserting his duty ; but defended himself with such ability and force, as greatly railed the expetations which had already been entertained by his party (i).
The law, he laid, required him only to carry arms ten years, he had actually carried them twelve years; although he might legally have quit- ted his station of Qa.ftor at the expiration of one year, yet he had remained in it three years. How- ever willing the Censors may have been to remove this pelt from the commonwealth, they were too weak to attempt any censure in this slate of his caule, and in the present humour of the People. They endeavoured, inSvain, to load him with a share in the plot of Fregella; he fill exculpated himself: and, if he had poifeifed every virtue of a citizen, in proportion to his resolution, application, eloquence, and even severity of manners, he might have been a powerful fipport to the State. In a ipeech to the People, on his return from Sardinia, he concluded with the following remarkable words: " The purse which I carried full to the province, ' I have brought empty back. Others empty the
wine casks which they carry from Italy, and bring " them from the provinces replenished with silver " and gold (k)."
In declaring himself a candidate for the office of Tribune, Caius Gracchus professed his intention to
(i) Fuiarch. in C. C-racco. (,) A. GciliuS, lib. xv. c. 12.
propose
propose many popular laws. The Senate exertedc H A P. all their influence to difappoiit his views; but such ,, were the exeftations of the popular party through- out all Italy', thlatr they rodwded to the election in greater numbers than could find place in-the pub- lic square. They handed and reached out their ballots at the wiridows a'nd over the battlements; and Gracchus, though eleted, -was, in confe- quence of the opposition given to him, only fourth in the lift ().
Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, who, ever since the death of her son Tiberius, lived in re- tirement in Campania, upon hearing of the career which her son, Caius, was likely to run, alarmed at the renewal of a scene which had already occa- sioned her so much sorrow, expoilulated with him on the course he was taking; and, in an unaffected and paflionate address, spoke that ardent zeal for the republic, by which the citizens of Rome had been long distinguished. This high-minded woman, on whom the entire care of her family had devolved by the death of her husband, whilst the children were yet in their infancy, or under age, took care, with unusual at- tention, to have them educated for the rank they were to hold in the State, and did not fail even to excite their ambition. When Tiberius, after the dilfrace of Mancinus, appeared to withdraw from the road of preferments and honours, " How long," she said, ""'shall I be diitinguihed as the mother- " in law of Scipio, not as the mother of the Grac- " chi.?" This latter diflintion, however, she came to potfefs; and it has remained with her name, but from circumstances and events which this refpeta- ble personage by no means appeared to desire. In one fragment of her letters to Caius, which is flill preserved, '" You will tell me," she said, "that it
(I) Plutarch, Appian, OrofitF, Eutrop. Obfequens. VOL. I. Z " is '
B OO E." is glorious to be revenged of our enemies. No
". " one thinks so more than I, if we can be re. ^ '--." venged without hurt to the.republic; but if not,
" often may our enemies escape. Long may they "be safe, if the good of the commonwealth re. " quires their safety.'" In another letter, which appears to be written after his intention of suing for the Tribunate was declared, she accoits him to the following purpose: " I take the Gods to wit- " nets, that except the persons who killed my son " Tiberius, no one ever gave me so much afflic- " tion as you do in this matter. You, from whom " I might have expedted some consolation in my " age, and who, surely, of all my children, ought ' to be most careful not to distress me! I have not " many years to live. Spare the republic so long " for my fake. Shall I never fee the madness of "my family at an end ? When I am dead, you " will think to honour me with a parent's rites; " but what honour can my memory receive from " you, by whom I am abandoned and dishonour- " ed while I live ? But, may the Gods forbid you
should persist! if you do, I fear the course you " are taking leads to remorse and difRrafion, which " will end only with your life (mn)."
These remonfirances do not appear to have had any effect. Caius, upon his accession to the Tri- bunate, proceeded to fulfil the expectations of his L-- sm- party. The Agrarian law, though fiill in force, p-onia 2gs-had met with continued interruption and delay in ra.' the execution. It was even falling into neglect.
Caius thought proper, as the firfi aa of his ma- giftracy, to move a renewal and confirmation of it, with express injunctions, that there should be an annual distribution of land to the poorer citizens (n). (a) Fzagment Corn. Nepiois ab Andrea Scotto collean, edita Cum fcriptis Coin Nepotirs ( .) L::. ib. Ix. Vcilciuc, 1ib. i'. Hyginus de Limitibus. Appian,
d_ - V:.~ '!:~rlLr. To
To this he subjoined, in the first year of his office, c H A P. a variety of regulations tending either to increase "'* his popularity, or to diflinguifh his adminiflration.u'" ' Upon his motion, public granaries were ereaed,Lex fru. and a law was made, that the corn should be iffuedentaria. from thence monthly to the People, two parts in twelve under the prime or original cost (o).
This at gave a check to industry, which is the best guardian of manners in populous cities, or wherever multitudes of men are crowded toge- ther.
Caius likewise obtained a decree, by which the estates of Attalus, king of Pergamus, lately be- queathed to the Romans, should be let in the manner of other lands under the infpetion of the Censors; but the rents, initead of being made part of the public revenue, should be allotted for the maintenance of the poorer citizens (p). Another, by which any person deposed from an an office of magistracy by the People, was to be deemed for ever disqualified to serve the republic in any other capacity (q). This ad was intended to operate against O&avius, who by the influence of Tiberius, had been degraded from the office of Tribune; and the act took its title from the name of the person against whom it was framed.
An aA to regulate the conditions of the military service (r), by which no one was obliged to enter before seventeen years of age, and by which Ro- man soldiers were to receive cloathing as well as pay (s); possibly the first introdution of a uniform into the Roman Legions; a circumstance which, in modern times, is thought so essential to the cha- rater of troops, and the appearance of an army. (C) Semife & tricenti, for a halfand a third, &c.Liv. Plutarch.Appian. ibid. (p) Florus, lib. iii. c. xi . Ciccr. in Verrcm. (q) Privilegium in Octavium. (r) De militun commodis. (I) Plutarch in C. Graccho.-Lex Scmpronia de libcrtate civium.
Z 2 By
B o - By the celebrated law of Porcius, which allowed
I. of an appeal to the People, every citizen had a '' remedy against any oppressive sentence or pro-
ceeding of the executive magifirate; but this did not appear to Gracchus a sufficient refiraint on the officers of State. He proposed to have it enated, that no person, under pain of a capital punishment, should at all proceed against a citizen without a special commiflion or warrant from the People to that effect. And he proposed to give this law a retrofpet, in order to comprehend Popilius La- nas(t), who being Consul in the. year after the troubles occasioned by Tiberius Gracchus, had, under the authority of the Senate alone, proceeded to try and condemn such as were accessary to that sedition. Lanas perceived the form that was ga- thering againfit him, and chose to avoid it by a voluntary exile. This aft was indeed almost an entire abolition of government, and a bar to the exercise of such ordinary powers as were necefary to the peace of the commonwealth. A popular faction could withhold every power, which, in their apprehension, might be employed againfi them- selves; and in their molt pernicious designs had no interruption to fear from the Didator nam- ed by the Senate and Consuls, nor from the Consul armed with the authority of the Senate for the suppression ofdiforders; a resource to which the republic had frequently owed its preservation. As we find no change in the proceedings of the State upon this new regulation, it is probable that the absurdity of the law prevented its effe&t.
While Gracchus thus proposed to make all the powers of the State depend for their exittence on the occasional will of the People, he meant to ren- der the afeemblies of the People themselves more democratical by firipping the higher classes of the
(.) Ciccr. in Cluentio; pro Rlbino; pro domo fua.
prerogative
prerogative, precedence, or influence they pof-c H A p. sessed, in leading the publicdecifions. The Centu- "' ries being hitherto called to vote in the order of their ^v classes, those of the first or highest class, by voting firlf, set an example which was often followed by the whole (i). By the statute of Gracchus, the Centuries were required, in every queflion, to draw lots for the prerogative, and gave their votes in the order they had drawn.
Under this active Tribune, much public bufi- ness, that used to pass through the Senate, was engrossed by the popular assemblies. Even in the form of there assemblies, all appearance of refpeat to the Senate was laid aside. The Rofira, or plat- form on which the presiding magifRrate flood, was placed in the middle of an area, of which one part was the market-place, surrounded with falls and booths for merchandize, and the courts of jutlice; the other part, called the Comitium, was open to receive the People in their public atfemblies; and on one fide of it, fronting the Rotfra, or bench of the magistrates, flood the Curia, or Senate-houfe. The People, when any one was speaking, flood partly in the market-place, and partly in the Co- mitium. The speakers directed their voice to the Comitium, so as to be heard in the Senate. This disposition, Gracchus reverted, and-directing his voice to the Forum, or market-place, seemed to displace the Senate, and deprive that body of their office as watchmen and guardians of the public order in matters that came before the popular as- fernblies (w).
At the time that the Tribune Caius Gracchus engaged the minds of his contemporaries, and fur- nifhed history chiefly with there effects of his facti- ous and turbulent spirit, it is observed, that he (u) The firlt Century was called the Prerogativa. (w) M. Varro d: Re Rullica, lib. i. c. z. Cic. de Amicitia. Plutarch. in Vit. Caii G;acchi.
himself
B o o K himself executed works of general utility; bridges,
n. highways, and other public accommodations '-- throughout Italy. And that the State having car-
ried its arms, for the first time, over the Alps, hap- pily terminated the war with the Salyii, a nation of Gaul, whose territory became the first province of Rome in that country. And that Caius Sextius, Consul of the preceding year, was authorised to place a colony in the neighbourhood of the hot springs, which, from his name, were called the Aqua Sextim, and are tiill known by a corruption of the fame appellation (x).
From Asia, at the fame time, it was reported, that Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, and ally of the Romans, was murdered, at the intfigation of Mithridates, king of Pontus, whose fifier he had married; that he had left a son for whom Mithri- dates affeced to secure the kingdom; but that the widowed queen having fallen into the hands of Ni- comedes, king of Bythinia, this prince, in her right, had taken poffeflion of Cappadocia, while Mithridates, in name of his nephew, was hastening to remove him from thence. On this fubje& a re- solution was declared in the assembly of the People at Rome, that both Nicomedes and Mithridates should be required immediately to evacuate Cap- padocia, and to withdraw their troops. This refo- lution Caius Gracchus opposed with all his elo- quence and his credit, charging his antagonists aloud with corruption, and a clandestine corre- fpondence with the agents, who, on different fides, were now employed at Rome in soliciting this as- fair. " None of us," he said, " sand forth in this " place for nothing. Even I, who desire you to ' put money in your own coffers, and to consult : the interest of the State, mean to be paid, not ; wiith money indeed, but with your favour and
(x) At Aix, in Prorence.
"a good
a good name. Tlhey who oppose this. resolution c H A P. likewirfecovet, not honours from you, but mo- I '' n:1 from' Nicomnedes; and'they who support it," "expet'to 'be paid by'Mithridates, not by you. "As'for those wHo are'filent, they, I believe, un- " deritand the market best of all. They have ' heard the fory 'of the poet. who'being vain that ' he'had got a great fiin of money for rehearsing 'a tragedy, was'told:by another, that it was not ' woriderful' he. had got 'o inuch for talking, " when I:';faid' the theher, 'who it seems knew
more('than' he was wifhed'to declare, have got "ten, fimnes as much for' holding my tongue. ': Tere'is- rothing that a king will buy at so great " a ptice,; on occasion, as filerlce (y).
Such', at'tirhes, was the style, in which this po- pular 'oratir chose 'to address his audience. Indi- viduals are won by flattery, the multitude by bus- fooneiry-? tiid.atire. From the tendency of this ifeech, it 'appears to have been the opinion of Gracchtis, .not that the Romans should sequester the Rirdidom of Cappadocia for the heirs of Ariara- thes,:'but'that' they should seize it for themselves. The''qiefti6n, however, which now arose relating to the'fiuceflion to this kingdom, laid the founda- tion of :a tedious and bloody war, of which the operations and events will occur 'in their place.'
Gracchus, on the approach of the election of u. c. 69. Consuls, eiployed all his credit and influence to C )on,;ij' support Caius' Fannius, in opposition to Opimius, ntiAlcino- who, 'by-his':vigilance and' activity in fipprefling b'rbl". the treasonable designs of -the allies at Fregellae, had incurred the displeasure of the popular party; and Fanniiius'being accordingly chosen, together with Cn.' Domitius Ahenobarbus, Gracchus pro- ceeded to' offer:' himself as a candidate to be re-
(y) A. Gellius, lib. ii. c. Ic.
eleAed
B O O K elected into the office of. Tribune. In. this he .fol-
, _ lowed the example of his brother Tiberius in a:flep,
which, being reckoned illegal as well as alarming, was that which hastened his ruin. An attempt'had been since made by Papirius Carbo to have.the le- gality of such re-elections acknowvledged 5,but this having failed, Caius Gracchus, with:greatiaddrefs, inserted in one of his popular edicts, a clause de- claring it competent for the People t. re-elet .a Tribune, in cafe he should need a contiiuatioin of his power in order to fulfil his public engagemnents. To avail himself of this clause, he 'r..i declared, that his views in behalf of the People were ,farfrom being accomplished. Under this pretenej.ie ob- tained a preference to one of the new candidates, and greatly strengthened the tribunitian power by the prospect of its repeated renewals, and..duration for an indefinite time. ".-. i.- sera Upon his re-election, Caius, continuing'his ad- '?-'.~ ministration upon the fame plan of animosity to
the Senate, obtained a law to deprive that body of the share which his brother had left them-in tlie courts of justice; and ordaining, that the judges, for the future, should be draughted from .the Equefirian order alone, a class of men, who.being left out of the Senate, and of course not compre- hended in the laws that prohibited commerce, had betaken themselves, as has been observed (z), to lucrative professions, were the farmers of the reve- nue, the contrators for the army, and,, in general, the merchants who conducted the whole trade of the republic. Though they might be confidered as neutral in the diiputes of the Senate and. People, and therefore impartial where the other orders were biassed, there was no class of men more likely to prostitute the character of judges for interest or adual hire. This revolution in the courts of jus-
(z) Page 295.
tice
tice .accordingly.may have contributed greatly toc H A p. hasen. the approaching corruption of manners, and " the disorders of the government.
The next ordinance prepared by Gracchus, orLexdel'ro- ascribed to him, related to the nomination of offi-'"ordi- cers to gbvern-the provinces, and, if it had been llrit.ly observed, might have made rome compen- fation for the former. The power of naming such officers was. committed to the Senate, and the arrangements ye.re to be annually made before the elctionn.bf'Corifutrs.' This continued to be law, but was often'over-/ruled by the People (a).
In the fame year, the boldest and moil danger- ous project that had'ever been formed by any of the popular leaders,..that for admitting the Italian allies upon the'rolls'of the Roman People, already attemptcd by Fulvius Flaccus, was again renewed by Caius Gracchus.; and, upon the utmost exertion of the vigilance and authority of the Senate, with grea'tdifiiulty prevented.
The rumour of this projet having brought mul- titudes to Rome, the Senate thought it neceflary to give;the-Cbnfuls in charge to clear the city, on the day that this important queflion was expeced to come on, of all firangers, and not to fiffer any aliens to remain within four miles of the walls. During the dependence of this queflion, Gracchus flattered the poorer citizens with the profped of advantageous settlements, in certain new colonies, of fix thousand men each, which he proposed to plant in the diflricts of Campania and Tarentum, the molt cultivated parts of Italy, and in colonies, which he. likewise proposed to fend abroad into some of the richefi provinces. Such settlements had been formerly made to occupy and secure re- cent conquest; they were now calculated to serve '(a)Florus, lib. iv. c. 13. Sallust. de Bell. Jugurth. No. 621. Ci- cero de Provineiis Confularibus.
as
o o K as baits to popular favour, and as a provifon, L made by the leaders of faation, for their own
friends and adherents.
The Senate, attacked by such popular arts, re- solved to retort on their adversaries; and for this purpose infiruc&ed Marcus Livius, another of the Tribunes, to take such measures as should, if pof. fible, supplant Gracchus in the favour of the Peo- ple. Livius, profefling to at in concert with the Senate, proposed a number of adts: one to conci- liate the minds of the allies, by giving 'hem, while they served in the arrriy, the fame exemp- tion from corporal punishment, which the Roman citizens had enjoyed. Le.Li;iade Another for the establishment of twelve different T,'uC''ni colonies, each of three thousand citizens. But .o:;i,. what, possibly, had the greatest effect, because it
appeared to exceed in munificence all the edicts of Gracchus, was an exemption of all those lands, which should be distributed in terms of the late Semproniaa Law, from all quit-rents and public burdens, which had hitherto, in general,. been laid on all poffeifions that were held from the Pub- lic (b). It was proposed to name ten commiflion- ers to distribute lands thus unincumbered to the People; and three colonies are mentioned, Sylla- ceum, Tarentum, and Neptunia, as having been acAually ent abroad this year, and probably on these terms. I.-a.i:. About the fame time it was decreed, that the
city of Carthage might be rebuilt for the reception of a colony of fix thousand Roman citizens. This decree bears the name, not of Sempronius or of Livius, but of Rubrius, another Tribune of the fame year.
The Senate readily agreed to the settlement of :hefe colonies, as li.e'y to carry off a number of
f) ?i;tar.-- t :. ^.u 1;. ; M. ajr ^ dl ,l'bu, Rorman's.
the
the more faaious citizens, and to furnish an op- c H A P. portunity likewise of removing from the city, for ',.. some time, the popular leaders themselves, under pretence cf employing them to condu& and to fettle the families destined to form those establish- ments. Accordingly, Caius Gracchus, and Ful- vius Flaccus, late Consul, and now deeply en- gaged in all these factious measures, were dellined to take charge of the new colonifis, and to super- intend their settlement (c).
In the mean time, the Senate, in the election ofU. c 63. Opimius to the Confulihip of the following year,oplmiu, carried an important objeat to the reputation andO- F'b- interest of their party, and conceived hopes of be-Max'u. ing able, by the authority of this magifirate, to combat the designs of Gracchus more effetually than they had hitherto done. He was accordingly retained in the adminifiration of affairs in Italy, while his colleague, Fabius, was appointed to command in Gaul, Caius Gracchus, having the presumption to offer himself a third time candidate for the office of Tribune, was rejected, and had the mortification to find that the authority of the Senate began to prevail; and, as they had credit enough to procure his exclusion from any share in the magifiracy, so they might be able to fruitrate or reverie many of the ats he had obtained in fa- vour of his party.
By the repulse of Gracchus and his associates, the ariftocratical party came to have a majority, even in the college of Tribunes. Questions of le- giflation were now likely to be determined in the assembly of the Centuries; and this circumfiance alone, while the Senate was able to retain it, was equal to an entire revolution of the government. The Centuries, under the leading of an active Consul, were likely to annul former resolutions
(f) Plutarch. Appian. Orofius.
with
s o o . with the fame decision and rapidity with which
- they had been passed. Much violence was ex-
pecked, and the different parties, recollecting what had happened in the cafe of Tiberius Gracchus, took meafires not to be surprised by their antago- nifts; for the most part came to the place of as- fembly in bands, even under arms, and endea- voured to possess the advantage of the ground as in the presence of an enemy.
Minucius, one of the Tribunes, in consequence of a resolution of the Senate, pretending that he was moved by some unfavourable presages, pro- posed a repeal or amendment of some of the late popular acts; and particularly, to change the def- tination of the colony intended for Carthage, to some other place. This motion was strenuously opposed by Fulvius Flaccus, and by Caius Grac- chus, who treated the report of presages from Africa as a mere fiction, and the whole design as proceeding from the inveterate hatred of the No- bles to the People. Before the assembly met, in which this queiion was to be decided, there popu- lar leaders attempted to seize the Capitol, but found themselves prevented by the Consul, who had already, with an armed force, secured that fiation.
In the morning after they had received this dif- appointment, the People being assembled, and the - Consul being employed in offering up the custom- arv sacrifices, Gracchus, with his party, came to their place in the Comitium. One of the attend- ants of the Consul, who was carrying away the entrails of the victim, reproached Gracchus, as he paired, with sedition, and bid him desist from his machinations against the government of the com- monwealth. On this provocation, one of the party of Gracchus firuck the Consul's officer with his dag- ger, and killed him on the spot. The cry of mur- der ran through the multitude, and the assembly
began
began to break up. Gracchus endeavoured toc H A p. speak, but could not be heard for the tumult; and 'l. all thoughts of business were laid aside. The Con- ~' ful immediately summoned the Senate to meet; and having reported what had happened in the Comitium, and what appeared to him the first a& of hoffility in a war, which the popular fation had prepared againfi the State, he received the charge that was usual on perilous occasions, to provide, in the manner which his own prudence should di- re&, for the safety of the commonwealth. Thus authorised, he commanded the Senators and the Knights to arm, and made proper dispositions to secure the principal streets. Being malter of the Capitol and Forum, he adjourned the assembly of the People to the usual place on the following day, and cited the persons accused of the murder to answer for the crime which was laid to their charge.
In consequence of this adjournment, and the Coniul's inftrutions, numbers in arms repaired to the Comitium at the hour of assembly, and were ready to execute such orders as they might receive for the public safety. Gracchus and Fulvius re- futed to answer the citation, and the Capitol being secured against them, they took post, with a nu- merous party in arms, on the Aventine Hill, which was opposite to the Capitol, and from which they equally looked down on the Forum and place of assembly. Being again cited to appear at the Tri- bunal of the Roman people, they sent a young man, one of the sons of Fulvius, to capitulate with the Consul, and to fettle the terms on which they were to surrender themselves. Upon this message they were told, in return, that they muff answer at the bar of the assembly, as criminals, not pre- tend to negotiate with the republic, as equals; that no party, however numerous, was entitled to parley with the People of Rome: and to this an-
fwer
B 0 K fwer the meflenger was forbid, at his peril, to
IL bring any reply. The party, however, still hoped ""to gain time, or to divide their enemies; and they
ventured to employ young Fulvius again to repeat their meTfage. He was seized by the Consul's or- der. Gracchus and Fulvius, with their adherents, were declared public enemies; and a reward was offered to the person who should kill or secure them. They were instantly attacked, and, after a little resistance, forced from their ground. Gracchus fled by the wooden bridge to the oppo- site fide of the river, and was there slain, either by his own hand, or by that of a faithful servant, who had undertaken the talk of saving him in his last extremity from falling into the power of his ene. mies. Fulvius was dragged to execution from a bath where he attempted to conceal himself. The heads of both were carried to the Consul, and ex- changed for the promised reward.
In this fray the party of the Senate, being regu- larly armed and prepared for slaughter, cut off the adherents of Caius Gracchus and Fulvius in great- er numbers than they had done those of Tiberius; they killed about three thousand two hundred and fifty in the streets, and confined great numbers who were afterwards firangled in the prisons. The bodies of the slain, as the law ordained, in the cafe of treason, being denied the forms of a funeral, were cast into the river, and their estates confif- cated (d).
The house of Fulvius was rated to the ground, the area laid open for public uses; and, from these beginnings, it appeared that the Romans, who in the purfnit of their foreign conquefis, had so li- berally ifed the blood of other nations, might be- come equally lavish of their own. (d) Appian. Plutarch. Orofiu, ;b. v. c. i-2. Florns, lib. iii. c. 15. Auaor dc V-iri IlluLaibus, c. 65.
C H A P.
CHAP. IV. State of Order and Tranquillity which followed the
Spprefion of the late Tum2ults.-A-ppearance of Caius Marius.-Fo reign Wlars.-Complaints agairti .jugurtha.-Appearance of the Cimbri.-War with yugurtha.-Camnpaign and Treaty of Pifo.-M-i- gurtha came to Rome with a safe Conducti.-Ob- liged to retire fron thence.--Campaign of Metellus. -Of Marius.--Jugurtha betrayed by Bocchus.- His Death, after the Triumph of Marius.-This General re-eleeed, in order to command again2j the Cimbri. T HE popular party had, in the late tumults,c H A P.
carried their violence to such extremes, as Iv. dilgufted and alarmed every person who had any desire ofdomeftic peace; and in their ill advised re- course to arms, but too well juitified the measures which had been taken againfi them. By this ex- ertion of vigour, the Senate, and ordinary ma- gifirates, recovered their former authority; affairs returned to their usual channel, and the most per- set order seemed to arise from the late confusions. Questions of legislation were allowed to take their rife in the Senate, and were not carried to the Peo- ple, without the sanction of the Senate's authority. The legislative power was exercised in the assembly of the Centuries, and the prohibitory or defensive function of the Tribunes, or representatives of the People, was such, as to prevent the abuses of the executive power in the hands of the ariflocracy, without flopping the proceedings of government, or fubtiituting ademocratical usurpation in its place. Even the judicative power, vested in the Equefirian
order,
B o o K order, promised to have a salutary effec, by keep- I_>_., ing a balance between the different ranks and dif-
tinttions of men in the republic.
The ariflocratical party, notwithstanding the as- cendant they had recently gained, did not attempt to rescind any of the regular inftitutions'of Grac- chus; they were contented with infliting punish. ments on those who had been accessary to the late sedition, and with re-establishing such of the No- bles as had suffered by the violence of the popu- lar faction. Popilius Lanas, driven into exile by one of the edicts of Gracchus, or by the persecution to which it exposed him, was now recalled upon the motion of Calpurnius Pifo,. one of the Tri- bunes (a). u. c. 633. As the state of parties was in rome measure re- Pub~ii. versed, Papirius Carbo thought proper to. withdraw ad c. Pi-from the popular fide; and, by the credit of those o.'; c"rnow in poffefiion of the government, was promot-
ed to the fiation of Consul, and yielded the first fruits of his conversion by defending the cause of his predecessor Opimius, who, at the expiration of his Consulate, was brought to trial for having put Roman citizens to death without the forms of law. Carbo, though himself connected with those who suffered, now pleaded the justice and necessity of the late military executions; and, upon this plea, obtained the acquittal of his client.
This merit on the part of Carbo, however, did not so far cancel his former offences as to prevent his being tried and condemned in the following year, as an accomplice in the sedition of Gracchus. He was supposed to have been accessary to the death of Scipio; and his cause not being warmly espoused by any party, he fell a :sacrifice to the imputation of this heinous crime. It is said, that, upon hearing his sentence, he killed himself (b). (a) Cicero in Bruto. (b) Valerin; Max. lib. iii. c. 7. Cicero in Bru!o.
Otavius
Odavius, one of the Tribunes of the present H A P. year, moved an amendment of the law obtained, i . by Gracchus, refpeEting the distribution of cornLe-oaa. from the public granaries, probably to ease thevi Pm-F treasury in part of that burden; but the particu-mentar"" lars are unknown.
About this time the celebrated Caius Marius be- gan to appear in the public assemblies of the Peo- p!e. He was a person of obscure birth, and rufiic manners, formed amidfl the occupations of a peasant (c), and the hardships of a legionary fol- dier, but of a resolute spirit, and insatiable ambi- tion. He was a native of Arpinum, and without any other apparent title than that of being a deni- son of Rome, laid claim to the honours of the State. He is remarkable for having suffered more repulses in his firfi attempts to be elected into of: fice, and for having succeeded more frequently as- terwards than any other Roman citizen during the existence of the commonwealth. Marius, after being disappointed in his first can- vas for the office of Tribune, succeeded in the following year. The ads which were passed un- der his Tribunate, and which bear his name, do not carry any violent expressions of party-fpirit, nor give intimation of that insatiate ambition with which he afterwards distressed his country; the firftLex Muri related to the condut of elections, and providedde slffra, fime remedy for an evil which was complained of "' in the manner of soliciting votes. The space be- tween the rails, by which the citizens passed to give in their ballots, was so broad as to admit, not only those who came to vote, but the candidates likewise, with their adherents and friends, who came to importune and to overawe the People in the very adt of delivering their votes. Marius pro- posed to put an end to this practice, and to pro-
(r) Juvenal. S2t. viii. Pln. lib. xxxiii. c. II. VOL. I. A a vide
B o O v";de for the entire freedom of the People, by nar-
rowing the entrance, so that only the voters could pals. A party of the Nobles, with Aurelius Cotta the Consul at their head, not knowing with what a resolute spirit they were about to contend, being averse to this reformation, prevailed on the Senate to withhold its authority, without which any regu- lar cquefion on this subjed, could not be put to the People. But Marius, in the character of Tri- bune, threatened the Consul with immediate im- prilonment, if he did not move to recall this vote of the Senate. The matter being re-considered, Lucius Metellus, who was firfi on the Rolls, hav- ing given his voice for affirming the first decree, M\as ordered by Marius into custody; and there being no Tribune to intercede for him, mufi have gone to prison, if the dispute had not-terminated by the majority agreeing to have the matter carried to the People, as Marius proposed, with the Sanc- tion of the Senate's authority.
In another of the ats of Marius the republic was fiil more indebted to his wisdom and courage, in wi.hfianding an attempt of one of his colleagues to flatter the indigent citizens at the expence of the public treasury, by repealing the recent regulation of ('Ctavius, and lowering the terms on which corn was distributed from the granaries. This was an ordinary expedient of Tribunitian faftion. ilarius opposed it as of dangerous consequence. And his conduc in this matter marked him out as one not to be awed by any party, and a person, who, into .hate-ver party he should be admitted, was dcftined tn govern. The times indeed were likel to give more importance to his character as a f1cdier than as a citizen; and in that he was fill if.rther laifd above the malice of those who were incl,: -ed to revile or undervalue what were called his up art pretensions (d).
(d) rlutarch. in Mario
From
From the time that the Romans first passed into c H A P. the Transalpine Gaul, as auxiliaries to the republic IV. of Marseilles, they had kept on foot in that neigh- bourhood a military force; and, by planting colo- nies at convenient flations, shewed their intention of maintaining poffeflions on that fide of the Alps. Betultus, or Betultich, a prince of the country, who was supposed able to raise a force of two hun- dred thousand men, attempted to expel these in- truders, but was defeated, first by the Proconsul Fabius, afterwards by Domitius Ahenobarbus, and furnished these generals with the fubjeQs of their refpcdive triumphs. This prince himself became acaptive to Domitius, and was carried to Rome, where he was led in proceflion, diftingtiilhed by his painted arms and his chariot of silver, the equi- page in which it was said he usually led his army to battle (e).
It appears that the Romans had employed ele-. c. 6;3. phants in the first wars they made in Gaul; for the victory of Domitius is attributed to the effect that was produced by. these animals (f).
Quintus Marcius succeeded Domitius in the' command of the forces which were employed in Gaul, and continued to gain ground on the na- tives, who appeared from different cantons fuccef- fively to resist his arms. He planted a colony at Narbo, to firengthen the frontier of the newly-ac- quired province on one fide; and as the Romans had hitherto always passed by tea into that country, he endeavoured to open a paflage by the Alps, in order to'have a communication by land with Italy on the other. In the'courfe of there operations the Staeni, an Alpine nation that opposed him, were entirely cut off. (e) Velleius Pater. Ainmianus Marcell. lib. xv. fine. Padionus in Vcrrinam Sccundam. Val. Max. lib. v. c. 9. (f) Suetonius in Vita Neronis.
A a 2 About
B o o K About this time the Roman generals obtained
- their triumphs on different quarters, in the Baliares
and in Dalmatia, as well as in Gaul; and the re- public did not meet for some years with an enemy able to resist her power, except on the fide of Thrace and the Danube, where the Proconsul Cato was defeated; and where a refifiance was for some years kept up by the natives.
But of the foreign affairs which occupied the at- tention of the Romans, the most memorable was the contest of pretenders to the crown of Numidia, which, by the death of Micipfa, the son and fuc- ceffor of Massinissa, came to be disposed of about this time. The late king had two sons, Adherbal and Hiempfal. He had likewise adopted Jugur- tha, the natural son of his brother Manaftabal, whom he-had employed at the head of his armies, thinking it safer to gain him by good offices, than to provoke him by a total exclusion from favour. He had formed a proje&, frequent among barba- rous and despotic sovereigns, but always ruinous, to divide his territories; and he hoped that, while he provided for his own sons, he [hould secure to them, from motives of gratitude, the protection and good offices of Jugurtha, whom he admitted to an equal share with them in the partition of his kingdom. The consequences of this mistaken ar- rangement soon appeared in the distractions that followed, and which arose from the ambition of Jugurtha, to make himself malter of the whole. For this purpose he formed a secret design against the lives of both the brothers, of whom the younger, Hiempfal, fell into his snare, and was assassinated. Adherbal, being more cautious, obliged his crafty enemy to declare himself openly, took the field against him, with all the forces he could raise, but was defeated, and obliged to take refuge in the Roman province, and from thence thought proper
to
to pass into Italy, in order to lay his complaints c H A P. before the Senate and People of Rome. I.
Mafliniffa, the grandfather of this injure l prince, had given effe&ual aid to the Romans in their wars with Carthage; and, upon the final reducion of that republic, was rewarded with a considerable part of its spoils. From this time forward the Ro- mans expe&ed, and the king of Numidia paid to them, a deference like that of a vassal or tributary prince to his sovereign lord. Upon the faith of this connection, Adherbal now carried his com- plaints to Rome; and Jugurtha, knowing how ready the Romans were, in the characer of arbi- trators, to confider themselves as the sovereigns of other nations, thought proper to fend deputies on his part, to counteract the representations of his rival.
This crafty adventurer had served under Scipio at the siege of Numantia, where he had an oppor- tunity of observing the manners and discipline of the Romans, and accommodated himself to both. He was equally diffinguifhed by his implicit sub- mifflon to command, as by his impetuous courage, and by the ability of his conduEt in every service. He had even then probably directed his views to the fucceflion of Numidia, and saw of what confe- quence the Romans might prove in deciding his fortunes. He had studied their character, and had already marked out the line he was to follow in conducting his affairs with that People. They ap- peared to be a number of sovereigns assembled together, able in council and formidable in the field; but, in comparison to the Africans in gene- ral, undesigning and simple. With the pride of monarchs they began, he imagined, to feel the in- digence of courtiers, and were to be moved by considerations of interels rather than force. His commissioners were now accordingly furnished with ample presents, and with the means of grati-
fying
B o o lfying the principal persons at Rome in a manner ,-- -that was suited to their refpec'ive ranks and to their
influence in the commonwealth.
In the choice of this plan Jugurtha, like moit po- liticians that refine too much, had formed a system with great ingenuity, and spoke of it with a fpe- c:ous wit; but had not taken into his account the whole circumstances of the cafe in which he en- gaged. Rome, he supposed, was a city to be fold. He forgot that, though many Romans could be bought, no treasure was sufficient to buy the repub- lic; that to buy a few, made it necessary for him to buy many more; that as he raised expectations, the number of expeaants increased without limit; that the more he gave, the more he was fiill ex- pected to give; that in a state which was broke in- to parties, if he gained one by his gifts, that alone was fuiffcient to rouse the other againit him. And accordingly, after lavishing his money to influ- ence the councils of Rome, he was obliged to have recourse to arms at last, and to contend with the forces of the republic, after he had ex- haufted his treaflire in attempting to corrupt her virtue.
Although Jugurtha had many partizans at Rome, such was the injustice of his cause, or the suspicion of corruption in those who espoused it, that they durst not openly avow their wishes. They endea- voured to suspend the resolutions which were in agitation againfi him, and had the matter referred to ten commiflioners who should go into Africa, and in presence of the parties fettle the differences which fhbfiiied between them. There indeed he practised his art on the Roman commiflioners with better fiucees than he had experienced with the Se- nate and People. He prevailed upon them to di- vide the kingdom, and to favour him in the lot wvhich should be afligned to himself: knowing that force must ultimately decide every controversy
which
which should arise on the fubjeit, he made choice,c H A p. not of the richest, but of the most warlike division; Iv. and indeed had already determined that, as soon as the Romans left Africa, he should make an end of the contest by the death of Adherbal ; trufiing that, by continuing to use the specific which it was said he had already applied, he might prevail on the Romans to overlook what they would not, on a pre- vious request, have permitted.
He accordingly, soon after the departure of the Roman commiflioners, marched into the territories of Adherbal, shut him up in the town of Cir:a; and, while the Romans sent him repeated nmeilages to defif, fill continued the blockade, until the mcr- cenaries of Adherbal, tired of the hardships they were made to endure, advised, and, by their ap- pearing ready to dci'ert, forced him to commit him- ftlf to the mercy of Jugurtha, by whom he was im- mediately put to death.
By these events, in about seven years from the death of Micipfa, Jugurtha had attained to the ob- ject of his highest desires; but the arts which pro- cured him a crown, likewise rendered his slate in- secure. He was disappointed in his expectation to pacify the Romans. The money he dealt went in- tothe coffers only of a few, but his cimes roured the indignation of the whole People. PraEtifed fatefmen or politicians are seldom routed by mere feelings of indignation on the subjel of private wrongs. They have, or pretend to have, reasons of slate to suppress the consideration of individuals. The greater part of the Roman Senate according- ly, whether acting on maxims of policy, or won by the presents of Jugurtha, received the complaints which were lodged against him with indifference; but the aflembly of the People, moved by the cries of perfidy and murder which were railed by the Tribunes, received the representations of his con- duct with indignation and rage. These pafiions
were
B 0 0 K were inflamed by opposition to the Nobles, who
were supposed to favour the murderer. Neither the most deliberate Statesman nor the most deter- mined partizan of Jugurtha durfl appear in his cause, nor propose to decline a war with that prince, although it was likely to be attended with considerable difficulties; and was to be under- taken at a time when a cloud hung over Italy on the fide of Gaul, a quarter from which the Romans always expe&ed, and often experienced, the mofi terrible fiorms. u. c 640. About the time that Adherbal laid his complaints
against J-gurtha before the Senate of Rome, a new enemy had appeared. The north of Europe, or of Asia, had cast off a swarm, which, migrating to the south and to the weft, was first descried by the Romans on the frontier of Illyricum, and pre- fently drew their attention to that fide. The horde was said to consist of three hundred thousand fight- ing men, conducting their families of women and children, and covering the plains with their cattle. The Consul Papirius Carbo was ordered to take polt in Illyricum, to observe the motions of this tremen- dous hofl. He was alarmed with their teeming to point towards the diftrid of Aquileia; and putting himself, with too little precaution, in their way, could not withiland their numbers, and was over- whelmed as by a tempest.
This migrating nation the Romans have called by the name of Cimbri, without determining from whence they came. It is said that their cavalry amounted to no more than fifteen thousand; that it was their practice to despise horses, as well as the other spoils of their enemies, which they generally de-lroyed: and from this circumstance it may be argued, that they were not of Scythian extraction, nor sprung from those mighty plains in the northern parts of Asia, where military force has from time immemorial confifed of cavalry, where horses
were
were valded above every other species of acquifiti- c H A P. on or property; and that they must have been bred '_, amongst mountains and woods, where tlis animal is not equally useful. On their helmets, which were cretted with pluines of feathers, they carried the gaping jaws of wild bealts. On their bodies they wore breaft-lates of iron, had shields painted of a corifpicuous colour; and carried two misfile javelins or darts, and a heavy sword. They col- le&ed their fighting men, for the most part, into a solid square, equally extending every way: in one of their battles it was reported that the fides of this square extended thirty fiadia, or between three and four miles. The men of the foremost ranks were fastened together with chains locked to their girdles, which made them impenetrable to every attack, and gave them the force of a torrent, in sweeping obflrutions before them. Such were the accounts with which the Romans were alarmed on the ap- proach of this tremendous enemy.
Although, by the defeat of Carbo, Italy lay open to their devastations, yet they turned away to the north and the westward, and keeping the Alps on their left, made their appearance again on the frontier of the Roman province in Narbonne Gaul, and from thence passed into Spain, where they continued to alarm Roman settlements and kept Rome itself in fufpence, by the uncertainty of the trad they might afterwards choose to pursue.
Such was the fiate of affairs, when the popularu. c. 64. cry and generous indignation of the Roman Peo-luscpio pie forced the State into a war with Jugurtha. Nafc. The Consul Pifo was appointed to command in,,i"L, 1C'r Numidia. The necessary levies and supplies forRBl'"a. this service were ordered, and Jugurtha could no longer doubt that the force of the Roman republic was to be employed against him; yet, in hopes to avert the storm, he sent his son, with two proper
affitlants,
- o o K afifiants, in the quality of ambassadors to Rome,
n chiefly trufling to the arts of insinuation he had ' hitherto practised, and to the distribution of pre-
sents and of money. Their arrival being reported to the Senate, a resolution of this body passed, that, unless they brought an offer from Jugurtha to surrender his person and his kingdom at difcre- tion, they should be required in ten days to depart from Italv.
This answer being delivered to the son of Ju- gurtha, he rre'ently withdrew, and was followed by . lora-an army, which was prepared to embark for Afi-ica. The war was conduAed at first with g::.t vivacity and success: but Jugurtha, by of- fc:;ng great public cencefiions or private gratifi- c.-:ons, prevai-ed on the Consul to negotiate. It was ailcec, that, upon receiving a proper hoflage on thc part of the Romans, the king himself mhould repair to thdr camp, in order to conclude the trea- ty. in the articles that were made public, the king agreed to firrender himself at discretion, and to pay a large contribution in horses, corn, ele- phants, and money ; but in secret articles, which were drawn up at the fame time, the Consul en- gaged that the person of the king should be safe, and that the kingdom of Numidia mhould be le- cured to him.
During there tranfations the time of the expira- tion of Pifo's command drew near, and he himself vas called into Italy to preside at the approaching election. His report of the treaty with Jugurtha was received with suspicion, and the cry of corrup- tion resumed by the popular party. " Where is " this captive ?" said the Tribune Memmius; " if " he have surrendered himself, he will obey your "commands ; fend for him; queflion him in re- " spect to what is pall. If he refutes to come, we " fhal! know what to think of a treaty which brings " impunity to Jugurtha, princely fortunes to a few
,, private
: private persons, ruin and infamy to the Roman c H A P. " republic." Upon this motion the Prxetor Caflius V. Longinus, a person of approved merit and un- shaken integrity, was hastened into Africa, with positive inftrutions to bring the king of Numidia to Rome. By the fafe-conduEt which Callits brought on the part of the republic, and by his own assurances of protection, Jugurtha was pre- vailed on to commit himself to the faith of the Ro- mans. He laid aside his kingly fiate and atten- dants, set out for Italy, and determined to appear as a suppliant at Rome. Upon his arrival, being called into the public aflembly, Memmius pro- pnfed to interrogate him on the libjedt of his liip- poled secret tranfaCion with certain members of the Senate; bhit here Bebius, another of the Tri- bunes, iuterpoild his negative; and, notwithliand- ing that the People exclaimed, and even menaced, this Tribune perlifled. And before this bar to the larther examination of Jugurtha could be removed, an incident took place, which occasioned his iudden departure from Italy.
Malliva, the son of Guluffa, being the grandson and natural representative of Mafliniffa, and the only person betides Jugurtha who remained of the royal line of Numidia, had been persuaded by Albinus, the Consul elected for the ensuing year, to state his pretensions before the Roman Senate, and to lay claim to the crown. Jugurtha, though at Rome, and in the power of those who were likely to resent his crimes, gave a specimen of the bold and sanguinary counsels to which he was inclined, employed againfi this competitor the ordinary arts of his court, and had him alaflinated. The crime was traced to its author, but the fafe-conduct he had received could not be violated; and he was only commanded, without delay, to depart from Italy. On this occasion he left Rome with that me-
morable
B O o K morable faying; " Here is a city to be fold, if any
`,i- buyer could be found." U. c. 643. The Consul Albinus soon followed Jugurtha, to 't:. i.- take the command of the Roman army in Africa; oC:I.;; and being eager to perform some notable action lbis" . before the expiration of his year, which was fast
approaching, he urged the king of Numidia, with all the forces he could assemble in the province; but found that he had to do with an enemy who had the art to elude his impetuosity, and from whose apparent conduct no judgment could be formed of his real designs. This artful warrior often advanced with a teeming intention to hazard a battle, when he was most resolved to decline it; or he precipitantly fled, when he meant to return upon his enemy, and take advantage of any difor- der he might incur in a too eager pursuit. His of- sers of fubmiflion, or his threats, were equally fal- lacious; and he used, perhaps in common with other African .princes, means to mislead his enemy, which Europeans, antient as well as modern, have in general condemned. He made solemn capitu- lations and treaties with a view to break them, and confidered breach of faith, like a feint or an am- bush, as a stratagem licenced in war. The Euro- peans have always termed it perfidy to break the faith of a treaty, the Africans held it flupidity to be caught in the snare.
By the artifices of Jugurtha accordingly, or by the remiflnefs of his antagoniit, the war was pro- traEed for another year, and the Consul, as the time of the election drew near, was recalled, as ufil- al, to preside in the choice of his successor. At his arrival the city was in great agitation. The cry of corruption, which had been raised against many of the Nobles, on account of their supposed corref- pondence with jugurtha, gave an advantage to the popular party, and they determined to improve it, by raifir.g profect':ions to the rin of persons, either
odiouti
odious to the People, or obnoxious to the Equefiri-c H A P. an order, who then had the power of judicature in a_ their hands(g). Three inquisitors were accord- ingly named by special commiflion to take cogni- zance of all complaints of corruption that (hould be brought before them; and this commifion was inflantly employed to harass the Nobility, and to revenge the blood which had been shed in the late popular tumults. Lucius Calpurnius, Pifo, Befiia, C. Cato, Spurius Albinus, and L. Opimius, all of consular dignity, fell a sacrifice on this occasion to the popular resentment. The Tribune Mamilius, upon whose motion this tribunal had been ereted, with his associates, apprehending that, upon the ex- piration of their trust, the heat of the prosecutions might abate, moved the People that they might be continued in their office; and, upon finding them- selves opposed by the influence of the Senate and all the ordinary powers of the State, they suspend- ed, by virtue of their tribunitian power, the election of Consuls, and for a whole year kept the republic in a state of absolute anarchy.
In this interval Aulus Albinus, left by his bro- ther, the late Consul, in the command of the army in Africa, determined to improve the occasion by some honourable a&ion. He left his quarters in the winter, and marched far into the country, hop- ing that by force or furprize he might possess him- self of the Numidian treasures or magazines. Ju- gurtha encouraged him in this design, affected fear, retired with precipitation wherever the Romans presented themselves; and, to encreafe the pre- fumption of their general, rent frequent meflages to implore his pity. He at the fame time endea- voured to open a correspondence with the Thraci- ans and other foreigners, then serving in the Roman camp. Some of these he corrupted; and, when he
k() Cicero de Clir; Oratribus. Saluit. in Bell. Jugurth.
had
B o o xhad drawn the Roman army into difficult situations,
. and prepared his plan for execution, he suddenly
advanced in the night to the Roman station; and the avenues being entrufied, as he expected, to the Thracians and Ligurians whom he had corrupted, and by whom he was suffered to pass, he fur- prifed the Romans in. their camp, and drove them from thence in great confusion to a neigh- bouring height, where they enjoyed, during night, some retpite from the enemy; but without any re- source for fibfifence, or hopes of recovering their baggage.
In the morning jugurtha desired to confer with the Praetor; and representing how much the Ro- mans, firipped of their provision and equipage, were then in his power, made a merit of offering them quarter,on condition that they would concludeatrea- ty of peace, and in ten days evacuate his kingdom.
These terms were accordingly accepted: but the capitulation, when krfown at Rome, gave occa- sion to much indignation and clamour. It was voted by the Senate not to be binding, and the Consul Albinus, in order to repair the loss of the Public, and to restore the credit of his own family, made hasty levies, v.ith wlhich he proposed to renew the v-ar in Numidia. But not having the consent of the Tribunes to this measure, he was obliged to leave his forces behind him in Italy, and joined the army v ithout being able to bring any reinforcement. He fcund it in no condition to face the enemy, and was c:ntented to remaiin n the province till a fuc- cefl:r inould be named. v. c.-. !6 'erntment of the disgraces incurred in Africa,
.... ' .and se;:r of in:-afion from the Cimbri, who, having :J:-- '-, trave'-! -1d Spaiin and Gaul, were fill on their march, ', .....l appe-:.r to have calmed for a little time the animosity
or d- r. 'c faOtions at Rome. The consular elec- tions .-crec iffered to proceed, and the choice of :!e People fell on Quintus Cecilius Metellus and
M. Junius
IM. Junius Silanus; the firit was appointed to thec H A p. command of the army in Numidia, the second to I.V observe the motions of the Cimbri on the frontiers of Gaul, and to turn them aside, if poflible, from the territory of Rome. About this time those wandering nations had sent a formal message to the Romans, desiring to have it underitood on what lands they might fettle (h), or rather, over what lands they might pass in migration with their herds. This request being refused by the Se- nate, they opened a paifage by force, overcame in battle the Consul Silanus, and, probably with- out intending to retain any conquelt, continued to move wherever the aspect of the country tempt- ed their choice.
Metellus proceeded to Africa with a confidera- ble reinforcement; and,, having spent some time in relloring the discipline of the army, which had been greatly neglected, and in training his new klvies to the duties and hardships of the service, he direced his march to the enemy's country, and in his way had frequent messages from Jugurtha, with profeflions of submission and of a pacific dif- position.
When the Roman army entered on the terri- tory of Numidia, they accordingly found the coun- try prepared to receive them in a friendly manner; the people in tranquillity, the gates of every city left open, and the markets ready to supply them with necessaries.
These appearances, with the known character of Jugurtha, creating diftrull, only excited the vigi- lance of Metellus. They even provoked him to retort on the Numidian his own insidious arts. He tampered with Bomilcar and the other mef- lengers of Jugurtha to betray their master, and promised them great rewards if they would
(b) Floius, lib. iii. Liv, lib, Ixv.
deliver
B o o K deliver him into the hands of the Romans either '-v_ living or dead.
Jugurtha, not confidering that his known cha- raAer for falsehood must have destroyed the credit of all his professions, even if he should at any time think proper to make them sincere, and trufling to the effect of his submissive messages in rendering the enemy secure, made a disposition to profit by any errors they ihould commit, and hoped to cir- cumvent and destroy them on their march. For this purpose he waited for them on the descents of a high mountain, over which they were to pass in their way to the Muthul, a river which helped to form the situation of which he was to avail himself. He accordingly lay concealed by its banks until the enemy actually fell into the snare he had laid for them. With the advantage of the ground and of numbers, he maintained, during the greater part of the day, a contell with troops who posses- fed, against his irregulars, a great superiority of order, discipline, and courage; but not having found the Romans, as he expeced, in any degree off their guard, he was, in the event of that day's action, obliged to fly with a few horse to a remote part of his kingdom.
This victory obtained over Jugurtha, appeared to be an end of the war. His army was dispersed, and he was left with a few horse- men, who attend- ed his person, to find a place of retreat, and to chute a flation at which to assemble new forces, if he meant to continue the war.
The Numidians were inured to action. The. frequent wars of that continent, the wild and unset- tied state of their own country, made the use of horses and of arms familiar: but so void was the nation of military policy, and its people so igno. rant of order, that it was scarcely possible for the king to fight two battles with the fame army. If victorious, they withdrew with their plunder; if
defeated,
defeated, they supposed all military obligationsc H A p. at an end: and in either cafe, after an action, iv. every one fled where he expe&ed to be soonest in' - safety.
Metellus, after the late engagement, finding no enemy in the field, was for some time uncertain to what part of the kingdom Jugurtha had dirented his flight. But having intelligence that he was in a new situation assembling an army, and likely to form one still more numerous than any he had yet brought into the field, tired of pursuing an enemy on whom defeats had so little effet, he turned away to the richer and more cultivated parts of the king- dom. Here the plunder of the country might better repay his labour, and the enemy, if he ven- tured to defend his territory, might more sensibly feel his defeats. Jugurtha perceiving his intention, drew his forces towards the fame quarter, and soon appeared in his rear.
While Metellus was endeavouring to force the city of Zama, Tugurtha pierced into his camp, and, though repulsed from thence, took a post, by which he made the situation of the Romans, be- tween the town and his own army, so uneasy, as to oblige them to raise the siege..
This the Numidian prince thought a proper op- portunity to gain some credit to his pacific profeffi- ons. He made an offer accordingly to surrender at discretion, and actually delivered up great part of his arms and military stores; but this purpose, if ever sincere, he retracted, and again had recourse to arms.
The victory which had been obtained in Africa, . c. 641. flattered the vanity of the Roman People, and S,'ivus~, - procured to Metellus in the quality of Proconsul, ba, QHor- a continuation of his former command. Thepo^MN's; troops he had poRed in Vaca being cut off by theAurelius inhabitants, he made hafiy marches in the night,scaurus. surprised the place, and, without having allowed
VOL. I. B b the
B o K the authors of that outrage more than two days
XI to enjoy the fruits of their perfidy, amply re- '"V^' venged the wrong they had done to the Roman
garrison.
But the success of Metellus did not haften the ruin of Jugurtha so fait as his own mifcondudt, in the jealousy and sanguinary measures which he took to suppress plots and conspiracies, either real or supposed to be formed against his life, by persons the mofi in his confidence.
Bomilcar, fiill carrying in his mind the offers which had been made by Metellus, and willing to have some merit with the Romans,into whose hands he and all the fubjeds of Jugurtha were likely soon to fall, formed a design against his master, and drew Nabdalfa, a principal officer in the Nu- midian armies, to take part in the plot. They were discovered in time to prevent the execution of their design, but they made Jugurtha from thenceforward confider the camp of his own army as a place of danger to himself, rendered him dif- truiiful, timorous, and unquiet; frequently chang- ing his company and his quarters, his guards and his bed. Under there apprehensions, by which his mind was considerably disordered and weakened, he endeavoured, by continual and rapid motions, to make it uncertain where he should be found; and he experienced at last, that private assassination and breach of faith, although they appear to abridge the toils of ambition, are not expedient even in war; that they render human life itself, for the advantages of which war was undertaken, no longer eligible or worthy of being preserved. Weary of his anxious slate, he ventured once more to face Metellus in the field, and being again defeated, fled to Thala, where he had left his chil- dren and the moil valuable part of his treasure. This city too, finding Metellus had followed him, he was obliged to abandon, and, with his children
and
and his remaining effects, fled from Numidia, first c H A P to the country of the Getuli, barbarous nations, V. that lived among the mountains of Atlas south of Numidia, and whom he endeavoured to arm in his cause. From thence he fled to Bocchus king of Mauritania, whose daughter he had married; and having persuaded this prince to confider his quar- rel with the Romans as the common cause of all monarchies, who were likely in fucceflion to be- come the prey of this arrogant and insatiable power, he prevailed on the Mauritanian to assemble his army, and to attempt the relief of Numidia. Jugartha, in conjunction with his new alley, directed his march to Cirta, and Metellus perceiv- ing his intention, took potl to cover that place. But while he was endeavouring, by threats or persuasions, to detach the king of Mauritania from Jugurtha, he received information from Rome' that he was superseded in the command of the army; and from thenceforward protracted the war, un- der pretence of messages and negociations, and possibly inclined to leave it with all its difficulties entire to his successor. Marius, having served under Metellus, had with great difficulty, and not without some expressions of scorn on the part of his general, obtained leave to depart for Rome, where he meant to fland for the Consulship. He accordingly appeared in the capacity of candidate for this honour, and by vaunting, inflead of concealing, the obscurity of his ancestors; by inveighing againfl the whole or- der of Nobility, their dress, their city manners, their Greek learning, their family images, the stress they laid on the virtue of their forefathers to com- penfate the want of it in themselves; but more especially by arraigning the dilatory conduct of Metellus, and by promising a speedy issue to the war, if it should be entrusted to himself; a pro- mise, to which the force and ability he had shown
Bb in
B O O Kin all the stations he had hitherto filled, procured \_^ him some credit; he so far won upon the People,
that he was chosen consul, in opposition to the in. terest of the Nobles, and to the influence of all the leading men of the Senate. His promotion was in a particular manner galling to Metellus, whose re- putation he had attacked, and to whose fiation in Africa, by an express order of the People, in con- tempt of the arrangement which had been made by the Senate, he was now to succeed. U. c. 6_.. Upon the nomination of Marius, the party who L. c2"i had opposed his preferment did not attempt to c. Mins. withhold the reinforcements which he asked for the
service in which he was to command. They even hoped to encreafe his difficulties by suffering him to increase the establishment of his province. The wealthier class of the People alone were yet ad- mitted into the legions; and being averse to such distant services, were likely to conceive a dislike to the persons by whom they were forced to inlifi. Marius in this capacity might lose some part of the popular favour which he now enjoyed, and become less formidable to his rivals in the State. But this crafty and daring politician, by flighting the laws which excluded the necessitous citizens from serving in the legions, found in this class of the People a numerous and willing supply. They crowded to his fiandard, and filled up his army without delay, and even without offence to thole of a better con- dition, who were pleated with relief from this part of their public burdens.
This was a remarkable and dangerous innova- tion in the Roman State, and may be mentioned among the steps which hafiened the ruin of the com- monwealth. From this time forward the sword be- gan to pass from the hands of those who were inter- efied in the preservation of the republic,into the hands of others who were willing to make it a prey. The circumstances of the times were such, indeed, as to give warning of the change. The service of
a legionary
a legionary soldier was become too severe for the lefsc H A p. indigent order of citizens, and now opened to the ne- IV cefitous the principal road to profit, as wellas ho- nour. Marius, to facilitate his levies, was willing to gratify both; and thus gave beginning to the forma- tion of armies who were ready to fight for or against the laws of their country, and who, in the sequel, substituted battles for the bloodless contests which hitherto had arisen from the divisions of party.
The new consul, unrivalled in the favour of the People, obtained whatever he required, and, being completely provided for the service to which he was defined, embarked for Africa with a great reinforcement, and in a few days arrived at Utica. Upon his atrival, the operations of the war were retumed, and carried into the wealthiest provinces of Numidia, where he encouraged his army with the hopes of spoil. The new levies, though com- posed of persons hitherto excluded from the military er-vice, were formed by the example of the legions al:-idy in the field, and who were now well ap- prifed of their own superiority to the African ar- mies. Bocchus and Jugurtha, upon the approach of this enemy, thought proper to separate, and took different routes into places of safety in the more difficult and inaccefible parts of the coun- try.
This reparation was made at the suggestion of Jugurtha, who alleged that, upon their appearing to despair, and to discontinue all offensive opera- tions, the Roman general would become more fe- cure, and more open to surprise. But Marius, without abating his vigilance, pressed where the enemy gave way, over-ran the country, and took poffeflion of the towns they had left. To rival the glory which Metellus had gained in the redution of Thala, he ventured on a like enterprise, in the face of similar difficulties, by attacking Thapfa, a place Surrounded with defarts, and in the midst of
a land
B o o K a land destitute of water, and of every resource
for an army. Having succeeded in this design, he ventured, in his return, to attack another fortress, in which, it being supposed impregnable, the royal treasures were lodged. This strong hold was situ- ated on a rock, which was every where, except at one path that was fortified with ramparts and tow- ers, faced with fieep and inacceflible cliffs. The garrison permitted the firit approaches of the Ro- mans with perfect security, and even derision. After some fruitless attacks, Marius with some im- putation of folly in having made the attempt, was about to desist from the enterprise, when a Ligu- rian, who had been used to pick snails on the cliffs over which this fortress was situated, found himself in search of his prey, and by the growing facility of the ascent, led to a height from which he began to have hopes of reaching the summit. He accord- ingly surmounted all the difficulties in his way; and the garrison being then intent on the opposite fide of the fortress to which the attack was directed, he returned unobserved. This intelligence he carried to Marius, who without delay ordered a detach- ment of chosen men, with an unusual number of trumpets and instruments of alarm, to follow the direction of this guide. He himself, to divert the attention of the besieged, and to be ready, on re- ceiving the proposed signal from within, to make a vigorous and decisive assault, advanced to the walls. The Ligurian, with much difficulty, en- deavoured to effect his intentions. The soldiers who followed him were obliged to untie their fan- dais and their helmets, to fling their shields and their swords, and, at difficult parts of the rock, could not be persuaded to advance until their guide had repeatedly passed and repassed in their fight, or had found flumps and points of the flone at which they could fallen cords to aid their ascent. The summit was to he gained at last by the branches of
a tree
a tree which, being rooted in a cleft of the rock,c H A p. grew up to the edge of the precipice. By the IV. branches of this tree the whole party passed, and, ' J climbing near to its top, landed at last on the fum- mit. They inltantly founded their trumpets and gave a sudden alarm. The besieged, who had been drawn to the walls to resist the enemy who attacked them in front, were aitonifhed with this found in their rear, and soon after, greatly terrified with the confused flight from behind them of wo- men, children, and men unarmed, and being at the fame time vigorously attacked at their gates, were no longer able to resist, suffered the Romans to force their way at this entrance, and in the end to become" mailers of the fort.
While Marius was engaged in the siege of this place he was joined by the QeRftor Sylla, who had been left in Italy to bring up the cavalry, which were not ready to embark at the departure of the Consul. This young man was of a patrician and noble family, but which had not, for some gene- rations, borne any of the higher offices of State. He himself partook in the learning which then spread into Italy, from a communication with the Greeks, and had paired the early part of his life in town dillipation or in literary fiudies, of which the last were confidered at this time at Rome as a fpe- cies of corruption almost equal to the first. He was yet a novice in war, but having an enterprifl ing genius, soon became an objet of respect to the soldiers, and of jealousy to his general, with whom he now laid the foundation of a quarrel more fatal to the commonwealth than that which had subsisted between the present and preceding commander in this service.
The king of Numidia, flung by the sense of what he had already loft, and expetding no advan- tage from any further delays, determined, in con- junction with Bocchus, to make a vigorous effort,
and
B o oK and to oblige Marius, who was then moving to his
winter quarters, yet to hazard a battle for the pre- servation of what he had acquired in the preceding campaign. The king of Mauritania had been in- clined to remain neutral, or to enter on a separate treaty with the Romans; but being promifcda third part of the kingdom of Numidia, in cafe the Ro- mans were expelled from thence, and the war should be brought to a happy conclusion, he once more brought forward his army, and joined Ju- gurtha.
The prosperous fiate of the Romans, undifturb- ed for forne time by the opposition of any enemy in the field, inspired them with some degree of negligence or security, by which they were ex- posed to surprise. About an hour before the setting of the fun, their march was interrupted by the at- tack of numerous parties, who, without any fettled order, occupied the fields through which they were to pass, and seemed to intend, by assailing them on every fide, to begin the night with a scene of confusion, of which they might afterwards more effettually avail themselves in the dark. In an action begun under there disadvantages, it was sup- posed, that the Roman army might be entirely defeated, and in a country with which they were not acquainted, and in circumfiances for which they were not at all pr-pared, being unable to es- sect a retreat, surrender at discretion.
Jugurtha, with his usual intrepidity and conduct, profited by every circumtlance which presented it- self in his favour. He brought the troops,-of which his army was composed, whether Getulians or Nu- midians, horse or foot, to harass the enemy in their different ways of fighting, and where they could easiest make their attacks. Wherever a party was repulted, he took care to replace it; and some- times affected to remit his ardour, or to fly with every appearance of panic, in order to tempt the
Romans
Romans to break from their ranks. Marius, not- c H A P. withilanding, with great dexterity and presence of iv. mind, maintained the form of his march; and, W before night, got poffeilion of some heights on which he could secure his army. He himself, with the infantry, chore that which had the fleepeft as- cent, and ordered Sylla, with the cavalry, to take his poll on a smaller eminence below. That his position might not be known to the enemy, he pro- hibited the lighting of fires, and the usual founding of trumpets at the different watches of the night. The Numidians had halted on the plain where night overtook them, and were observed, at break of day, reposing in great security, and with- out any seeming apprehension of danger from an enemy, who was fippofed to be flying, and who, on the preceding day, had, with some difficulty, escaped from their hands. Marius resolved to at- tack them in this situation, and gave orders, which were communicated through the army, that, at a general found of the trumpets, evere man should fiand to his arms, and with a great shout, and beating on his shield, make an impetuous attack on the enemy. The design, accordingly, succeed- ed. The Numidians, who had often affected to fly, were driven into an adtual rout. Great num- bers fell in the flight, and many ensigns and tro- phies were taken.
After this victory, Marius, with his usual pre- cautions, and without remitting his vigilance, on a supposition that the enemy was dispersed, direat- ed his march to the towns on the coast, where he intended to fix his quarters for the winter. Ju- gurtha, well apprised of his route, proposed again to surprise him before he should reach the end of his journey; and, for this purpose, avoided giving him any premature or unnecessary cause of alarm, He prepared to attack the Roman army in the neighbourhood of Cirta, which was to be the end
of
B o o sos their labours, and near to which he supposed
"- that they would think themselves secure from any ''fu urther attempts of their enemy. In the execution
of this design, he, with the greatef ability, con- ducted his troops to the place of action, and there too made every effort of condut and resolution. But the match being unequal, he was obliged to give up the contest; and, with his sword and his armour all bathed in blood, and almost alone, is said to have left a field, in which, for the first time, he had taken no precautions for re-affem- bling his army, and on which his Numidians were accordingly routed, to rally no more! u. c. 647. Upon there repeated defeats, Bocchus despaired Scr .',. of the fortunes of Jugurtha, and sent a deputation
t - to Mlarius, requesting a conference with himself, or c'-...o wxith some of his officers. He obtained an inter-
view with Sylla and Manlius; but, upon their ar- rival, had taken no fixed resolution, and was still kept in furpence, by the persuasion of those of his court who favoured the interest of Jugurtha. Ma- rius, being continued in his command, resumed the operations of the war, and was about to attack the only place which yet remained in the hands of the enemy. When the king of Mauritania, alarm- ed by this circumliance, took his resolution to sue for peace, he ient a deputation of five chosen per- sons, firlt to the quarters of Marius, and, with this general's permilion, ordered them to proceed from thence to Rome. These deputies, being admitted into the Senate, made offers of friendship in the name of their marter; and were informed, in re- turn, that he mutt give proofs of his friendly dif- position to the Romans, before they could believe his profellions, or liiten to any terms of peace. When this answer was reported to Bocchus, he was not at a lots to underfhand that the Romans wished him to deliver up the king of Numidia into their hands; and teems to have conceived the de-
sign
sign of purchasing peace, even on there terms. c H A P. Sylla being already personally known to him, he _v made choice of this officer, as the person with whom he would treat, and desired he might be sent to his quarters. The Roman Q aeftor accord- ingly set out with a small party. On the way he was met by Volux, the son of the king of Maurita- nia, with a thousand horse: him he confidered as of doubtful intention, whether come as a friend or an enemy; but coming with profeflions of fiiend- ship from the king his father, and with orders to escort the Roman Qusftor, they proceeded toge- ther. On the lecond day after this juntion, Vo- lux came in haste to the quarters of Sylla, and in- formed him, that the advanced party had disco- vered Jugurtha poRted on their route, with a con- fiderable foice, and earnefily prefed the Romans to endeavour to make their etcape in the night.
Sylla could no longer command his fu!picions, and, sensible that he had imprudently, without hostage or other security, ventured too far on the faith of an African prince, proudly refuled to alter his march; desired that the Mauritanian prince, if he thought proper, should depart; but informing him, at the fame time, that the Roman people would know how to revenge the injury done to their officers, and would not fail to punilh the per- fidy of the king his father. Volux made protelia- tions of his innocence; and as the Roman Q:aetior could not be prevailed on to save himself by flight, this prince inlifted to remain, and to flare in his danger. They accordingly kept on their way, passed through the troops of Jugurtha, who, though disposed to offer violence to the Romans, had yet some measures to observe with the king of Mauritania, whose son was in the company; and while, contrary to his usual character, he remained undecided, the prey escaped him, and got out of his reach.
Jugurtha
B o Jugurtha sent persons of confidence immediately
to counteract the negotiations of Sylla at the court of Bocchus; and each of these parties solicited the king of Mauritania to betray the other. The Nu- midians endeavoured to persuade him, that, with such an hotiage as Sylia in his hands, he might flill expect obme honourable terms from the Romans; and Syila, on the other part, represented, that, as the king of Mauritania had offended the Ro- mans, by abetting the crimes of Jugurtha, he must now expiate his guilt by delivering him over to juflice. It was the inclination of this prince to favour Jugurtha; but it was his interest, as well as his intention, to gain the Romans. While he was fiill in futpence, he gave equal encouragement to both parties; and, without being finally determin- ed what he flould do, appointed the Roman Quieflir and the king of Numidia to meet him wi:hout any escort, or number of men in arms, re- serving to the last moment the power of determin- ing against the one or the other. He had placed a body of his own troops in ambush, and, soon after the parties were met, gave a signal, which his men understood to be for seizing Jugurtha. The Numidians, who attended their king, were lain; he himself was put in chains, and delivered up to the Roman Q2axftor. Sylla, with the exul- tation of a hunter, received this lion in his toils; and, though he lived to perform much greater ac- tions, fill appears to have valued h;mfelf motl on the success of this commission. He boasted so much of his prize, that he became, from that mo- ment, an objec of jealousy to Marius, and was confidered as a person advancing too fast in the fame career of renown (i). It was understood among the Romans, that the commander in chief, upon any service, in any division or province of
(;) Plutarch. in M2rio & in Syllb.
the
the empire, enjoyed the triumph for viCtoriesc H A P. gained, even in his absence, by his lieutenants, or 'v. by those who served under his command; and Marius probably thought that Sylla took more to himself than was due upon this occasion. The de- fire of being the person who put the finishing hand to any service, however accomplilhed, was not peculiar to these officers. It was an effect of the Roman policy in maling the rewards of honour depend so much on events, without regard to the means which were employed to produce them. From this circumstance, the citizens of this repub- lic were as desirous of having the reputation of fuc- cefsful adventures affixed to their names, as cour- tiers in modern Europe are desirous to have titles of nobility, or badges of their sovereign's fa- vour.
The war being thus at an end, Marius appoint- ed a thanksgiving; and, while he was offering the customary sacrifices, the news arrived from Rome that the People had dispensed with the law in his favour, and again had made choice of him for Con- ful of the following year. This choice was deter- mined by the great alarm which the Romans had taken on the approach of the barbarous nations, who, like a meteor, had, for some years, traversed the regions of Europe, and, with uncertain direc- tion, were said to destroy wherever they moved. The Romans had repeatedly flood in their way, and had provoked a resentment, which these bar- barians were supposed, in haste, to wreck upon Italy. They were at first heard of under the name only of Cimbri; but were now known to consist of many nations, under the appellations of Am- brones, Teutones, Teetofagi, and others; and had gained acceflions of force by the junction of the Tigurini, and other Gaulilh nations, who, either by choice or compulsion, were made a part in this
mighty
E o O K mighty host, whose movements the Romans con-
- fidered as chiefly directed againil themselves. '. C. 4' Besides the armies commanded by the Consuls p. R=:cilaCarbo and Silanus, who had fallen victims to this 'r:.: c barbarous enemy, other considerable bodies, under
Scaurus and Cailius, had perished by their hands; and other misfortunes, from the fame quarter, were coming apace. At the time that Marius had finithed the war with Jugurtha, Qtintus Servius Cepio, having the former year - commanded in Gaul, where he destroyed or pillaged the city of Toiofa, and made a great booty, confifing, ac- cording to Juftin, of one hundred thousand pounds weight of gold, and one million five hundred thou- sand pounds weight of silver, was now, in his turn, to meet with this enemy; the Consul Mallius or Manilius had orders to join him; and all the troops they could aflemble were thought necessary to withstand the Barbarians. These generals united their forces on the Rhone, but without a proper disposition to aft in concert; they were according- ly defeated in battle; eighty thousand Romans, amongit whom were the two sons of the Consul Manilius, were killed in the action; forty thou- sand attendants of the army were maflacred in cold blood. Both camps were taken.
After this victory the lords of the Cimbri, being assembled in council, called before them Aurelius Scaurus, formerly a Roman Consul, lately second in command to one of the vanquished armies, and now a prisoner. They questioned him with refped to the forces in Italy, and the route to be taken across the Alps: To there questions he made an- fwer, That it would be in vain for them to invade that country; That the Romans, on their own ter- ritory. were invincible. And, in return to these words, it is said, that a Barbarian firuck the pri- soner with his dagger to the heart. It is further said of this barbarous council, that they came to a
resolution
resolution to spare no prisoners, to destroy the c H A p. spoils of the slain, to cast all the treasures of gold rv. and silver into the nearest river, to destroy all'-v horses with their saddles and furniture, and to save no booty whatever; and it mufft be confessed, that in this their resolutions were guided by a policy well accommodated to the manner of'life they chore to maintain. Wealthy poffeflions frequently disqualify even fettled nations for the toils of war, but to migrating tribes, they would be certain im- pediments and the means of ruin (k).
These accounts of the character of an enemy, and of the fate of Roman armies which ventured to encounter them, were received at Rome with amazement and terror. The citizens changed their dress, and assumed the military habit. Ru- tilius, the Consul, who had remained in the admi- nifiration of affairs in Italy, had infirudions from the Senate to array every person that was fit to bear-arms. No one who had attained the military age was exempted. It is mentioned, that the son of the Consul himself was turned into the ranks of a legion. There was little time to train such le- vies; and the usual way was thought insufficient. The fencing-mafters, employed to train gladiators for the public shews, were brought forth, and dif- tributed to inliru&t the citizens in the use of their weapons (1). But the expedient, on which the People chiefly relied for deliverance from the dan- gers which threatened them, was the nomina- tion of Marius to command against this terrible enemy. ; This officer, upon hearing of his re-eletion, set out for Italy, and, with his legions and their cap- tives, entered Rome in triumph; a spectacle, of which Jugurtha, in chains, with his unfortunate
(i) Orofius, lib. v. c. 16. Eutrop. lib. v. (I) Valer. Max. lib. ii. c. 3.
children,
B o o Kchildren, were the principal figures. When the
IL IL_ ,procession was over, the captive king was led to a
dungeon, under orders for his immediate execu- tion. As he was about to be itripped of his orna- ments and robes, the executioner, in halle to pluck the pendants from his ears, tore away the flesh, and thruRt him naked into a dungeon below ground. He descended into this place with a smile, faying, " What a cold bath is here!" He pined about fix days, and expired. A king and an able commander would, in such a situation, have been an objet of refpe& and of pity, if we did not recollet, that he was the murderer of Ad- herbal and Hiempfal, the innocent children of his benefactor. And if we did not receive some con- folation from being told, that his own children, who were likewise innocent, were exempted from the lot of their father, and honourably entertained in Italy.
Marius, in this triumph, is said to have brought into the treasury three thousand and seven pounds, or thirty thousand and seventy ounces of gold, and fifty-feven thousand seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver; and in money, two hundred and eighty- seven thousand denarii (n). He entered the Se- nate, contrary to custom, in his triumphal robes, probably to insult the Nobles, who used to despise him as a person of obscure extraction, born in a country town, and of a mean family: but finding that this was confidered as an a& of petulance, and generally condemned, he withdrew and changed his dress.
The kingdom of Numidia was dismembered; part was put into the possession of Bocchus as a re- ward for his late services; and part reserved for the surviving heirs of Massinissa.
(mrJ) About lo,ocoL
As
As the law respecting the Consulate now flood, c H A P. no one could be elected in absence, nor re-elected '. into this office, till after an interval of ten years. u. . 649. Both clauses were dispensed with in favour of Ma-' on0uls;C rius, under pretence of continuing him at the head c. Flavius of the army; but as he might fiill have remainedFimb""' at the head of the army, and have rendered the fame services to the State in the quality of Procon- ful, his re-election may be ascribed to his own am- bition, and to his jealousy of other rising men in the State. Being confidered as head of the popu- lar party, his elevation was an objeCt of zeal to the Tribunes, and was intended to mortify those who affeced the distinctions of andeni farr.;y. Con- trary to the usual form, and wirtiout casting lots, he was preferred to his colleague in the appoint- ment to command in Gaul. Having his choice of all the armies at that timc in Italy, he took the new levies, lately a;i.crm-.:a and disciplined by Rutiiius, in preference to the veterans, who ;,ad served in Africa under Metellus and himtl fs It is probable that he was determined in ibis choice, more by his desire to gratify the vzteran, wvho wished to be discharged, than by the confideratiun of any supposed superiority in the discipline to which the new levies had been trained (n).
Upon the arrival of Marius in his province it appeared, that the alarm taken for the safety of Italy was somewhat premature. The Barbarians in their battles only meant to maintain the reputa- tion of their valour, or to keep open the tract of their migrations. They had found the lands, from about the higher parts of the Danube and the Rhine, through Gaul, and across the Pyrennees into Spain, and to the ocean, convenient for their purpose, and sufficiently extensive. They had yet meditated no war with the Romans, or any
(n) Frontius de Stragcm3t. lib. iv. c. 3, VOL. I. C c other
B o o K other nation; but did not decline the encounter
where they met with resistance. At present they continued their migrations to the westward, with- out any intention to cross the Alps, or to visit the nations who inhabited within those mountains.
We have nothing recorded in history concerning the movements of these wandering nations, during the two subsequent years, except what is related of their adventure with Fulvius, a Roman Pretor, probably in Spain, who, in return for hostilities committed in his province, having made a feint to draw the attention of their warriors, surprised and sacked their camp. Under the apprehension, how- ever, of their return towards Gaul and Italy, Ma- rius continued to be elected Consul, and was re- peatedly named to the command of the army that was destined to oppose them. His party at Rome had, at this time, betides the exigency which jus- tified their choice, many other advantages against their antagonists, and maintained the envious quar- rel of the lower people against the nobility with great animosity and zeal.
C H A .
CH AP. V. Review of the CircumflJances which revived the popu- lar party.-Farther Account of Laws and Regula- tions under their Admini/iration.-State of the Em- pire.-Fourth Confllale of Maarius.-Continued Migrations of the barbarous Nations.-Defeated by Marius at Aique Sextie.-By Marius and Catulus in Italy.
H E Senate had, for some time after thee H A P. suppression of the troubles which were raised _- by Fulvius and the younger Gracchus, retained its authority, and refrained the Tribunes of the Peo- ple within ordinary bounds; but by the fifpicions which arose against them, on the subject of their trar.factions with Jugurtha, and by the miscarriages of the war in Numidia, they again loft their ad- vantage. It is difficult to ascertain the real grounds of these suspicions. Sallust seems to admit them in their utmost extent, and represents the whole order of nobility as mercenary traders, disposed to fell what the republic entrulted to their hpnour. That the presents of Jugurtha were sometimes ac- cepted, and produced some effet, is not to be doubted; but that the arifiocracy of Rome, during its Ihort reign, was so much corrupted, is scarcely to be credited. Such a measure of corruption must have rendered the State a prey to every foreign power that was in condition to mislead its councils, and is not confifient with that superiority which the Romans .then generally poffefled in their negotia- tions, as well as in their wars. The charge itself favours too much of that envy with which the lower class of the People at all times interpret the con-
Cc 2 dun
, o Ko K duc of their superiors, and which was greatly
c. ountenanced by the partizans of Cafar, at the time when Sallust wrote, in order to vilify and re- duce the Senate. We cannot, however, oppose mere conjecture to the positive testimony of Sallut, corroborated by some suspicious circumstances in the tranfations of the times. Among these we may recollect the patronage which Jugurtha met with at Rome, contrary to the profeflions of the Romans, in behalf of justice, and the uncommon number of Senators degraded, at that time, by au- thoritv of the Censors, Q. Cacilius Metellus and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus (a), which has been already mentioned in its place.
Whatever may have been the real occasion of the cry then subsisting againit the Nobles, we have seen that the popular party, availing themselves of it, and giving it all manner of countenance, found means to recover great part of their loil power. The Tribunes, having obtained the establishment of a special cormiflion for the trial of all those who had received bribes from Jugurtha, made the peo- ple confider their own ad, in constituting a court of inquiry, as sufficient to evince the reality of the crime. The prosecutions which continued to be carried on for two years, upon this supposition, served more than the subje&t of any former ditpute to alienate the minds of men from each other, and from the public. Quefiions were more of a pri- vate than of a public nature, and occupied the worst of the human paflions, envy, malice, and revenge. One party learned to cherish falsehood, subordination, and perjury; the other lived in con- tinuai fear of having such engines employed againti them selves.
The People, in their zeal to attack the Nobility under any pretence, made no diftintion between (.) !t is alic:dy rent:cn-d, that thirty-two Senators were lnruck o they :uil, by thcrC mn.itate.error
errors
errors and crimes; and, contrary to the noble spi-c H A P. rit of their anceflors, treated misfortune, incapa- v. city, or treachery, with equal rigour. One Tri-- -'" bune had extended the use of the secret ballot to the trial oflelter crimes (b) ; another, upon this oc- cafion, took away all diftintions, and introduced it in the trial of capital crimes allb (c); so that the judge, without being accountable, indulged his fe- cret malice or partial favour (d).
Laws were made to promote the interell, as well as to gratify the animosity of the lower peo- ple. By the Agrarian law of Gracchus, certain li- mits were set to efiates in land; but, in order to render the excess of lands, in the hands of any par- ticular person, immediately useful to the People, it was permitted, by an amendment made during the low slate of the ariftocratical party, that per- sons in possession of more than the legal measure of land, might retain their estates, but fubjeat to a rent to :be collected for the benefit of the poorer citizens; and thus it was proposed, that without any trouble in taking poffeflion of lands, or re- moving from the city, the favourites of the party Lhould' be accommodated, and reap the fruits of sedition and idleness unimpaired (e).
It was proposed, by the.Conful Servilius Capio,u. c. 647. that the Senate, whose members were perfonallydcejuxse i, so much exposed to prosecutions, Ihould have their Ihare likewise in composing the Juries, a privilege of which, by the edict of Gracchus, they had been deprived (f). In whatever degree this proposal was adopted, it was again expressly repealed upon the motion of Servilius Glaucia. And Capio soon after experienced, in his own person, the animofi- ty of the popular faction, being tried for mifcar- riage in his battle with the Cimbri. He was con-
(b) Lex Caflia Tabellaria. (e) Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. i. (c) Lex Cxlia Tabellaria. (f) Valer. Max. lib. v. c. g. (d) Cicer. de Legibus, lib. iii.
demned
o o o K demned by'the judges, and afterwards, in virtue
I. of a regulation obtained by Cassius, one of the Tri- ' bunes, declared, in consequence of that sentence,
dilqualified to hold a place in the Senate (e).
Besides the tranfacions already mentioned, the following particulars, overlooked in the hurry of recording military operations and events, may serve still farther to characterize the times. M. Ju- nius Silanus was tried for mifcondua against the enemy; M. Emilius Scaurus, first on the roll of the Senate, was brought to trial for contempt of religion; but both acquitted. The ardour'for these :prdfecutions and popular regulations, continued iuntil 'the second Consulate of Marius, when M. Marcius Philippus, one of the Tribunes, moved to restore the law of Tiberius Gracchus respecting the division of estates in land; and, in his speech in support of this motion, affirmed, that:there were not two thousand families in Rome possessed of any pro- perty in land whatever (f). This motion, however, was withdrawn.
Among the crimes which the populace were now so eager-to punish, fortunately that of peculation or extortion in the provinces was one. To facili- tate complaints on this fubjeft, not only persons having an immediate interest in the cafe, but all to whom any money or effects injuriously taken miglht have otherwise come by inheritance, were intitled to prosecute for this offence; and any alien, who convited a Roman citizen of this crime, so as to have him fitruck off the 'rolls of the People, was himself to-be inrolled instead of the:citizen dif- 'placed (g).
:Domitius, one of the Tribunes, attacked the ariftocratical coritfitution even of the priefihood, and endeavoured to transfer the right of eletion
(c) Afconils Pdianus in Corneliana Ciceronis. (f) Cicr. de Ofidis, lib. ii. (g) Cicero in:Balbiana.
from
from the order itself to the People; but fuperffiti- H A P. on, which continues to influence the bulk of man- V. kind after reason has failed, here flood in his way. The cuflom was against him; and, in such matters, religion and .cuflom are the fame. The People, Lx Domi-
"- .--~ ' t r ia de Saccr- therefore, it was confessed, could not interferedotiis without profanation; but a certain part of the Peo- ple might judge of the candidates, and infiru& the college of .priests whom they were to chufe (h). The fame artifice, or verbal evasion, had been al- ready admitted in the form of eleting the Pontifex Maximus, now chosen by seventeen of the Tribes who were drawn by lot (i).
*During this period, a just alarm was taken on the subjet of private as well as public corruption. Liberty was conceived to imply a freedom from every refiraint, and to justify licence and contempt .of the laws. The aids which were given to the People to.enable them to subsist in profusion and idleness; the wealth that was passing to Rome in the hands of traders, contrators, and farmers of .the revenue, as well as provincial officers, by whom the profits.of a first appointment were lavished in public {hews, fights of gladiators, and.baiting of wild beasts, to gain the People in their canvas for farther preferments; these several circumstances tended, in the highest degree, to corrupt the Peo- ple, and.to render them unworthy of that fove- reignty which they actually possessed in the preva- lence of the popular faction.
The severities which were prafifed in certain .cafes, the sumptuary laws which were provided to restrain luxury, were but feeble aids to fiop such a source of disorder. It is mentioned, as an instance of such severity, that some vestals were questioned at this time for a breach of that sacred obligation
(b) Afconius in Corneliana Ciceronis. (i) Cicero de Lege Agraria.
tQ
B o _ to chafritv, under which they were held up as a
u. -pat::rn of manners to the Roman women; that L"-'t :.-:e of them were condemned, and, together
x;ith Roman knights, the supposed partners in their crimes, suffered extreme punishment. A temple was on this occasion ereeed to the goddess Venus under a new title, that of the Reformer (k); and prayers were to be offered up in this temple, that it might please the goddess to guard the chafti- ty of Roman women (1).
The term luxury is somewhat ambiguous; it is put for sensuality or excess in what relates to the preservation of animal life ; and for the effec of vanity, in what relates to the decorations of rank and fortune. The luxury of the Romans, in the present age, was probably of the former kind, and lumptuary laws were provided, not to restrain va- nity, but to govern the appetites for mere debauch. About the time that Jugurtha was at Rome, the sumptuary law of Fannius received an addition, by which Roman citizens were not only reftrited in their ordinary expence, but the legal quantities and species of food were prescribed to them. The whole expence of the table was restricted to thirty asses (;i;) a day, and the meat to be served up, to three or four pounds, dried or salted. There was no rerridion in the use of herbs or vegetables of any frt (;z). According to A. Gellius, the law permitted, on certain days, an expence of an hun- dred alses; on wedding-days, two hundred. It is remarkable, that this law continued to have its effect on the tables of Roman citizens after Cicero was a man (o). The Epicures of his time were obliged to make up, in the cookery of their
(k) Vcnu; Ve:ticordia. (i) O ofiu;, lib. v. c. l$. Jul. Obfequenn. Ovid. Fall. lib. v. (~A) Abut ixwo hiliilngs. (,) Macrobius Satur. lib. ii. c. 17. :? Erpif. Ad Fazmliar. lib. vii. al Gallam.
vegetable
vegetable diet, what was defetive in that species of c H A P. food. V.
About the time of the commencement of the Numidian war, the People, according to the Cen- sus, amounted to four hundred and three thousand four hundred and thirty-fix citizens, fit to carry arms. At this time it was that the Censors, Quintus Cecilius Metellus, and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, expelled thirty-two members from the Senate.
While the Romans were intent on the war which fubfifled in Africa, they were assailed by enemies in some of the other provinces. In Spain, hof- tilities, at intervals, were frill renewed. In endea- vouring to quell one of the revolts of the natives, the Roman Praetor was killed; in another encoun- ter, the forces employed against them were cut off; and a fresh army was transported from Italy, to fe- cure the Roman poifeflions.
Hoffilities were likewise continued on the fron. tier of Macedonia, by the Scordifci, Triballi, and other Thracian nations; and the Proconsul Rufus, by his victories in this quarter, obtained a triumph.
During this period, in the Consulship of Attilius Serranus, and Q. Servilius Capio, the year after the first Conlulfhip of Marius, were born two illus- trious citizens, M. Tullius Cicero, and Cneius Pompeius Strabo, afterwards diflinguifhed by the appellation of Pompey the Great. And we are now to open the scene in which the persons, on whom the fate of the Roman empire was to depend, made their several entries into life, or into public business, and began to pass through an infancy or a youth of danger, to an old age of extreme trou- ble, which closed with the subversion of that confti- tution to which they were born.
Marius having, without any memorable event, ti.c ' passed the year of his second Consulship on ther;1i', 3,,,.
frontier,",.
B o o K frontier of Narbonne Gaul, was, by the People,
fill under the tame apprehension of the Cimbric invasion, re-eleded into the fame office, and deftin. ed for his former station. This year likewise the Barbarians turned aside from his province, and left the republic at'leifure to contend with enemies of less consideration, who appeared in a different quarter. Athenio, a slave in Sicily, having mur- dered his mafier, and broken open the prisons or yards in which slaves were commonly confined at work, afiembled a number 1together, and being clothed in a purple robe, with a crown and a fcep- tre, affeced a species of royalty, -invited all the slaves of the island to assume their freedom under his protection. -He acquired sirength sufficient to cope with Servilius Caica, the 'Roman Prator, and actually forced him in his camp. He likewise de. feated the succeeding Prator,Licinius Lucullus(p); and was, in the third year of the'infurreetion, with great difficulty, reduced by the Consul Aquilius. This revolt was at its height in this year of the third Consulship of 'Marius, and it was quelled in the second year after it, the rebels being surrounded in their Prong holds, and obliged to surrender for want of provisions (q). The whole is mentioned now, that it may not recur hereafter to interrupt matters of more moment.
About the fame time the Romans had been ob- liged to equip a naval armament under Marcus Antonius, known by the appellation of the Orator, against the Cilician pyrates, who had lately insetsed the seas. All that we know of this service is, in general, that it was performed with ability and success (r).
From Macedonia, Calpurnius Pifo reported, that the victory he had gained over the Thracians had
(p) Florue, lib. iii. c. 19. (q) Ibid. lib. iv. c. 19. (r) Ibid. lib. iii. c. 6. Cicero Cz Orator. lib. i.
enabled
enabled him to penetrate to the mountains of Rho- c H A P. dope and Caucasus. v.
Such was the state of the empire when CaiusT'" Marius returned from his province in Gaul, to pre- fide at the eleCtion of Consuls. He was again, by the voice of the People, called upon to resume his formier trust; but he affected, from modesty, to decline the honour. His partizans were prepared for his aCting this part, and were accordingly, by their importunities, to force him into an office which he to modestly seemed to decline. Among these, Apuleius Saturninus, at this time himself candidate for the office of Tribune, charged Ma- rius with treachery to his country in proposing to desert the republic in times of so much danger; and wish his reproaches prevailed so far as to render him passive to the will of his fellow-citizens, who wished to re-place (s) him again in his former flation.
In this fourth Consulate, the courage and mili-u. c. 651. tary skill of Marius came to be actually exerted in'U 4, L.' his province. The barbarous nations, after theirLutatiu return from Spain, began to appear in separate bo-Cat dies, each forming a numerous and formidable army. In one division the Cimbri and TeCtofages had passed through the whole length of Gaul to the Rhine, and from thence proceeded by the Danube to Noricum or Aultria, and were point- ing towards Italy by the valley of Trent. The Consul 'Lutitius Catulus was flationed near the descent of the Alps to observe the motions of this body.
In another division, the Ambrones and the Teutones hung on the frontier of the Roman province in Gaul, between the Garonne and the Rh6ne, and gave out, that they meant, by the
(0) Plutarch. in Mario.
moll
E O O rrmoft ordinary route of the mountains, to join their
1__ - aii:csin Italy.
Upon the approach of this formidable enemy, Marius took poit on the Rh6ne at the confluence of that river with the here, and fortified his camp in the most effectual manner. The Barbarians, re- proaching him with cowardice for having taken these precautions, efnt, agreeably to their own no- tions of war, a formal challenge to meet them in battle; and haxing had for answer from Ma- rius, That the Romans did not consult their ene. mies to know awhen it was proper to fight, they were confirmed in the contempt which they al- ready entertained of his army, ventured to leave them behind, and proceeded in separate divisions towards Italy. Marius followed; and, with ra- pid marches, overtook them as they passed over the country without any precaution; some of them near to the Roman colony of Sextius (t), and far removed from each other. Having found them under such disadvantage, and in such confusion as exposed them to slaughter, with scarcely any power of refiiance, he put the greater part to the sword. Thus part of the hordes, who had for many years been so formidable to the Ro- mans, were now entirely cut off. Ninety thou- sand prisoners, with Teutobochus, one of their kings, were taken, and two hundred thousand were said to be slain in the field (a).
The news of this vicory arriving at Rome, while it was known that another division of the fame enemy, not less formidable, was still in the field, it was not to be doubted that the command and office of Consul would be continued to Ma- (:) Now Aix, in Provence. (=) Itlurch. in Mario. Orrus, lib. v. c. i6. Florus, lib. iii. c. 3. Vcil:ias.ri E ropiuus
rius.
rius. The populace, incited by rome of the fac-c H A p. tious Tribunes, joined, with the other uilal marks V. of their attachment to his person, that of difrefpeEt and insolence to those who were supposed to be his opponents and rivals. Of there Metellus Nu- midicus, whom he had supplanted in the com- mand of the army againll Jugurtha, was the chief. This refpeEtable citizen, being now in the office of Censor, one Equitius, an impostor of obscure or lavish extraction, offered himself to be enrolled as a citizen, under the popular designation and name of Caius Gracchus, the son of Tiberius. The Censor, doubting his title, called upon Sem- pronia, the filler of Gracchus, to telify what ihe knew of this pretended relation; and, upon her giving evidence against him, rejeted his claim. The populace, ill-difpofed to Metellus, on account of his supposed difference with Marius, took this opportunity to insult him in the discharge of his office; attacked his house, and obliged him to take refuge in the Capitol. Even there the Tribune Saturninus would have laid violent hands on his person, if he had not been proteced by a body of the Roman Knights, who had aflembled in arms to defend him. This tumult was suppressed, but not without bloodshed.
While the popular faction were indulging inu. c. 653. there marks of their dislike to Metellus, they pro-i,, 't, ceeded to betlow the honours which they intended NM. ,qui- for Marius, and chore him for a fifth time Consul,'""' in conjunction with M. Aquilius. His late fplen- did successes againll one division of the wandering Barbarians jutlified this choice, and pointed him out as the fittest person to combat the other, which was {till expeced from the fide of Noricum to attempt the invasion of Italy. Catulus, the late colleague of Marius, commanding the troops that were fiationed on the Athefis, to cover the access
to
o o . to Italy from the valley of Trent, was destined to I. a&t in subordination to the Consul8 who had given '"-'orders to haften the march of his victorious army
from the Rh6ne.
Catulus had taken post above Verona, thrown a bridge over the Athefis, and, in order to command the paifage of that river, had fortified stations on both its banks. While he was in this pofiure, and before the juncion of Marius, the enemy arrived in his neighbourhood. The amazing works which they performed fully served to confirm the report of their numbers. They obftruaed with mounds of timber and earth the channel of the river, so as to force it to change its course; and thus, instead of passing the river, they threw it behind them in their march. They continued to float such quan- tities of wood on the fiream above the bridge which Catulus had built, that the passage of the water being topped, the bridge with all the tim- ber which was accumulated before it, was en- tirely carried off. The Roman army, on feeing such evidence of the numbers and firength of their enemy, were seized with a panic. Many deserted their colours, some fled even to Rome without halting. The Proconsul thought proper to order a retreat; and thus, by seeming to authorise what he could not prevent, he endveavoured to save in part the credit of his army.
The level country on the Po was in this manner laid open to the incursions of the Barbarians. The inhabitants of Italy were greatly alarmed: and the Roman People passed an a& of attainder against all those who had abandoned their colours. Marius, who continued at Rome while the legions advanced on their march from Gau!, suspended the triumph which had been ordered him by the Senate, went to receive hi. aimy at the foot of the Alps, and to haften its j'unction with Catuals.
Upon
Upon the junation of the two armies, those whoc H A r. had lately fled recovered their courage, and the ge- nerals determined, without loss of time, to hazard a battle. It is said that the Barbarians of this di- vision were still ignorant of the disaster which had befallen their allies on the other fide of the Alps, and had sent a defiance or a challenge to fight; but that being informed of this calamity when they were about to engage, they made their attack with less than their usual ferofity and confidence. Catulus received them in front. Marius made a movement to assail them in flank; but as they were hid by the clouds of dust which every where rose from the plain, he misled his way, or could not engage till after the enemy had been repulsed by Catulus, and were already put to flight. The rout was extremely bloody; an hundred and fifty thousand were said to be slain; sixty thousand ilb- mitted to be taken plifoners. The remainder of this mighty host, even the women and children, perished by their own hands; and the race of bar- barous nations who had migrated through Europe, perhaps for ages before they encountered with the Romans, now appear to have been entirely extir- pated (u).
On receiving the news of this victory at Rome, the city relbunded with joy, and the People, in every sacrifice they offered up, addrelied them- selves to Marius as a God. He had been conflant!i attended in this war by Sylla, who, though already an objea of his jealousy, still chose to neglect the preferments of the city, and to serve in the camp. In the late viatory Marits was no more than part- ner with Catulus. Upon the arrival of the armies at Rome, he did justice to Catulus in this particu- lar, and admitted him to partake in his 'triumph. In this proceflion there were no carriages loaded ([) Plutarch. in Mario & Sylla. Orofius, lib. v. c. 1. rlorur, lib. iii. c. 3. Vellci:. I!ul p. Appian. in Cc!Lica.
with
o o O K with gold, silver, or any precious spoils of any
11 fort; but, instead of them, the shattered armour
-' and broken swords of an enemy; the furer marks
of an honour justly won, and of a more important service performed. These were transported in loads, and piled up in the Capitol.
C H A P.
C H A P. VI. Characer and immoderate ambition of Marius.-
Death of Nonius.-Re-elelTion of the lTribune Sa- turninus.-His Sedition and seizing the Capitol.- Death of Saturninus-Reverfe in the State of Par- ties.-Recal of Metellus.-Violent Death of the fribune Furiis.-Birth of Caius Julius Ccefar.- Lex Cecilia Didia.-Blank in the Roman Hijfory. -Sylla offers himself Candidate for the Office of Pretor.-Edia7 of the Censors agaiftl the Latin Rhetoricians.-Brllion in the Roman Treasury.- Present of a Groupe in golden Figures from the King of Mauritania.-Alas of Livius Drtifis.- Revolt of the Italian Allies.---Policy of the Romans in yieldig to the necefity of their Affirs.---The Laws of Plautius.
PON the extintion of the wandering na-c H A p. tions which had now for rome time molefied V'. the empire, there was no foreign enemy to en- danger the peace of Italy. The wars in Thrace and in Spain had no effet beyond the provinces in which they fubfified. The infurredion of the &laves in Sicily, by the good condu& of Aquilius the Consul, to whom that service had been com- mitted, was near being quelled.
Marius being now returned to the city, might have quitted the paths of ambition with uncom- mon distinction and honour. An ordinary Confu- late, after his having been so often called upon in times of danger, as the person moR likely to save his country, could make no addition to his glory. His being set aside in times of security and leisure, would even have been the most honourable and
VOL. I. D d flattering
r o o Knflattering comment that could have been made on
his former elections.
But immoderate thirll of power, and extreme animosity to his rivals, not elevation of mind, were the charaderiftics of Marius. His ambition had hitherto passed for an aversion to ariftocratical usurp- ations. But his contempt of family diftindtions, the offspring of a vanity which made him feel the want of such honours, by clashing with the efta- blifhed Subordination of ranks in his country, be- came a source of difaffe&tion to the State itself. He formed views upon the Consulate yet a sixth time; and inflead of the moderation, or the fa- tiety of honours with which he pretended to be actuated when he hoped to be prelred into office, he employed all his influence, even his money, to procure a re-eletion; and accordingly prevailed, together with Valerius Flaccus. He had warmly espoused the interest of this candidate againfi Me- tellus, more from animosity to the competitor, whose great authority, placed in opposition to him- U. C. 65. self, he dreaded, than from any regard or predi- C;i5 M:-le&ion for Fiaccus. Being chosen, in order the ;.iu 6to, L. vrl.Flac- more to strengthen himself in the exercise of his
- power, he entered into concert with the Tribune
Apuleius Saturninus, and it is probable, agreed to support this facious demagogue in his pretensions to remain in office for another year; a precedent which had taken place only in the molt faaious times of the republic, and which was in itself more dangerous than any other re-election whatever. The person of the Tribune being sacred, his will was absolute, there was no check to his power be- fides the fear of being called to account at the ex- piration of his term; and if this fear were removed by the perpetuity of office, it was a power yet more formidable than that of the Diaator, and to be refrained only by the divisions which might
arise
arise among those who were joined together in the H A P. exercise of it. vw.
The faction that was formed by Marius and the Tribune Saturninus, with their adherents, was far- ther strengthened by the accession of the Praetor Glaucia. This person, while in office, and as he fat in judgment, had received an affront from Sa- turninus, in having his chair of state broken down, for presuming to occupy any part in the attention of the People, while an assembly called by the Tribune was met. He nevertheless chole to overlook this insult, in order to be admitted a part- ner in'the consideration which was now enjoyed by these popular leaders.
Upon the approach of the tribunitian elections, the Senate and Nobles exerted themselves to pre- vent the re-election of Saturninus; and nine of the new candidates were, without any question, de- clared to be duly elected in preference to him. The tenth place too was actually filled by the elec- tion of Nonius Sufenas, whom the aristocracy had supported with all its influence. But the party of Apuleius, enraged at their disappointment, had re- course to violence, forced Nonius, though already vested with the sacred character of Tribune, to take refuge in a work-shop, from whence he was dragged by some of the late soldiery attached to Marius, and slain. The aflembly broke up, and faber persons, though reputed of the popular par- ty, retired under the strongest impreflions of affliti- on and terror. Marius had reason to apprehend some violent re- solution from the Senate, and was in no haste to assemble that body. Mean time Glaucia, in the night, with a party armed with daggers, took pof- session of the Capitol and place of assembly, and, at an early hour in the morning, having gone through the forms of election, announced Apuleius again Tribune, in the place that was vacated by
Dd 2 the
Bo o K the murder of Nonius. This furious demagogue
1- was accordingly reinflated in the sacred character,
which, though recently violated by himself, was still revered by the bulk of the People. He was continually attended by a new set of men who in- fested the streets, freemen of desperate fortune, whom Marius, contrary to the eftablilhed forms of the constitution, had admitted into the legions, and who were grown fierce and insolent, as partners in the victories of that general, and who were made to expect that, in cafe the popular party should prevail, they themselves should have estates in land and comfortable settlements.
Under the terror of so many affafins, who confidered the Nobles as enemies to their cause, Marius with his fation were become masters of the commonwealth. The better fort of the People were deterred from frequenting the public assem- blies, and no one had courage to propose, that any enquiry should be made into the death of the Tri- bune Nonius, in whose person the sacred law was again set at nought (a). Lx ArV- Apuleius hastened to gratify his party by pro.
posing popular laws. One to seize, in name of the Public, those lands on the Po which had lately been desolated by the migrations of the barbarous nations, and to distribute them in lots to the poorer citizens (b).
Another, by which it was resolved, that in the province of Africa a hundred jugera a man Ihould be distributed to the veterans (c): that new fettle- ments should be made in Greece, Macedonia, and Sicily : and that the money taken from the temple at Tolofa (d) should be employed in the purchase of lands for a like purpose: that wherever these (a) Appian de Bell. Civil. lib. i. Plutarch. in Mario, lib. lxix. Valer. Max. lib ix. c. 7. Orofus, lib. v. c. 57. Flonrus lib. iii. c. 6. (4) Appizn de Bell. Civil. lib. i. (c) Aur. de Viris Illullribus in Sturnino. (d) Nw Thouloufe. co
colonies
colonies should be planted, Marius should have ac H A P. power to inscribe, at each of the settlements, three VL aliens into the lift of citizens (e). That the price, Lx 'u hitherto paid for corn by the People at the publicmn'tria. granaries, should be remitted, and that corn (hould be distributed gratis.
Upon the intention to obtain, the lafi of those laws being known, Q Servilius Caepio, one of the Q2euftors, represented, that if such a law (hould pals, there would be an end of industry, good or- der, and government; and that the treasury of Rome would not be sufficient to defray the ex- pence. He exh6rted the Senate to employ every measure to defeat the motion. And this body ac- cordingly made a resolution, that whoever at- tempted to obtain the law: in queflion. should be deemed an enemy to his country. But'sApuleius was not to be refrained by the terrors of this re- solution. He proceeded to propose the law in the usual form, and had planted the rails and balloting urns for the People to give their votes, when Caepio, with a body of his attendants, had the courage to attack the Tribune, broke down the fleps; and overset the balloting urns; an ation for which he was afterwards impeached upon an accu- fation of treason, but by which, for the Drefent, he disappointed the designs of the faction (f).
Apuleius, to extend the power of the popular assemblies, and to remove every impediment from his own designs, brought forward a number of new regulations. One to confirm a former fiatute, by which the-a&s of the Tribes were declared to have the force of laws. Another, declaring it to be treason for any person to interrupt a Tribune in putting a question to the People. A third, obliging the Senate to confirm every act of the Tribes
(e) Aut. de Viris Illufribus:in.Satunino. (f) *Aut. Rhetoricorum ad.Heiennium.
within
B o O K within five days after such aft had passed, and re-
nC.I quiring every Senator, under pain of a fine, and
of being firuck off the rolls, to take an oath to abide by these regulations. While these motions vere in debate, some one of the party who op. posed them, in order to flop the career of this sac- tious Tribune, observed, that it thundered; a cir- cumfiance which, upon the ordinary maxims of the Roman Augurs, was sufficient to suspend any business in which the People were engaged, and to break up their assembly. " If you be not silent," laid Apuleius to the person who observed that it thundered, " you will also find that it hails." The affembiy accordingly, without being deterred by this interposition of the auspices, passed acts to these several purposes. The power of the Senate was intirely suppressed, their part of the legillature was reduced to a mere form, and even this they were not at liberty to withhold. Marius called them together,and proposed thatthey should confider what resolution they were to take with respect to a change of so much importance, and particularly with re- ipet to the oath which was to be exated from the members. The old warrior is said, on this occafi- on, to have pracifed an artifice by which he im- posed on many of the members, and which after- wards furnished him with a pretence for removing his enemy Metellus from their councils. He de- clared himself with great warmth againit taking the oath, and by his example led other Senators to ex- press their sentiments. Metellus, in particular, as- fured the assembly, that it was his own resolution never to come under such an engagement.
While the Senators relied on the concurrence of Marius in refilling the oath, the time appointed for administering it nearly approached; and this Con- fil!, after the third day was far spent, assembled the Senate, set forth the dangerous slate of the com- monwealth; at the fame time expressed his own fears of the disturbances that might arise if the Se-
nate
nate refused to gratify the People in this matter ;c H A P. and while multitudes were assembled in the fireets vs. to know the issue of their councils, he required that the oath should be administered. He himself took it, to the altonifhment of the Senate, and the joy of the populace assembled by Apuleius, who founded applause through every part of the fireets. Metellus alone, of all who were present, refuted to comply, and withRood all the intreaties of his friends, who represented the danger with which he was threatened. " If it were always safe to do " right," he said, " who would ever do wrong? " But good men are diflingujbed, by choofing to do " right even when it is least for their safety to "do o."
On the following day the Tribune Saturninus entered the Senate, and, not being stopped by the negative of any of his own colleagues, the only power that could restrain him, dragged Metellus from his place, and proffered an ad of attainder and banishment againfi him, for having refused the oath which was enjoined by the People. Many of the mofi refpecable citizens offered their aid to defend this illustrious Senator by force, but he him- self declined being the subject of any civil commo- tion, and went into exile.
While the ad, which afterwards passed for his banishment was preparing, he was heard to fay, " If the times should mend, I Ihall recover my " flation; if not, it is a happiness to be absent " from hence." He fixed his abode at Smyrna, conduEted his retirement with great dignity during his exile, and probably felt as he ought, that any censure inflided by men of a vile and profligate charater was an honour.
In these tranftaions elapsed the second year, in which Apuleius filled the office of Tribune; and, being favoured by a supineness of the opposite party contracted in a seeming despair of the repub-
lic,
B o o Klic, he prevailed yet a third time in being vefled _s. with this formidable power. To court the favour
of the People, he affected to credit what was al- leged concerning the birth of Equitius; and, un- der the name of Caius Gracchus, son of Tiberius, had this impostor associated with himself in the of. fice of Tribune. The name of Gracchus, in this station, awakened the memory of former hopes and of former resentments. The party had def- tined Glaucia for the Consulate, and appear to have left Matius out of their councils. This will perhaps account for the conduEt with which he concluded his adminifiration in the present year.
At the election which followed, the interest of the Nobles was exerted for Marcus Antonius and C. Memmius. The first was declared Consul, and the second was likely to prevail over Glaucia; when, in the midst of the crowds that were aflem- bled to vote, a sudden tumult arose; Memmius was beset and murdered; and the People, alarmed at so lirange an outrage, were seized with a panic, and fled.
In the night Glaucia, Saturninus, and the Quef- tor Saufeius, being known to be met in secret conference, all the citizens who yet retained any regard for the commonwealth crowded together, in fear of what so desperate a faction might at- tempt. All the voices were united against Satur- ninus, the supposed author of so many disorders and murders. It was proposed, without delay, to seize his person, either living or dead: but being put on his guard, by the appearance of a storm so likely to break on his head, he thought proper, with the other leaders of his party and their retain- ers in arms, to seize the Capitol, and there to fe- cure themselves, and to overawe the assembly of the People. It was no longer to be doubted that the republic was in a frate of war. Marius, who
had
had fomented these troubles from aversion to the c H A p. Nobles, now remained undetermined what part he VLI should at. But the Senate being assembled, gave'" the usual charge to himself and his colleague to avert the danger with which the republic was threatened; and both these officers, however much they were disposed to favour the sedition, being in this manner armed with the sword of the com- monwealth, were obliged to employ it in support of the public peace. The Senators, the Knights, and all the citizens of rank repaired in arms to their ltandard. Antonius, Consul eleced for the following year, in order to hinder the partizans of the facion from resorting to the city, was fiationed in the suburbs with an armed force (g). The Ca- pitol was invested in form, and appears to have held out some days; at the end of which, in order to oblige the rebels to surrender, the pipes that sup- plied them with water were cut off. This had the intended effect. They submitted to such terms as were proposed to them; and Marius, still inclined to treat them with favour, had them confined to the hall of the Senate till farther orders. In the mean time a great party of citizens, who were in arms for the defence of the republic, impatient of delay, and thinking it dangerous to spare such daring offenders, beset them inflantly in their place of confinement, and put the whole to the sword (h).
It was reported, though afterwards questioned upon a solemn occasion (i), that Caius Rabirius, a Senator of diffintion, having cut off the head of Apuleius, carried it as a trophy agreeable to the manners of those times, and had it presented for (g) Cicero pro. C. Rabirio. (b) Plut. in Mario. Appian de Eell. Civil. lib, i. Orof. lib. v. c. 17. Flor. lib. iii. Aut. de Viris Illult. Cicero in Sextiana in Catal. lib. i. Philip. lib. viii. & pro Caio Rabirio. (i) At the trial of Rabirius, when, some years afterwards, he was ac- cufrd of having killed Saturninus.
some
B O O t frome days at all the entertainments which were
I- given on this occasion, and at which he was a
-- guest.
This was the fourth tribunitian sedition raised to a dangerous height, and quelled by the vigour and resolution of the Nobles. Marius, who had been obliged to aa as the infirument of the Senate on this occasion, saw his projects baffled and his cre- dit greatly impaired. Plutarch relates, that he soon after chose to leave the city for some time, on pre- tence of a desire to visit the province of Asia, where his active spirit formed the projeE of new wars, for the conduct of which he was much better qualified than for the administration of affairs in peace.
Upon the suppression of this dangerous sedition, the commonwealth was restored to a slate which, compared to the late mixture of civil contention and military execution, may have deserved the . C.6. name of public order. One office of Consul was AM. ':- frill vacant; and the election proceeding without c;.-'P-difturbance, Poftumius Albinus was joined to An- bi . tonius. Most of the other elections had also been
favourable to the Nobles; and the majority even of the Tribunes of the People were inclined to re- spect the Senate and the Aristocracy, as principal supports of the government.
The rift effect of this happy recovery was a motion to recal Metellus from banilhment. In this motion two of the Tribunes, Q. Pompeius Rufus and L. Porcius Cato concurred. But Ma- rius having opposed it with all his influence, and Publius Furius, another of the Tribunes, having interposed his negative, it could not at that time be carried into execution. Soon after, however, the fame motion being renewed by the Tribune Callidius, and Furius having repeated his nega- tive, Metellus, son of the exile, in presence of the People, threw himself upon the ground, and, em- bracing hlie Tribune's knees, beseeched him not to
withstand
withinand the recal of his father. The young man, c H A P. from this action, afterwards acquired the Sirname V'. of Pius; and the Tribune, iniblently spurning him * as he .lay on the ground, served his cause by that at of. indignity perhaps more effetually than he could have done by lending a favourable ear to his requefi. The People, ever governed by their pre- sent paffions,.were moved with tendernels and with indignation. They proceeded, without regard to the negative of Furius, under emotions of fympa- thy for the son, to recal the exiled father. The messenger of the republic, charged with the inti- mation of this resolution to Metellus, found him at Tralles in Lydia, among the fpedators at a public show. When the letters were delivered to him, he continued to the end of the entertainment with- out opening them; by this mark of indifference, treating the favour of a disorderly populace with as much contempt as he had shown to their cen- sure.
The Senate, now become the supreme power at Rome, by the dittafte which all reasonable men had taken to the violence of the opposite party, were gratified, not merely with the test of fuperio- rity they had gained in the recal of Metellus, but likewise in the downfal of some of the Tribunes who had been acive in the late disorders. Pub- lius Furius, now become an object of general de- teflation, fell a sacrifice to the law of Apuleius, which declared it treason to interrupt a Tribune in putting a question to the People. Being accused by Canuleius, one of his colleagues, of violating this law, he was by the populace, who are ever carried by the torrent, and prompt for execution, prevented from making his defence; and, though a Tribune, put to death. Decianus, another of the Tribunes, in supporting the charge against Furius, happened to speak with regret of the death of Saturriinus, a crime for which he incurred a pro-
fecution,
B o o K fecution, and was banished (k). So itrong was the ^_<_ tide of popularity now opposite to its late direction,
and so fatal even to their own cause frequently are the precedents or the rules by which violent men think to obtain discretionary power to themselves. The murder of Nonius was a precedent to jufiify the execution of Apuleius, and both were followed by that of Furius. The law which made it treason to interrupt the proceedings of Apuleius, was em- ployed to prevent any interruption to the ope- rations of his enemies against himself and his faction.
Amidst these triumphs of the ariftocratical party, Sextus Titius, one of the Tribunes, still had the courage to move-a revival of the Agrarian law of Gracchus. The propofai was acceptable in the as- fembly of the people (1). And the edi& was ac- cordingly passed; but it was observed, that while the People were met on this business, two ravens fought in the air above the place of assembly, and the college of Augurs, on pretence of this unfa- vourable omen, annulled the decree (m). Titius, the author of it, was loon after condemned for having in his house the statue of Saturninus (n).
The Consul Acquilius returned from Sicily; and having had an ovation or proceflion on foot for the reduEtion of the Sicilian slaves, was on the following year brought to trial for extortion in his province. He called no exculpatory evidence,. nor deigned to conrt the favour of his judges. But when about to.receive sentence, M. Antonius, who had plead- ed his cause, tore open the velt of his client, and displayed to the court and the audience the scars which he bore in his breast, and which were the marks of wounds received in the service of his country. Upon this fpecacle, a sudden emotion (:) Via. Max. lib. viii. c. . (r) Ibid. pro C. Rabirio. Ibid. de (I) Juiius Obfsqurn,. Oralor. lib. ii. c, 3S. {m Cicero de Lcgibu, lib. i.
of
of pity or respect decided against the former con-c H A p. viEtion of the court, and unfixed the resolution, vl. which a few moments before they had taken to-- ' condemn the accused.
Among the events which difiinguifhed the Con- fulate of M. Antonius and A. Pofthumius Albinus, may be reckoned the birth of Caius Julius Cafar, for whose ambition the feeds oftribunitian disorder now sown were preparing a plentiful harvest. This birth, it is said, was ushered in with many presages and tokens of future greatness. If indeed we were to believe, that nature in this manner gives inti- mation of impending events, we should not be surprised that her most ominous signs were em- ployed to mark the birth of a personage who was destined to change the whole face of the political world, and to lay Rome herself, with all the nati- ons she had conquered, under a perpetuated mili- tary government.
Antonius and Albinus were succeeded in officeu. c. 655. by Q. Cacilius Metellus and Titus Didius. The Q- CTciliug war iill continued in Spain, and fell to the lot ofNep,, Didius. Upon his arrival in the Province, Dola-T. Didiu'. bella, the Propraetor, set out on his return to Rome, and, for his victories in Spain, obtained a triumph. Metellus remained in the adminifiration of affairs in Italy.
The adminifiration of the present year is difinn- Lex Ccii- guifhed by an at in which both Consuls concurred, Didia. and which is therefore marked in the title with their joint names. The Roman People had frequently experienced the defedt of their forms in the manner of enacting laws. Factious Tribunes had it in their power to carry motions by furprize, and to pass in the fame law a variety of clauses; and, by obliging the people to pass or rejet the whole in one vote, frequently obtained, under the favour of some popular clauses, ads of a very dangerous tendency. To prevent this abuse, it was now
enated,
z o o K enaated, upon the joint motion of the Consuls Ca-
__ cilius and Didius, that every proposed law should
be made public three market days before it could receive the ailent of the people: that all its differ- ent clauses should be separately voted: and that it should be lawful for the People to pass or rejec the whole or any part of it (o).
This law had a salutary tendency; and, though far from sufficient to prevent a return of the late evils, it served for a time to flop the current of tribunitian violence; but while the source was open, any mere temporary stagnation could only tend to increase the force with which it occasionally burfi over every impediment of law or good order that was placed in its way. And the inefficacy of measures taken upon the fuppreflion of any danger- ous sedition to eradicate the evil, shows the ex- treme difficulty with which men are led, in most cafes, to make any great and thorough reforma- tion.
It is somewhat singular, that about this time, in the midit of so much animosity of the People to the Senate and Nobles, this superior class of the citizens were the patrons of austerity, and con- tended for sumptuary laws, while the popular Tri- bunes contended for licence. " What is your li- " berty," said the Tribune Duronius to the Peo- ple (while he moved for a repeal of the sumptuary law of Fannius), " if you may not consume what ' is your own; if you muff be restrained by rule " and mealure; if you must be flinted in your "pleasures ? Let us shake off, I pray you, these " musty remains of antiquity, and make free to "enjoy what we and our fathers have gained (p)."
For the petulance of there exprellions, this Tri- bune was, by the judgment of the Ceniors, on the (c) Cic. Philip. v. Pro domo fua. Epilt. ad Atticum, lib. ii. (p) val. M;.. lib. ii. c. 9.
following
following year, expelled from the Senate; and he c H A P. took his revenge by prosecuting the Censor An- vt. tonius for bribery in canvafling for his office. u. c. 656.
Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and Publius Liciniusc"n corne- Crassus being railed to the office of Consul, the lat- lus, P. Lic ter was appointed to relieve Didius in Spain, andniu"c"iru'. the other to succeed Metellus In Italy. There is, during some years, a considerable blank in the materials from which we collet this hitlory; little more is recorded than the fuccellion of Consuls with the number of years, and a few particulars that ill supply the interval in our accounts of what pafled in the city, or in the series of important as- fairs abroad. So far as there particulars, however, can be referred to their refpetive dates, it will be proper, while we endeavour to mark the lapse of time, to record them in the order in which they are supposed to have happened.
In the present year are dated two remarkableu. c. 656. ats of the Senate; one to condemn the use of ma- gic, another to prohibit human sacrifices (q): the first proceeding, perhaps, from credulity in the authors of the law, the other implying some re- mains of a gross and inhuman fuperfiition, which was frill entertained by the People though rejected by the Government (r).
In the following Consulate the kingdom of Cy- rene was bequeathed to the Romans by Ptolomy Appion, the late king. But, as this People pro- sessed themselves to be the general patrons of li- berty, where this blefiing was not forfeited by some adt of ingratitude or perfidy in their allies, they did not avail themselves of this legacy, leav- ing the fubjedts of Cyrene to retain for some lime the independence of their'nation with a species of popular government; and in this form they were allowed to remain as a separate State, until, in a
() Plin, lib. xxx. c. 1. (r) Dion. Caflius, lib. xlii. p. 2X6.
general
R o O K general arrangement made of all the dependencies
n_. of the empire, they came to be reduced to the form
of a province. u. c. 65S. The following Consuls gave its name and its L-.i:' date to an acQ of the People nearly of the fame M,,fi.-sce-tenour with some of those formerly pafled for the .-Lcn. exclusion of aliens. The inhabitants of Italy fiill M.iia dc continued the practice of crowding to Rome, in e!bu "l-expectation of obtaining in a body the prerogative
of citizens, or at leat of intruding themselves, as many of them separately did, into some of the Tribes, by which persons of this description, from voting at elecions, came themselves by degrees to be elected into the higher offices of State.
Times of fation were extremely favourable to this intrusion of strangers. Different leaders con- nived at the inrolment of those who were likely to favour their refpedtive parties. And the facious Tribunes, in whatever degree they may have fa- voured the general claim of the allies to be admit- ted as Romans, treated the fubje& as matter of opposition to the Senate. They expected to raise the fiorm of popular animosity and tumult with the more ease, in proportion as the numbers of the people encreafed. By the act of Licinius and Mucius, nevertheless, a scrutiny was set on foot, and all who, without a jus title, ventured to ex- ercife any privilege of Roman citizens, were re- mitted to their several boroughs (s).
In this Consulate is likewise dated the trial of Servilius Cspio, for his supposed misconduct about ten years before in his command of the army againfi the Cimbri. He had exasperated the po- pular faction, by opposing the a&t of Saturninus for the gratuitous distribution of corn, and his enemies were now encouraged to raise this prose- culion against him. The People gave sentence of
(s) Aoln. in Orat. pro Coraclio Majeft. reo.
condem-
condemnation, and violently drove from the placec H A P. of assembly two of the Tribunes who ventured to v interpose their negative in his favour. Authors, according to Valerius Maximus, have differed in their accounts of the sequel; some affirming that Cepio, being put to death in prison, his body was dragged through the itreets as that of a traitor, andcaft into the river; others, that he was, by the favour of Antifitis. one of the Tribunes, rescued, or enabled to make his escape (t).
C. Norb.anus, who was said to be author of the riot which occasioned the condemnation of CQepio, and the supposed cruel execution of that citizen, was or the following year brought to trial himself for mal-adminifiration and sedition in office; but, by his own popularity, and the address of the ora- tor Antonius, who pleaded his cause, was ac- quitPte.dna).
The war i.n Spain fill continued; and the Ro- mnans having gained considerable victories, sent ten commiflsoners, to endeavour, in concert with Crassus and Didius, to make such arrangements aS might tend to the future peace of those provinces; but in vain; hostilities were again renewed in the following year.
L. Cornelius Sylla4 who had been Quaftor inu. c 66g. the year of Rome fix hundred and forty-fix now, C.Val. after an interval of about fourteen years, and with-M.Hier'rc- out having been Edile, flood candidate for the of-""iu ficeof Prator. Whether his negleAt of political honours, during this period, proceeded from idle- nets, or from want of ambition, is uncertain. His character will justify either conitrution, being equally susceptible of diflipation, and of the disdain of ordinary diftintions. The people, however, refused to gratify him in his desire of passing on to the office of Prator without being Edile; as they
(t) Val. Max. lib. iv. c. 7. (u) Cicero do Orator, lib. ii. VoL.. I. E e were
B o o K were resolved to be gratified with the magnificent
". shows of wild beasts, which his supposed corre-
fpondence with the king of Mauritania enabled him to furnish. But to remove this objection to his preferment, he gave out, that as Pretor he was to exhibit the fame shows which were expected from him as Edile; and having, in the following year, persisted in his suit, he was accordingly elet- ed, and fulfilled the expecations of the People; insomuch, that he is said to have let loose in the Circus a hundred maned or male lions, and to have exhibited the method of baiting or fighting them by Mauritanian huntfmen (w). Such was the price which candidates for preferment at Rome were obliged to pay for public favour.
In this variable scene, where so many particular men excelled in genius and magnanimity, while the State itself was subjet to the government.of a capricious and disorderly multitude, P. Rifflius, late Qeiflor in Asia, exhibited a spectacle sufficient to counterbalance the lions of Sylla; and, if it were permitted in any cafe whatever to treat our country with disdain, an instance to be applauded of the just contempt with which the undeserved re- fentments of corrupt and malicious men ought to be received. Having reformed many abuses of the equestrian tax-gatherers in the province which he governed, he was himself brought before the tri- bunal of an equestrian jury, to be tried for the crime he had restrained in others. In this situation he declined the aid of any friend, told the judges he would make no defence; but fiated the parti- culars by which he had offended his prosecutors, left the court to decide, and, being condemned, retired to Smyrna, where he ever after lived in great tranquility, and could not be prevailed on, even by Sylla in the height of his power, to return
(a) Piin. lib. ii' . c. 16.
to
to Rome (x). Great as the State and Republic of C.H A p Rome was become, unmerited disgrace was cer-.v. tainly ajuf object of contempt or indifference.
The Proconsuls, Didius and Crassus, were per- mitted to triumph for victories obtained in Spain, but had not been able to eitablifh the peace of that country. The war which broke out afresh in one of the provinces was committed to Valerius Flac- cus, and the care of the other to Perperna, one of theConfuls. Flaccus, near the town of Belgida, obtained a great victory, in which were slain about twenty thousand of the enemy; but he could not prevail on the canton to filbmit. Such of the Peo- ple as were inclined to capitulate, deliberating on terms, were beset by their fellow-citizens, and the house in which they were assembled being set on fire, they perished in the flames.
The war having been likewise renewed with theu..c. 661. Thracians on the frontiers of Macedonia, Geminius, c. audiu who commanded there in the quality of Propraetor,Ni. Pci r.p was defeated, and the province over-run by the""' enemy.
The Praetor Sylla, at the expiration of his office, was sent into Asia with a commiflion to reflore Ariarathes to the kingdom of Cappadocia, which had been seized by Mithridates, and to restore Py- lamenes to that of Paphlagonia, from which he had been expelled by Nicomedes king of Bythinia. The Preetor having successfully executed both there cOmmiflions, continued his journey to the Euphra- tes, where he had a conference, and concluded a treaty with an ambassador from Ariarathes king of the Parthians (y).
From an ediet of the Censors, Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus and C. Licinius Crassus, condemning (x) Val. Max. lib. vi. c. 17. Liv. lib. Ixx. Orlofiu, lib. v. c. 17. Ck. de Orat. & in Bruto. Pxdianus in Divinationem. Velleius, lib ii, (y) Plutarch. in Sylla. Appian. in Mithridatico. JuRin, lib. xxiii, ltrabo, lib. xii.
E e the
; o o the schools of Latin rhetoric (z), it appears that
, the Romans, during this period, ifill received with
relutance the refinements which were gradually taking place in the literary as well as in the other arts. " Whereas information," said the Censors in their edit, " has been lodged before us that
schools are kept by certain persons, under the " title of Latin rhetoricians, to which the youth "of this city retort, and at which they pass intire " days in frivolity and sloth; and whereas our an- " cefiors have determined what their children should " learn, and what exercises they ought to fre- " quent: these innovations on the customs and "manners of our forefathers being, in our opinion,
offenfiveand wreng, we publish these presents, " that both masters and scholars, given to there " illicit prafices, may be duly apprised of our '" pleasure (a). Cicero being now fourteen years of age, and employed in learning that eloquence for which he became so famous, was probably in- volved in this censure, as frequenting the schools which, by this formal edit of the magifirate, were condemned.
In the Consulate of Marcus Philippus and Sext. Julius Cafar, according to Pliny, there were in the Roman treasury sixteen hundred and twenty- eight thousand eight hundred and twenty-nine pondo (b) of gold (c), or between sixty and fe- venty or eighty milions fierling. In the fame year a present sent from the king of Mauritania had near- ly produced a civil warin the commonwealth, and greatly inflamed the passions from which that cala- mity soon after arose. Bocchus, in order to re- mind the Romans of the merit he had acquired by delivering jugurtha into their hands, had caused (E) Cicer. de Orator. lib. iii. . c 4. (a) A. Geliu., lib. xv. c. Ax. (b) Th- Roman pondo of ten ounces. (c) P!:n. Harducn, lib. xxxiii. c. 3.
this
this feene to be represented in a groupe of images c H A p. of gold, containing his own figure, that of Ju- ,l. gurtha, and that of Sylla, to whom the unhappy prince was delivered up. Marius, under whose auspices this tranfadtion had passed, being provoked at having no place in the representation of it, at- tempted to pull down the images after they had been erected in the place of their deltinatiori in the Capitol. Sylla was equally solicitous tohave them remain; and the contest was likely to end in vio- lence,. if matters of greater moment had not arisen to occupy the ardent and vehement spirit of there rivals.
The expetations of all parties at Rome, and throughout Italy, were now raised by the projets of Liviis Drufus, an' aive Tribune, who, in or- der to distinguish himself, brought forward many fubjeds of the greatest concern to the public. He acted at first in concert with the leading men of the 'Senate, and was supported by them in order to obtain some amendment in the law as it then flood with rerpe& to the courts of julfice. The Equefirian order had acquired exclusive poffeflion of the judicature. The Senators wished to recover at lealt a Ihare in that prerogative; and Drufus, inLer de ju- order to gratify them, moved for an act of whichdicii- the tendency was, to reflore the judicative power of the Senate: to prevent opposition from the Equefrian order, he proposed, at once, to enrol three hundred knights into the Senate; and that the Senators, who appear at this time to have amounted to no more than three hundred, might not withstand this increase of their numbers, he left to each the nomination of one of the new members; proposing, that from the fix hundred so constituted, the lifts of judges should be taken (d). Many of (d) Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. i. uAt. de ViriElllufribus, c. 66. Ci- cero pro Clientio. t
the
D o o Kthe knights were reconciled to this arrangement, by
- the hopes of becoming Senators; but the order, in -'" general, seem to have confidered it as a snare laid
to deprive them of their consequence in the go- vernment of their country; and individuals re- fused to accept of a place in the Senate, at the hazard of so great and so sudden a change in the condition of their own order, and of the conftitu- tion of the State (e). ti S.te- This Tribune likewise proposed an a& to debase ma r'' the silver coin, by mixing an eighth of alloy. But
the part of his projec which gave the greatest alarm, was that which related to the indigent citi- zens of Rome, and to the inhabitants of Italy in general. d.-c Co- With, a view to gratify the poorer citizens he : o .. proposed that all the new settlements, projeted by
the law of Caius Gracchus, should now be carried into execution. The Consul, Marcus Perperna, having ventured to oppose this proposal, he was, by order of the Tribune, taken into cufiody; and so roughly treated in the execution of this order, lhat, while he struggled to disengage himself, the blood was made to spring from his noitrils. " It
is no more than the pickle of the turtle-fifh (f), said the Tribune, a species of delicacy, in which, it seems, among other luxuries of the table, this Consul was supposed frequently to indulge him- self. if- d- ci- For the allies of Italy, Livius Drufus proposed i:t: so-. to obtain the favourite object on which they had
been so long intent, the privileges and powers of Roman citizens. In all his other proposals, he had the concurrence of some party in the common- wealth, and by persuasion, or force, had obtained (!) Appia. de cl. Civ. fib. i. Aut. de Viris Illuflribus, c. 66. Ci- cr o ro Clicntio. (f) Ex turdis maria. Aut de Viris Iliultribus, inL. Druf. Val. Max. i:b, ix. c. 5. Florus.
hiW
his purpose; but in this he firuck at the perfonalc H A P. consideration of every citizen, and wasoppofed by VI the unanimous voice of the whole People. This Tribune used to boast, that he would exhaust every fund from which any order of men could be gratified, and leave to those who came after him nothing to give, but the air and the earth (g). The citizens in general, however, were become tired of his favours, and the people of Italy were ill- disposed to requite the merit of a projeEt which he had not been able to execute. Soon after the mo- tion, -which he made in favour of the Italians, had been rejected, Drufus was suddenly taken ill in the public assembly, and Papirius Carbo, another of the Tribunes,'made a short speech on the occasion, which, among a People prone to fuperfiition, and ready to execute whatever they conceived to be awarded by the gods, probably hastened the fate of his falling colleague: " O Marcus Drufus !" he said, "' the father 1 call, not this degenerate son; "thou who ufedft to fay, The commonwealth is " sacred, whoever violates it is sure to be pu- - nifhed. The temerity of the son has evinced "the wifdorn of the father." A great shout arose in the assembly, and Drufus (h), being attended to his own house by a numerous multitude, received in thecrowd a secret wound of which he died (i). All his laws were soon after repealed, as having passed under unfavourable auspices. But the in- habitants of Italy were-not to be appeared under their late disappointment, and discontents were breaking out in every part of the country, which greatly alarmed the republic.
In this state of public uneasiness, some pro- fecutions were raised by the Tribunes, calculated to gratify their own private resentments, and tend- (g) Floruw, lib. iii. c. 17. (h) Cicero in Bruto, p. 63. (i) Veleius, lib. ii c. 13, 14. Appian. Florua , lib. iii. c. 17.
ing
o o K ing to excite animofities. Q_ Varius Hybrida ob-
tained a decree of the People, directing, that in- quiry fliould be made by whose fault the allies had been made to expect the freedom of the city. In consequence of an inquest set on foot for this pur- pose, L. Calphurnius Beftia, late Consul, and M. Aurelius Orator, and other eminent men, were condemned (k). Mummius Achaicus was banish- ed to Delos. Emilius Scaurus, who had long main- tained his dignity as Princeps, or firfi on the roll of the Senate, was cited on this occasion before the People, as a person involved in the fame guilt. Quintus Varius, the Tribune, who accused him, being a native of Spain, Scaurus was acquitted upon the following short defence: "Q. Varius, " from the banks of the Sucro, in Spain, fays, That " M. Emilius Scaurus, firit in the roll of the Se- " nate, has encouraged your fubjets to revolt; " Varius maintains the charge; Scaurus denies it " There is no other evidence in this matter: chufe " whom you will believe (l)."
The year following, Varius himself was tried, and condemned agreeably to his own act; and while the prosecutions fufi-ended all other civil affairs, and even the meafiures required for the safety of the public, the inhabitants of Italy were forming dangerous combinations, and were ready to break out in actual rebellion. -They were.exaf- perated with having 'their suit not only refused, but in having the abettors of it at Rome confidered as criminals. They sent deputies to meet at Cor- finium, and to deliberate on a plan of operations. Their deputies were to form a Senate, and to chufe two executive officers, under the denomina- tion of Consuls. (f) Appian. Vai. Mix. lib. viii. c. 6. Cicero in Brnto. (1) Cicero pro M. Scauro filio. Aut. de Viris IlluRribus, c. 72. Qui., tilizn. lib. v. c. 1z. VaL Max. lib. iii. c. 7.
The
The Romans took their firt fCufpicion of a dan- c H A p. gerous design in agitation among their allies, from VL bbferving that they were exchanging hofiages a- mong themselves. The Proconsul Seryilius, who commanded in the Picenum, having intelligence to this purpose from Afculum, repaired thither, in order, by his presence, to prevent any commo- tion; but his coming, in reality, hastened the revolt. His remonstrances and his threats made the inhabitants sensible that their designs were known, and that the execution of them could no longer in safety be delayed. They accordingly took arms, and put to the sword the Proconsul Servilius, with his lieutenant, and all the Roman citizens who happened to be in the place. The alarm immedi- ately spread throughout all the towns that were concerned in the plot; and, as upon a signal agreed, the Marfi, Peligni, Veflini, Marcini, Pi- centes, Ferentanm, Hiypini, Pompeiani, Venufini, Apuli, Lucani, and Samnites, took arms, and sent a joint deputation to Rome to demand a par- ticipation in the privileges of Roman citizens; of which they had, by their services, contributed so largely to encreafe the value.
In answer to this demand they were told by the Senate, That they must discontinue their assem- blies, and renounce their pretensions; otherwise, that they must not presume to fend any other mef- sage to Rome.
War being thus declared, both parties preparedu. c. 661. for the conteit. The allies murtered a hundredl. Juliu thousand men, in different bodies, and under dif-P.Rutilius ferent leaders': The Romans found themselves inLuPu" an infiant brought back to the condition in which they had been about three hundred years before; reduced to a few miles of territory round their walls, and beset with enemies more united, and more numerous than ever had assailed them at once on the fame ground. But their city was likewise en-
larged,
B o o slarged, their numbers encreafed, and every indi-
IL vidual excellently formed to serve the State, as a "' warrior and a citizen. All of them assumed, up-
pon this occasion, the fagum, or military dress; and being joined by such of the Latins as re- mained in their allegiance, and by such of their colonies, from different parts of Italy, as conti- nued to be faithful, together with some mercena- ries from Gaul and Numidia, they assembled a force equal to that of the allies.
The Consuls were placed at the head of the two principal armies; Lucius Julius Caesar, in the coun. try of the Samnites (in), and Rutilius, in that of the Marfi (n). They had under their command the most celebrated and experienced officers of the republic; but little more is preserved to furnish out the history of this war than the names of the Roman commanders, and those of the persons op- posed to them. Rutilius was attended by Pom- peius Strabo, the father of him who afterwards bore the title of Pompey the Great; Caspio, Per- perna, Meffala, and Caius Marius, of whom the !aft had already fooften been Consul. Cafar had, in the army which he commanded, Lentulus, Di- dius, Crassus; and Marcellus. They were opposed by T. Afranius, P. Ventidius, Marcus Egnatitls, Qo Pompedius, C. Papius, M. Lamponius, C. Ju- dacilius, Hircus, Aflinius, and Vetius Cato, at the head of the allies. The forces were similar in discipline and in arms. The Romans were likely to be inferior in numbers and in resources, but had the advantage in reputation, authority, and in the fame of their leaders, inured to command in the highest stations. But so well had the allies' taken their measures, and with so much animbfity did (,r) Now pzrtof iLh kine-om of Naptee. t{) Ccre igucuL part of the EcclCGaftical State.
they
they fiupport a quarrel, which they had been me- C H A P. ditating for some years, that the Romans appeared vl at first unequal to the contest, and were furprifedt'--v and overcome in many encounters.
The detail of these operations is imperfectly re- corded; and does not furnilh the materials of a re- lation either intereffing or infiruftive. We must therefore content ourselves with a lift of actions and events, and with the general result.
One of the Consuls, Lucius Cafar, in the first. encounter of the war, was defeated by Vetius Cato near Efernia, and had two thousand men killed in the field. The town of Efernia was immedi- ately invested, and some Roman Officers of dif- tintion were obliged to make their escape in the disguise of slaves. Two Roman cohorts were cut off at Venafrum, and that colony fell into the hands of the enemy. The other consul, Rutilius, was likewise defeated by the Marfi, and fell in the .eld, with eight thousand men of his army. His colleague was called to the city to preside at the eleAion of a successor; but being necessarily detained with the army, the office continued va- cant for the remainder of the campaign, while the army aaed under the direction of the late Consuls, Marius and Capio.
The corpse of Rutilius, and of other persons of rank, being brought to public funeral at Rome, so alarmed and funk the minds of the People, that the Senate decreed, that, for the future, the dead should be buried where they fell.
In the mean time, Lucius Cafar obtained a vic- tory in the country of the Samnites; and the Se- nate, in order to restore the confidence of the Peo- ple, as if this victory had suppressed the revolt, resolved, that the fagum, or military dress, should be laid aside (o). (O) .-iv. lib. Ixxi . Appian. Orofius, lib. v. c. i2. F:oru. , lib. iii. c. 18. Vcllciii. uLIroli.
The
B 0 0 The usual time of the Consular elecions being ,,-, come, Cn. Pompeius Strabo and Porcius Cato ;. c. 66- were named. ct.bo,'. Pompey gained a complete victory over the L. Po.iu3 Marfi; and, notwithstanding an obstinate defence, CIto. reduced the city of Afculum, where hostilities at
first had commenced, and where the Romans had suffered the greatest outrage. The principal inha- bitants of the place were put to death, the remain- der were fold for slaves. The other Consul, Cato, was killed in an attack upon the entrenchments of the Marfi; and although Marius and Sylla, in different quarters, had turned the fortune of the war againit the allies, yet the event still continued to be extremely doubtful.
The Umbrians, Etruscans, and the inhabitants of other diftri&s of Italy, who had hitherto hefi- tated in the choice of their party, took courage from the perseverance and success of their neigh- bours, and openly joined the revolt. The more distant parts of the empire were soon likely to seize the contagion: they were already, by the obltruc- tion they met with in carrying supplies of provifi- ons or revenue, fevered from the capital, and the allegiance they owed as conquered provinces, when- ever they favi their opportunity to withdraw it, was likely to vanish like a dream or ideal existence.
Mithridates, the king of Pontus, did not ne- glect the occasion that was offered to him; he put al! his forces in motion, expelled Nicomedes from Bythinia, and Ariobarzones from Cappadocia, and made himfrif master of the greater part of the Lesser Asia.
In this extremity it appeared necessary to com- ply with the demands of the allies; but the Senate had the address to make this conceflion seem to be an act of munificence and generosity, not of weak- ness or fear.
The
The Latins, who had continued in their allegi-c H A P. ance, were, in consideration of their fidelity, ad- vL mitted toallthe privileges of Roman citizens. The- Umbri and Tuscans, who either had not yet de- clared, or who had been least forward in the war, were next comprehended; and the other inhabi- tants of Italy, observing, that they were likely to obtain by favour what they endeavoured to extort by force, grew remiss in the war, or withdrew from the league, that they might appear to be forward in the general return to peace.
The Marfi, Samnites, and Lucanians, who had been, the principal authors of the revolt, or who had acted with most animosity in the conduct of it, continued for some time to be excluded from the privilege of Romans. But the civil war, which soon after broke out among the citizens themselves, terminated either in the extirpation of those aliens, and in the settlement of Roman colonies in their llead, or gave them an opportunity, under favour of the party they espoused, of gaining admittance to the privilege to which they aspired: so that, in a few years, all the inhabitants of Italy, from the Rubicon to the Straits of Meflina, were become citizens of Rome; and a conflitution of slate, which had been already overcharged by the num- bers that partook of its sovereignty, was now alto- gether overwhelmed; or if this change alone were not sufficient to destroy it, was not likely long to remain without tome notable and fatal revolution. Assemblies of the People, already sufficiently tu- multuary, being now confidered as the collective body of all the Italians, were become altogether impracticable, or could be no more than partial tumults raised in the fireets of Rome, or the con- tiguous fields, for particular purpfles: insomuch that when we read of the authority of the Senate being set aside by an order of the People, we may venture to conceive all government lufpbnded at
the
P o K the infiance of that party, who had then the popu-
II. lace of Rome at their call. ~.- Licinius CralTus and L. Julius Cafar were chosen
Cenrors, in order to make up the new rols- of the People. This, it is likely, was found to be a dif- ficult and tedious work. It became necessary to scrutinize the rolls of every separate borough, in order to know who were entitled to be added to the lift of Roman citizens; and this difficulty was farther encreafed in consequence of a law devised about this time by Papirius Carbo, in which it was enaced, that not only the natives and antient de- nizens of Italy, but all who should, for the future, obtain the freedom of any Italian borough, if they had a residence in Italy, and had given in their claim to the Preetor sixty days, should by that at become citizens (p): so that the prerogative of the Roman People continued to be in the gift of every separate corporation, as well as in that of the State itself.
The number of the aliens admitted on the rolls, at this muster, is not recorded; but it was proba- bly equal to that of the antient citizens, and might have instantly formed a very powerful and danger- ous faction in the State, if effectual measures had not been taken to guard against the effect of their influence. For this purpose, they were not mixed promiscuously with the mass of the People, but confined to eight particular Tribes (q); by this means they could only influence eight votes in thirty-five (r); and the antient citizens were still possessed of a great majority. But this artifice did not long escape the attention of those who were ag-
p) Cicero pro Archia Poata. (q) Veilcius Pa.erculus, lib. ii. c. to. (r) Historians mention this particular, as if eight new Tribes vere added to the former thirty-five; but the continual allusion of Roman .'ri- ters, to the number thirty-five, will not allow us to suppose any augmnn- tsioa. Cicero de Lege Agraria zda, c. 8.
grieved
grieved by it, and became the subjea of a newc H A P. dispute. vi.
While the Romans were meditating, or a&cually making this important change in the Rate of the commonwealth, they found leisure for matters of less moment, in which they endeavoured to pro- vide for the peace of the city, and the adminiftra- tion of juflice.
Plautius, one of the Tribunes, obtained a newLex Plotia law for the selection of judges, by which it wasde Judi't'. enacted, That each Tribe should annually elet fifteen citizens, without any distinction of rank; and that, from the whole so named, the judges in all trials that occurred within the year should be taken (1). This law appeared to be equitable, as it gave, with great propriety, to all the different classes of men in the State, an equal right to be named of the juries; and to every party con- cerned, an equal chance of being tried by his peers.
The fame Tribune likewise obtained a law forLex Plotia the preservation of the public peace, by which itde i. was declared capital to be seen in public with a weapon, or instrument of death; to occupy any place of firength in the city; to offer violence to the house of any person, or to disturb any com- pany; to interrupt any meeting of the Senate, as- fembly of the People, or court of jultice. To these clauses Catulus subjoined another, in which he comprehended persons surrounding the Senate with an armed force, or offering violence to any magistrate (t).
()' Pedianus in Cornelianam Ciceroras. (t) Cicero pro Calio, et Arufpicumr Rrpontr.
CHAP..
C H A P. Vl. Trirumph of Pompeius Strabi.-Progrefs of SyUid.-
$War with the Kiig of Pntus.-Rife of that Kingdom.-Appointment of Sylla to comnnmaud.-- Policy of the Tribrne Sulpicius.-SyllT's Cinm ffioi recalled in Favour of Marius.-His March fi-om Campania to Romie.-Expels Marius and his Sac- tion from the City.-His Operations in Greece.- Siege of Athens.-Battle of Chaeronea.-Of Or- cholnenos.-T'ranifalions at Rome.-Policy of Cinnai -Marius recalled.-Ciina flies, and is deprived.- Recovers the Poffeffon of Rome.--Treaty of Sylla with Mithridates.-He passes into Italy.-Is op- posed by numerous AJrmies.-- ariaos Events of the IYar in Italy.-Sylla prevails.-His Proscription, or Mafacre.--Namied Dictator.-His Policy-Rr- Jignation-a-nd Death. B o o . R H E social war, though far from being fuc-
j "  cefsful, concluded with a triumphal procef- sion; and the Senate, though actually obliged to yield the point for which they contended, thought proper, under pretence of advantages gaitled orl some particular occasions, to eret a trophy. They singled out Pompeius Strabo for the pageant in this ceremony; either because he had reduced As- culum, where the rebellion first broke out, or be- cause a victory obtained by him had moit immedi- ately preceded the peace. But the most remarka- ble circumfiance in this proceflion was, its being, in shew, a triumph of the old citizens over the new, but in reality a triumph of the latter. Ven- tidius Baffus, being a prisoner in the war, and led as such in the present triumph, came in thg form
of
of a captive to share in the prerogatives of a Ro- c H A P. man; he was, in the sequel, promoted to all the V honours of the State; and himself, in the capacity of a vitorious general, led a proceflion of the fame kind with that in which he had made his first en- try at Rome as a captive (a).
Sylla, by his conduct and his successes wherever he had borne a separate command in this war, gave proof of that superior genius by which he now began to be distinguished. By his magnanimity on all occasions, by his great courage in danger, by his imperious exactions from the enemy, and by his lavish profusion to his own troops, he ob- tained, in a very high degree, the confidence and attachment of his soldiers, and yet in this, it is probable, he acted from temper, and not fiom de- sign, or with any view to what followed. With so careless and so bold a hand did this man already hold the reins of military discipline, that Albinus, an officer of high rank, and next in command to himself, being killed by the soldiers in a mutiny, he treated this outrage as a trifle, faying, when the matter was reported to him, That the troops would atone for it when they met with the enemy (b).
With the merits he had recently displayed in thisu. c. 66s. war, he repaired to the city, laid claim to the Con-LlC : fulate, and was accordingly chosen in conjuntion Pomp. Ru- with Quintus Pompeius Rufus. sus, Cos.
It was thought necessary still to keep a proper force under arms in Italy, until the public tran- quillity should be fully efiablifhed. The army, which had acted under Cneius Pompeius Strabo, Conffil of the preceding year, was destined for this service; and Qgintus Rufus was appointed to the command of it. (a) Val. lib. vi. c. 9. Gellins, lib. xv. c. 4. Plin. lib. vii. c. 43. Dio Caflius, 43. fine. (b) Plutarch. inSylla. VOL. . F f The
B o K The war with Mithridates, king of Pontus,
'... however, was the principal object of attention;
and this province, together with the army then ly- ing in Campania, fell to the lot of Sylla.
The monarchy of Pontus had risen upon the ruins of the Macedonian establishments in Asia; and, upon their entire suppression, was be- come one of the most considerable kingdoms of the East.
Mithridates had inherited from his ancestors a great extent bs territory, reaching in length, ac- cording to the representation of his own ambaffa- dor in Appian, twenty thousand Radia, above two thousand miles. He himself had joined to it the kingdom of Colchis, and other provinces on the coafis of the Euxine sea. His national troops amounted to three hundred thousand foot, and forty thousand horse, besides auxiliaries from Thrace, and from that part of Scythia which lies on the Meotis and the Tanais, countries over which he had acquired an ascendant approaching to a sovereignty. He had pretensions likewise on the kingdoms of Bithynia and Cappadocia, which he had hitherto relinquished from refpet to the Romans; or of which he had deferred the effect until he should be prepared to cope with this for- midable power. All his pretensions indeed, like those of other monarchs, were likely to extend with his force, and to receive no limitation but from the defect of his power. And such were his resources, and his personal character, that, if he had encountered on the fide of Europe with an enemy less able than the Romans were to with- fiand his progress, it is probable that in his hands the empire of Pontus might have vied with that of the greater conquerors. '
About the time that the social war broke out in Italy, Cafiius Longinus, Manius Acquilius, and C. Oppius were, in different characters, Rationed in
the
the province of Asia, and took under their proteai-c H A P. on every power in that country that was likely to vL' oppose the progress of Mithridates.
Nicomedes, who had been recently restored to the crown of Bithynia, made hostile incursions un- der the encouragement of there Roman generals, even into the kingdom of Pontus. Mithridates, having made fruitless complaints to them on this fubjead; and thinking that the diftrafted state of Italy furnished him with a favourable opportunity to flight their resentment, he sent his son Ariara- thes into Cappadocia with a force to expel Ario- barzanes, though an ally of the Romans, and to possess that kingdom. He took the field him- self, and sent powerful armies, under his generals, against Nicomedes, and against the Romans, who had assembled all the force of their province and of their allies, to the amount of an hundred and twenty thousand men, in different bodies, to defend their own frontier, or to annoy their enemy.
Mithridates fell separately upon the several divi- sions of his enemies forces; and having defeated Nicomedes, and afterwards Manius, obliged the Roman officers, with their ally, to retire; Caflius to Apamea, Manius towards Rhodes, and Nico- medes to Pergamus. His fleet, likewise, consist- ing of three hundred gallies, opened the passage of the Hellespont, took all the ships which the Ro- mans had flationed in those straits; and he himself loon after in person traversed Phrygia and the Les- ser Asia, to the sea of Cilicia and Greece. In all the cities of the Lesser Asia, where the people now openly declared their deteflation of the Roman dominion, he was received with open gates. He got possession of the person of Oppius, by means of the inhabitants of Laodicea, where this general had taken refuge with a body of mercenaries. The mercenaries were allowed to disband, but
F f 2 Oppius
B o o sOppius himself was conduced as a prisoner to the
". head-quarters of Mithridates, and, in mockery of
his state as a Roman governor, was made to pass through the cities in his way, with his fasces or en- signs of magifiracy carried before him.
Manius Acquilius likewise fell into the hands of the enemy, and was treated with similar scorn; and with a barbarity which nothing but the most crimi- nal abuse of the power he lately possessed could have deserved or provoked. Being carried round the cities of Asia on an ass, he was obliged at every place to declare, that his own avarice was the cause of the war; and he was at last put to death by the pouring of melted gold into his throat.
While Mithridates thus overwhelmed his ene- mies, and was endeavouring to complete his con- quest of Asia by the reduction of Rhodes, he order- ed his general Archelaus to penetrate by the way of Thrace and Macedonia into Greece.
Such was the alarming ilate of the war when the Romans, having scarcely appeased the troubles in Italy, appointed L. Cornelius Sylla, with fix legions that lay in Campania, to embark for Greece, in or- der, if poflible, to siem a torrent which no ordinary bars were likely to withstand.
But before Sylla or his colleague could depart for their provinces disorders arose in the city, which, without waiting the approach of foreign enemies, brought armies to battle in the streets, and covered the pavements of Rome with the slain.
Publius Sulpicius, Tribune of the People, with a singular boldness and profligacy, ventured to tamper with the dangerous humours which were but ill suppressed in the event of the late troubles; and, as if the State had no experience of civil wars and domestic tumults, lighted the torch anew, and kindled the former animosity of the popular and Senatorian parties. The severe measures hitherto
taken
taken by the Senate and Magistrates against thec H A p. authors of sedition had, in some inflances, been VI. effectual to (hatch the republic out of the hands, of'~ lawless men, and to suspend for a while the ruin of the commonwealth; but the examples so. given, inflead of deterring others from a repetition of the fame crimes, appear only to have admonished the faEtious leaders to take proper precautions, and to make the necessary preparations before they em- barked in designs against the State. They accord- ingly improved and refined by degrees on the measures which they successively took against the Senate; and when the Tribune Sulpicius began to at, he made his arrangements equal to a system of formal war. This Tribune, according to Plu- tarch, had three thousand gladiators in his pay, and in despite of the law of Plautius, had ever at his back a numerous company of retainers, armed with daggers and other offensive weapons; these he called his Anli-fenate; and retained to support him in an attempt, which he was at no pains to disguise, against the authority of the Senate itself. He moved the People to recal from exile all those who had fled from the city on occasion of the for- mer disorders, and to admit the new citizens and enfranchised slaves to be enrolled promiscuously in all the Tribes without regard to the late wife limita- tion of the Senate's decree, by which they were re- firidted to four. By the change which he now pro- posed, the citizens of least consideration might come to have a majority, or a great sway in the public deliberations. The Tribunes would be- come masters in every question, and fill up the rolls of the people in the manner that most suited their interest.
This presumptuous man himself undertook to pro- cure the freedom of the city for every person that applied to him, and boldly received premiums in
the
Bo o K the fireets for this prostitution of the privileges and
" powers of his fellow-citizens.
The more refpeaable citizens, and the magif. trates, in vain withstood these abuses. They were overpowered by force, and frequently driven from the place of assembly. 'In this extremity they had recourse to superstition, and by multiplying holy- days, endeavoured to flop or to disconcert their antagonifis. But Sulpicius, with his party, laid violent hands on the Consuls, in order to force them to recal these appointments. Young Pompey, the son of the present Consul, and fon-in-law to Sylla, v.as killed in the fray. Sylla himself, who had w:ithdrawn from the tumult, feeling that he was in the power of his enemies, and being impatient to get into a situation in which he could more effectu- ally resist them, chore for the present to comply with their demands (c).
In the midst of there violences, the city being under an actual usurpation or tyranny, Sylla re- paired to the army in Campania, with a resolution to pursue the objet of his command in Asia, and to leave the Tribunitian florms at Rome to spend their force. But soon after his departure, it ap- peared, that Marius was no firanger to the councils of Sulpicius; and that he hoped, by means of this Tribune, to gratify an ambition which outlived the vigour of his faculties and the firength of his body. His firfi obje-t was to mortify his rival Sylia, in revoking, by a decree of the People, the appointment of the Senate, and to supersede him in the command of the army againfi Mithridates. A decree to this purpose was accordingly with ease obtained by Sulpicius, in one of those partial con- ventions, which took upon them to represent the People of Italy in the fireets of Rome; and Ma- rius, now appointed general of the army in Cam-
(r) Plutarch. in Mario, p. 5z6. edit. Londin. 4to.
pania,
pania, sent the proper officers to intimate his ap c H A P. pointment to Sylla, and to receive from him, in . behalf of his successor, the charge of the army, and the delivery of the itores. Sylla had the ad- dress to make the troops apprehend that this change was equally prejudicial to them as to him- self; that Marius had his favourite legions whom he would naturally employ; and that the fame act of violence, by which he had supplanted the general, would bring other officers and other men to reap the fruits of this lucrative service in Asia. This persuasion, as well as the attachment which the army already 'bore to their general, produced its effet (d).
The officers, who intimated the appointment of Marius, on declaring their commiflion, found that violence could take place.in the camp as well as in the city. Their orders were received with scorn. A tumult arose among the foldiecs; and citizens vefied with a public character, formally commilfi- oned to intimate an order of the Roman People, and delivering their commands to this purpose, were slain in the camp. In return to this outrage tome relations and friends of Sylla were murdered in the city, and such retaliations were not likely soon to end on either fide (e).
Fation is frequently blind, and does not fee the ife that may be made of its own violent prece- dents againlt itself. Although Sylla is said to have hesitated, yet he was not a person likely to shrink from the contest, in which his own enemies, and those of the State, had engaged him. Stung with rage, and probably thinking that force would be juitified in snatching the republic out of luch vi- olent hands, he proposed to the army that they should march to Rome. The proposal was re-
(d) Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. i. ({e Plularch. in Mario, Edit. Lond. p. 526.
ceived
B o O K ceived with joy; and the army, without any of the
I!. scruples, or any degree of that hesitation which is "'~-~ascribed to their commander in adopting this
measure, followed where he thought proper to lead them.
On this new and dangerous appearance of things, not only Marius and Sulpicius, with the persons most obnoxious on account of the insults offered to Sylla and other refpetable citizens, were seized with consternation; but even the Senate and the Nobles werejulfly alarmed.
A faction, it is true, had assumed the authority of the Roman People, to violate the laws, and to overawe the State; but armies, it was thought, are dangerous tools in political contefis; and no good intention on the part of their leaders, no magnani- mity or moderation in the execution of their in- tentions, can compensate the ruinous tendency of a precedent which brings force to be employed as an ordinary resource in political divisions. Even the present slate of the republic did not appear so de- fperate as to justify such a measure.
The Senate accordingly sent a deputation to Sylla with entreaties, and with commands, that he would not advance to the city. This deputation was received by him within a few miles of the gates. He heard the remonstrance that was made to him with patience, and seemed to be moved. He gave orders, in the hearing of the deputies, that the army should halt; sent the proper officers to mark our a camp, and suffered the commifli- oners to return to their employers, full of the per- suasion that he was to comply with their requeit. But as soon as he thought this intelligence had reached the city, and had lulled his antagonifis into a fate of security, he sent a detachment close on the heels of the deputies, with orders to seize the nearest gate; and he himself, with the whole army, speedily followed to support them.
The
The gate was accordingly seized. The People, c H A p. in tumult, endeavoured to recover it; Marius fe- . cured the Capitol, and summoned every man, whether freemen or slaves, to repair to his fRandard. His party, as they afferbled, were drawn up in the streets. Sylla, in the mean time, at the head of his army, rushed through the gate, which his van- guard still maintained, against the multitudes.by whom they were pressed. He was greatly annoy- ed from the battlements and windows as he passed, and might have been repulsed by the forces which Marius had assembled, if he had not commanded the city to be set on fire, in order to profit by the confusion into which the People were likely to be thrown in avoiding or extinguishing the flames. By this expedient he drove Marius from all the stations he had occupied, forced him to abandon the city, and obliged his adherents to separate.
While the army was difiributed in different quar- ters of a city, deformed with recent marks of bloodshed and fire, their general assembled the Se- nate, and desired them to deliberate on the present slate of affairs. Among the measures he suggested on this occasion, was a law by which Marius, with his son, and twelve of his faAion, who had fccret. ed themselves, were declared enemies of their country. This sentence was accompanied with a public injun&tion to seize or kill them wherever they could be found. The reasons upon which this ad of attainder was granted were, that they had violated the laws of the republic, and reduced the slaves to desert from their maiters, and to take arms against the State (f).
While the officers of juflice were dispersed in execution of this decree, and many others were (f) Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. i. p. 387. The namer mrnlion-d in this a& of attainder or outlawry, were Sulplci., Marius' father and Ton, P. Cethegus, Junius Brutu-, LCniun andl Iub. (ranii, Albinovanu,, Marcus Suetonius.
bury
B o O K bufl in search of their private enemies, thus laid at
i'- their mercy, the Tribune Sulpicius, having fled to
the marshes on the coast near Laurentum, was dragged from thence and slain, His head, fe- vered from the body, as that of a traitor, who had surpassed every leader of faction in the outrages done to the laws and the government of his coun- try, was exposed on one of the rostra; an ex- ample afterwards frequently imitated, and which, though it could not make any addition to the evil of the times, became an additional expreffi- on of the animosity and rancour of parties against each other (g).
Marius, upon his expulsion from Rome, retired to his own villa at Salonium; and, being unpro- vided for a longer flight, sent his son to the farm of one Mutius, a friend in the neighbourhood, to procure what might be necefary for a voyage by sea. The young man was discovered at this place, and narrowly escaped in a waggon loaded with itraw, which, the better to deceive his pursuers, was ordered to take the road to Rome. The father fled to Oflia, and there embarked on board a vessel which was provided for him by Numerius, who had been one of his partizans in the late troubles. Having put to sea, he was forced by firess of weather to Circeii, there landed in want of every neceliary, and made himself known to some herdsmen, of whom he implored relief. Being in- formed of the parties that were abroad in pursuit of him, he concealed himself for the night in a neighbouring wood. Next day, as he was within a few miles of the town of Minturnae, he was alarmed at the fight of some horsemen, ran with all the speed he could make to the shore, and, with much difficulty, got on board of a boat which was pafling. The persons with whom he thus took re-
() Vc:iius Patcrculus, lib. ii. c. 19.
fuge
fuge relifted the threats and importunities of thec H A P. pursuers to have him delivered up to them, or v' thrown into the sea; but having rowed him to a supposed place of safety, at the mouth of the Liris, they put him on shore, and left him to his fate. Here he first took refuge in a cottage, afterwards under a hollow bank of the river, and, last of all, on hearing the tread of the horsemen, who frill pursued him, he plunged himself to the chin in the marsh; but, though concealed by the reeds and the depth of the water, he was discovered and dragged from thence all covered with mud. He was carried to Minturnae, and doomed by the ma- giftrates of the place to susser the execution of the sentence which had been denounced againit him- felfand his parlizans at Rome. He was, however, by some connivance, allowed to escape from hence, again put to sea, and, at the island ]Enaria, joined some associates of his flight. Being after- wards obliged to land in Sicily for a supply of water, and being known, he narrowly escaped with the loss of rome of the crew that navigated his vessel. From thence he arrived on the coast of As- rica; but, being forbid the province by the Pretor Sextilius, continued to ihift his abode among the islands or places of retirement on the coall (h).
Marius was in his seventieth year when he made this attempt to overturn the Roman republic by means of popular tumults, and when he firove to obtain the command of an army in the busiest and most arduous service which the Roman empire had then to offer. Being forced, by his miscarriage in this attempt, into the state of an outlaw, he fill ariused the world with adventures and escapes, which historians record with the embellishments of a pifturefque and even romantic description. A Gaulish or German soldier, who was employed at
(b) Plutarch. in Mario, edit. Lond, p. 534,
Minturns
B O o K Minturne to put him to death, overawed by his a,. aipet, recoiled from the talk; and the people of
the place, as if moved by the miracle, concurred in aiding his escape (i). The presence of such an exile on the ground where Carthage had flood, was supposed to encreafe the majesty and the melan- choly of the scene. " Go," he said to the LiCor who brought him the orders of the Prator to de- part, " tell him that you have seen Marius fitting " on the ruins of Carthage (k)."
The Senate, thus reflored to its authority, and, by the fupprefiion of the late sedition, masters of the city, took the proper measures to prevent, for the future, such violations of order introduced for popular government. They resolved that no question of legislation should be agitated in the as- fembly of the Tribes (1); and Sylla, before he left the city, thought proper to dispatch the election of Consuls for the following year, but did not em- ploy the power, which he now poffefled, to make the choice fall on persons who were both of the senatorian party. Together with Octavius, who had the authority of the Senate at heart, he suffered Cinna, though of the opposite faction, to be chosen, and only exated a promise from him not to difiurb the public peace, nor, in his absence, to attempt any thing derogatory of his own honour (m).
Having in this manner restored the common- wealth, Sylla fCt out with his army for their deflina- tion in Greece. Quintus Rufus, the other Confll of the preceding year, at the fame time repaired to his province in the country of the Marfi, where, as has been mentioned, he was to succeed Cn. Strabo in the command of some legions; but be- ing iens agreeable to these troops than his predecef-
(!}) V .!lus Pz-:r. !:b. iC. c. 19. (A) Plutarch. in Mario. (;i/ A:D;r.n. d: Ec:!. Ci-iil. l;b. i. ( i-. i,. i ; 13' , L. iii. c. . L. Appian. de Bell. Civil, lib, i.
for,
for, the soldiers mutinied upon his arrival, and putc H A P. him to death. Cn. Strabo, though fufpeted of v'l. having connived with them in this horrid tranfadi- on, was permitted to profit by it in keeping his station. So quick was the succession of crimes which difireffed the republic, that one disorder es- caped with impunity, under the more atrocious es- sects of another which followed it.
When Sylla was about to depart from the city,u. c. 666. Virgilius, one of the Tribunes, moved an im-l-: cor" peachment againfi him for the illegal steps he had oaavius, lately taken. But the ltate of the war with Mithri-c' dates was urgent, and Sylla took the benefit of the law of Memmius, by which persons named to command had a privilege to decline answer- ing any charge which should be brought against them, when going on the service to which they were appointed.
The king of Pontus, notwithlfancling he had been disappointed in his attempt upon Rhodes, was become mailer of the Lesser Asia, had fixed his residence at Pergamus, and employed his offi- cers, with numerous fleets and armies, to carry on the war in different quarters, making rapid acqui- fitions at once on the fide of the Scythian and Thracian Bosphorus in Macedonia and in Greece. His general, Archelaus, had reduced most of the Greek islands, and was hafiening to make himself master of the Grecian continent. Delos had re- volted, and thrown off the yoke of Athens, at the time that it fell into the hands of this general. The king proposed to make use of it as a decoy to bring the Athenians themselves under his power. For this purpose he pretended a desire to restore the island, with the treasure he had seized there, to its former maflers; and sent Ariftion, a native of Athens, but now an officer in his own service, with an escort of two thousand men, to deliver this treasure into their hands. Ariflion being, un-
der
B o o K der this pretence, received into the Pyreus, conti-
IL nued to hold this place, with the city of Athens it- """'afelf, for Mithridates, and, by means of the forces he
assembled in Attica, soon after over-ran Beotia, Achaia, and Laconia.
To there powerful encroachments on the Ro- man territory, and to the personal injuries done to such of their generals as had fallen into his hands, Mithridates had joined a barbarous outrage, that roused, in the highest degree, the resentment of the Roman People. He had sent orders to all his commanders in every town and fiation in Asia, on a day fixed, to begin a massacre of the Roman citizens that were any where fettled in that coun- try, and to publish a reward for the slaves of any Roman who should succeed in deitroying their mailer. This order was executed with marks of insult, in which the infiruments of cruelty are often apt to exceed their infirutions. It is parti- cularly mentioned, that at Ephesus, Pergamus, and other cities of Asia, intire families, taking re- fuge in the temples, and embracing the altars, in- sants with their parents, and without dilinftion of sex or age, were dragged from thence and murdered. The number of persons that perished in this massacre, if ever known, is no where men- tioned (n).
The resentment which was natural on this oc- canfon, together with the real danger that threatened the empire, fully justified the contempt with which Sylla treated the impeachment of Virgilius, and the celerity with which he left the city of Rome. Having transported to Dyrachium an army of fix legions, he took the route of Thessaly and ]Etolia; and having raised in there countries contributions for the pay and subsistence of his army, he re- ceived the submission of the Beotians, who had
(c) Appian. de Bell. Mithrida p. Se5, 586.
lately
lately been obliged to declare for Mithridates, and c H A p. advanced to Athens, where Ariflion in the city, VI. and Archelaus in the Pyrseus, were prepared to'w " make a vigorous resistance. Mithridates, who was mafler of the sea, collected together all the troops which he had distributed in the islands, and ordered a great reinforcement from Asia to form an army on the fide of Beotia for the relief of Athens.
Sylla, to prevent the enemy, haltened the siege of this place. He firfi made an attempt to force his way into the Pyrxeus by scaling the walls; but being repulsed, had recourse to the ordinary means of attack. He ereEted towers, and raising them to the height of the battlements, got upon the fame level with the besieged, and plied his mifliles from thence. He shook the walls with battering en- gines, or undermined them with galleries, and made places of arms for his men, near to where he expeced to open a breach. But the defence of the place was vigorous and obitinate, and so well conducted, that he was obliged, after many fruit- less efforts, to turn the siege into a blockade, and to await the effects of famine, by which the city be- gan already to be pressed.
It was in a little time brought to the last extre- mity. Those who were confined within the walls had consumed all the herbage, and killed all the animals that were to be found in the place; they were reduced to feed on the implements of leather, or other materials that could be turned into sus- tenance, and came at last to prey upon the car- cafes of the dead. The garrison was greatly di- minifhed in numbers; and of those who remain- ed, the greater part was dispirited and weak: but Arifion, expecing for himself no quarter from the Roman general, still ffowed no desire to capitu- late; when Sylla, knowing the weak irate to which the besieged were reduced, made a vigo-
rous
B 0 o K rous effort, itormed and forced the walls with
t. great slaughter. Ariftion, who had retired into "-'"c the Acropolis, was soon afterwards takern and
slain.
Archelaus, likewise greatly distressed in the Py- raeus, found means to escape by water, and haflen- ed to join the army that was forming on the fide of Thessaly; leaving the pofR he abandoned to fall into the hands of Sylla, who rated its fortifications to tha ground.
The army of Mithridates advanced into Beotia. Every part of it was sumptuously provided with all that was necerfary for fubfifience or parade. There was a numerous cavalry richly caparisoned; an Infantry of every description, variously armed, some to use miffliie weapons, others to engage in close fight; a large train of armed chariots, which, being winged with scythes, threatened to sweep the plains. The whole army amounted to about an hundred and twenty thousand men. But their mafier, with all his ability, it appears, relied, in the manner of barbarous nations, more on their numbers than he did on their order, or on the con- duc& of their officers. Sylla was to oppose them with thirty thousand men.
On this inferior enemy Archelaus continually pressed with all his forces, and endeavoured to bring on a general action, which Sylla cautiously avoided; waiting for an opportunity that might deprive the enemy of the advantage they had in the superiority of their numbers. The armies be- ing both in Beotia, Archelaus inadvertently took poll near Cheronea, on the ascent of a steep hill that was formed into terraces by ledges of rocks, and which terminated at lafi in a peak or narrow summit. On the face of this hill he had crowded his infantry, his cavalry, and his chariots, and trust- ed that, although the ground was unfavourable to
such
such an army, it was till inacceflible, and could H A P. not be reached by an enemy. VII.
While Archelaus believed himrelf secure in this '-'~ position, Sylla continued to observe him from the post he had fortified at a little diflance; and was told by Come natives of the country, that the hill which the enemy had occupied might be arcended in their rear, and that any part of his army might be safely conduced to the summit. Upon this in- formation he made a disposition to engage, placed his main body against the enemy in front, and, that he might throw them into confusion by a double attack, sent a powerful detachment, with proper guides, to seize on the heights above their encampment.
The unexpected appearance of Sylla's detach- ment in the rear produced the alarm that was in- tended. Their impetuous deCcent from the hill drove in confusion all who came in their way from thence to the camp. The rear fell down on the fiont. A great uproar and tumult arose in every part. And in this critical moment Sylla began his attack, and broke into the midst of enemies, who hvere altogether unprepared to receive him. They were crowded in a narrow space, and mixed with- out any diflinAion of separate bodies of officers or men; and, under the disadvantage of their ground, could neither resist nor retire. In the centre, numbers being trod under foot by those who crowded around them, perished by violence or sus- focation; or, while they endeavoured to open a way to escape, were slain by each others swords. Of an hundred and twenty thousand men, scarcely ten thousand could be assembled at Chalcis in Eubcea, the place to which Archelaus directed his flight. Of the Romans, at the end of the aCtion, only fifteen men were mifling, and of these two re- turned on the following day (o).
(6) For this fat Plutarch quotes the Memoirs of Sylla. VOL. I. G g Archelaus,
B OO Archelaus, even after this rout of his army, be- ,__.~~ ing frill matter at lea, drew supplies from Asia and
from the neighbouring islands; and, being secure in his retreat in Eubca, made frequent dercents on the neighbouring coasts. While Sylla endeavour- ed to cover the lands of Beotia and Attica from these incursions, Mithridates made great efforts to re- place his army in that country; and in a little time had transported thither eighty thousand frelh troops under Dorilaus, to whom Archelaus joined himself with those he had saved from the late difafler. The new army of Mithridates, confifing chiefly of cavalry, was greatly favoured by the nature of the ground in Beotia, which was flat and abounding in forage. Sylla, though inclined to keep the heights on which he was least exposed to the ene- my's cavalry, was obliged, in order to cover the country from which he drew his fubfiflence and forage, to descend to the plains in the neighbour- hood of Orchomenos. There he took post among the marshes, and endeavoured to fortify himself with deep ditches againfi the enemy's horse. While his works were yet unfinished, being attacked by the Asiatic cavalry, not only the labourers, but the troops that were placed under arms to cover the workmen, were seized with a panic, and fled. Sylla, having for rome time in vain endeavoured to rally them, laid hold of an ensign, and rushed in delpair on the enemy. " To me," he said, "it is glorious to fall in this place: but for you, " if you are asked where you deserted your " leader, you may fay at Orchomenos." Num- bers who heard this reproach returned to the charge with their general; and wherever they presented themselves, flopped the career of the enemy, and put them to flight. The Roman army at length recovered itself in every part of the field; and Sylla, remounting his horse, took the full advantage pr the change of his fortune, pursued the enemy
to
to their camp, and forced them to abandon it withc H A p. great slaughter. VIL
After the loss of this second army, Mithridates appears to have despaired of his affairs in Greece: he suffered Sylla to enter into quiet possession of his winter quarters in Thessaly, and authorised Arche- laus to treat of peace.
Both parties were equally inclined to a treaty; the king of Pontus urged by his lofies, and the Roman Proconsul by the slate of affairs in Italy. Sylla, though commanding in Greece by authority from the Roman Senate, had been degraded, and declared a public enemy by a resolution of the People at Rome. An officer had been sent from Italy to supercede him; and a Roman army, inde- pendent of his orders, was atually employed in the province. Mithridates too, while he had sus- tained such losses in Greece, was pressed by the other Roman army in Asia, under the command of Fimbria, who, with intentions equally hostile to Sylla as to Mithridates, advanced with a rapid pace, reduced several towns on the coast, and had lately made himfelfmatter of Pergamus, where the king himself had narrowly escaped falling into his hands. In there circumstances a treaty was equally season- able for both.
Sylla had been absent from Rome about two years, during which time, having no supplies from thence, he had supported the war by the contribu- tions which he had raised in Greece, ]Etolia, and Thessaly, and with the money he had coined from the plate and treasure of the Grecian temples (p). The republic, in the mean time, had been in the poffeflion of his enemies, and the authority of the Senate was, in a great measure, suppressed. Soon after he left the city, Cinna, notwithilanding his engagements to Sylla, revived the proje&t of keep-
(p) Plutarch. in Sylla & Lucullo.
Ggz ing
B 0 o K ing the more refpe&able citizens in fubjetion, un.
der pretence of a government placed in the hands ,.~,' of the People.
The dcfignation of the popular party was the fame with'that which had difiinguifhed the follow- ers of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus; but the objet was changed, and the nominal popular faction it- self was differently composed. Formerly this sac- tion confited of the populace of Rome and of the poorer citizens, opposed to the noble and the rich. The objecs for which they at that time contended, were the distribution of corn, new settlements, or the division of lands. At present the parties consisted of the inhabitants of the country towns lately admitted, or still claiming to be admitted, on the rolls of the People on one fide, and of the Senate and antient citizens on the other. The ob- ject to which the former alpired, was a full and equal participation in all the powers that belonged to the Roman People. They were far from being satisfied with the manner of their inrolment into a few particular Tribes, and laid claim to be ad- mitted without distinction among the antient citi- zens, and to have consideration and power pro- portioned to their numbeis. In this they were sup- ported by Cinna, who made a motion in their fa- vour in the assembly of the People, and at the fame time proposed to recal Marius and the other exiles of that party from their banishment. The Consul Otavius, with the majority of the Senate and antient citizens, opposed there propositions; but Cinna was likely to have a powerful support in the new people that flocked to him from the country towns, and in the friends of the exiles. On the day of assembly, multitudes of the new citizens took poffeflion of the place of meeting, and were observed to be armed with daggers or ihort swords. Octavius was attended at his house by a numerous assembly of the ancient citizens?
)vlXo
kwho were armed in the fame manner, and waitedc H A P. to take such measures as the neceflity of the cafe _ might require. Being told that the Tribunes who had forbidden the queflion were violently attacked, and likely to be forced from the affemb[y, they came forth into the fireets, and drove their antago- nifts, with some bloodshed, through the gates of thecity. Cinna endeavoured to make head againfI his colleague, and invited the slaves, under a pro- mise of liberty, to his standard. But finding if impossible within the city, that was occupied by his opponents, to withstand their force, he with- drew to the country towns, and solicited supplies from thence. He passed through Tibur and Pre- nelle toNola, and openly implored the inhabitants to aid him against their common enemies. On this occasion he was attended by Sertorius, and by some other Senators who had embarked in the fame ruinous faction. Their solicitations at any other time might perhaps have been fruitless; but now, to the misfortune of the republic, a number of armies were still kept on foot in Italy, to finish the remains of the social war. Cn. Strabo com- manded one army in Umbria, Metellus another on the confines of Lucania and Samnium, and Appius Claudius a third in Campania. There ar- mies confilled chiefly of indigent citizens, become soldiers of fortune, were very much at the difpo- fal of their leaders, in whole name they had been levied, to whom they had sworn the military oath, and on whom they depended for the settlements and rewards which they were taught to expet at the end of their services. They were inclined to take part in the cause of any faction that was likely by the expulsion and forfeiture of one part of the city, to make way for preferments and fortunes to the other.
Cinna distrusted Pompey and Metellus; but hoping for a better reception from Appius Claudius,
he
B o o K he repaired to the camp of this general, and had
_ the address to gain'the troops who were under his
command. o ,-ius, Mean time the Senate, without entering into
any particular difcuflion of the guilt which Cinna had incurred in the late tumult at Rome, found that, by having deserted his station, he had acu- ally divested himself of his office as Consul; and they obtained the election of L. Cornelius Merula in his place.
Marius, being informed that one of the armies in Italy, with a Roman Consul at its head, was prepared to support him, made haste from his exile in Africa: he landed in Tuscany, was joined by numbers, and had an offer of being vested with the ensigns of Proconsul. But intending to move indignation or pity, he declined every privi- lege of a Roman citizen, until the sentence of at- tainder or banishment, which had been pro- nounced against him, should be reverted. In the manner practised by suppliants, with a mean ha- bit and ghastly figure, to which he was reduced by the diflrefs of his exile, he presented himself to the People; but with a countenance, fays his historian, which, being naturally stern, now rather seemed terrible than piteous (q). He implored the protec- tion of the country towns, in whose cause he too pretended to have uffiered, and whose interests were now embarked on the fame bottom with his own. He had many partizans among those who had composed the legions which formerly served under his orders. He had reputation and autho- rity, and soon assembled a considerable force, with which, in concert with Cinna, with Sertorius and Carbo, he advanced towards Rome.
They inverted the city in three separate divifi- ons. Cinna and Carbo lay before it, Sertorius
(q) Plut:rcb. in Mario.
took
took poll on the river above, and Marius below c A P. it. The last, to prevent supplies from the sea, vIi. made himself master of the port of Ofia; the first had sent a detachment to Ariminum, to prevent any relief from the fide of Gaul.
In this extremity the Senate applied to Metelius, iequefting that he would make any accommoda- tion with the Italian allies, and haften to the relief of the city. The delays which he made in the ex- ecution of these orders, enabled Cinna and Marius to prevent him in gaining the allies. The inhabi- tants of Italy at this time had it in their option to accept the privileges they claimed from either par- ty; and, having.chofen to join themselves with the popular faction- they threw their weight into that scale.
Metellus, however, advanced into Lalium; and, being joined by the Consul Oaavius, took poll on the Alban Hill. Here they found that the troops, being inclined to favour their enemies, deserted apace. Metellus, being reduced to a few attend- ants, despaired of the cause, and withdrew into Africa. Oaavius returned to his station in the city.
The army lately commanded by Pompeius Strabo, was now deprived of its general; he hav- ing been killed by lightning in his camp. And the Senate was not inclined to repose any confi- dence in his men. He himself had rome time he- fitated between the parties; and the troops, at his death, were prepared to chbofe the fide which was most likely to favour their interest. With so un- certain a profpe&t of support, the Senate thought it safer to enter into a treaty with Cinna and Marius, than to remain exposed to the necessity of being obliged to admit them by force. They offered to reinstate Cinna in the office of Consul, and to re- flore Marius, with the other exiles, to their condi- tion of Roman citizens; only flipulating that they
would
B o o -: would spare the blood of their opponents, or pro-
ceed again:t them according to the laws of the commonwealth. While this treaty was in depend- ance, Marius, affecting the modesty of a person whom the law, according to his late sentence of banishment, had disqualified to take any part among citizens, observed a fullen and obflinate silence. Even when the treaty was concluded, and the gates were laid open to himself and his fol- lowers, he refused to enter until the attainder un- der which he lay should be taken off, and until he was replaced in his condition as a Roman. The People were accordingly assembled to repeal their former decree. But Marius, proposing to take his enemies by surprise, did not wait for the comple- tion of the ceremony. While the ballots were col- lecting, he entered the city with a band of armed men, whom he employed in taking vengeance on all those who had concurred in the late measures against him. The gates, by his orders, were fe- cured, but mofi of the Senators escaped. Sylla's house was demolished, many who were reputed his friends were slain, others aflifted his wife and his children in making their escape. Among the signals by which Marius directed the execution of particular persons, it was underfiood that if he did not return a salute which was offered him, this was to be confidered as a warrant for immediate death. In compliance with these instructions, some citi- zens of note were laid dead at his feet. And as the meanest retainers of his party had their resent- ments as well as himself, and took this opportu- nity to indulge their pafions, the city resembled a place that was taken by storm, and every quar- ter resounded with the cries of robbery, murders, and rapes. This horrid scene continued without intermillion five days and five nights.
The following are the names of a few of the principal Senators who suffered: the Consul Ota-
viur
vius was murdered in his robes of office, and in c H A p. pretence of his liators; two Senators of the name VL. of Cefar, Caius and Lucius; two of the name of Crassus, the father and the son, who, attempting to escape, but likely to be taken, fell by their own hands; Attilius Serranus, Publius Lentulus, C. Nu- mitorius, M. Babius, whose bodies, fattened on a hook, were dragged by a rope through the itreets; Marcus Antonius, one of the first Roman Senators, who had betaken himself intirely or chiefly to civil arts, and is known therefore by the name of the Orator; this Senator being discovered in a place of concealment, was killed by affailins sent for the purpose. The heads of the others were exposed on the rofira; that of Antonius was placed on the table of Marius, who bore him, it seems, a pecu- liar degree of animosity and rancour. Catulus, once the colleague of Marius in the Consulate, partner in his lait and most decisive victory over the Cimbri, and without question one of the most refpetable Senators of the age, was included in the warrant for general execution. Marius being Solicited in his favour, made answer, He mniif die. And this vicim, choofing to avo;d by a voluntary death the insults likely to be offered to him by his enemies, having Ihut himself up, with abrafier of burning coals, in a close chamber which was re- cently plaistered, perished by suffocation.
Merula, the Flamen Dialis, whose name, with- out his own knowledge, had been inscribed Consul in place of that of Cinna, now likewise, willing to maintain the dignity of his ilation, opened his ar- teries at the shrine of Jupiter, whose priest he was, sprinkled the statue of the god with his blood; on feeling the approach of death, he tore from his head the apex or crest of the order, which, by the maxims of religion, he always carried while alive, but with which on his head it would have been im- pious and ominous to die, and took those who were
present
B o o K present to witness of the exactness with which he
m performed this duty.
Cinna himself became weary of the murders which were committed to gratify the avarice of mean and needy adventurers, or the rancour even of figitive laves against the masters they had de- ferted; he wished to terminate so horrid a scene, but it seems could not flop it otherwise than by the death of those who were employed in it. He caused great numbers of them accordingly to be fur- rounded and put to the sword. He proposed, in concert with Marius, to give some form or title to their government, by assuming the Consulate: and although there is no doubt that they could have easily obtained the sanction of an ordinary election, yet they chose to usurp the ensigns and powers of Confu! without any iuch pretence (r). Marius, while he took the title of Consul, continued to acf like a chief of banditti, connived at the disorders that were committed by his military retainers, and - continued still to superintend the execution of the orders which he had given on his firit entry into the city, to put his opponents to death.
In the midst of thele crimes, however, the name of Sylla, and the fame of his vicories in Greece, gave continual presage of a just retribution. Ma- rius was agitated with nocturnal fears, and gave signs of a distracted mind. Some one, he ima- gined, in the words of a poet, continually found- ed in his ears, Horrid is the dying lion's den; which being applied to himself, seemed to announce his approaching dissolution. He took to the exceflive life of wine, contracted a pleurisy, and died on the seventh day of his illness, in the seventeenth day of his lait or seventh Consulate, and in the seventieth year of his age; leaving the tools he had employed
(r) Livy, Epitome, lib. riil.
in
in subverting the government of his country, to c H A P. pay the forfeit of his crimes. VIE.
Livy, it appears (s), had made it a question, whether Marius had been most useful to his coun- try.as a soldier, or pernicious as a citizen. It has happened unfortunately for his fame, that he closed the scene of life with examples of the latter kind. In what degree he retained his genius or abilities cannot be known. His insatiable thirst of power, like avarice in the cafe of other persons, seemed to grow with age. His hatred of the Nobles, con- tradted in the obscurity of his early life, remained with him after he himself had laid the amplell foun- dations of Nobility in his own family. And he died in an attempt to extinguish all just or regular government in the blood of those who only were qualified or disposed to sustain it.
Upon the death of Marius, the government flill continued to be usurped by Cinna. 'Many of the Senators, and other citizens, obnoxious to the pre- vailing party, took refuge with Sylla. This gene- ral himself was declared a public enemy; his es- feds were seized; his children, with their mother, having narrowly escaped the pursuit of his enemies, fled to the father in Greece.
Upon this occasion Sylla did not change his con- duEt in the war, nor make any concessions to the enemies of the State. He talked familiarly every day of his intention to punish his enemies at Rome, and to avenge the blood of his friends, but not till he had forced Mithridates to make reparation for the wrongs he had done to the Romans and to their allies in Asia.
Alarmed by these threats, Cinna took measures to strengthen his party; alfumed, upon the death of Marius, Valerius Flaccus as his colleague in (U) I.ivy, Epitome, lib. viii. Appian. de Bell- Civil. lib. i. Phl- tarch. in Mario. Florup, lib. iii . c 21. Vellcius Pater. lib. ii. t. 19, &c. Dio. Calf, in Fragmcntis.
the
B o o Kthe office of Consul; and, having afligned him the
command in Asia, with two additional legions, trusted that with this force he might obtain poifefi- on of the Province.
But Flaccus, upon his arrival in Thessaly, was deserted by part of the army, which went over to Syiia; and palling through Macedonia in his route to Asia with the remainder, a dispute arose between himself and his lieutenant Fimbria, which ended in the murder of the Conlul Flaccus, and in the fuc- cellion of Fimbria to the command. Sb little de- ference or respect did citizens pay, in the disorder of those unhappy times, even to the government they professed to serve.
Fimbria, with the troops he had seduced to his standard, after he had affaflinated their general, made a rapid progress in Asia, and hastened, as has been observed, the resolution to which Mithri- dates was come, of applying for peace. To this crafty prince, urged by the necessity of his own as- fairs, the conjuncture appeared to be favourable, when so much diffraction took place in the coun- cils of Rome. He had experienced the abilities of Sylla; he knew his eager desire to be gone for Italy, and to be revenged of his enemies; and he expeted to gain him by proffering afiifiance in the war he was about to wage with the opposite party at Rome.
Upon a message from Archelaus, Sylla readily agreed to an interview in the island of Delos; and here being told, in the name of Mithridates, that he should have money, troops, and shipping to make a defeent on Italy, provided he would enter into a confederacy with the king of Pontus, and make war on the Romans, by whom he was now proscribed, Sylla, in his turn, propolsd to Arche- laus to desert Mithridates, to deliver up the fleet and the army which was under his command, and to rely for protection and reward on the faith of
the
the Romans. They will speedily feat you, he c HAP. said, on the throne of Pontus. Archelaus having v"l rejeteed this proposal with horror, " And you," fays Sylla, " the slave, or (if you prefer that title) " the friend of a barbarous tyrant, will not betray " your trust, and yet to me have the presumption " to propose an at of perfidy. The fields of " Charonea and Orchomenos should have made "you better acquainted with the characer of the " Romans."
Upon this reply Archelaus saw the necessity jos purchasing the treaty he was inftrusted to make, and accordingly made the following con- ceflions:
That the fleet of Pontus, confifling of fe- venty Galleys, should be delivered up to the Romans.
That the garrisons should be withdrawn from all places which had been seized in the course of this war.
That the Roman province in Asia, together with Paphlagonia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia should be evacuated, and the frontier of Pontus, for the future, be the boundary of Mithridates's territory.
That the Romans should receive two thou- sand talents (t), to reimburse their expence in the war.
That prisoners should be refiored, and all defer- ters delivered up.
While these articles were sent to Mithridates for his ratification, Sylla in no degree relaxed the measures he had taken to secure and facilitate the passage of his army into Asia. He sent Lucullus (t) round the maritime powers of the East to assemble a fleet; and, after having made tome incursions into Thrace, to gratify his army with the spoil of
(t) About 386,ool0 . (") Vide Plutarch. in Lucullo.
nations
B O O K nations who had often plundered the Roman pro-
vince, he continued his route to the Hellespont, and was met in his way by the messengers of Mithridates, who informed him that their master agreed to all the articles proposed, except to that which related to the ceflion of Paphlagonia; and at the fame time made a merit of the preference he had given to Sylla in this treaty ; as he might have obtained more favourable terms from Fim- bria. " That is a traitor," said Sylla, " whom " I hall speedily punish for his crimes. As for " your master, I shall know, upon my arrival " in Asia, whether he choofes to have peace or " war."
Being arrived at the Hellespont, he was joined by Lucullus with a fleet which enabled him to pals that strait. Here he was met by another message from Mithridates, desiring a personal interview; which was accordingly held in the presence of both armies, and at which the king of Pontus, after some expostulations, agreed to all the conditions already mentioned. In this he probably acted from policy, as well as from the neceflity he felt in the present state of his affairs. He ifill hoped, in conlequence of this treaty, to turn the arms of Sylla against the Romans, and trusted that the peace he obtained for himself in Asia was to be the beginning of a war in Italy, more likely to distress his enemies than any efforts he himself could make against them. With this reasonable profpet he retired into his own kingdom of Pontus; and there, strengthening himself by alliances and the acquisition of territory on the northern coasts of the Euxine, he prepared to take advantage of future emergencies, and to profit by the irate of confusion into which the affairs of the Romans were hastening.
Sylla having brought the Mithridatic war to an ;ifTue o honourable for himself, and having every
where
where gratified his army with the fDoils of theirc Ht A P. enemies, being pofremfed of a considerable rum of V'I money and a numerous fleet, and being secure of the attachment of the soldiers, who had experienced his liberality, and reited their hopes of fortune on the success of his future enterprizes, prepared to take vengeance on his enemies, and those of the republic in Italy. He proceeded, however, with great deliberation and caution; and, as if the State at Rome were in perfect tranquillity, flaid to re- duce the army of Fimbria, to resettle the Roman province, and to effeEt the restoration of the allies, Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes, to their several king- doms of Cappadocia and Bithynia.
Fimbria being required by Sylla to resign a com- mand which he had illegally usurped, retorted the charge of usurpation, and treated Sylla himself as an outlaw: but upon the approach of this general, being deserted by his army, he fled to Pergamus, and there put an end to his life by the hands of a slave, of whom he exated this service. To punish the province of Asia for its defection to Mithri- dates, Sylla obliged the inhabitants to pay down a fum equal to five years ordinary tax. He lent Curio to replace on their thrones the kings of Cap- padocia and Bithynia, who had persevered in their alliance with Rome, and sent an account of these particulars to the Senate, without taking any notice of the edict by which he himself had been stripped of his command, and declared an enemy (w). Before he set fail, however, for Italy, he thought proper to transmit to Rome a memorial, setting forth his services and his wrongs, as well as the in- jury done to many Senators who had taken refuge in his camp, and concluding with menaces ofjuf- lice againit his own enemies and those of the re- public, but assuring the citizens in general of pro-
(tw) Appian. in Bell. Mithridat. Plutarch, in Sy!l.
tetion
B o o K tection and security. This paper being read in the a_ " Senate, struck many of the members with dread-
ful apprehensions; expedients were proposed to re- concile the parties, and to avert the evils which the republic must susser from their repeated contenti- ons. A message was sent to pacify Sylla, and earnest intreaties were made to Cinna, that he would suspend his levies until an answer could be obtained from the other. But Cinna, in contempt -. C. 6 of these pacific intentions, took measures to prose- L. c-l.;ii-cute the war; divided the fasces with Cn. Papirius c^Cn' Carbo, whom, without any form of ele&tion, he P:r .:: assumed for his colleague in the Consulate; and, in 2:A ; the partition of provinces, retained for himself the
administration in Italy, while he afligned to Carbo the command in the neighbouring Gaul. These titular magistrates, with all the adherents of their faction, applied in great hafle to the raising of men, and securing the fidelity of the towns within the several divisions which they had received in charge.
Carbo exa&ed hofsages for their good behaviour from all the towns in his difirit; but as he had not authority from the Senate for this measure, he found himself unable to give it effect. To Cafrricius, the chief magifirate of Placentia, a perfcn of great age, who refused to comply, he laid, " Have not I your life in my power ?" " And have not I," said the other, " already lived " long enough (x) ?"
Cinna, however, having muflered a considerable force, intended to make head against Sylla in Thelfaly, through which he was expected to pass in his way to Italy, and determined to transport his army thither. But the troops being averse to embark, he himfeif, endeavouring to force them, was killed in a mutiny. A general disorder and
(x) Vzl. Max. lib. vi. c. z.
anarchy
anarchy infected the whole party. The electionc H A P. of a successor to Cinna was twice interrupted by `.l supposed unfavourable presages, and Carbo re- mained sole Consul.
At this time an answer arrived from Sylla to the proposals made by the Senate towards a reconcilia- tion of parties; in which he declared, " That he " never could return into friendship with persons "guilty of so many and such enormous crimes. " If the Roman People, however, were pleased " to grant an indemnity, he (hould not interpose, " but would venture to affirm, that such of the " citizens as chore, in the present disorders, to " take refuge in his camp, would find themselves " safer than'in that of his enemy's." He had em- barked his army at Ephesus, and in three days reached the Pyraus, the port of Athens. Here he was taken ill of the gout, and was advised to use the hot baths at Adipfus; at which he accordingly passed some time with great appearance of ease, amusing himself with buffoons and ordinary com- pany, as if he had no affair of any consequence in contemplation. His fleet, in the mean time, con- sising of twelve hundred ships, coafied round the Peloponnefus, and took on board the army which had marched by Thessaly to Dyrachium. Being apprehensive that some part of the legions, upon landing in Italy, and with so near a profpet of returning to their homes, might desert, or, trufi- ing to their consequence in a civil war, might be- come disorderly and distress the inhabitants, he exaAed a special oath, by which every man bound himself, upon his arrival in Italy, to abide by his colours, and to observe the firiteft order in his march through the country. The troops, wishing to remove all the remains of a difiruft which had suggested this precaution, made a voluntary offer of a contribution towards the support of the war; and Sylla, without accepting the favour, set fail with
VOL. I. H h the
B o o K the additional confidence which this proof of at- ^_Ic tachment in the army inspired.
He had, according to Appian, five Roman le- gions, with fix thousand Italian horse, and con- Liderable levies from Macedonia and Greece, a- mounting in all to about sixty thousand men. With this force he landed in Italy, in the'face of many different armies, each of them equal or fui perior in number to his own. The opposite party were supposed to have on foot, at different fiations, above two hundred thousand men. . C.670. L. Cornelius Scipio and C. Junius Norbanus, scip-, c. who were its leaders, being in possession of the Jn -Nor- capital and of the place of elecion, were named
for Consuls. Norbanus, in name of the republic, commanded a great army in Apulia; Scipio, ano- ther on the confines of Campania. Sertorius, young Marius,' with Carbo, in the quality of Proconsul, and others (as Plutarch quotes from the memoirs of Sylla) to the number of fifteen commanders, had each their armies, amounting in all to four hun- dred and fifty cohorts (a); of these different bo- dies none attempted to dispute the landing of Sylla, nor, for some days, to interrupt his march. He accordingly continued to advance as in a friendly country, and in the midst of profound peace. The inhabitants of Italy, confidering the Roman no- bility, in whose cause Sylla appeared, as averse to the claim they had made of being promiscuously enrolled in the Tribes of Rome, were likely to oppose him, and to favour the fation which had for some time prevailed in the State. To allay iheir animosity, or to prevent their taking an active part againfl him, Sylla summoned the leading, men of the country towns as he passed, and gave them assurances that he would confirm the grants, which had been made to them, if.they did not forfeit
(n) About z.5,coo men.
these
there and every other title to favour, by abettinge H A iP. the faftion which had subverted the goverriment. m..
On his march he was joined by Metellus Pitds, who, as has been observed, after a fritlefs alteript, in conjunftion with the Coriful O&avius, to cover Rome from the attack of Marius and Ciniini; had withdrawn to Africai and being forced frorii thence by Eabius, returned into Italy. Being in Liuiria, where he till retained the charater of PFrcbhfiul, lBe enideavoured to kee forrie forces' on fddt, arnd to sustain the hopes of his party; wlien fd giret a chanige wa maide in theiir favour by the arrival of the army frnm' Greece.
Syllia wa likewise, ab'ioit the fame tiif , joined by Cneius Pormpeius, fdn to the late' Cordfu Poi- peiu's Strabi, who, though too young for any public charaaer, had assembled a coniiderable bo- dy of rmen' to make himself of conseq'uence in the present contest. Being now only about nineteen years of age; he was remarked for engaging man- ners, and a manly afpe&, which procured him a ge- neral favour and an uncommon degree ofrefpet&z). This diftintion being unf6ught for, was pbffibly confidered by him as his birth-right, and gave him an early impression of that fuperibrity to his felloiV- citizens which he continued: to assume through the whole of his life. He had served in thole legions with which Cinna intended to have carried the war agairit Sylla into Asia or Greece; but, being averse to the party, he withdrew when the army was about to embark, and disappearing suddenly, was supposed to have been murdered by the order of Cinria, a fufpicioi, which, among other circum- flaices; incited the soldiers to that mutiny in which the general was killed. Sylla appears himself to have beer won by the promising aspea of this young man, and received him with distinguishing marks of regard.
(_) Plutarch. in Mario.
H h 2 Numbers
B OO K Numbers of the Senate and Nobles, who had
"- hitherto remained exposed at Rome to the insults .~,'^~ of their enemies, now repaired to the camp of Sylla,
The Consul Norbanus, being joined by young Marius, lay at Canufium. Sylla, while he was preparing to attack them, sent an officer with over- tures of peace; there they rejected with marks of contempt. This circumstance had an effect which Sylla perhaps foresaw and intended. It roused the indignation of his army, and in the action which followed, had some effect in obtaining a victory in which fix thousand (b) of the enemy were killed, with the loss of only seventy men to himself.
Norbanus, after this defeat, retreated to Capua; and, being covered by the walls of that place, waited the arrival of Scipio, who intended to join him with the army under his command. Sylla marched to Tianum to prevent their junction; and, on the approach of Scipio, proposed to ne- gotiate. The leaders, with a few attendants, met between the two armies, and were nearly agreed upon terms of peace; but Scipio delayed his final content until he should consult with Norbanus at Capua. Sertorius was accordingly dispatched to inform Norbanus of what had pafled, and hostilities were to be suspended until his return; but this messenger, probably averse to the treaty, broke the truce, by seizing a post at Sueffa which had been occupied by Sylla; and the negociation had no other effet than that of giving the troops of both armies, as well as their leaders, an opportu- nity of conferring together; a circumstance which, in civil wars, is always dangerous to one or other of the parties. In this cafe the popularity of Sylla prevailed; and the soldiers of his army, boasting of the wealth which they had acquired under their general, infected his enemies, and seduced them
(b) Plutarch. in Syll. edit. Londin. p. 83.
to
to desert their leader. Scipio was left almost alonec H A P. in his camp; but Sylla, receiving the troops who v'L. deserted to him, made no attempt to ceize their" -' general, suffered him to escape, and, with the ac- cession of strength he had acquired by the juntion of this army, continued his march towards Rome. Norbanus at the fame time evacuated Capua, and, by forced marches in a different route, endeavoured to prevent him.
About this time, Sertorius, who, before the war broke out, had, in the distribution of provinces, been appointed Propraetor.of Spain, defpairihg of affairs in Italy, in which probably he was not fuffi- ciently consulted, repaired to his province, and determined to try what the genius of 'a Roman leader. could effea at the head of the warlike natives of that country.
The chiefs of the Marian party, who remained In Italy, made efforts to collec all the' frces they could at Rome. Carbo, upon heaiing that' the army of Scipio was seduced to desert their general, said, " We have to do with a lion an'd"'a so', of " which the fox is probably the more' dangerous ' enemy of the two."
Norbanus, soon after his arrival in the'city, pro- cured an edit of the People, by wihich'Metellus, and the others had whojoined Sylla, were declared enemies to their country. About ihe'.fame time a fire broke out in the Capitol, and the buildings were burnt to the ground. Various fufpicioris were en- tertained of the cafe ; but as no party had any iri- terest in this event, it was probably accidenitl, ind served only to agitate the minds of the People, prone to fuperfition, and apt to find alarririig pre- fages in every uncommon event.
The remainder of the season ,ias Spenf by both parties in collecirig their forces from every quarter of Italy; and the term of the Consuls in office being nearly expired, Carbo procured his own rid-
minatioai
B O o mination to succeed them, and inscribed the name
of Marius, scarcely twenty years of age, as his t. c. 671. colleague. This young man is by some said to C. M'rius, have been the nephew, by others the adopted son, CsrPo. of the late celebrated C. Marius, whose name had
so long been terrible to the enemies, and at length not less so to the friends, of Rome.
At this time the Senate cofifented to have the plate and ornaments of the temples coined for the pay of the supposed Consular armies. They were, however, notwithstanding this aft of obsequious- ness, believed to incline to the opposite partry, and not to be trusted in cafe the city were attacked. The members being assembled together by orders of the Prztors, Damafippus and Brutus, the most fufpeted, were taken aside and put to death; of this number, Quintus Mucius Scvo!a, Pbritifex Maximus, flying to the temple in which he was ac- customed to discharge his sacred office, was killed in the porch.
The military operations of the following spring began with an obstinate fight between two cori- fiderable armies commanded by Metellus and Carinas. The latter being defeated with great loss, Carbo halfened to the scene of aetion, in order to cover the remains of the vanquifled army.
In the mean time Sylla, being epcamped at Setia, and having intelligence that the young. Ma- rius was advancing agaitift him, put his rrnyin motion to meet him, forced him back to Sacripor- tum, near Prmnelie, where an a&ion soon after en- sued, in which Marius was defeated.
The routed army having fled in difqrder to Prae- nefte, the sirss who arrived w\ere received intp the place; but as it was apprehended the eneimy., ight likewise enter in. the tumult, the gates 'vere flhut, and many, being excluded,- ere flaughtered.under the ramparts. Marius himself efcapd, by a r.pe
which
which was let down from the battlements to hoil c 9 A p. him over the walls. Vl.
In consequence of this victory Sylla invetRd' Prrnefie; and as great numbers were thus ftid- denly cooped up in a town, which was not pre- pared to fubfit them, he had an immediate prof- peEt of feeing them reduced to the neceflity of fur- rendering at discretion. Committing the charge of the blockade to Lucretius Offella, he himself, with part of the army, proceeded to Rome. Me- tellus, in a second action, had defeated the army of Carbo, and Pompey that of Marius near Sena; and the party of Sylla being vicorious in every part of Italy, the city was prepared to receive him as soon as he appeared at the gates. The p'atizans of the opposite faciori withdrew, and left him iafier of the capital.
Sylla having posted his army in the field: of Mars, he himself entered the city, and calling an assembly of the People, delivered san harhngpe; in which he imputed the disorder of the time's to the injustice and cruelty of a few factious.re'n, who lad overturned the government, and sacrificed the belt blood of the republic to their ambitiora and to their personal resentments. He exhorted all well- disposed men to be of good courage, arid assured them that they should soon fee the republic re- stored. In the mean time, he gratified his army with the spoils of the opposite party, declaring the effe'ts of all tlofe to be forfeited who had been ac- celfary to the crimes lately committed against the State. After this first specimen of his policy in the city, leaving a sufficient force to execute his or- ders, he hastened to Clufium, where Carbo; being joined by a considerable' reinforcement from Spain, was preparing to recover the metropolis; or-to re- lieve his colleague Marius, who- Was- reduced to great distress in PrsnefRe.
The
B o o K The events which followed the arrival and ope-
.__, rations of Sylla in Tuscany were various, but for
the most part unfavourable to Carbo, whose force, by desertions and the sword, was declining apace. The issue of the war seemed to depend on the fate of Prsnefte, and the whole force of the party was therefore direted to the relief of that place. The Lucanians and Samnites, who had espoused the cause of Marius, and who, by his favour, had ob- tained the freedom of Rome, apprehending im- mediate ruin to themselves, in the fuppreflion of a party by whom they had been prote&ed, determined to make one great effort for the relief of Marius.
They were joined in Latium by a large detach- ment sent by Carbo, under Carinas and Marcius, and made an attempt to force the lines of the be- fiegers at Pranefte, and to open the blockade of that place. But having failed in this design, they turned, with desperation, on the city of Rome, which was but sightly guarded by a small detach- ment which had been left for that purpose. Sylla being informed of their intention, with hafiy marches advanced to the city, and found the enemy already in possession of the suburbs, and preparing to force the gates.
It was about four in the afternoon when he ar- rived, after a long march. ' Some of his officers proposed, that the troops, being fatigued, should have a little time to repose themselves; and that, for this purpose, they should remain on the ram- parts until the following day. Sylla, however, proposing, by his unexpected pretence, and by coming to action at an unusual hour, to surprise the enemy, gave orders for an immediate attack. The event for some time was doubtful; the wing that was led by himfeif gave way, or was forced from its ground; but the other wing under Crassus
had
had a better fortune, put the enemy to flight, and c n A P. drove them to Antemnae. V1.
The action, though thus various in the differentt '-'~ parts of it, became, in the event, completely de- cifive. Eighty thousand of the Marian party were killed in their flight, and eight thousand taken. Carbo, in despair of the cause, fled into Sicily. The troops that were blocked up in' Prenefte, having no longer any hopes of relief, surrendered themselves, and the whole party was dispersed or cut off. Marius attempted to escape by the galle- ries of a mine, and being prevented, killed him- self. His head was carried to Sylla, and by his order exposed in the market-place. " That boy," he said, " should have learnt to. row before he at- " tempted to fleer !"
Sylla being now mailer of the republic, all men were in anxious expetation of the sequel; nor was it long before they had a specimen of the measures he was likely to pursue. About fix or eight thou- sand of those who were supposed to be the vilefl infiruments of the late ufuipations and murders, being taken prisoners in the war, or surprised in the city, were, by his direction, shut up in the circus, and instantly put to death.
While this horrid scene was acting, he had as- fembled the Senate, at a little distance, in the tem- ple of Bellona; and as most of the members then present had either favoured, or at least tamely sub- mitted to the late usurpation, he made them a speech on the slate of the republic, in which he reproached many of them as acceflary to the late disorders, and admonished them, for the future, to refpeft the legal government and conlsitution of their country. In the midst of these admonitions, the cries of those who were slaughtered in the circus reaching their ears, the assembly was greatly alarm- ed, and many of the members flarted from their ,feats. Sylla, with a countenance iemr, but un-
disturbed,
Bo o K disturbed, checked them as for an inflance of le-
"- vity. " Be composed," he said, " and attend to ~'"' the business for which you are called. What
" you hear are no more than the cries of a few " wretches, who are suffering the punishment due " to their crimes." From this interruption he resumed his subjet, and continued speaking till the massacre of these unhappy victims was com- pleted.
In a harangue which he afterwards delivered to the People, he spoke of his own services to the re- public, and of the misdemeanour of others, in terms that struck all who heard him with terror. " The " republic," he said (if his opinion were followed), L should be purged; but whether it were so or no, " the injuries done to himself and his friends should
be punished." He accordingly ordered military execution against every person who had been ac- ceffary to the late massacres and usurpations; and while the sword was yet reeking in his hands, pass- ed great part of his time, as usual, in mirth and dissipation with men of humourous and singular charaters. He deigned not even to inquire into the abuses that were committed in the execution of his general plan. The persons who were em- ployed in it, frequently indulged their own private resentment and their avarice in the choice of vic- tims. Among these, Catiline, then a young man, had joined the victorious party; and he plunged, with a singular impetuosity, into the midst of a form which now overwhelmed a part of the city. He is said, among other persons to whom he bore an aversion, or whose effects he intended to seize, to have murdered his own brother, with firange circumfiances of cruelty and horror.
While these dreadful murders, mixed with many examples of a just execution, were perpe- trated, a young man, C. Metellus, had the courage to address himself to Sylla in the Senate,
and
and desired he would make known the extent ofc H A p. his design, and how far these executions were to be V1," carried ? " We intercede not," he said, " for the "condemned; we only intreat that you would re- " lieve out of this dreadful slate of uncertainty all
those whom in reality you mean to spare." Sylla, without being offended at this freedom, .pu.lifhed a lift of those he had doomed to deftruc- tipn, offering a reward of two talents for the head of each, and denouncing severe penalties againit ,eery person who should harbour or conceal them. Hence arose the pra'tice of publishing lifts of the persons to be marfacred, which, under the odious name of profcriptiol, was afterwards imitated with ., l^ fatal effects inthe :subsequent c vulfions of the State.
The present proscription, although it promised some security to all who were not comprehended in the fatal lift, dpened a scene, in some refpe&s, more dreadful than that which had been formerly acted in this nmaffacre. The. hands of servants were hired against their masters, and. even those of children against their parents. The mer.cenary of .every denomination were encour.age.d, hy; a, great premium, to conmit. what before only the. ministers gf'public justice thought themselves entitled to per- form; apd, there followed a scene, in, which human nature had full. scope to. exert all: the evil of which it"'is susceptible, treachery, ingratitu.de, difiruft, malice, and revenge,; and would- have. retained. no claim to our efteern or commiseration, if its cha- rafter had not been redeemed by contrary in- frances of fidelity, generosity., and courage, dif- played by those who,. to preferv e :theirfriends and benefagtors, or even to preserve, frangers, who took refuge under their prqteaion, hazarded all the dangers with which the proscribed themselves were threatened.
ln
o o K In consequence of there measures, about five
__thousand persons of consideration were put to
death, among whom were reckoned forty Se- nators, and sixteen hundred of the Equestrian order.
From these beginnings the Romans had reason to apprehend a tyranny, more sanguinary perhaps than any that ever afflicted mankind. " If in the ", field you flay all who are found in arms against " you," said Catulus (b), "and in the city you " flay even the unarmed; over whom do you pro- " poe to reign ?"
These reproaches were by Sylla received as jests; and the freedom and ease of his manners, as well as the professions he made of regard to the commonwealth, were imputed to insensibility, and to a barbarous dissimulation, which rendered his character more odious, and the profpet of his fu- ture intentions more terrifying.
In comparing the present with the late ufurpati- ons, men recolleaed, that Marius, from his in- fancy, had been of a severe and inexorable tem- per; that his resentments were sanguinary, and even his frowns were deadly; but that his cruelties were the effect of real passions, and had the apo- logy of not being perpetrated in cold blood; that every person on whom he looked with indifference was safe; and that even when he usurped the go- vernment of the State, as soon as his personal re- fentments were gratified, the sword in his hand be- came an innocent pageant, and the mere ensign or badge of his power. But that Sylla directed a massacre in the midst of composure and ease. that as a private man he had been affable and pleasant, even noted for humanity and candotr (c); that the change of his temper having commenced with his (b) Probably the Con of him who perifed in the tyranny of Marius. ic) Plu:zrch. in S)11.
exaltation,
.exaltation, there were no hopes that the fheddingc H A p. of blood could be flopped while he was suffered to Vi. retain his power. His daring spirit, his address, ' - his cunning, and his ascendant over the minds of men, rendered the profped of a deliverance, if not desperate, extremely remote. The republic teemed to be extinguished for ever; and if the rage of blood, after the first heat of the massacre, appeared to abate, it was flayed only for want of victims, not from any principle of moderation, or sentiment of clemency.
Such was the aspea of affairs, and the grounds of terror conceived even by those who were inno- cent of the late disorders; but to those who had reason to fear the resentment of the vitor, the prof- pedt was altogether desperate. Norban us, having fled to Rhodes, received at that place an account of the proscriptions, and, to avoid being delivered up, killed himself. Carbo, being in Sicily, endea- voured to make his escape from thence, but was apprehended by Pompey, and killed. All the or- dinary offices of State were vacated by the defer- tion or death of those who had filled or usurped them.
Sylla had hitherto ated as malter, without any other title than that of the sword; and it was now thought necessary to supply the defeQ. He retired from the city, that the Senate might assemble with the more appearance of freedom. To name an interrex was the usual expedient for refioring the constitution; and proceeding to elections in a legal form after the usual time had elapsed, or when by any accident the ordinary succession to office had failed. Valerius Flaccus was named. To him Sylla gave intimation, that, to resettle the commonwealth, a Diatator, for an indefinite term, should be ap- pointed, and made offer of his own services for this purpose. These intimations were received as :ommands. Flaccus, having assembled the Peo-
ple,
s o o Kple, moved for an at to vest Sylla with the title of
". Dictator, which gave him a discretionary power
over the persons, fortunes, and lives of all the citi- zens.
No example of this kind had taken place for a hundred and twenty years preceding this date. In the former part of this period, the jealousy of the arifiocracy, and in the latter part of it, the nega- tive of the Tribunes, had always prevented a mea- sure from which they severally apprehended some danger to themselves. It was now revived in the person of Sylla with unusual solemnity, and rati- sied by an act of the People, in which they yield- ed up at once all their own claims to the fove- reignty, and submitted to monarchy for an indefi- nite time. Sylla having named Valerius Flaccus for his lieutenant or commander of the horse, re- turned to the city, presenting a fight that was then unusual, a single person, preceded by four-and- twenty lictors, armed with the axe and the rods; and it was not doubted that these ensigns of ma- giftracy were to be employed, not for parade, but for serious execution, and were speedily to be fiained with the blood of many citizens, whom the sword had spared. The Dictator, being at- tended likewise by a numerous military guard, in order that the city, in all matters in which it was not necessary for himself to interpose, might fiill enjoy the benefit of the usual forms, he directed the People to assemble, and to fill up the ordinary lifts of office.
Lucretius Offella, the officer who had command- ed in the reduction of Prenefte, presuming on his favour with the Dictator, and on his consequence with the army, offered himself for the Cofifulate. Being commanded by Syila to desist, he frill con- tinued his canvas, and was, by order of the Dita- tor, put to death, while he solicited votes in the streets. A tumult immediately arose the Centu-
rion,
riqn, who executed this order againfi Offella, was c H A p. seized, and, attended by a great'concourfe of peo- vlI. pie, was carried before the Ditator. Sylla heard the complaint with great composure, told the mul- titude who crowded around him, that Offella had been slain by his orders, and that the Centurion must therefore be released. He then dismissed them, with this homely but menacing apologue. " A countryman at his plough, feeling himself " troubled with vermin, once and again made a " halt'to pick them off his jacket; but being " molefled a third time, he threw thejacket, with C' all its contents, into the fire. Beware," he said,
of the fire; provoke me not a third time(e)." Such was the tone of a government, which, froni this example, was likely to be fatal to many who had concurred in the efiablifhment of it, as well as to those of the opposite party.
Sylla, soon after his elevation to the flation of'. c. 675. Ditator, proceeded to make his arrangements and Decuincn. to new-model the commonwealth. The army (f)bl, D"'' appeared to have the firfl or preferable claim to his attention. He accordingly proposed to reward them by a gift of all the lands which had been for- feited by the adherents of the opposite party. Spo- letum, Interamna, Praenefie, Fluentia, Nola, Sul- mo, Volaterra, together with the countries of Sam- nium and Lucania, were depopulated to make way for the legions who had served under him- self in the reduction of his enemies. In there new, inhabitants of Italy, whose prosperity depended on his safety, he had a guard to his perlbn, and a sure support to his power. By changing their con- dition from that of soldiers to land-holders and peasants, he dispelled, at the fame time, that (c) Appian. in Bell. Civil. iib. i. Plutarch. in Sylla. (f) It appears that Livy reckoned forty-feven legions, Epitom. lib. lxuxix.
dangerous
B o o K dangerous cloud of military power, which he him- ^ ^,, efelf or his antagonists had raised over the common-
wealth, and provided for the permanency of any reformations he was to introduce into the civil establishment. The troops, from soldiers of for- tune, became proprietors of land, and interested in the preservation of peace. In this manner, whatever may have been his intention in this ar- bitrary aft of power, so cruel to the innocent sufferers, if there were any such, the measure had an immediate tendency to terminate the public confusion. Its future consequences, in point- ing out to new armies, and to their ambitious leaders, a way to supplant their fellow-citizens in their property, and to practise usurpations more permanent than that of Sylla, were probably not then foreseen.
The next aQ of the Dictator appears more in- tirely calculated for the security of his own per- son. A body of ten thousand men, lately the property of persons involved in the ruin of the vanquished party, having their freedom and the right of citizens conferred on them, were en- rolled promiscuously in all the Tribes; and as the enfranchised slave took the name of the per- son from whom he received his freedom, these new citizens became an acceflion to the family of the Cornelii, and in every tumult were likely to be the sure partizans of Sylla, and the abet- tors of his power. They had received a free- dom which was connected with the permanency of his government, and foresaw, that, if the leaders of the opposite party, in whose houses they had served, should be restored, they them- selves must return into the condition of slaves; and they accordingly became an additional fecu- rity to the government which their patron was about to establish.
So
So far Sylla seemed to intend the security ofc H A pR his own person, and the liability of his govern- ,-- ment; but in all his subsequent inflitutions, he had a view to reftdre the arifiocracy in its legis- lative and judicative capacity, to provide a proper supply of officers for conducting the accumu- lated affairs of the commonwealth, to furnilh hands for every department, and to guard against the growing depravity of the times, by extend- ing and securing the execution of the laws. He began with filling up the rolls of the Senate which had been greatly reduced by the war, and by the sanguinary policy of the parties who had prevailed in their turns. He augmented the number of this body to five hundred; taking the new members from the Equefirian order, but ' leaving the choice of them to the People.
The legislative power of the Senate, and theLexde J. judicative power of its members were reftored.dicii'. The law that was provided for the last of these purposes confifled of different clauses. By the first clause it was enacted, that none but Senators, or those who were intitled to give their opinion in the Senate (g), Ihould be put upon any jury or lift of the judges (h). By the second, that, of the judges so feleted, the parties should not be allowed to challenge or reject above three.
By a third clause it was provided, that judg- ment, in trials at law, should be given either by ballot, or openly, at the option of the defen- dant; and by a separate regulation, that the nomination of officers to command in the provin- ces, with the title of Proconsul, should be commit- ted to the Senate. (g) All the officers of State, even before they were put upon the rol!c, were intitled to speak in the Senate. (b) Tacit. Anal. lib. xi. Cic. pro Cliento. VOL. I. I During
B OOK During the late tribunitian usurpation, the ^ ,' whole legislative and executive power had, under
pretence of veiling those prerogatives in the as- fembly of the Tribes, been seized by the Tri- bunes. But Sylla restored the antient form of assembling the People by Centuries, and reduced the Tribunes to their defensive privilege of in- terpofing by a negative against any a& of op- pression; and he deprived them of their pre- tended right to propose laws, or to harangue the People. He moreover added, that none but Senators could be elected into the' office of Tribune and, to the end that no person of a factious ambition might chufe this flation, he procured it to be enacted, that no one who had borne the office of Tribune could afterwards be promoted into any other rank of the magif- tracy.
With refpe& to the offices of State, this new founder of the commonwealth revived the obfo- lete law which prohibited the re-eleftion of any person into the Consulate, till after an interval of ten years; and enacted, that none could be elected Consul till after he had been Qaftiior, .Edile, and Prator. He augmented the num- ber of Pretors from fix to eight; that of Quar- tors to twenty; and, to guard againit the dif- orders which had recently afflited the republic, declared it to be treason for any Roman officer, without the authority of the Senate and People, to go beyond the limits of his province, whether with or without an army, to make war, or to in- vade any foreign nation whatever.
He repealed the law of Domitius relating to the election of priefis, and restored to the college the intire choice of their own members.
He made several additions to the criminal law, by statutes against subornation, forgery, wilful
fire,
fire, poisoning, rape; assault, extortion, and for- C H A P. cibly entering the house of a citizen; and a flatute VI". making it penal to be found with deadly weapons of any fort. To all there he added a sumptuary law, of which the tenor is not precisely known; but it appears to have regulated the expence at ordinary (h) meals and at funerals, and to have likewise fettled the price of provisions.
These laws were promulgated at certain inter- vals, and intermixed with the measures which were taken to restore the peace of the empire. In order to finish the remains of the civil war, Pompey had been sent into Sicily and Africa, and C. Annius Lufcus into Spain. In this province, Sertorius had taken arms for the Marian faction; but being at- tacked by the forces of Sylla, and ill supported at first by the Spaniards, he fled into Africa. From thence, hearing that the Lufitanians were disposed to take arms against the reigning party at Rome, he repassed the sea, put himself at their head, and in this situation was able, for rome years, to find occupation for the arms of the republic, and for its most experienced generals.
Soon after the departure of Sylla from Asia, Mu- rena whom he had left to command in that pro- vince, found a pretence to renew the war with Mithridates; and, having ventured to pass the Halys, was defeated by that prince, and afterwards arraigned as having infringed the late treaty of peace. Sylla listened to this accusation, difap- proved the conduEt of Murena, and sent first A. Gabinius, and afterwards Minucius Thermus, to supersede him in the province.
Mean time Sylla himself exhibited a splendid triumph on account of his victories in Asia and Greece. The proceflion lasted two days. On the first, he deposited in the treasury fifteen thousand
(b) Gellius, lib. ii. c. 24
.Ii a pondo
B o o x pondo of gold (i), and an hundred and fifteen thou-
f and pondo of silver (k); on the second day, thir- teen thousand pondo of gold (1), and seven thou- sand pondo of silver (m). There was nothing that had any reference to his vi&ory in the civil war, except a numerous train of Senators, and other citizens of diffinction, who, having resorted to his camp for protection, had been restored by him to their estates and their dignities, and now followed his chariot, calling him Father, and the deliverer of his Country. v. c. 67:. Upon the return of the eletions, Sylla was L. C-o. S, C4 . again chosen Consul, together with Q. Cecilius ciil. Metellus. The latter was destined, at the expira- Sp^rt'. tion of his office, to command against Sertorius in
Spain. Sylla himself frill retained the Ditatorial power, and was employed in promulgating some of the aats of which the chief have been men- tioned.
Pompey having, in the preceding year, by the death of Carbo, and the dispersion of his party, finished the remains of the civil war in Sicily, was now ordered by the Senate to transport his army into Africa. There Domitius, a leader of the op- pofite fa&tion, had erected his standard, aflembled some remains of the vanquithed party, and re- ceived all the fugitives who crowded for refuge to his camp. Pompey accordingly departed from Si- cily, leaving the command of that island to Mem- mius, and embarked his army, consisting of fix legions, in two divisions; one landed at Utica, the other in the bay of Carthage. Having come to an engagement with Domitius, who had been joined by Jarbas, an African prince, he obtain- ed a complete victory over their united forces, (i) Rcc'skning the pondo at ten ounces, and 41. aa *ence, this will talke about 60,ao0 I. (i) About a87,5ool. (1) About 50,000ooo. ([=) About 140,03ol. Plin. Iib. xxxiii.initio.
and
and afterwards penetrated, without any refifiance, c H A 1'. into the kingdom of Numidia, which though de- pendant on the Romans, had not yet been reduced to the form of a province.
The war being ended in this quarter, Sylla thought proper to supersede Pompey in the pro- vince, and ordered him to disband his army, re- serving only one legion, with which he was to wait for his fucceflor. The troops were greatly incensed at this order; and, thinking themselves equally entitled to settlements with the legions who were lately provided for in Italy, refused to lay down their arms. They earnestly intreated their general to embark for Rome, where they promised to make him master of the government. This young man, with a moderation which he continued to support in the height of his ambition, withitood the temp- tation, and declared to the army, that, if they persised in their purpose, he must certainly die by his own hands; that he would not do violence to the government of his country, nor be the object or pretence of a civil war. If in reality he had en- couraged this mutiny, it was only that he might thus have the honour of reclaiming the soldiers, and of rejecting their offer. The ambition of this singular person, as will appear from many passages of his life, led him to aim at consideration more than power.
While Pompey was endeavouring to bring the troops to their duty, a report was carried to Rome, that he had actually revolted; and was preparing with his army, to make a descent upon Italy. " It " appears to be my fate," said Sylla, " in my old
age, to fight with boys;" and he was about to recal the veterans to his flandard, when the truth was discovered, and the part which Pompey had ated was properly represented. The merit of this young man on that occasion was the greater, that he himself was unwilling to disband the army be-
fore
B o 0 K fore theyfhould return into Italy to attend atriumph,
n'. which he hoped to obtain; and that the resolution
he took to comply with his orders, proceeded from refpedt to the Senate, and the authority of the State.
Sylla, won by the behaviour of Pompey on this occasion, was inclined to difpenle with his former commands, and accordingly moved the assembly of the People, that the legions serving in Africa might return into Italy.
This motion was opposed by C. Herennius, Tri- bune of the People, who ventured to employ the prerogative of his office, however impaired, against the power of the Ditator. But Sylla perfitled; obtained a law to authorise Pompey to enter with his army into Italy; and when he drew near the city, went forth with a numerous body of the Se- nate to receive him. On this occasion, it is said, that, by calling him the-Great Pompey, Sylla fixed a designation upon him, which, in the Ro- man way of diffinguifhing persons by nick-names, whether of contempt or refpe't, continued to fur- nifh him with a title for life. The times were wretched when armies itated themselves in the commonwealth as the partizans of their leader, and when the leader, by not betraying his country, was supposed to perform a great acion.
Pompey, upon this occasion, laid claim to a triumph. Sylla at firfi opposed it as being con- trary to the rule and order of the commonwealth, which reserved this honour for persons who had at- tained to the rank of Consul or Pretor; but he afterwards complied, being struck, it is said, with a mutinous faying of this aspiring young man, bidding him recolle&, that there were more per- sons disposed to worship the rising than the setting fun.
In the triumph which Pompey accordingly ob- tained, he meant to have entered the city on a
carriage
carriage drawn by elephants; but there animalsc H A p. could not pass abreast through the gates. His 'v1 donation to the troops falling short of their expec- tation, and they having murmured, and even threatened to mutiny, he said, the fear of losing his triumph Ihould not affect him; that he would in- flantly disband the legions, rather than comply with their unreasonable demands. This check, given to the presumption of the army by an offi- cer so young and so aspiring, gave a general satis- fation. P. Servilius, a Senator of advanced age, said, upon this occasion, " That the young man " had at last deserved his triumph and his title."
Pompey, by his vanity in demanding a triumph contrary to the established order of the common- wealth, had impaired the luitre of his former ati. ons; by this lalt at of magnanimity, in refirain. ing the insolence of the troops, he forfeited the as- fedtions of the army; and in both there circun- stances together, gave a complete specimen and image of his whole life. With too much refpe& for the republic to employ violent means for its ruin, he was possessed by a vanity and a jealousy of his own personal consideration, which, in de- tail, perpetually led him to undermine its founda- tions.
Upon'the return of the elections, Sylla wasu. c. 674. again' defined for one of the Consuls; but he de-^prAs'ct." dined this piece of flattery, and direaed thediau choice to fall on P. Servilius and Appius Claudius. Soon after there magistrate's entered on the dif- charge of their trust; the di&tator appeared, as usual, in the Forum, attended by twenty.four litors: but, instead of proceeding to any exercise of his power, made a formal resignation of it, dif- miffed his retinue, and, having declared to the People, that, if any one had any matter of charge against him, he was ready to answer it, continued to walk in the streets in the character of a private
man,
E o O K;man, and afterwards retired to his villa near Cuma, _:', where he exercised himself in hunting (n), and other
country amusements.
This resignation throws a new light on the cha. rater of Sylla, and leads to a favourable conltruc- tion of tome of the most exceptionable parts of his conduct. When, with the help of the comment it affords, we look back to the establishments he made while in power, they appear not to be the acts of a determined usurper, but to be fitted for a republican government, and for the reitoration of that order which the violence and corruption of the times had fiufpended.
That he was atuated by a violent resentment of personal wrongs, cannot be questioned; but it is likewise evident, that he felt on proper occasions for the honour and preservation of his country, in the noblefi sense of there words. In his firfi attack of the city with a military force, his adions showed, that he meant to rescue the republic from the ufur- pations of Marius, not to usurp the government himself. When he returned into Italy from the Mithridatic war, the state of parties already en- gaged in hostilities, and the violence done to the republic by those who pretended to govern it, will abundantly jufiify his having had recourse to arms. For the massacre which followed, it may be Ihock- ing to suppose that the evils of human life can re- qu!re such a remedy: but the cafe was singular, exposed to disorders which required violent reme- dies, be) ond what is known in the history of man- kind; a populous city, the capital of a large coun- try, whose inhabitants ftiii pretended to ad in a collective body, of whom every member would be a maFier, none would be a subjec, become the joint sovereigns of many provinces, ready to spurn at all the iniitutions which were provided for the
(-} A pi.aa e . Cell . Civili. ib. i.
purposes
purposes of government over themselves, and ate H A p. all the principles of justice and order which were Vii. required to regulate their government of others. Where the gangrene spread in such a body, it was likely to require the amputation-knife. Men rushed into crimes in numerous bodies, or were led in powerful fa&ions to any species of evil which suited their demagogues. Whatever may have been Sylla's choice among the infiruments of reforma- tion and cure, it is likely that the sword alone was that on which he could rely; and he used it like a person anxious to effect its purpose, not to recom- mend his art to those on whom it was to be prac- tifed.
In his capacity of a political reformer, he had to work on the dregs of a corrupted republic; and although the effect fell short of what is ascribed to fabulous legislators and founders of ilates, yet to none ever were ascribed more tokens of magnani- mity and greatness of mind. He was superior to the reputation even of his own splendid aCtions; and, from simplicity or disdain, mixed perhaps with superstition, not from affected modetly, at- tributed his success to the effeLcs of his good for- tune and to the favour of the gods. While he be- flowed on Pompey the title of Great, he himself was content with that of Fortunate. He was a man of letters, and pafled the early part of his life in a mixture of diflipation and study. He wrote his own memoirs, or a journal of his life, often quoted by Plutarch, and continued it to within a few days of his death. A work poflibly of little elegance, and even tainted, as we are told, with superstition; but more curious surely than many volumes corrected by the labours of retired study.
When tired of his youthful amusements. he sued for the honours of the State; but with so little ap- pearance of any jealous or impatient ambition, that, if he had not been impelled by provocations
VOL. I. K k into
B o o K into the violent course he pursued, it is probable
IL that he would have been contented with the usual '1- e-^career of a prosperous Senator; would have dif-
dained to encroach on the rights of his fellow-citi- zens, as much as he resented the encroachments that were made on his own, and never would have been heard of but on the Rolls of the Consuls, and in the record of his triumphs. But fortune destined him for a part still more conspicuous, and in which it may be thought, that, although none ever less studied the unnecessary appearances of humanity or a scrupulous morality, none ever more effenti- ally served the persons with whom he was con- nected.
\With respect to such a personage, circumfiances of a trivial nature become fubjeEs of attention. His hair and eyes, it is said, were of a light co- lour, his complexion fair, and his countenance blotched. He was, by the most probable ac- counts, four years old at the time of the sedition of Tiberius Gracchus, and seventeen at the death of Caius Gracchus so that he might have perceiv- ed at this date the effect of tribunitian seditions, and !taken the impressions from which he acted againf: them. He served the office of Qguafor un- der Mar:us in Africa at thirty-one; was Consul for the sirs time at forty-nine or fifty (o); was Dic- tator at fifty-fix; resigned when turned of fifty- eig ht; and died vet under sixty, irs the year which followed that of his resignation.
There remained in the city, at his death, a nu- merous body of new citizens who bore his name: in the country a still more numerous body of vete- ran officers and soldiers, who held efiates by his gift: numbers throughout the empire, who owed their safety to his protection, and who ascribed the existence of the commonwealth itself to the exerti-
(o) VeL Pater. lib. i., c. 17.
ons
ons of his great ability and courage: numbers who,C H A P' although they were offended with the revere exer- cife of his power, yet admired the magnanimity of his resignation.
When he was no longer an obje& of flattery, his corpse was carried in proceflion through Italy at the public expence. The farces, and every other ensign of honour, were restored to the dead. Above two thousand golden crowns were fabri- cated in haste, by order of the towns and provinces he had protected, or of the private persons he had preserved, to teilify their veneration for his me- mory. Roman matrons, whom it might be ex- pe&ed his cruelties would have affected with hor- ror, loft every other sentiment in that of admira- tion, crowded to his funeral, and heaped the pile with perfumes (p). His obsequies were.performed in the Campus Martius. The tomb was marked by his own directions with the following characte- riftical inscription: " Here lies Sylla, who never " was outdone in good offices by his friend, nor c, in ats of hostility by his enemy (q)." His me- rit or demerit in the principal transactions of his life may be variously estimated. His having slain so many citizens in cold blood, and without any form of law, if we imagine them to have been in- nocent, or if we conceive the republic to have been in a state to allow them a trial, must be confidered as monfirous or criminal in the highest degree: but if none of these suppositions were just, if they were guilty of the greatest crimes, and were themselves the authors of that lawless state to which their coun- try was reduced, his having saved the republic from the hands of such ruffians, and purged it of the vilest dreg that ever threatened to poison a free State,
(p) Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. i. Plutarch. in Sylla. (q) Plutarch. in Sylla, fine.
may
o o K may be confidered as meritorious. To satisfy "a himself, who was neither solicitous of praite nor
dreaded censure, the firong impulse of his own mind, guided by indignation and the sense of ne- ceffilty, was probably sufficient.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
l^^~~C'^-'^
A Sermon Preached  in the Ersh Language to  His  Majesty's  First Highland  Regiment of Foot,  Commanded by Lordfohn  Murray, At   their  Cantonment at Camberwell, on the 18th Day  of  December  1745. Being  appointed as  a Solemn Fast.


God,  in dispensing   his  Judgments  and  mercies  to humankind,  no  doubt pays  regard  to  their  different  characters;  and  though  we  are  not  rashly to Judge  of men's  merit  by their  misfortunes  in  particular  instances, yet sacred  history  gives sufficient  authority to presume that public  calamities are the effect  of public corruption,  and that there  is no way of thoroughly averting  the  punishment  but  by  a general  reformation  of  manners.
It  is from  this  consideration  that  at  particular  times,  but  more  especially  in times of general distress, the national authority  is interposed  to admonish every congregation  and society of men  to humble  themselves before  God in a solemn  and open  manner,  that  he may avert  his deserved Judgments from  us and bless our resolutions towards a better conduct  for  the  future.
As our country  is  at present torn with domestic disorder, we can do no less in duty to our God, to our fellow-countrymen,  and to our own souls, than heartily  to  comply with  the  public  appointment,  in  humbling  ourselves before  God,  in  praying  that  he  would  forgive  our  sins,  and  disappoint the  malice  of our  enemies. This  is our  duty  as men  and  Christians,  in common  with  all  the  members  of  the  society  to which  we  belong. As I have had occasion to illustrate this on a former  occasion, I shall at present turn  your  attention  to your  peculiar  duty  as men who  are  in  the  more particular  manner  set  apart  for  the  defense  of your  country;  to  whose hands  the  sword  is entrusted  and whose  business  it  is, not  only by your pious and  regular behavior to draw down the blessing of God  upon  your country and contribute  to its peace and  good order, but more  particularly to repel the assaults of its enemies by the blessing of God on your  fidelity and courage. It  was  with  a  view to this that  I  made choice to these words of Joab,   in which  he addressed  himself to the army  of  Israel  when  they were ready to engage with their enemies. And it is to be hoped  that the  motive he uses to whet their resolution  may have the like effect  upon you. If it be made  to  appear  that your  people  and  the  cities of your  God  are  attacked and endangered  in their most valuable concerns, I doubt not but you will think the occasion  calls upon you to play the men, and exert your  utmost vigor  in their  defense.
In  the first place, shall endeavor  to  make  it appear that  it  is the  duty of  every  man  to  defend  his  country  when  in  danger.  Secondly,  that  the present  circumstances  of our  country  render  it the  indispensible  duty of every man, and yours  in particular, to be active in its defense.
In  the first  place,  by  a man's  country  is meant  that  society  or  united body of men of which he is a member, sharing all the advantages that arise from  such  a union. Not  merely  the  soil  or  spot  on which  he was  born, as  it  is  too  often  understood  by  many. On  this  supposition,  the  love  of one's  country,  which  has  always  been  esteemed  the  most  manly  virtue, might be rejected  as a mere whim or prejudice. No: the name of country bears a meaning  more  sacred  and  interesting.  It was  not  for  the  place of their  nativity  ia.t  Joab   exhorts  the  Israelites   to play the  men;  it  is for  their people  and  for  the  cities of their  God. As if  he  had  said, God  has already with a mighty arm  relieved your fathers  from  oppression, he made  them free  and  established  them  into a well-ordered  society; he entrusted  them as  keepers  of  his  oracles,  the  blessed  effects  of  which  deliverance  and establishment  you  now  feel. Do not the  laws he  gave you  serve to direct the  conduct  of every  individual  and  to  defend  you  from  the  violence  of others? Are you not instructed in the knowledge of the True God and have you  not  his worship  established  in  the  cities?
Take  courage   then,   and play the  Men for  your  People  and for   the  Cities of your God.
Suffer  not  that  people, whom  he has established  in peace and  liberty, to be scattered over the  face of the  earth,  his  laws to  be  canceled  or  his worship  corrupted.  It  is in a state of society alone that  man  can prosper  either  in  his civil or  religious interests.  We  do  not  subject  ourselves  to  government  merely  to  satisfy the  lusts of those who  are fond  of power.  It  is because  society, under  the regulation of  laws  and government,  is the  state for which  providence  has calculated  our  natures. No  sooner  do  we  make  our  entrance  here,  than we  stand  in  need  of assistance  of others; and were  it not continued,  and afterwards  reciprocally given and received through the whole of our lives, our  being  here  was  forlorn  and  comfortless  indeed.  Laws  are  necessary to secure our persons and properties, to protect the weak and restrain  the violent. Kings and judges become necessary to put those laws in execution and to apply their  sanctions when  necessary  for  the good  of  society.
Our religious  interests  too  are  maintained  under  the  influence  of sound  and wholesome  laws; and  the very name  of  it must  soon  perish  and  dwindle away amongst  men  were  it not  for  the union  into  societies. As the assistance of others  is necessary to  supply  us with  the  outward  conveniences of  life,  so it is likewise to instruct our minds and communicate what God has been pleased to reveal concerning himself  Had not particular men  in nations and countries been appointed to preserve the Oracles of God, our fathers  [would have] received the gospel  in  vain and we never should have heard  the  glad tidings of  salvation  through Jesus  Christ.  In  short,  it  is to society and mutual intercourse  that we owe the advancement of sciences, arts,  improvements,  and  everything  that  is conducive  to the welfare  of  a reasonable  being.
If society is a thing so indispensably necessary to human  nature, and if every individual member reaps such inestimable advantages from  their joint  confederacy,  we  can  no  longer  hesitate  in  drawing  our conclusion  that  each member  is bound, both  on  account  of  his  own  and the public welfare, to maintain that league from which he derives so many blessings. Or  shall we say  that  a  man  is  to lie idle and draw  his  nourishment from  that stock to which he contributes  nothing? Must he not contribute to the support  of that establishment  to which  alone he  owes the  security of his own person and property? The contrary conduct  is not only  unjust, but the height of folly and madness: For if he allows that roof which shelters him  to be destroyed, he himself must  suffer.  If any particular  person is  mean  and  dishonest  enough  to desert  the  public  interest  in  times  of danger,  his cunning ought  to  conceal  his sentiments  from  others  lest  his example  might  induce  them  likewise  to  throw  off  the  restraint  of  laws and  good  order  and  deprive  him  of that  security  and  those  privileges  he was unworthy to enjoy.  In  times of peace and  tranquility every man  may sufficiently  contribute  to the support  of the common  interest by keeping within  the sphere of  his  particular  profession;  but more  may be requisite when the public  is in danger. Thus you  are doubly bound  to defend  your country  as  men  who  share  the  influence  of  its  laws,  in  common  with others, and as men who are set apart and maintained  by the public for this very end. But I proceed to show, in the second place.
That the present circumstances of your country render it the indispensible duty of every man, and yours in particular, to exert your utmost vigor in its defense.
To  prove this, no more  will  be necessary than to show that every subject of Britain enjoys all the advantages that arise from  a  well-ordered  state and that this good order of government  is in danger of being subverted  unless we  exert  ourselves  in  its support.  If any  man  is insensible  of the  advantages that we enjoy  as subjects  of Britain  it must be owing to his want of experience  and  his being a stranger  to oppression. Were we, on  the  one hand, to behold the miserable confusion  that attends anarchy, or to groan under  the  insolence  and  pride  of  a  tyrant,  we  might  then  learn  to value our  present  happiness  at  a higher  rate. Were we  to  behold  violence  and rapine in the room ofjustice,  or  [to see] the unrestrained  lusts of a tyrant take the  place of  law  and  equity, we might thence  learn to consider  security  and  liberty  as a treasure  not  too  dearly bought  at the  expense of our blood. This our  fathers  felt,  and  they  have  left  us the  fruits  of their  toils in  our  present  happy  establishment.  Our  laws  secure  our  civil  liberties and  shelter  us  from  injury;  no man, however weak or  despicable,  can be injured without redress, nor can the most powerful  injure, without  being called  to  an account. Our  king, in whose wise  and  mild  government we have all cause to rejoice, can make no  law  without the advice of his people  given by their representatives  in parliament. And indeed the whole nation almost  shows  how well  they  are  satisfied  with  his  government,  by  that alacrity with which  they contribute  support  to the  king and  our  present constitution.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at:  For  where  are  the  instances of  his  oppression,  or  where  is  he  that  can  tax  him  with  any  encroachment on  his people's  privileges? Are not our  laws duly executed  and  our persons and properties secured, the happy effects  of which administration we behold  in that peace and independence which prevails in every part of our  country?  Nor  are we  less  happy  in  our  religious  establishment.  We have Moses and the prophets, the gospel of Christ, and the writings of his apostles  put  into our  hands with  freedom  to peruse  them;  there  to  learn our duty and with our own  eyes perceive what God requireth of  us.
Our worship  is not  clogged v^th  superstitious  ceremonies  calculated  to strike the  simple with  awe or  raise the  power  of  a  designing men. We have no whimsical doctrines for which there  is no foundation  in scripture. We are not bound  to yield implicit faith  to the dictates of others. Every man  may openly  profess  his  sentiments,  unless  manifestly  subversive  of the  state, without  any  apprehensions  of  the  rack  or  gibbet;  means  of  instruction frequently  used  even  where  Christianity  is  pretended  to.  Care  is  taken that  we  be  instructed  in  religion  in  our  youth  and  the  duties  of  it  afterwards  inculcated  through  the whole  of our  lives. In  that  particular,  that part  of  the  country  from  which  we  come  is  peculiarly  indebted  to  the king and government.  Free schools  have been  erected  for  the  instruction of  the  poor  and  ministers  supported  at the  expense of the crown. Where churches were thinly scattered,  [the king and government  saw to it]  that the  knowledge  of  religion  and  the worship  of God  might  be wanting  in no part  of  the  kingdom." How well some of them  have repaid  this care, let their own consciences answer. Blessed be God, we are not accountable for  the conduct  of others, nor  need we blush while our  own  character as faithful  and honest  [men]  remains entire.
What has now been mentioned  is a short review of privileges you  enjoy under the present government; your persons  and liberty  is secured; your religion  is established  pure and  undefiled  according to the Word of God.
What  change  for  the  better  this  rebellion  would  bring  is not  easily conceived. Do the authors of it propose to give greater security  to  our persons, to better our  laws, or reform  our  religion? Neither  can be expected  from the rapacious tempers of some, nor the avowed principles of  others.
Would they only substitute another  in the room  of the best of kings? This would argue them mad and declared enemies to their country: For what purpose rebel  against  one  whose  clemency  and  equitable  government  they  have experienced,  in  favor  of another,  of whom  nothing farther  is known  but that  he  has  been  bred  in  the  schools  of  tyranny  and  superstition?  The madness  of  such  a procedure  is  open  and  palpable,  or  looks  rather  like the daring attempt of desperate men  to advance their own  fortunes  at the expense  of their  country.  Shall we suppose  that, contrary  to the  declared inclination of this kingdom, they subvert the present government  by  force; where  then  is our  security? Where are our  laws and  privileges? Force has already  taken  place; we  are  already  enslaved  into  compliance with  their demands. And on what grounds can we presume but that they will maintain, by the measures of tyranny and oppression, what they have gained by force? Can we suppose that those who  [have] contemned  laws and justice in  making their acquisition will peaceably yield to these rules when  their success  shall  give  them  more  license  to  transgress?  As we  have  all  the reason in the world to dread the consequences of their  success,  so  we have reason  to  bless God  that  he  has put  the  means  in  his  majesty's  hands  to scourge their  insolence and protect this nation  from  the ruin  they intend it. It  is to be hoped  that  we,  upon  this occasion, will contribute our share towards  those  ends  as we  tender  the   Good of  our  People,   and  the Cities  of our Cod.
The  single  circumstance  of  its being hatched  and  supported  by the declared enemies of our country is sufficient  to obviate the most specious pretences  made  in  favor  of  this  rebellion.  Are  the  French,   against  whom we  have spent our  blood  and  treasure, whom  you  have encountered  like enemies in the  field,  now become our friends? Are they concerned  for our welfare?  Do they propose to rectify what  is amiss in our government  and render us happy at their own expense?  Let who will be ensnared  by such pretences, sure the very mention  of  it  is enough to rouse the  indignation of a reasonable man; and the more so, if it has misled any of those we may have  formerly  deemed  worthy  of our  friendship  and  acquaintance.'''  By what arguments  can they prove that the  French   have no design to extend their  dominion,  their  religion,  and  policy  to  this  island?  Does  any  part of  their  former  conduct  authorize  us  to  form  such judgment?  If  they have no such design,  if they are quite disinterested  in the present cause, there  must  be  some  uncommon  change  in  their  policy;  and  the  usage they now intend  [for]  the rebels  oBritain,  very different  [from]  that they have shown towards others who relied on them. They too will  feel  in the consequences  that  they  are  only  made  tools  to  serve  the  purposes  very different  from  the ends they propose to themselves.
But  even  let us  suppose  the  French   only  meant  to  seat this  Pretender on  the throne   o{Britain  and  leave him  afterwards  the  free  management of the kingdom: What can we expect in our civil religious concerns  from a popish king but the subversion  of liberty and entire corruption  of our religion? May we not expect to have our bibles snatched from our hands, ourselves  dragged  to  the  stake  and  the  gibbet  for  perusing  the Word  of God? Ignorance and superstition again resume their tyranny in our lands and  we  and  our  posterity  bend  to  the  unnatural  dominion  of  priests and churchmen?  But to quiet  these our  apprehensions, we  are told  our future  mock  prince  has  no  regard  to  religion  at  all.  How  agreeable  a prospect it is to live under the dominion of an atheist, let those who have any  regard  to  religion  or virtue  Judge!
The  very name  of  religion  must be lost under such a government, or that form  established which is most conducive to the ends of  the  prince, not that which  is most  agreeable to the Word of God. And  is there any that bids fairer to enslave  humankind than  popery,  or  any  that  a  designing,  ambitious  prince  would  sooner pitch upon, for that end? But granting he had no personal attachment  to the Church  of  Rome,  yet  he  lies under  the  highest  obligations  to  those who  have; and  the establishment  of it here must  have been  a condition stipulated  in  order  to  engage  them  in  his  interest.  Has  he  not  received his  early  instructions  form  the  zealous  supporters  of  popery,  and  does not  he come  from  these  schools to claim the  sovereign direction  of our affairs  civil  and  religious?  Sure  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  Court of  Rome,  who  consider  us  as their  enemies  and  our  religious  constitution  as  directly  subversive  of  their  authority,  will  take  this  and  every opportunity  to  sap  the  foundation  of  our  religion  and  policy  in  order to  subject  us  again  to  their  dominion.  These  things  are  so  open  and palpable  that  it must  argue very little concern  about  religion to  hesitate in  the  matter. The  mere  mention  of  a  change  in our  government  from France  or  Rome  is enough to create suspicions and rouse the spirits of the most  secure. But  allowing there were  no  such weighty prejudice  in  the case,  yet the very presence that is made to support this Pretender's claim is enough to fill every breast with indignation. We are told, here is a man, notwithstanding  we  are now under the best government, who has a right to command  us, our  persons, and  estates. It  is strange: Are we then,  by birth, the property of a man? May we be bought and  sold  like the beasts of the field? Were  any  man  to  sell  us  so we  should  be  surprised  at  his impudence, yet such  is  the pretence that  is  made to support this rebellion.
Though  the  government  we  are  under  is  the  most Just  and  equitable, though we are all averse to change, yet  we  belong to another  indefeasible  right  of succession  in consequence  of which  he now comes to claim  by force.  Such a claim  is certainly founded  on principles  the most  unheard and  extravagant.  We  must  suppose  that  government  is established  not for  the  good  of humankind  but to  satisfy  the  lusts of  a  Prince; and  that the whole  body of  a  people was made  for  his sake, seeing he  has a right to disturb  their  peace  and  happiness,  in  order  to  impose  his  dominion over them.  Since one  man  may thus become the proprietor  of millions, whose persons and  lives are only destined  to serve his pleasure; by what marks has providence distinguished  this wonderful  man  for whose sake millions of his own species were created? Were we not originally  formed after  the  Image of God,  as well as he? Are we not  reasonable beings and accountable  for  our  conduct?  We  are  accountable  for  the  changes  we make  in our  laws and  religion,  and  if we corrupt  that  religion  God  has given  us we must  answer  it  at the  great  Day. From what  right  then  has he a title to impose a change on us, for which we alone are accountable?
Blessed  be  God,  there  is nothing  either  in  Scripture  or  Nature  to  give countenance  to  such  a claim.  We  have voluntarily  submitted  ourselves to  a lawful  government;  we  have the Word  of God  known  amongst  us and  his  worship  established  according  to  it.  And  none  has  a  right  to withdraw our alliance from  our king or  force us to admit any corruption into our worship.
Thus  I hope  it  sufficiently  appears  that we  have  great  reason  now  to bestir  ourselves  in  defense  of  our  country.  Our  personal  security,  our religion,  laws,  and  everything  that  can  be  dear  to  a  reasonable  man  is called  into question. The  Disturbers  of  its  peace are now  advanced  into the very heart of the Kingdom and would direct their course towards the metropolis  which  you, with  others,  are  appointed  to  defend;  and  I  am persuaded  [that] when you  have occasion to act you will not be wanting to  your  religion,  your  kind,  your  country,  and  yourselves;  which  will effectually  wipe  away  any  reproach  that  may  be  thrown  upon  you  on their  account.
Remember,  you  are  men  sworn  to defend  your  country:
Take  courage, and play  the  Men for   your People  and for   the  Cities of your God.
If you  oppose your acquaintances it is to prevent their ruin: If you oppose your relations it is to save them and their posterity from  slavery  forever.
Let  us now humble  ourselves before  God; pray that  he would  forgive our  sins;  that  he  would  continue  the  Light  of  his  Gospel  amongst  us;
and strengthen our Hands in the Defence  of our holy religion and happy privileges.
REMARKS ON A PAMPHLET LATELY PUBLISHED BY DR. PRICE, INTITLED, OBSERVATIONS on the NATURE of CIVIL LIBERTY, the PRINCIPLES of GOVERNMENT, and the JUSTICE and POLICY of the WAR with AMERICA, &C.

IN A LETTER from a GENTLEMAN in the Country to a MEMBER of PARLIAMENT.


S I R, SEND you some Remarks upon Dr. Price's Pamphlet, concerning which you do me the honour to desire my opinion. A gentleman who gives his name to the Public is intitled to have the fairest conftruftion put upon his words, and I shall be extremely sorry if, in differirg from Dr. Price, any exprefion escape from me that is too abrupt for the refpe& that is due to him. As I am a mere commentator, I am likely to bas dull as the reit of my fraternity, but flall, nevertheless, abide by the order, and confine myself to the matter, that is fuggefled by my Author.

You will please to observe, that the Doc-or refs his argument on a definition of Civil Liberty, which is therefore a principal subjet of theie Remarks. He confiders Liberty under four general divisions, Phbfical Liberty, Moral Liberty, Religious Liberty, and Civil Liberty .
The firR is the principle of spontaneity. The fecond is the power of following our own jenfe of right and wrong. The third, the power of exercifing the religic;n we like best. And the fourth, or Civil Liberty, is the power of a civil society or jfate to govern ifteif ly its own cifcretion.

The Docor, in the following inference from all thele definitions collated together, puts Liberty in contradifcinction to Restraint, and makes Restraint, in every cafe, the essence of Slavery. ;iln all these cafes, he fays, there is a fcrce -which sands opposed to the agent's own will, and wL ick, as far as it operates, produces servitude.
And he concludes the whole deduction with observing, that as far as in any inflance the operation of a:y ca'.r comes in to ;refrain the power of selfgo'-vernmrt, so far flaveiy is introduced. Nor do I think, he adds, that a p-ecifer idea than this of Libe;-,y and Slaveiy can be formed.

I am under the necessity, however, of owning, that this idea is omewhat perplexing to me.
It does not appear, that upon this idea of Liberty any civil community can be formed without introducing slavery. For even where the collective body are sovereigns, they are seldom unanimous, and the minority must ever fubmir to a power that ltands opposed to their own will.

In this, however, the loss of Liberty may be fiJpc';l unavoidable; for it is common to fay, that men, by entering into society, give up a part of their Natural Liberty.

But there is yet another difficulty. If Liberty be opposed to Refiraint; I am afraid it is inconfiient with the great end of civil government itself, which is to give people security from the effe& of crimes and disorders, and to preserve the peace of mankind.

The Liberty of any single man, in this fenfc of a freedom from relsraint, would be the servitude of all. In Turkey, perhaps in Brandenburgh, there are persons who pretend to this Liberty; but I believe that no one can devise a more plentiful source of slavery than this. The Liberty of every separate diffriE or corporation in a slate would be national independence; and as far as the humour for it should spread, would threaten every community with the loss of every incorporated member that has a pretence for separation, or a fancy to fct up for ifclf.

I confess I am somewhat surprised that Dr. Price, who quotts ontifquieu with o much regard on cthcr occasions, fliould have overlooked wh.t he has said on th's. Among the other milfaken notions of Liberty, this celebrated writer ohfirves, T1'at some ,ha: ciofounded the LPcwrr- cf the people with the Liberty f the people* . -T:ha ini deocracies the pecple seem to do ,what they pl je; tlt tht Liberty does not colnfi in doing hbat we pleafi. It conrifts in being free to do what we ought to incline, and in not being cbligcd to do what we ought not to incline . We oo-hbt to remember, he continues, that Independence is one thing, and Liberty another. That if any cilizen wee free to do what he pleased, this vwold be an extincion of Li!erty, for every one e!2 woidd have the fame freidc;m j.

If the Doctor perfit in his definition of Civil Liberty, it will be difficult to support the high encomium which he bestows upon it. For it would be a real curse to numbers of mankind to to be left to do what they please. Certain, infiances we have had of this Liberty in the cafe of despotic princes, who were taught to think that they had a right to do what they pleased;
but they were, in consequence of this Liberty, the completeft wretches that have appeared in the hi'ory of mankind.

Whether we fay or no with Montesquieu, that the power of the people is not the liberty of the people, it may be said with confidence, that the power of the people is not the happiness of the people. Corrupt and vicious men, afiembled in great bodies, cannot have a greater curie beflowed upon them, rih:n the power of governing thcmfelves.

It is possible that the Doctor may have meant to qualify his definition and the encomium of Civil Liberty, by supposing, that it was preceded by Moral Liberty; and if he did, :his would be rather an aukward way of informing us, that Liberty conlifts in the freedom t doo what is ju and innocent. In the mean cine, and till Moral Liberty is fully eftabliihed in ihe world, we flall do well to prepare foine efiraint for the inclinations of men, and be contented with a Liberty which secures to us the possession of our rights, while it restrains from invading the rights of others.

Here, however, I am obliged to look forward fomn pages , and mufi confess, that the Doclor hiiniflf has qualified his description of Liberty in iome such manner as this: A free fJane, he fays, at the fame time that it is free itfcE, makes all its members free, y excluding liceniioiuf;efs, and guarding their pejons and property and good name againfl infilt. That is to fay, when we bring together the two parts of the Docor's description, that a free state produces servitude, to produce Liberty. Or, as he concludes the paragraph himelf, that Gcvernmiet reJifrains Liberty, when used to dejiroy Liberty.

This collision of words, I confess, renders the precision of the Dodcor's former idea somewhat suspicious; but we must be contented with the good meaning, and only regret, that the qualification of the general definition had not come sooner, and that it is not more uniformly kept in view through the piece. If a writer should insist, that the inhabitants of St. Giles's have a right to seize the houses in Grosvenor Square, and afterwards, upon a difficulty Itated, should qualify his doctrine by fayuig, that he affirmed the right only on a supposition that they had bought the subje&s in queflion, and had paid for them, his doctrine might be true on the whole; but his manner of stating it, by leaving out so important a condition till it was required to solve an objection, especially if he dropt it, afterwards through the whole of his argument might appear somewhat exceptionable. It is probable that ome of the parties concerned would be in such haste to avail themselves of the right, that they would not stay to think of the condition. And I apprehend with some regret, that the Docor may have readers who will reason on his definition of Liberty, and think themselves entitled to do what they please, without attending to the qualification that is asterwards brought to explain it.

My impatience to have a satisfactory account of this important subject, by collating together the descriptions and limitations of my Author, has carried me a few pages too faf ; I think myself now, however, authorised to conclude with the content of the Doctor, that Civil Liberty is not precisely a power to do what we please, but the security of our rights; and that a person may be free, although contrary to his own will he is obliged to pay his debts, and even to contribute to the revenue ol' the iate.
And if the Doctor insists that Liberty f ii implies a freedom from restraint, he will please to observe, that nothing can give a more complete freedom from unjult rcftraint, than the perfeit fccurity that we cannot be wronged. This is the frecdom which Mcntefquieu holds forth to our esteem; and I presume, it is that Liberty on which Dr. Price beflows his encomium, notwithflandiig his apparent partiality to the freedom of doing what we please. I now return to the place at which I met my Author .

The Doctor, in every fep of his argument, is somewhat hurried by his own definition. In every free slate, he fays, every man is his own legiiator: all taxes are free gifts for public services. It may be fair to ak in what part of the world such a state does, or ever did exist ?
Or what fort of laws thieves and pickpockets are likely to make against theft ? Or how much of his property the miser is likely to bring to the coffers of the Public ?

In most free Rates the populace have as much need to be guarded against the effe& of their own folly and errors, as againR the usurpation of any other person whatever. And the eflence of political Liberty is such an etablishment as gives power to the wife, and safety to all. The exercise of power in popular assemblies has a mixture of effecs, good and bad.
It teaches a people, as it did the Athenians, to become wits, critics, and orators. It gives to every man one chance against being oppressed, in allowing him to appear for himself. But it places him when accused before rash, precipitate, prejudiced, and inequitable judges; he is no more his own legislator, than he is the master of the people, And he is in fa& subjet to a power, which is of all others the most unstable, capricious, and arbitrary: bound by no law, and fubjeat to no appeal. For this reason, Mr. Montesquieu has very wifely said, that Democracy and Aristocracy are not by their nature free governments *.

They are inferior in this refpef to certain species of monarchy, where law is more fixed and the abuses of power are better restrained.

The Door farther observes , or concludes, from his definition, that Civil Liberty in the mofi perfect degree can be enjoyed only in small flates, 'where every member is capable of giving his susfrage in person, and of being chosen into public offices.

It is true that democracy is tolerable only in small states; and the Do&or certainly means to speak of democracy, when he makes this inference on the fubje& of Liberty. But even in the smallest fates, the preservation of public consistency and justice, the security of private rights, must ever recommend some mixture of ariftocratical power, that may prove a check on the caprice of the people; and such a mixture took place in all the happiest institutions of antiquity.

The Doaor owns *, that although Liberty be most perfea in small states, it is not altogether banilhed from great ones: For, where alt the members of a fate are not capable of giving their suffrages on pzblic measures individually and personally, they may do this by the appointment of fubfitutes or representatives.

In this conceflion, the Dotor begins to elude the force of his own definition; and when we confider how little in some cafes the conitituent may know of what his representative does, it appears, that by this device, men may be their own legislators, without so much as knowing that laws are enacted or proposed. And even.

America, at the distance of three thousand miles of sea, may enjoy its freedom by fending fubflitutes or representatives to the Parliament of Great Britain.

This indeed is one of the happiest institutions of mankind, and might be of use in small as well as in great states, by giving every order of the people that thare in the legislature of their country, which is necessary to guard their own rights, without enabling them to usurp on the rights of others. But I must still contend, that the Liberty of every class and order is not proportioned to the power they enjoy, but to the security they have for the preservation of their rights.

In stating this fortunate principle however, theDoctor very reasonably recommends a fair and adequate representation, and makesfuch a defcription of pretended inadequate representation, as I
am afraid can hardly fail of being applied to the government of Great Britain *. The reprefentatives of seven millions are chosen by less than three hundred thousand, and the whole is attended with circumstances that make the Dotor exclaim, it is an abuse of language to fay, that fucb a slate poseses Liberty. And that rather than bE governed in such a manner, it would perhaps be better to be governed by the will of On: JMan without any representation.

The fat in our history, I believe, is, that there never entered into the head of any person able to bring it about, except Cliver Cromwell, the idea of having the people of Great Britain represented. Perfins of a certain description were in the way of attending the king in his wars and in his Parliaments. It appears that they confidered this diftinetion rather as a burden than as a privilege. The kings were in use to grant exemptions to the officers of their court, and to others. The counties and boroughs that ent fubfitutes were obliged to give-them wages; and sometimes, by the connivance of heriffs, eluded the duty altogether. In process of time, however, a place in the King's Court of Parliament became of more confequence. Deputies became willing to serve without wages; boroughs revived their charters.
Freeholders embraced their distinction as a privilege, and their representatives improved it into a formidable power, which became of the greateft importance to themselves and to their country. So little however are mankind corn.
monly aware when they are laying in politics the foundation of the best fuperftruaures. The spirit of the constitution, the design of the conftitution, are the mere conftrucions of fpeculative men; at least, they only mean the cffeet of the constitution, which, notwithstanding the disdain of our Author, has been in many refpeas superior to the effect of any other conflitution in the known world; and notwithitanding the high ideas of Liberty with which it is contracted does atually bestow upon its fubjecs higher degrees of Liberty than any other people are known to enjoy.

It is known, that under all the defects of the British Legislation, the subjet enjoys more fecurity than was ever before enjoyed by any people; and this not accidentally, but by a very natural tendency of the constitution, by lodging legislation in the hands of persons interested in the justice of the laws which they make, and by giving to all the different orders of the state a power to rejeEt or amend every law that is likely to be grievous on themselves. It is less material who elects, than it is who may be elected.

For so long as no one can be elected without the qualifications of a British commoner, the interests of the Commons in the lower house is fecu e.

The experience of Europe, Asia, and Africa, should convince Dr. Price, that it is not better to be governed by one man than by such a representation: but this hasty expression of the Dotor, hows the danger of going so fast in search of ideal perfection, which is apt to make us despise what is attainable and obtained, for the fake of something impracicable, and sometimes absurd.

It is of great moment to extend the participation of power and government, as far as the circumstances and charater of a people will permit; but extremely dangerous to confound this advantage with Civil or Political Liberty; for it may often happen, that to extend the participation of power, is to destroy Liberty. When al the powers of the Roman senate were tranfferred to the popular assemblics, the Liberty of Rome came to an end.

In general, to be free, is to be guided by one's ewn will; but licentiousness is its opposite *.

Dr. Price seems to forget his own definition of Liberty, and admits the reitraint of crimes as necessary to it: nay, admits that Liberty is not les infringed when the licentious multitude do what they please, than it is when a single person does so; although he seems to think, and perhaps justly, that the former infringement is the most repairable and the least prnicious of the two, .

Dr. Price has very juffly observed, that the imputation of omnipotence to any government' except that of the firongeft, the most numerous, or the greatest force; is absurd and that even force cannot always secure obedience. It must be satisfied with the alternative of obedience, of tortures, or of death. Government, whatever be its origin, must employ various engines, of which force is but one authority, refpe&t, public confidence, persuasion, are the principal engines to be employed with the body of a wellmeaning and innocent people: force is the engine to be employed against criminals and slaves.

And the government of mere force, in every instance, either finds people slaves, or makes them so.

It is absurd to fay, as some writers have said in the course of this paper-war, that there mufft be in every state one supreme uncontrolable power; for this never yet existed in any state whatever. The despotic Prince, in search of such a power, finds, that he changes the corntrol of assemblies, councils, civil departments, or of men of education and virtue only, to come under the control of Serjeants and Corporals.
In our government, King, Lords, and Commons are not one power, but three collateral powers; any one of which may flop the motions of all the reft. This observation, however, takes 'nothing from the authority of their joint as wherever they concur, nor had any one till now, from the extreme ettlements of Britilh subje&s in the old world, to their utmost migrations in the new, doubted the validity of any such a. Dr.
Price seems to regret that the efforts formerly made by our fathers in behalf of Liberty are no longer repeated he hould likewise regret, that our liberties are no longer attacked in the fame manner as in the times of our fathers. The contest between the prerogative of the King and the privilege of Parliament is discontinued: the King has influence enough in Parliament to obtain the neceflary supports of his government, though, I hope, never to obtain the smallest resignation of the people's right. In the contest of our times, the parties are the pretenders to office and the holders of office. A noble contest, though an ignoble cause. I must call it a noble contest, as it is undoubtedly one principle of life in our constitution. It leads one party to watch the motions of adminiftration; and the other to be on their guard because they are watched. As the matter now flands, indeed, it is more the interest of oppofition to stop the ordinary movement of government, than to prevent its abuses. If they can stop the ordinary course of government, the minister must withdraw to make way for themselves: but in preventing abuses, they only oblige him to change ill measures for good, and by this means to take a firmer hold of his power.
I know that many ill consequences might be imputed to the state of our parties; but I am not for removing any one safe-guard to freedom, until we have found a better.

Dr. Price infers from his argument, that no one community can have any power over the property or legijlatiot of another, that is not incorporated with it by a jus and adequate representation.

In this paflage, by the word Power, he certainly means the right to have such a power; for it is an undoubted fad, that many ltates have had the power. Even the admired and happy republics of Swifterland and Holland have their fubje& towns and provinces; and this nascent republic of New England too, if it D acquire the independence which, under the denomination of Liberty is projected for it, may come to have its subject towns and provinces, and, among the foremost, some of those who are now so ready to become partners of its revolt against the state.

I do not contend for the right to any such power in any actual cafe, but I contend not only for the reality of the power, but for the right likewise in some supposable cafes. No writer on the law of nature, that I know of, has denied that states or bodies politic may perform every a that any private party can perform; and if this be admitted, it follows, that they may, either by contract or forfeiture, become tributary or subjet to another state or body politic, as much as a single man may become the servant or debtor of another single man by fipulation or forfeiture.

This maxim of the law of nature, I confess, does not bind the Americans to contribute to the supply of the British Empire, unless it can be shewn that they have received all the benefit of fubjeEts; and therefore have stipulated to perform all the duties of fubjets, by the fame tacit convention that binds every inhabitant of Great Britain.

I agree with the Dotor, that the fubjecton of one state to another is inexpedient, and often calamitous for both; but this will not preclude one member of the fame slate, who has always made common cause with another, from having a very just claim to expeE a joint contribution to the common support.

After what has passed between Great Britain and her Colonies, whoever pretends that Great Britain hould drop every claim of a return, and the Colonies refuse to make any return, under every possible security to their property, must have very high notions of the generosity incumbent on the one party, and as low notions of what is incumbent on the other. Nay, but they have traded with us, and this is enough: and have not we traded with them ? Have they given us their goods for nothing ? Or have they been careful to receive value? Or have they taken less value than other nations would have taken ? These questions should be anfwered before we are told that their trade has repaid us for all the blood and treasure we have expended in the common cause, and before it can be admitted that in the heights of prosperity, at which they may arrive, they are not bound under any form, or with any precautions, for the remainder of their property, to contribute any part of it whatever to the common supplies of the Empire.

The Do&or owns that one state may become bound to indemnify another for an injury done them, or be bound to give security against future injury; but who can set limits to the poffible rights thus established in the claim of one state against another. It is impossible to tell how long a state may be tributary, or how much it may pay before it has acquitted a debt of indemnification; or what precaution may be neceflary to obtain, for the future, a sufficient security against injuries. The Romans, when they recovered Campania from its revolted inhabitants, and from Hanibal, thought proper, for their own future security, to abolish the Municipal Senate, and assemblies of that province: Such meetings they confidered as a standing conspiracy against themselves. In this I shall not pretend to justify their condut, but suppositions may be made that would be fufficient to justify it, and such as I shall neither be willing to make nor apply to the American Colonies: But let no one contend, that in the plenitude of madness, they may not forfeit more to the state, than any one would be willing to exaa from them. I will not fay what an imperious flare, like that of the Romans, so often quoted in a imilar cafe, would have exaced and done; but if we are to hope that one party will not inflit the penalty, we may hope likewife that the other will not incur it.

Writers on the Law of Nature sustain the validity of a fair contra&t in all cafes where the performance is possible or lawful. That it is both possible and lawful for one corporation or body politic to submit themselves to the laws, and contribute to the supplies of another, no one will doubt; that all corporations and bodies politic belonging to the fame state are aually under such a contract, no body ever questioned.

No one can bind himself to receive the religious opinions of another, because his opinions are not in his power, but he may bind himself, if he pleases, to pay a ihilling in the pound of his estate.

But can one generation bind another ? No doubt, in every lawful contract, as much as any person can bind his heirs, or as much as the late King of France could bind the successors to his crown to leave Canada in the possession of the English. The Docor's reasoning on this subjeet takes away the obligation of treaties, or at best makes them temporary agreements, to last for the lives of those who made them.

It is confessed, that favours voluntarily conferred, cannot be stated as a ground of debt; but they who reft so much on the affection and attachment of the Colonies to the Mother Country, ought to allow Something for the favours done by the Mother Country to her Colonies.

The Doctor attempts a diftintion between the reparation of parts in the fame kingdom, and the reparation of parts in the fame empire, which I confess I cannot comprehend; but if he lays so great a stress on the difference of names, he may be told, that Great Britain and its dependencies is not an Empire, but a kingdom.
I see no warrantable part for mankind to a& under either denomination, but to acquiesce in the government which Providence has given to their kingdom or their empire, until they are sure that they do not change it for the worse; and in this, reformers upon general principle, however sanguine, are far from being secure.

It is the fashion, however, I observe, with some writers, to give high expecations of the great perfection to which human nature is tending, especially in America; for I think Old England, by their account, is degenerating. 
But a republic extending 1200 miles in one direction, and without any known bounds in the other, is ill an experiment to be made in the history of mankind. Our ancestors made the experiment in vain, within narrower limits; they too had high expectations of what mankind were about to exhibit; they thought the millennium and the kingdom of Christ were at hand, but they found, in their tead, the iron reign of an usurper, supported by military force. It is charity, perhaps, to pray that if the Colonies must break with us for ever, they may be more faithfully served by those they employ, than they themselves have served their country. The officer, perhaps, has not yet appeared, who, on that emergency, is to dismiss the Congress as Cromwell did the Parliament. But what title have they to hope for an exemption from the too common fate of mankind; the fate that has ever attended Democracies attempted on too large a scale; that of plunging at once into military government ? The armies they form against their country will need no other title to become their malters. It is even fair to conclude, from the history of the world, that there is no time of more danger than those times of sanguine, of florid, and enthusiastic expeclation, in which mankind are bent on great and hazari dous change.

Americans, however, may ill be thought out of this question; they seek no innovation; they are the parties that contend for the ancient eftablilhment. Their plea, however, I hope is better founded than this *. The Parliament of Great Britain has made laws for the Colonies from their first eftablilhments. The charters of the Colonies fubjeaed them to taxes, and they have been taxed by as of the British Parliament: Matters therefore were in their ordinary train, when the Americans ftopt hort, and would proceed no farther. I will not, however, insist, that the change of circumstances may not have required a change of policy; and that, as the Americans are growing rich, and have something that tempts rapacity, they ought to have better security for their property, than the continuance of former pracice will perhaps betlow.
But, in this view of the contest, what is to be done if the Colonies have a right to contend for new securities ? Let them apply to the state with proper professions of duty, and representations of the dangers they apprehended; but no one See the Rights of Great Britain aflerted againt the Claims of America, can pretend that the state ought to yield up the ordinary way of constituting a revenue, till a new and better way is fubfiituted in its place.

The Dotor refers to the example of the Romans, and bids us confider how much they sussered for having been the tyrants of other nations, and I shall never recommend to any slate to follow their example.

Dr. Price * has deduced, from our leading principle, viz. that every rejiraint on the will of man is an introduSion of slavery, a number of consequences that seem to hi- incapable of being disputed. There is, indeed, nothing that requires to be disputed, but his principle itself, for with that, the consequences mull fall. Its application, as he observes, to the present quesion with America, is obvious; and the principle indeed seems to be made for the application, and is fitted to justify the desire of national independence, under the name of Civil Liberty.
The change of words has a mighty effe&, even in the frame of an argument. There is not an Englilh gentleman, I believe, that would not Ihrink from the thought of reducing millions of his fellow-fubjests to a fate of lervitude, and as few that will not be sized with indignation in being told that the Colonies aim at independence, and will contribute no longer to the joint support of their common country.

We shall be told, however, that the Colonies do not aim at independence.-Yes, if they aim at the Liberty designed for them by Dr. Price.
If they aim only at security to their rights and properties, let the question be fairly flated, and put in the train of pacific discussion.

The Doctoris pleased to fay, that the question of right, with all liberal inquirers, ought to be;
not what jurifdicion over them, precedents, ifatutes, and charters give, but what reason and equity, and the rights of humanity give: This, he fays, in truth, is a question which no kingdom has ever bad occasion to agitate. It is certainly the firfl time it ever was proposed that men having any political eablifhments, statutes, precedents, or charters, should at once demolifih, cancel, or set aside all the maxims, records, or conventions on which every party must rely for the preservation of his property, and from which alone he can learn the relation in which he stands to the tfate, or to his fellow-fubjets. Why has no kingdom ever had occasion to agitate such a question ? Have no parties arose in politics before ? Have no dillrits or corporations of the fame community claimed privileges and exemptions that have been disputed with them ?
It is well known that such queffions have been agitated, and that parties uniformly referred to precedents, tatutes, and charters for a determination. To bring queffions of this fort to any supposed tribunal of reason, of equity, and humanity, is to set human affairs afloat upon the ea of opinion and private interef, and to deprive men of those charts, landmarks, and rules of failing, by which they were in use to be guided, and to diret their cause.

It is certainly true, that no nation ever planted Colonies with o liberal or so noble a hand as England has done. But she has done so on the plan of those very charters, flatutes, and precedents which are now to be set aside. And her having done so much for her Colonies, is surely an unfavourable topic from which to inser the right of her Colonies to do nothing for her. It is indeed to be lamented, that, in the place of argument, this controversy is haften.
ing to employ the sword. Blessed were he that could bring it to a different issue. But 1 hope, that neither the Americans, nor the advocates that plead for them, will think, that every concefflon flould come from Great Britain. They have hitherto said to the King of Great Britain, on his own territory, as the Romans said to Pyrrhus and to Hannibal, " You muff evacuate " this land before we will treat;" and if this were granted them, it is likely they would be ready to declare what further concessions they expeE from the Crown and Legilfature of their country.

The Docor * proposes to determine the justice of the war by the obje& of it; and this he collects from a latute moved and carried in Parliament, under the auspices of a noble Lord, and of honourable gentlemen, who are the declared friends of America, and in whose intentions the Americans repose such confidence, that they have never once, as I have been told, complained of this declaratory law. From this tfate of the cafe; that is, from the silence of America on this law, and from the friendly intentions towards America of those who obtained it; I am inclined to think, that this law cannot be the ground f the quarrel. I rather lufpe&, that we are going to war about taxaatiun and property, than about speculative declarations of right; and that one party is very indifferent about laws that are to bring them nothing, and others about laws that are to take nothing from them. And on this supposition I Should think, the fair way of determining the justice of the claim, would be by flating two questions. The firit, Whether the charters, ftatutes, and precedents; that is to fay, whether the present confiitu:ion of Great Britain refpeting her Colonies; has committed a power of Taxation over America, to the legislature of Great Britain. If this question hall be decided in the affirmative, as I am persuaded it mut be so decided, it will follow, that the Legiflature of Great Britain has yet incurred no blame in urging a claim in which they were justified by the constitution of the state.

I however mofl willingly admit a second question. Has the situation of affairs undergone any change that require a change of policy and of measures, that deserve the attention of the Legifature, and on which the Colonies ought to be heard with candour and patience, bo as to avoid, if poflible, inconveniencies to which, in a new situation, old precedents, and even statutes and charters might carry us ?

The principal changes in our circumstances are, that our Colonies, under the influence of charters and statutes, have increased in resources and in people: that Great Britain is heavily burdened, and that now, from being at an or
dinary 

dinary expence in nursing and protecting her Colonies, ihe would gladly draw ome share of the public supplies from thence. This fituation, I confess, is new, and may require some suitable policy. If the Parliament of Great Britain, as formerly, be to grant the money of the Americans ; the latter may think their property not secure. At the fame time, if any party independent of the Parliament of Great Britain be to grant money to the Crown; this constitution loses one of its principal securities, the dependence of the Crown for supplies on the Commons of Great Britain.

Here is a difficulty, on which it is not furprifing that parties ihould differ, and inadvertently get into a very hearty quarrel, in which both may susser extremely before any one is able to find a solution.

In Rating the question, I have passed over many things which other persons may think of great consequence, in order to come at what I apprehend every one will think so.

I do not write in order to persuade my correfpondent, that the Legislature of Great Britain should retain their unlimited power of granting the money of America. But I write under a I deep convition, that the Americans ought to contribute to the supplies of the empire. And that they ought now, before an indemnity is granted for the pafl, to specify the taxes on which they will effablith a revenue for the state, and which, without augmenting the burden on them, may increase with their resources their population and the immunities given to their trade; but subjea to no other alteration, without the content of Parliament and their own.
Or if they choose rather to pay some fixed proportion of what the Commons of Great Britain from time to time levy on themselves, let them have it in the mode which they themselves, or better judgments than mine, can determine.

They have been told, that the Parliament of Great Britain will not tax them, if they are pleased to tax themselves. No fpeci.c tax, no specific fum has been mentioned to them; and yet this proposition, coming from the Commons of Great Britain, has, by themselves and by their advocates on this fide the water, been termed an insult. The plain Englifl, I am afraid, is, that the Americans do not think any supply from thence due to the state of Great Britain. Or, that their advocates do not think they ought to grant any such supply till they themselves are in power. The Americans may flatter themselves, that if the party that now opposes Government, were in power, they would obtain every favour and every concession. But they may be assured, that no Minister in the councils of the King will surrender the undoubted right of this country, to require from America ome hare in the supplies which are necessary to support the the Imperial Crown and the Empire of Great Britain. If precautions be wanting to secure the rights of that people in the mode of attaining this necessary end, the parties may still have an opportunity of entering into a candid and fair discussion of this subjec. Commissioners are soon to be appointed by the King, who are to accompany his fleets and armies across the Atlantic, doubtless with the humane and merciful intention to spare, by pacific means, if that is yet possible, the effusion of blood.

In this light the Colonies ought certainly to confider this lenient measure. And if they do, I think they ought to be ready on their part, to meet the advances of the King with dutiful representations of the Securities they deem necessary in the future administration of government refpeaing them.If no such ftep is taken, we may fairly conclude, that they are intoxicated with the idea of feparation and independence, and that they are resolved solved not tb grant supplies in any mode or ir any proportion whatever. And if this be their resolution, I am afraid the sword muff strike as well as be raised; and till they exculpate themselves from the design of withdrawing their allegiance, and every reasonable mode of ulpply from the Crown of Great-Britain, the wounds they receive will appear to comefrom the hand of Justice, and will remain unpitied by many persons, who are far from wishing to invade their liberties.

It is likely that the councils of the King will incur more censure for the relucance with which they have armed the kingdom against this revolt, than they will for any supposed precipitation in urging matters to extremities. But it is a noble error to have been flow in believing.
that Britifi fubjeds, unmoleited in their religion or in their liberties, still in pofleffion of that government by which they had arrived at so much prosperity, untouched in their property by any unprecedented invasion ; and if assailed, only assailed by penal statutes, to make compenfation for an outrage done to the property and the trade of their fellow-fubjets: It was, I fay, a noble error to be flow in believing that British subjects, under this description; would have drawn upon themselves and this nation all the horrots of a civil war. If we were taught to think them pufilanimous, they were certainly taught to think our councils irresolute, diftrated, and unflable; but both, I hope, will return from their errors, and exchange the sword for a more rational mode of arbitration.

Dr. Price, being to confider the jufice of the war, recites all the pleas that may be offered by the state in support of coercive measures.
Those pleas he supposes to be, he necfity of war to preferie the unity of the empire: our fuperi;rity: our pretensions as the parent fiate: the return duefor our benefits: our sovereignty in the territory of imerica. The Do&or will own, that union is at least a desirable object, and will pardon our endeavours to preserve it, by the tame means that states, the most moderate, have employed for this purpose; the policy of a common interest, a common sense of duty, and the authority of a common government. If any one contend, that we ought to rely on either of the former principles to the exclusion of the latter, and that we ought to resign either the authority or the force which government on occasion must exert, I should fufpec that he does not wih to have us united, nor even to leave us possesed of the common resources for the preservation of peace and good order, that all nations have employed within their dependencies.

I mean not to argue from the second topic.

Nations do not found obligations of allegiance and duty on difference of wealth, numbers of people, or the uppcfed precedency of scholars and learned men. i hopc the remaining title, however, will not be ol flithtiy trcated. The name of Parent State is not an empty found.
It carries the authority by which civil rights are eftabliflled and modified. If America derive nothing from this authority, why did its settlers take any charters from the crown of GreatBritain ? Or if they were emancipated by these charters, why is not their emancipation expreiled in ome such terms as the following?
Wh'Vereas certain persons mean to depart this our kingdom and form fiates apart, we hereby emancipate fich perfions, discharge their allegiance to us, and difiontinue our prote.icon. If, on the contrary, they took possession of their settlements by grants of the Crown, if they have been uniformly confidered as British fubjecs, amenable to the law and under the protection of the state, what title have they now to withdraw their allegiance because their settlements were made in America, any more than if they had been on Hounllow-Heath or on Finchley-Common?
The charters, the precedents, the flatutes on which this right of the state is founded, can no more be disputed than the charters, precedents, and statutes on which the constitution of the state, respecting any other part of its power, is established. The utmost any party can plead is, that circumstances are changed, and require a new system of policy, or at leaf some additional precautions, to give to the British fubjets of America the fame security, or a security as nearly as possible the fame, with that which is enjoyed by their fellow-fubjects at home.

Exaction of gratitude is but an ungracious plea; the fa& is, that the state protected and encouraged that part of her fubjets on the fame mixed motives of political interest and affection, that he protects and encourages every other member of the community, and there is no other member that has not an equal title to reje& the claim of gratitude. It may again be repeated, that confidering what has passed between Great Britain and her Colonies, the Americans will be found to a an odious part in this contest; they are not satisfied with the enjoyment of their municipal governments, and such a mode of contributing to the supplies of the empire, as may be consistent with the safety of their persons and their properties.

The sovereignty of a territory, and the property of its land, every where admits of a diftinaion. The state is undoubtedly sovereign of all the territory on which any of her fubjeas, under her protecion, and by her charters and grants, have made any settlements; and the territory of North America was, and is subject to all the claims of sovereignty under the limitation of statutes and charters. I write from memory, but appeal to the original deeds, whether ome of them did not give an exemption from Taxation during a limited time, with . c-cent implication, that at the expiration of that term they should be fubje& to taxation like other British fubjt&s. And whether others did not limit taxation to specific duties, mentioned with a like implication, that the right of taxation was entire while the exercise of that right was reftrited.

But Dr. Price is willing to plead *, that the Colonies did fettle under the faith of charters, and we muff admit, that they have a right to all the immunities and exemptions granted them by statute, or by charter under the authority of statute; but let not their advocates plead the authority of charters in one page and rejet them in the next. It is certain, that the Colonies were planted on the authority of law, and never aspired to establish their privilege on a higher base. It is likewise probable, that all of them, at their first settlement, would have enbraced, as an ample security of their property, an exemption from every burden besides that of parliamentry taxation. How far this security may now be deemed sufficient, I am willing to leave as a subject of better and more able difculion.

The remainder of Dr. Price's observations on the jufrice of the war tend to prove, that the pait or present site of the constitution refpeaing the Colonies, is not precisely what it ought to be in the present state of the empire, nor such as it ought to be in the event of farther changes, of which he has tated the poflible contingency; and in this 1 do not pretend to decide, but hope that persons better qualified will bring it to proper trial, not of force, but of political expediency and national wisdom.

Dr. Price, in the 2d Section of the 2d Part of his Pamphlet, in which he inquires, whether the war with America is j.ftified by the principles of the constitution, affects to confider the Americans as a separate people; and inquires, whether the war be made to elabliJh our constitution among them. If this question has any meaning at all, I apprehend it should stand, Whether, by the present conflitution of the state, the Legislature of Great Britain is in poffeilion of a right to impose taxes and to enact laws binding in America ? If they be in possession of such a right, have they been known to abuse it ? They have been in poffeflion of the right, and scarcely at all exerted it. But the Americans are now alarmed, and think that this right may be abufed; let them come forward, therefore, and urge the precautions necessary to be taken against this abuse. If they will accept of no security below that of independency, and total feparation of commonwealth; this, I apprehend, they muff acquire at the point of the sword. But other and better remedies for the evil may yet be expe&ed from the councils of a state that has been as remarkable for moderation, as for resolution in the conduct of great affairs.

Advocates in this cause perpetually quote the spirit and principles of the British confitution against the letter and the fact. Do they mean its primeval slate, the intention of its 'founder, or something else, that they fancy concerning it?
Its primeval state is very little known; and if it were, could not be admitted as the rule of proceeding in opposition to subsequent eflablifhments and compacts. In that sage which is called 

called the feudal constitution, the King had hid domain or royal estate, and had no other claim on his fubjeas but their personal services in his wars. When he wanted some extraordinary supply, he summoned his vassals together, and made his proposition to them for that purpose; they deliberated and refused, or granted ometimes in commutation for military services, and fomtimes as a voluntary gift.
The Constitution was gradually raised upon these foundations. The Parliament became what it is, and the state in poffefiion of a maxim, that the King can raise no supplies without consent of Parliament. This is the origin, and this is the far in our constitution; and right or wrong, till within these few years, or few months, within the Britilh territory Of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, Parliament was supposed omnipotent and irresistible: what change may now be made to accommodate forms to new fituations, I hope may fill be determined by a better decision than that of the sword. But, till that is determined, I hope, that every good subjea will pay a proper refpe& to the fat, and the letter of the confitution, whatever fancy he may have about the spirit of it. We may wish for improvements in the laws of the Rfate, but till these are made, we must abide by the law as it stands.

In the next Sedion*, Dr. Price brings in question the policy of the war with America.
There is, in fad, no apology can be made for any war, betides the necessity of it to maintain bome right, and some right that is worth concontending for at this expence. Whether Great Britain has any such right now at flake, and by what steps this right came to be brought in hazard, are two separate questions.

I muf maintain, that until our union is legally dissolved, the American Colonies are a part of the British empire. That ads of sovereignty, from which Great Britain might, or did derive, material advantage, were exerted by the legiflature of Great Britain. That the ad of navigation, the ads limiting trade, the appointment of governors and other civil officers, the eflabliflment of a revenue, however inconsiderable, were all of them ads of sovereignty, in which the state and people of Great Britain are deeply interested. That the interest of Great Britain, constituted by there ads of sovereignty, is now in imminent hazard; and in all human probability, to be secured by that force alone with which the slate shall appear to be armed in support of its own rights. So much has been said for the Americans in this country, and they have met with so little control in their own, that their pretensions arelikely to rife. If they prevail by force in reducing the power of legislation, will they not take the fame opportunity to reduce the navigation at, and other every right of sovereignty? What is to hinder their proceeding to asfume that independency, which is so roundly prescribed to them under the denomination of Liberty? Are they not getting fast into a fituation, in which the overeignty of the Crown is likely to become as odious, at least to their leaders, as the power of the Legifature itself ?
One man is brought from behind the counter, to be member of a sovereign Congress; another to be one of five that wield the executive power of a great empire: others are promoted proportionally, though to inferior ftations; and may entertain hopes of rising to the highest: one man is raised from a dealer in hories to 'e a general, another from a barber to be a culonel; all of them, I make no doubt, well qualified for the stations they fill: but whether they be or no, likely to be fond of their dignities, and unwilling to part with them; ready to employ all their authority, all their credit, all the force they can command to prevent the return of peace, which muff bring the downfal of their power, and fend them again to their trades and their obscurity; what but a proper force, and a proper aspec of determination, on the part of Great Britain, can bring flch persons as these to reason, or deliver out of their hands the bulk of the fober and the induftrious people of America ? who, feeing their properties and their peace at flake, will be glad to return to the bosom of the ate, and be happy to receive such fatisfa&ion on the future security of their property and civil rights, as I hope no generous or candid mind can ever entertain any idea of refuting them.

Men are indeed, as Dr. Price observes, too apt to be governed by the lust of power, by revenge, and by other detestable paiffons. But are these passions unknown in America? Have the leaders in this revolt no ambition, no revenge to gratify, or would it be prudent in any administration to trust to the moderation and candor of parties, who have oared already so high above the condition of fubjeas, and who have such an interest in perpetuating a breach to which they owe so much personal consequence ?

It may be confessed, that as matters now fland, the Americans are not likely to acknowledge the moif evident rights of Great Britain, farther than thole rights are supported by force. But it will be asked, How came we into this situation ? Is not the war, though neceTfary now, the sequel of many unnecefary steps, that being discontinued in time, would have prevented it entirely ? It may be so, and so have been the greater number of wars that have afflicted mankind. Disputes arise, provocations become reciprocal, and evils accumulate. The beginnings are admitted, because no body perceives the end; and every fool is a wife man after the event has shown him what was coming.

I am willing to own, that Dr. Price is inclined to censure measures, rather than to strike at men. That for this purpose he recals to our memory, the policy of many years, fraught with initruction to those who are now to act on the scene of public affairs. He predics, though 1 hope rashly, the loss of America; and to make us fenfible how much we are to lose, he paints in the most favourable colours, the happy state at which that country at the beginning of these hostilities had arrived, and the growing importance of its trade to Great Britain. I hope, however, it will be remembered, that the Colonies arrived at this happy Rate under the influence of British policy, and under the undisputed right of the British Legislature to bind them in all cafes whatsoever: and as we have so long prospered together, under this this policy; that the Do&or's prediction may still prove false; that a moderate hare of public spirit and good intention, on that fide of the water as well as on this, may still save to all parties their reciprocal advantages, without incurring the inconvenience that either apprehends.
But for this purpose, as we are perpetually alarmed with the hundreds of thousands that the Americans can arm, I am afraid that Britain must not come to the conference unarmed, or in a ft to be insulted.

I write in every page on the supposition that negociation may take place; and who, but infernal spirits, would ever go to war with any other intention than to obtain an equitable peace. The party on whose fide the aversion to treaty lies, will be answerable for the confequence.

As for the trade of America, I am ready to allow it as high as the advocates of America are pleased to make it. Be it granted that we fold them our goods at our own price; but unless this price was a higher than we received from other markets, unless it was better paid, I do not fee why this trade is preferable to any other vent fcr our commodities. Even if the price were higher, which I am told it was not, the flow returns of this market rendered it less profitable than many others we have had and till may have.

But have the Americans a right to withdraw their trade from our merchants and manufacturers, as well as their supplies from the state ?
If they have not, why should it be supposed that they mean to carry the lines of separation beyond the bounds which they themselves, and their advocates, assea to prescribe. Trade is the child of interest, and will follow where its parent leads. But the right of sovereignty must be maintained by authority, and ometimes by force. The subjects of Great Britain do not claim a right of sovereignty, neither in Europe nor in America; but they expect from each other, and from the Americans, the reasonable co-operation of fellow-fubje&s; and the state itself must maintain its sovereignty in both. If any part of the monarchy withdraw its allegiance, the remainder mutl repel such an insult with their blood.

We are, in this argument, threatened with the attacks of enemies from abroad, while we are engaged in a war with our Colonies. But the advocates of America, it is hoped, do not with that the ifate of Great-Britain should bow the head to foreign nations, as well as to her own subjects. If our quarrel be momentous and just, we must support it or perilh, be the enemy who he will. But we have had our wars, and none of our enemies have yet had cause to rejoice in the effet of their arms against us. I am, however, inclined to believe, that this alarm, as it is injurious to the honour of nations with whom we are at peace on the faith of treaties, so it is injurious to their sagacity, and discernment of their own political interest. What are they likely to gain by erecting the colonies of North-America into a power independent of Britain ? Will their own Colonies become more dutiful after this example of a supposed successful revolt ? Or will they have lets to fear in behalf of their Weft-India settlements, from this rising confederacy, than they have from Britain ? The new enemy will be nearer to those settlements, and have many more advantages in seizing them, than the old.

Few persons are qualified to enter the lilts with Dr. Pricc, on the subjed of accounts and calculations; but this alone will not enable us, in particular cafes, to decide the great questions of national right. Paper-currency and public debt are the consequences of a fortunate conftitution, and of an unlimited credit both public and private. They have given us the advantage in many a contest to forces superior to our own; and the evil, though great, by our Author's account, is susceptible of a cure. It is probably in order to urge this cure, that the desperate ifate of the patient is so much explored. Such admonitions go home to Ministers of State, who can verify or disprove the sacs, and will not be shaken by false allegations. The people, however, are in more danger, and in the most flouriflhing time of the Public, may susser as much from a false alarm of bankruptcy, as they could from a real one. A false and wanton alarm of fire, in a crowded theatre, has cost many lives; but they who alarm us so loudly on the subject of public credit, may have the consolation to know, that their own accounts are not fully credited, otherwise we should have the people of England crowding into every avenue that leads to the Bank, and treading each other to death, with an eager haste to get forward while any cash was to be had for their paper.

Most people, however, believe, that it is not necessary for a great kingdom to have all its riches in cash; and even the example of the Americans, whose advantages Dr. Price is not on the present occasion inclined to decry, will serve to prove, that a people, with no better resource than a paper circulation, may rush into the midst of alarming convulsions. The Americans have reaoln to believe, that their country will be a feat of war, and yet carry on their operations with paper. Will not the landing of a few troops on their coafis, infuJrreions threatening a revolution of governmenct, or events that produce a general panic, operate in America as they would do in Europe ? And put an end there, as it would any where else, to the subsistence of armies, and to every species of traffic that depends on the faith of paper, or the credit of a government that supposes a revolution in order to give it any being.

But if in the present contest with America our revenue is likely to decline, and if the whole of it be scarcely adequate to the difficulties in which we are involved; this does not appear a proper argument to convince us, that we ought not to expect any aid from America; nor is it a very liberal apology for the Americans refusing to bear any part of the burden, of which a considerable part was incurred in their own cause. In their cause singly, if they persist and prevail in gaining that Liberty of independence which is now pointed out to them; but in our common cause if they continue united with us, and bear ajuft proportion of our burdens.

In tfating the honour of the nation as affeed by the war with Amnerica, Dr. Price supposes, that the claims of the state are wrong, and that the refiltance of the Colonies is jufi. On this iuppofition, the argument is unanswerably for him; and the concetfions of justice, however late, would, at least to our fellow-fubje&s, be honourable. But this, I humbly conceive, is begging the question. Hitherto the State has proceeded in the traa of precedents, and followed the rules of law and of charters. If a change be expected, the grounds of it should be laid in amicable representation, not in open war and hostility. Nations are like private men, they may commit errors, but must not susser themselves to be kicked even into reason. When the parties are once armed, a great nation must attend to is reputation, as well when it sheaths as when it employs the sword. If the Americans refuse upon any terms, whether in conjunction with, or in subordination to the Parliament of Great-Britain, to furnish any part of the public supplies, it is by no means necessary, in order to justify the ue of the sword against them, that they invade this fland. If a person re:use the payment of his just debts, he may be compelled to do right in his own habitation, no less than if he had aually entered with violence the house of his creditor.

We are said to assume as much power over the Americans as either the Genoese or the French could afiume over the Corsicans. The State of Great-Britain had assumed nothing but the power of prote&ing her Colonies, when her conttitutional powers in America began to be denied, and her authority spurned. What has happened since is surely matter of regret, at least, if not of just censure, to the warmest friends of America. A daring breach of peace and violence to property was committed, and went unpunished. Direct war has been levied in return for penal statutes. And inflead of reparation to their fellow-citizens for the damage done by the citizens of Boston, we are told, that they are an independent republic, and no longer accountable to the laws.

We are bid to think of the allies of the Romans in Italy, how they claimed to be enrolled as citizens of Romeo how they fought, and how the state perifned in the struggle. The claim of those allies was, by every reasonable person, thought to be fraught with disorder and public ruin. It was strenuously opposed by the mot H candid and virtuous citizens of Rome. The multitude of the people, in the place of assembly, but too often made a scene of confuion. IE was not thought necessary to bring an acceffon of the whole populace of Italy to swell the tumult. The event of the war was fatal to Rome; not because the claim of the allies was refused, as Dr. Price seems to insinuate, but because it was granted; and the sequel proved a striking example of what the Doctor does not seem to apprehend, that the power of the people is not the good of the people. Their liberty funk as their power increased, and perished at last by the very hands that were employed in support of the popular cause.

W.e are bid to confider* how far we are likely to succeed in the present war. The reader will please to observe, that success in war is a term of uncertain meaning. It may stand for the extermination of an enemy on the one hand, or for the most equitable terms of peace that can be obtained on te other. If the Doctor means the first, I hope that we Ilall not fucceed. If he means the second, I hope we hall succeed; and if the Americans be actuated by any thing hort of frenzy, they will not resign their property and their peace, burn their own towns, and fly to the desert, as the Doctor insinuates, to avoid embracing us once more as their brethren, and concurring with us upon some equitable and safe ground, in supporting the common cause of the slate. This I hall call vicory; and a victory to all the ingenuous and well-informed natives of America, as well as to those of the fame deicription in Britain.

Some individuals among them, who mcet in Congress, or frand at the head of armies, as the Lords of America, may think the reunion of the Empire a defeat; but to every one else, I hope, it will appear a new era of prosperity, and glory to the slate.

Dr. Price supposes , contrary to the leon of independence, which, under the denomination of Liberty he has read to the Americans, that they may still be willing to remain in the bofomn of the state, and on the fame bottom with their feliow-;fubjeas in Britain: But in what sense, and to what effec, remain on the fame bottom with us ? Will they acknowledge the law of the slate, and contribute some reasonable proportion toward its support ? Will they be contented with a reasonable security, admitted in the form of granting this supply, that it fliall not be augmented without their own content ?
If ever any such proposal had come from America, I am persuaded it might have served as the foundation of friendship, and terminated in some happy arrangement. But if, by maintaining their union with us, they only mean to continue the practice of calling upon our fleets and armies to defend them when attacked, without contributing any thing to support the power that protets them, I do not fee what interest the Rate has in this union. Nay, but they are willing to leave us the command of their trade. I confers I do not fee the wisdom of this policy on the part of America; we are arrived at an age of experience, in which all parties might fee the expedience of exchanging reftritions on trade for compensations in revenue. If the slate were disposed to oppress, he might do so as effectually by reftri&fions on trade, as by impofitions of taxes. And I believe, that if the Parliament of Great Britain, in its disputes with the Crown, had hofen rather to leave the trade of the people at its mercy, than to grant its supplies, the Public would have long since suffered severely by the choice.

I am sorry that Dr. Price hould endeavour to flatter the Americans on a supposed aversion of the people of Great Britain to this war, or impute to this circumstance the supposed flow progrefs made in recruiting the army. The nursery of the army in this country consists in the supernumeraries of our manufaturers, and labouring hands. Had the American leaders, by flhutting their ports on our traders, distressed us as they proposed, recruits for the army would have been bur too easily found; but as matters now stand, our armaments muf increase with their usual pace. If, to avoid loading the public, by means of new levies, with an enormous half-pay lift at the end of the war, it is to be opened with a supply of foreign troops, I hope ik wi cl ole with them too; and that in what(::.: manner the first army that goes to America i, composed, it will satisfy the people of that country that peace with Great Britain is better than war.

I am farther sorry, that Dr. Price ihould flatter the Americans on the subjed of their own strength, and of our weakness. If the Docor were pleated to recollec a few more of the pasfages of history, with which he is so well acquainted, he would observe, that no general, being to invade a country, thought himself obliged to have an army in numbers equal to the natives; and that most of the unhappy conquests recorded in the history of mankind were made with small armies, who, having the fuperiority of discipline, made a progress the more rapid that their numbers were few: in hort, that small armies have done more than I hope the arms of Great Britain will have to do in America; they have reduced, and kept in subje&ion, extensive countries, replenished with numbers of people, not of the weak and effeminate alone, but of the molt warlike and fiercest nations that are known in history.

The Romans, a little before the second Punic war *, mustered in Italy seven hundred thousand foot, and seventy thousand horse; yet this country was invaded by Hannibal with twenty thousand foot, and fix thousand horse : The greateft part of it was reduced, and remained in the hands of this enemy for sixteen years. With how small an army did Cafar reduce four hundred independent Certons, and fierce nations in Gaul ? With how few did he afterwards invade Italy itself, and with how few did he reduce the whole Roman Empire ? Were the Saxons that landed in Britain superior to the Britons; the Danes to the Saxons, or the Normans to the Englih ? On this point, therefore, .cald be sorry to flatter the Americans. The cii r:'ions * Polyb. lib. ii. c. 24. ;. ,,d that arise in a country that is invaded, turn the superiority of numbers into disorder and weakness. The Americans have not yet met the Britiih soldiers on the plain, and when they do, their numbers, I imagine, will not avail them much.

I have as high a sense of what men ought, and will do, in defence of their liberties, as any man: But I flatter myself, in the present cafe, that, unless the Americans mistake independence and separation of commonwealth for Liberty, that they will not think themselves called upon to try the force of this principle.

I hould willingly, with Dr. Price, in the close of his pamphlet, or while he is hastening to the conclusion *, rejoice in the profpea of a power growing in America that shall astonish the world. If it were not proposed to raise this power by dismembering the slate of Great Britain, and by stripping her of a branch lhe has nourished with so much care, and which by having partaken with her in every national advantage, is now in condition to bear an equitable part in her burdens; and which certainly, on every principle ofjuftice, human and divine, is not now entitled to fay, we need you no longer, and will take no father part in your affairs.

I confess that I think, when the cause of our country is at flake, impartiality is but a doubt.
ful virtue. It may be noble to wiih that our country should do no wrong, and it may be lawful to flay her hand when raflly lifted up against ti-e weak and the helpless; but when swords are drawn, to beat down that of a friend while the enemy is striking, I am afraid, is perfidy.

The Americans, it is true, are not come here to invade us; but they with-hold the rights of Great Britain, and oblige us to invade them, which is a no less justifiable ground of hotility. When citizens of Great Britain anticipate with joy the independent or separate greatness of America, it is natural to suppose, that they think the dismemberment of this empire will bring us back only to what we were about a century ago; diminish our luxury, give a check to many vices, and by landing us down a few fleps on the scale, only renew our endeavours to remount again. This, however, is not of a piece with the history of mankind; nations in their progress, though weak and inferior to 3 their 

their neighbours, spurn their condition, and continue to advance from the bottom to the top of the scale. But nations that have been high can seldom bear a fall; they fink in fthe cale with a retrograde motion as rapid as they advanced. Is Great Britain then to be sacrificed to America; the whole to a part, and a state which has attained high measures of national felicity, for one that is yet only in expecation, and which, by attempting such extravagant plans of Continental Republic, is probably laying the feeds of anarchy, of civil wars, and at last of a military government, so much that, in this great contest, Dr, Price might have ventured to fay, that the friends as well as the enemies of America may not know what they are doing?

I am happy to find in the conclusion of this Pamphlet , that Dr. Price, notwithstanding the language of independence which he has taught the Americans, is pleated to repeat with ome exprefiions of approbation, a motion for peace, fuggeted by a noble Lord, in which the union, dependency, and participation of America in the burdens of the Empire are included as part of the plan. The proposal does honour to the noble Lord; and if it had atually come from Ameriea, I mhould have thought it an equitable ground upon which to open a council of deliberation with the most friendly intentions. I should have prayed that, while the deliberations were open, parties would agree to a cessation of arms, and a suspension of penal ftatutes. But I fee not the use of fabricating plans, of which the firIt ftep always is a concession on the part of the Rfate, without any overture of submission on the part of its fubjeas. These subjects have treated plans of the minority with the fame contempt that they have treated acts of Parliament or resolutions of the majority, and seem to be determined to bring this contest to an iflue more agreeable to the enemies of Great Britain than to its citizens and friends.

P. S. I know not how the tenets of any party may be affeaed by what I write, but my paper is now in your hands if you publish it, I shall become the Author of a Pamphlet; and in that cafe beg of you to remember, that we pamphlet-writers of every condition mistake ourselves for statesmen, and so decide and advise without reserve. But that, not being singular, you w ill treat me no worse than you have done others of the fame description. Our esteem with many is fallen; but our consequence with a warm-hearted and reasoning people, who like to be consulted in their own affairs, merits the interposition of the best informed and best intentioned persons in the kingdom. My small pretensions being only to a hare of the last gratification, I hope to meet with ome indulgence on the first. And am, Your's, &c.
THE END.
INSTITUTES OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
For the use of Students in the College of EDINBURGH.
By ADAM FERGUSON, LL.D.

The SECOND EDITION.
REVISED and CORRECTED.



CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION.

I. Of knowledge in general, r 2. Of cience, - - 2
3. Of the laws of nature, - 4
4. Of theory, - - 7
5. Of the canles that have retard ed the progrefi of science, 9
6. Of the maxims of reason to be followed in Jpeculation, as well as in common lie, IO

7. Of moral philoJophy, - I
8. Of pneumatics, - - 12

PART I.
The natural hiflory of Man.


History of the species.

i. General arrangement, - i5
2. O' the form and afpecf of man, 16
3. Manl's residence, and manner of JitbfJienct, - - 18

a 4. Varieties 4. Varieties of the humann race, 9
5. Period of human life, - 20
6. Dfpofition of man to society, 2I
7. Of Population, - - 23
8. Varieties of choice andpurfiuit, 26
9. Arts and commerce, - 27
o1. Di)parity and rank, - 36
1 . Of political eftablihments, 39
12. Language and literature, 43


History of the individual.

I. General arrangement, - 46
2. Of co7fcioIfiefs, - - 47
3. Animalfenfe and perception, 48
4. ObfJrvation, - - 58
5. Memo:ry - - - 59
6. Ilnagination, -ib, 7. Abftration, - - 6
8. Refloning, - - 63
9. Foresight, 65
10. Propefity, - ib.
I 1. Sentiment, - - 68
I 2. De/ire and aversion, - 73
13. Volition, - - 75

PART

PART II.
Theory of Mind.

General observations, - 76



Enumeration of physical laws.

I. Laws of the unde;lfandlin, 8r 2. Laws of the will, - 85


The foregoing laws applied, &c.

i. To Ittereft, - 2. Emulation, - - 93
3. Pride, - 96
4. Vanity, - 98
5. Probity, - - 99
6. Moral approbation in general, i o 7. The objeS of moral approba tion, - - 04

a 2 8. The 8. The principle of moral appro bation, - - - os0


Of the nature and future profpeCs of the human foul.
i. Of the immateriality of the foul, - - - II
2. Of the immortality of thefoul, II2

P A R T III.
Of the knowledge of God, C H A P. I.

Of the being of God.
I. Of the universality of this be lief, - - - 114
2. Of thefoundations of this be lief, - - 6

C A P. II.

Of the attributes of God.
. Of these attributes in general, I 19

2. Of 2. Of the unity of God, - I9
3. power, - - 120
4. wifdoom, - - 12
5. goodnef, - - ib.
6. jqfice, - - I27

Of a future state, - - 28

PART IV.

Of Moral Laws, and their most general applications.


Definitions, - - - 30


Of good and evil in general.
i. General application of these terms, - - - I34; 
2. Of ejokyments and fijfe'rizgs, 135
3. Of pelrfcTions and defecs, 136
4. Of p/oji'eriy and adveifty, ib.

a 3 5. lariety 5. Variety offyftems in the appli cation of the terms good and evil .- - 137
6. The comparative moment of good and evil in their different acceptations, - 139

Of the fundamental law of morali ty, &c.

I. The law, - ' 49
2. Application to the mind, 150
3. Of the degrees of happiness, and the actual attainments of men, - - - 152
4. Of opinions produftive of mi fery, or that hinder improvement, - - 154
5. Of opinions, or circunmfan ces, productive of happi?ness, or that lead to improvement, - - - 157
6. Application to external ac tions, - - I59
7. Diverjfty of opinions concern ing the morality of external adions, - - I6

8. Caifes 8. Canses of this diversity, i62
9. Difference of the cafe, 163
Io. Diference of choice, - 64
II. Diference of interpretation, 165
12. Fundamental lawsof external action, -. ..- 168
I3. Diferent fanflions under 'which external afions are required, &c. - 69
14. Parties to whot laws apply, i7o PART V.
Of Jurisprudence.


The foundations of compulsory law, - - I72

The rights of men in general, 174

Laws of defence in general, I75


Difference of rights.

i. General diviion, - 176
2. Rights perJonal, - ib.
3. Rights. real, - - 177
4. Original rights, - - 178
5. Adventitious rights, - I79

Laws of acquisition in general, I80

Law of occupancy, - 181

Law of acquisition by labour, 182


Law of acquisition by contrac.

i. The obligations of contrad, I84
2. Laws of contras7 in general, I85
3. Contrals of different denomi nations, - - 188

4. The 4. The exceptions to contra1s in general, - - 189
5. Exceptions peculiar to condi tional and reciprocal contracs, - - - I94

Law of acquisition by forfei ture, - - 196

Of the law of acquisition as appli cable to particular rights.

i. Of pofe/ion, - - 97
2. Of property, - - ib.
3. Of command or service, 199


Of the law of defence.
i. Of the means of defence in general, - - 203
2. The cafe of parties Jirangers to each other, - - 204

3. Cafe of fellow-citizens, 2o6
4. Cafe of nations, 209

5. Colclhfion 5. Conzclhfion of jlrifprudence, 212

PART VI.

Of Cafuifry.

Of the fanaion of duty in ge neral, - - 213

Of the fantion of religion, 215

Of the fanaions of public re pute, - - 217

Of the fantion of conscience, 219


Of the tendency of virtue in external actions, . Of I. Of the different brannches of virtue, - - - 220

2. Duties referred to probity, 223
3. Duties referred to prudence, 230
4. Duties referred to temperance, 2-33
5. Duties referred tofortitude, 234
6. Uses of cafu il y, - 235
7. Of merit and demerit, 237

PART VII.

Of Politics.

Introduftion, - - 239


Of public ceconomy.
I. Of national resources in ge neral, - - 242

2. Of popilofilfefs, - 243
3. Of riches, - - 246
4. Of revenue, - - 255


Of political law.

I. Of this law in general, 260
M. Of the safety of the people, 262
3. Of the happiness of the people, 267
4. Of the fitness of the iilitu tion to the people, - 268
5. The distribution of office fitted to the coa1itution, 8 281
6. Importance of political itJli tutions, - - - 292

INSTI

INSTITUTES

o F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

INTRODUCTION.

Of ICnowledge in gelneral ':.
A LL knowledge is either that of particular facts, or that of general rules.

The knowledge of fads is prior to that of rules; and is the first requifite in the pracice of arts, and in the conduc of affairs.

* Bacon's Novum organum, A A

A general rule is the exprefrion of what is common, or is required to be common, in a number of particular cafes.

General rules are the result of ob servation, or will; and consequently are derived from mind.

Pratice, or condudc of any fort, though regulated by general rules, has a continual reference to particulars.

In speculation, we endeavour to eftablifn general rules.

In practice, we study particular cafes, or apply general rules to regulate our conduct.

0 Science.

Collection of fads, in de .. scription or narration, conftii tutes history.

General General rules, and their applica tions, to regulate or to explain p rticulars, constitute science.

Any general rule, exprefiing what is ffacI, or what is right, is termed a lav of lnature. 
A general rule, when applied to cxplaiin or regulate particulars, is termed a piincipie; and explanations or injunfions from principle, are termed theory, orfiflem. The particulars to be explained are termed phenomena.

Method in science is of two kinds; analytic, and fynthctic.

Analytic method, is that by whiichl we proceed from observation of fat&, or right, in particular cafes, to efabblifli general rules.

Synthetic method, is that by which we proceed from general rules to their particular applications.

The first is the method of inveftigation.

A 2 The The second of communication, or of the enlargement of science.

Argument is of two kinds: i priore, and a poJferiore.
By an argument a priore, the fat is proved from the law.

By an argument a pofleiore, the law is proved from the fat.

Of tJhe laws of Irature.
J-1 -H E laws of nature are either .h physical, or moral.
A physical law is any general ex pression of a natural operation, as exemplified in a number of particular cafes.

In every operation, men are by nature disposcd to apprehend an operating powver or cause.

Causes are of two kinds: Efficient, and final.

The Tile efficient cause, is the energy or power producing an effec.

The final cause, is the end or purpose for which an effect is .produced.

In supposing final causes, we suppose the existence of mind.

Physical science, is the know ledge and application of physical laws, or of efficient causes, to explain and account for appearances.

A moral law, is any general ex pression of what is good; and therefore fit to determine the choice of intelligent beings.

A physical law exists so far only as it is the sac'.

A moral law exifis in being obligatory.

The fibjecd from which physical laws are collected, may be classcd under four principal heads: Mechanifin, vegetation, animal life, and intelligence.

A 3 IS

It has not hitherto been made ap pear, although sometimes attempted, that these operations can be comprehended under the fame phyfical laws.

The phenomena of vegetation are not comprehended under any known law of mechanifin, much less those of animal life or intelligence.

The fubjets of moral science are, any matters of choice, together with the nature and actions of free and voluntary agents.

The immediate use of physical laws, is theory.

The immediate uses of moral law, nre choice, practice, and condut.

Of Theory.

" Heory consists in referring T. particular operations to the principles, or general laws, under which they are comprehended; or in referring particular effects to the causes from which they proceed.

To investigate or to point out any general rule or law of nature, in wl ich any particular fad- is comprehended, is to account for that fad.

Thus Sir Isaac Newton accounted for the planetary revolutions, by showing that they were comprehended in the laws of motion and gravitation.

To pretend to explain phenome na, by fliowing that they may be comprehended in a supposition or hypothesis, hypothesis, or by applying to them, metaphorically, the language proper to any other subjeA, is illusory in science.

Thus the vortex of Descartes, be ing a mere supposition, could not explain the planetary motions: and the terms, idea, image, or picture, of things, being terms merely metaphorical, cannot explain human knowledge or thought.

All phenomena, though not com prehended under any known law, are proper materials of natural hiflory.

All facts that cannot be explain ed by any rule previouly known, or better known than the fa&s themselves, may be termed ultimate sac7s.

It is evident, that all theory muff reft on ultimate sacs.

To require proof a priore for e very fad, were to fuppo Fe, that human knowledge requires an infinite ferics series of fads and explanations; whicli is impofible.

Glfes that have retarded the progress of Science.

T~-I H E neceflary avocations of JL human life.
The love of fyflem, and impa tience of delay, in the study of particulars.

Emulation of speculative men, and desire to supplant each other as founders of secs.

Prejudice, national or personal.
The difficulty of penetrating ap pearances, to discover what operations are like, what different.

Affeitation of acuteness or no velty in contefing the evidence of ultimate fads.

Vain desire of accounting for ultimate fads.

axims of Reason, to be followed in Jpeculation, as zwell as in common life.

.iHat nothing be assigned as A. a law of nature, until it be known as a faa in nature: That fadcs uniform as far as our knowledge of the subjed extends, be deemed universal laws of nature refpeing fiich fubjecl.

That partial laws be not extended beyond the conditions and limitations under which they are known to take place.

That like phenomena be referred to the fame laws.

That no proof or explanation be required of ultimate fads.

Of Moral PhiloJoply.

M/~Oral philosophy is the know-, M~l ledge of what ought to be, or the application of rules that ought to determine the choice of voluntary agents.

Before we cal ascertain rules of morality fitted to any particular nature, the fad relating to that nature ihould be known.

Before we can ascertain rules of morality for mankind, the history of man's nature, his dispositions, his specific enjoyments and fufierings, his condition and future profpeets, flould be known.

Pneumatics, or the physical hifto ry of mind, is the foundation of moral philosophy.

O f Pneaumatics.

P Neumatics treat physically of EL 'mind or pirit.

This science consists of two parts.
The first treats of man; the fecond, of God.

That part which treats of man, may contain the history of man's nature, and an explanation or theory of the principal phenomena of human life.

That which treats of God, con tains the proofs of his existence, attributes, and government.

The history of man contains ei ther such sacs as occur on a general view of the species, or such as occur to the individual, in recolleAing what pases in his own mind.

Tihe The first may be termed, the hi fJoly of the species ; the second, that of the individual.

In the theory of human nature are solved questions relating to the characters of men, to the nature and future prospects of the human foul, B INSTI



INSTITUTES

O F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART I.
The natural hifiory of Man*.


History of the Species.

General arrangemlent.
T HHE history of the human species contains the following articles.
I. The form and aspcd of man.

* See Buffon's Natural History.

B 2 2. His ## SECT. II. Of the form and aspect of Man.

2. His residence, and manner of fuibfifLence.

3. The varieties of his race.
4. The period of his life.
5. His disposition to society.
6. Population, ortl e gencrations and numbecrs of mankild.

7. V'aricies of c;oice and cpur,..

8. Arts ,nd commnrce.
9. Di{parities of rank and eftimation.

io. Political eftablifliments.
i . Language and literature.

Of the form and afpe? of Maln.
f HE human form is eret, fur niflied with articulations and muscles, fitted to retain this pofture, and to move in it with ease and safety.

The hand and the arm of man, is is an infrrument and a weapon, not a prop or support to his body.

His form and posture are well fitted to observation, to the use of reason, and to the practice of arts.

His aipef is expressive of his thoughts, sentiments, and intentions. It is calm or agitated; mild or fierce; languid or ardent; doubtful or decided; timid or intrepid.

His natural expressions consist of adions, gestures, finiles, frowns, tears, looks, together with changes of colour; and exhibit, on the whole, a variety, and a grace, which either do not take place, or are not observed, in other animals.

He is naked and unarmed; but by his invention qualified to fipply these defects.

The final cause appears to be, that his talent for invention lhould be employed.

B3 SECT; 

an's residence, and manner of fiGb fjlence.
OTher animals have their ran ges on the. earth, beyond which they do not willingly stray, or beyond which they are not qualified to subsist.

Some fubfii only in the hot cli mates, others in the cold or the temperate; but man resides equally in every climate, and can subsist on great varieties of food, both animal and vegetable.

He either accommodates himself to the inconveniencies of his fituation, or learns to surmount them.


Varieties of the human race.
U Nder the general form and a J fpe of mankind, there are ,considerable varieties of the race.

Men being dispersed over the face of the earth, receive the influences of climate, situation, and foil.

The animal and rational tempe rament, is comparatively phlegmatic and dull in cold climates; is more ardent and quick in warm climates; but has always possessed a diftinguifhed superiority in the temperate.

Apart from these diflinCions, the diversities of race are marked by a difference of flature, features, and complexion.

Mankind may be referred to fix different races.

The ## SECT. V. Period of human life.

The European, the Samoeide, the Tartar, the Hindoo, the Negro, and the American *.

Period of humanl life.
EeVery species of animal is pre served by succession.

The death of one generation is as much a part in the order of nature, as the birth and fucceflion of another.

In the human species, according to some obfcrvations, half the numbers that are born die before the Seventeenth, the seventh, or even the third year of their age is expired.

Long life t, in all climates, con * Buffon of the varieties of the human race.

t Buffon's Natural hitory. Halley's Tables.

Lowthorp's Abridgement of the Philofoplical Traliaaions, vol. 3. p. 669.

iltS


fills of between seventy and a hundred years.

It appears from the annual regi gifter of deaths where the numbers of people are known, That about one in thirty dies each year: That of twenty-feven or twentyeight, one is born: TLat about a fourth of the whole number are males. between eighteen and fifty-fix, able to carry arms.

Dfpofitioni of man ito focety *.
A Nimals have been distinguished into two classes; the solitary, and the social.

Animals of prey, for the most part, are solitary.

* Essay on the History of Civil Society, part i. set. 3.

Other Other animals are, for the most part, associating.

The associating may be farther subdivided into two kinds: I. Those which assemble in flocks or herds, merely for company or safety: 2. Those who unite their labours for some common purpose, and diftribute the burdens of the community according to some rule of inftinct or of reason.

The latter are associating and po litical. Man, though an animal of prey, and from necessity or sport addiced to hunting or war, is neverthelefs, in the highest degree, associating and political.

Societies may be referred to four general classes: families, companies, nations, and empires.

Families are united by affecion; 
companies by the desire of society; nations by the desire of security; and empires by force.

Men, ## SECT. VII. Of Population .

Men, by their confederacy, as well as by their artifice, are enabled to subdue every other species of animal, to subsist by their spoil, and to employ the strength of other animals, though superior to their own.

Separate societies are, for the most part, rivals or enemies *.

Of Population t.
M EN exist in greater numbers than any other species of the larger animals.

In some cafes they are found to * Essay on the History of Civil Society, part 1. fed. 4.

t Essay on the History of Civil Society, part3. set. 4. Wallace's Numbers of mankind. Hume's Populousness of ancient nations.

increase, increase, in others to decrease, in their numbers.

The quick or flow increase of a nimals in general, depend on the laws of propagation, on the fecurity, and the means of subsistence they enjoy.

The first relate to the age at which the parent becomes prolific; to the time that elapses in pregnancy; to the frequency of breeding; to the numbers of each brood; and to the period during which the parent continues prolific.

The laws of propagation deter mine the numbers that may spring from any single pair, and the numbers of generations that may subsist together.

These laws, in every species of a nimals, are, in favourable circunstances, sufficient to its increase.

Men, in every secure situation, people up to their resources; and the aid of government is required, not not to improve on the laws of propagation, but to befcow security and plenty.

Animals of prey have most difficulty in procuring their food.

Animals which are made a prey are least secure.

The security and subsistence of men, are malft impaired by their own mutual hoffilities and opprefsions.

The laws of propagation, as well as the means of fibfiftence, are supposed molt favourable to population in the warmer climates. To this it is imputed that nations in tho!e climates are populous, even under great defects of government.

C SECT, ## SECT. VIII. Varieties of choice and pursuit.

arieties of choice and puifiut.

EN have not, like the other animals, a fixed and deter minate choice of external objedts and pursuits.

Nations are frequently, by the difference of their manners and customs, mutual objects of wonder and censure, of contempt and aversion.

Even of two men placed in the fame or like circumstances, one acquiefces, or is pleated; the other complains.

They differ in refpe& to the means which they employ for the attainment of the fame, or of fimilar ends.


Arts and Commerce ".

EN are employed chiefly in 1M lprocuring the means of safety, fiubfifencc, accommodation, and ornament.

They pracife a variety of arts, or inventions, for these purposes; and are more or lefg successful in proportion as they have multiplied, divided, and completed their arts.

They appropriate the fruits of their flill and industry, and endeavour to accumulate wealth.

The arts which they praCtise for safety, are, the inventions of arms, places of retreat, and defence.

The earliest weapons appear to have been, the club, the fling, and * Harris on Coins.

C 2 the the bow: to there succeeded, in process of time, the spear and the sword, joined to the buckler or shield; 
Fire-arms, cannon, and then mul.fketry.

The desire of retreats has givcn rife to the art of fortification.

The art of war, in every age, mulf be accommodated to the fpecies of arms, engines, and methods T h. art L. L--...L,- ..r ifa Tle allu.Lts vilch men praie for Thre arts v-hich men pradire for _____...ns~'!-^^ _ -TC
sl I-;K L nnl- n seldom appropriated to the individual.

Nations that have observed the method, and the advantage, of breeding herds, betake themselves to pasturage.

They at firtf, generally, migrate, or wander, with their herds.

The individual acquires an im mediate property in cattle, but not in land.

N1.tis LAthat are actrbAst11 d raLi X

the uife of herbs, fruits, and grain, -..M 1,: ..A- -- 
_
_.- n SECT. VIII.

Varieties of choice and purfiuit.
/M EN have not, like the other - animals, a fixed and deter minate choice of external objets and pursuits.

Nations are frequently, by the difference of their manners and cutfoms, mutual objects of wonder and censure, of contempt and averlion.

Even of two men placed in the fame or like circumstances, one acquiefces, or is pleated; the other complains.

They differ in refpet to the means. which they employ for the attainment of the fame, or of fimilar ends.

Arts and Com)merce ".

MSPEN are employed chiefly in MV .procuring the means of safety, fibfiftence, accommodation, and ornament.

They practise a variety of arts, or inventions, for these purposes; and are more or lefT successful in proportion as they have multiplied, divided, and completed their arts.

They appropriate the fruits of their flill and industry, and endeavour to accumulate wealth.

The arts which they practise for safety, are, the inventions of arms, places of retreat, and defence.

The earliest weapons appear to have been, the club, the fling, and * Harris on Coins.

C 2 the the bow: to these succeeded, in process of time, the spear and the sword, joined to the buckler or ihield ; 
Fire-arms, cannon, and then ruflsetry The desire of retreats has given rife to the art of fortification.

The art' of war, in every age, must be accommodated to the fpecies of arms, engines, and methods of fortification, in use.

The arts which men practise for fubificence, are, ifliing, hunting, pasturage,, and agriculture.

Nations that know least of the rmeans of fibfiftence, have recourse to hunting and fishing; or rely on the pontancous growth of the.field in herbs or fruit.

In the result of these arts, the hunting-ground, the lak thee. river, or the bay, may be appropriated to the society; but the game is seldom seldom appropriated to the individual.

Nations that have observed the method, and the advantage, of breeding herds, betake themselves to pasturage.

They at first, generally, migrate, or wander, with their herds.

The individual acquires an im mediate property in cattle, but not in land.

Nations that are acquainted with the use of herbs, fruits, and grain, which do not grow spontaneously, or do not grow in sufficient quantities, betake themselves to agriculture.

The culture of land, to a certain degree, may precede property, as it did among the ancient Germans ', and among the nations of Nortl America..

* Vide Cx r, lib. 4 cap. r.; and lib. 6.
cap. 22. Charlcvoix's History of Canada.

C 3 Agri Agriculture, where the object is.

the temporary produce of land, is compatible with migration: where the objec is the improvement of foil, and perpetual fertility, agriculture requires settlement, and the property of land.

As the property of land excites to invention in agriculture, it likewife excites to invention in other arts.

They who have no land, betake thlemfelves to manufacture, that they may have wherewith to buy the produce of land.

By manufacure, men are fur nifled with the means of accommodation and ornament.

The means of accommodation are, cloaths, houses, furniture,, utensils, equipage.

Men, in different ages, are un equally furnished with these articles; they even subsist without them .but, in the ruder climates, under under such inconveniencies, as diminiih the numbers of the species, or prevent their increase.

The means of decoration are fich things as please the fancy, without being neceflary or useful.

Men, in all ages, are fond of de coration; they combine ornament with the means of subsistence and accommodation: but they may subsift, and enjoy every conveniency, without regard to, ornament.

Ornaments are principally made of rare materials; as gems, precious metals, &c.

Riches conilft in the abundance of things that conduce to safety, fiubfiftence, accommodation, and ornament.

Riches are the result, of arts and industry.

Whatever ingenuity men exert in the practice of arts, their success will depend' on a proper diftribution of their employments, and on their their making a separate business of each.

In making this distribution, the parties trust, that they may be able to exchange what they have to spare for what they want.

The progress of arts, as well as the casual distribution of commodities, depending on situation, climate, and foil, render commerce expedient, or even necessary.

Commerce, in the simplest form, consists of barter, without any standard of valuation, or medium of exchange: each party gives what he has to spare of one kind, for what he wants of another.

To extend trade, money, com munication, and the interposition of merchants, are required.

The first money, or medium of exchange, was generally some staple commodity, as corn, cattle, &c.

These were things of uncertain value, value, of inconvenient bulk, periffling or expensive in the keeping, and not easily divided, without making a change of value.

To avoid these several inconveni encies, the precious metals have been admitted in every trading nation as the medium of exchange.

They are, for the greater conve niency, employed in the form of coin.

The pound, or other ascertained weight or quantity of the precious metals, was employed as the standard of valuation.

The coin of all nations has un dergone considerable changes, both in refped to fineness and weight.

The present standard for silver in England, is 1 oz. 2 dw. fine, to I dw. allay.

For gold, 22 carats fine, to 2 carats allay.

The pound of standard silver is cut into 62 shillings.

That That of gold, into 42, guineas.
The pound of silver was original ly cut into 20 flillings: hence 20
shillings are still the nominal pound in money.

In the reign of Edward VI. the standard of silver was greatly debased, and the coin greatly diminified: The standard consisted of three parts of fine to nine of allay; and the pound of this debased metal was cut into 72 flillings.

The standard and weight of the coin have, since the reign of Elifabeth, remained the fame.

.Operations on the coin embarrass trade, by perplexing tranfadions, and by alarming the interest of debtors and creditors.

If, in debating coin, the interest of the creditor is not guarded, he must be defrauded.

In raising the value of the coin, the debtor would be defrauded.

Most Most operations on coin have been of the former kind.

The use of coin, and acual pay ments in money, are not necessary in every commercial transaction.

In the transfer of great fums, e ven the precious metals would be cumbersome and inconvenient.

To avoid this inconvenience, the practice of circulating bills has been adopted.

This pracice is founded in credit, and tends to extend it.

Commerce employs a number of separate professions; the manufacturer, the factor, the carrier, the merchant, the retailer.

The price of commodities in trade is as their scarcity combined with their demand.

Articles, in the production of which, labour, time, and flill, are required, continue to multiply, while the price is sufficient to maintain the labourer during the time he ## SECT. X. Disparity and Rank.

he is employed, to reimburse his apprenticeihip, and other expences, and to furnifhi an adequate reward.

When the price falls below this measure, the manufacure is difcontinued, until the.fcarcity brings up the price.

Disparity and Rank.
M EN are diversified, in refpe&

to their personal qualities and conditions.

The diftindion of personal qua lities arise from unequal strength and capacity, unequal knowledge, resolution, and courage, unlike difpositions of benevolence or malice.

These differences constitute either relations of dependence and power, or comparative degrees of eftimation.

The The strong, the knowing, the brave, are powerful; the weak, the ignorant, the fearful, are dependent.

The benevolent are engaging; the malicious offensive.

The knowing, the generous, and the brave, are esteemed ; the ignorant, the ungenerous, and the cowardly, are contemned: and all the qualities of human nature being referred to the -predicaments of excellence and defed, one man is held to be more, another less worthy.

Men differ in their predilection of qualities confidered as the conftituents -of excellence.

They prefer qualities the moif neceflary in their own situations, and the most eminent in their own way.

In dangerous situations, and in warlile ages, they chiefly admire valour.

In learned societies, they admire knowledge and ingenuity.

D In In trading nations, they admire industry, punctuality, and fair dealing.

But there being some circum stances common in the situation and disposition of all mankind; such as, their being united in society, -and concerned in what relates to their fellow-creatures; men universally admire qualities which constitute or procure the good of mankind; as, wisdom, justice, courage, and temperance.

Such qualities are generally comprehended under the title of Virtue.

Opposite qualities, under the title of Vice.

The external conditions of men are sometimes .confounded with perfonal qualities, and appear to have the fame effcts.

The rich are powerful, the poor are dependent.

Riches, birth, equipage, and finery, are esteemed: Poverty, obfcu rity, ## SECT. XI. Of Political Establishments *.

rity, and plainness, are contemned.

Disparities are found in every state of society; they are greateIt where riches, power, and education, are most unequally distributed.

Of Political EJtabl/Jhmenlts ".
W;W7Here men associate from as fecion and choice, and with little sense of private or of separate interest, they have been known to subsist without rule or political eftabliflment.

Even where they associate from a sense of expediency or necessity, they follow, without rule, the fuggeftion of every particular occasion.

* L'Efprit de Loix, liv. 2. Eflay on the Hi flory of Civil Society, part i. fee, io. Ibid.
part 3; fed. 2.

D 2 But But in maintaining an union which has arisen from casual coalitions, or force, Societies have been obliged to, adopt, and to submit to, government.

Where the coalition was casual, or forced, individuals felt separate interests, and wished for rules to adjust their disputes.

Some fuffcred themselves to be governed, and others pretended to government, on the footing of cafual dependency and superiority.

The abuses of casual fibordina tion have led men to think of pofitive institutions.

Positive institutions have con firmed, altered, or restrained, the powers which arise from casual subordination.

All the political institutions of men may be reduced to two, general classes: The simple, and the mixed.
Under the simple institutions, the supreme supreme power is committed to a single person, or to a single assembly or body of men.

In mixed institutions, the supreme authority is exercised by a plurality of collateral powers.

Simple institutions are, democra cy, aristocracy, monarchy, and defpotiim.

Democracy is the supreme power of the collective body.

This institution is calculated to correct, or to remove, the effects of adventitious dependency and subordination, and to reconcile equality with order.; '" : Aristocracy is the fipreme power of a particular rank ordlafs of'men.

This class of meii hais, in foie cafes, been elecive; in others,I hereditary. ..; ,, .

The institution itself, though cal culated to. confirm the fuperioritv of one rank, and the dependence of the other, may, notwithflanding, D 3 preserve preserve equality among the members of each class.

Monarchy is the supreme power of a single person, who, placed at the head of many subordinate dignities, has an authority- defined by laws.

This institution is calculated to confirm adventitious dependency and subordination.

Extensive and perpetual military arrangements have led to monarchical fibordination.

Despotism is the supreme power of a single person, assumed and maintained by force, on the ruin of every other pretension to rank.

Defpotifin has arisen from conquest, or military usurpation.

Mixed institutions are, either mixed republics, or mixed monarchies.

In mixed republics, the supreme power has been liared betwixt the collective ## SECT. XII. Language and Literature.

collective body, and a senate or convention of nobles.

In mixed monarchies, the fil preme power has been .flared, betwixt a king and nobles, or betwixt a king, nobles, and people.

L Anguage, in the most general L.4 sense, comprehends all: the external signs of thought, sentiment, or will.

Signs are, either original, or conventional -.

Original signs are such as men are led by inftind to employ, and to interpret.

Such are, tones of the voice, change of features, and gestures..

* See Reid's Inquiry into the human mind.

Conventional Conventional signs are such as men have agreed upon, or rendered customary.

Conventional signs may be ranged under the three following heads.

i. Mute signs.
2. Speech.
3. Written chara&ers.
Where men are forbid the use of speech, or are defective in the organs of hearing, or of pronunciation, they have recourse to mute signs; and attain, in a confiderable degree, the purposes of language.

Nations employ unequal mea fures of action, and of mute signs, together.with speech.

Speech is universal to mankind, and peculiar to the human species..

Every separate nation, or tribe, for the most part, has had a separate language, or different dialed.

The theory of speech, whether universal universal or particular, is the science of grammar ".

Written charaters are the signs of words, or of-articulate founds.

They are either verbal, or alphabetical.

Verbal characters are the signs of entire words.

Alphabetical characers the signs of elementary founds, or modulations; which being combined, conftitute words.

Writing preserves the memory of past tranfa&ions, of observation, and experience. It preserves literary productions, and tends to improve and to extend the use of speech.

See Harris's Hermes.






Hi-ory of the Individual.

General Arrangemlent.

HE history of the individual contains the following articles.

I. Consciousness.
2. Animal fenfe'and perception.
3. Observation.
4. Memory.
5. Imagination.
6. Abftradion.
7. Reasoning.
8. Foresight.
9. Propensity.
o1. Sentiment.
i i. Desire.
12. Volition, The ## SECT. II. Of Consciousness.

The first eight articles are com monly referred to the understanding; the remainder to the will.

Of Cofcioflnefs.
T HE mind is-confcious of it self, as acting or suffering, in all its operations and feelings.

It is conscious of the laws of thought or reason, which are termed the metaphyJical or geometrical axioms.

These axioms are the conditions on which all thought proceeds, and which need not be expressed, but for the fake of order or method.


Animial Seens and Perception *.
The organs of sense are commonly reduced to five heads: Touch, Taste, Smell, Hearing, and Seeing.

T o u. c H.

The whole animal frame is inr some degree an organ of touch.

The fnfations of touch, or feel* See Reid's Inquiry into the human mind.

ing, ing, are either pleasant, painful, or indifferent.

The interior or subcutaneous parts, are sensible only to the pains which arise from hurts or disorders.

The final cause appears to be, that in their ordinary, and found state, they should require no attention; but in cafe of disorders, that they should give the alarm.

On the exterior surface of the body, harmless sensations are indifferent, but whatever hurts is painful.

Indifferent sensations are the indi cations of the mere contact of innocent bodies.

Painful sensations are indications of hurts or wounds.

Pleafint sensations are the sign of relief from what hurts or wounds; as of moderate warmth succeeding to great cold, or tie converie.

Many indifferent sensations, in particular parts of the body, as in E the the hands, the tongue, &c. are indications of the intimate properties, and nice diftintions, of bodies; as ps their figure, polifih, hardness, softness, as well as comparative heat or cold.

The perceptions of this sense are, in some instances, original; in others, acquired.

The figure, hardness, softness, heat, and cold, of bodies, are matter of original perception.

Many of their salutary or perni cious qualities are learned by experience, and are matter of acquired perception.

In some cafes we perceive the na ture, as well as the existence, of qualities; as of figure, hardness, softness.

In others, we perceive the exist ence of the quality, but not its na-, ture; as of heat and cold.

The first have been termed pri mary, many, the other, secondary, qualities of bodies.

The sensations by means of which we perceive primary qualities, are, for the most part, indifferent, and have no name.

The sensations by which we per ceive secondary qualities, are, for the most part, either pleasant or painful; are confidered apart from the perception they bring; and frequently usurp the name of the quality perceived, so as to occasion a considerable ambiguity in language.
Thus heat or cold, which are the names of certain unknown properties in bodies, are Sometimes underftood of animal sensation or feeling.

The animal sensation can, in no cafe, have any resemblance to the fubjecd or quality perceived.

Its informations, therefore, are not like that we receive from the infpetion of a picture or image; 
E 2 but but like that we receive by means of language, or other arbitrary signs.

In original perception, the sign is affixed by nature, and the interpretation instinctive.

Our sensations are not fitted to furnish us with the means of inveftigation, and of proof, but with perceptions which precede all inveftigation or proof.

The sceptic, who affects to dif believe the informations of sense, has the fame perception with the dogmatist, who professes to believe.

T A S T E.

The organ of taste is placed in the tongue and palate.

Its sensations are, for the molt part, either pleasant or painful.

The qualities of bodies perceived by by it are secondary, as already explained *.

The sensations of taste become, after some experience, the indications, or signs, of what is pernicious or salutary in food, &c.

But the fame subjea is frequent ly known by sensations which difser greatly in refped to pleafire or pain.

The fcnfation is sometimes plea sant, at other times painful, or indifferent, while the fame objec is tfill perceived.

Thus under the influence of ap petite, the tafle of food is pleasant; when the appetite is cloyed, the taste is disgusting or painful.

It is likewise oft-times not in any considerable degree either pleasant or painful, or it is indifferent; yet in all those cafes the objeA is still * See p. o5. & Si.

E 3 perceived, AI. IjlUiI *i**LrI.AD, U "* 1^"T r-,U--thers, acquired.

Th.e fig.ur. hardne, h.o nef, heat, and cold, of bodies, are matter of original perception.

Many of their salutary or perni cious qualities are learned by experience, and are matter of acquired perception.

In some cafes we perceive the na ture, as well as the existence, of qualities; as of figure, hardness, softness.

In others, we perceive the exist ence of the quality, but not its nature; as of heat and cold.

The first have been termed pri 111ay', ^^^^ ""HB'^^^ Lt~IIIC5 s ior cne mcfl t art, either pleasant or painful; a.re confidered aparit from the perception they bring; and frequently usurp the name of the quality perceived, so as to occasion *a considerable ambiguity in language.
Thus heat or cold, which are the names of certain unknown properties in bodies, are sometimes underftood of animal sensation or feeling.

The animal sensation can, in no cafe, have any resemblance to the ftibje& or quality perceived.

Its informations, therefore, are not like that we receive from the infpeaion of a picture or image; 
E 2 but but like that we receive by means of language, or other arbitrary signs.

In original perception, the sign is affixed by nature, and the interpretation inftinclive.

Our sensations are not fitted to furnish us with the means of inveftigation, and of proof, but with perceptions which precede all inveftigation or proof.

The sceptic, who affeds to dif believe the informations of sense, has the fame perception with the dogmatist, who professes to believe.

T A S T E.

The organ of taste is placed in the tongue and palate.

Its sensations are, for the most part, either pleasant or painful.

The qualities of bodies perceived by by it are secondary, as already explained *.

The sensations of tafle become, after some experience, the indications, or signs, of what is pernicious or salutary in food, &c.

But the fame subjea is frequent ly known by sensations which difser greatly in refpedt to pleasure or pain.

The sensation is sometimes plea sant, at other times painful, or indifferent, while the fame objec is still perceived.

Thus under the influence of ap petite, the taRe of food is pleasant; when the appetite is cloyed, the taite is disgusting or painful.

It is likewise oft-times not in any considerable degree either pleasant or painful, or it is indifferent; yet in all those cafes the objeL is Rill * See p, 50. S& r.

E 3 perceived, perceived, and its qualities nicely diftinguiihed.

S M E L L.

The organ of smell is placed with in the nostrils, near to the paflage of the air in respiration.

There is a greater analogy be tween the sensations of fiell and taste, than between those of any other two of our senses.

They agree in giving a perception of secondary qualities; in enabling us, by the help of experience, to distinguish external subjeCts, and to recognise the fame fibject by the iledia of sensations that vary from pleasant to painful or indifferent.

H E A R
H E A R I N G.

The organ of hearing is placed in the interior part of the ear.

The sensations of found, whether single, or multiplied, and variously combined, are either pleasant, painful, or indifferent.

The quality perceived is fecon dary, found, by investigation, to be pulses of the air, occaiioned by explosions, or by the tremors of tense and elastic matter of any fort.

Sounds are diversified by their intensity and mulical tone.

Tones being a natural language of sentiment, are, by certain combinations, easily rendered pathetic.

Different founds are, by expe rience, learned to be the signs or indications of different fubjeds, and of different movements.

S I G H T.

S I G H T.

The organ of fight is placed in the eye.

Its sensations are Sometimes plea sant or painful, but for the most part indifferent.

Of the qualities perceived by means of there sensations, some are primary, others secondary.

The original perception obtained by fight, is that of the visible appearance of things external. This appearance includes superficial extension and figure, apparent magnitude, illumination, shade, and colour.

The acquired perception is that of the real dimensions, figures, and distances of bodies.

In the use of this organ, there is a series of signs and interpretations.

I. The I. The visible appearance is perceived by means of light.

2. Objects are perceived by the intervention of this appearance.

The fame obje& is perceived un der great varieties in the visible appearance.

The solid dimensions of bodies are underitood from the disposition of light and fliade on the visible surface.

The distances of known bodies are inferred from their apparent magnitude and diftindcnefs.

The real magnitudes of bodies at a known distance, are inferred from their apparent magnitudes.

This discernment of objects from their visible appearance, is the result of observation. Where we have no measure of the distance of bodies, we cannot from their apparent magnitude ascertain their real magnitude: or where we have no measure of the real magnitudes of bodies, we cannot ## SECT. IV. Observation.

cannot from their apparent magnitudes ascertain their distance.

The perceptions of sense are com municated to others by information or testimony.

Obfiervation.
OBservation is, the attention specially paid to things remarkable.

Things become remarkable by their reference to ourselves, or by their comparison, similitude, or contrast, with each other.

Collections of observations, or of fads, constitute history, either defcriptive or narrative.

Descriptive history is the detail of coexistent circumstances and qualities.

Narrative history is the detail of successive events.

S E C T.



Memo7y.

Emory is the recolledion of fubjeds past.

It is casual, or intentional.
It is casual, when fubjeds or thoughts, by any connection of their own, recur to the mind.

It is intentional, when the mind, from design, recalls any subjed or thought.

Ilatgiination.

Magination is the stating of objeds as inveRfed with all their qualities and circumstances, real or fioitious.

Objeds imagined may be defcri bed, bed, may excite sentiment and passion, and lead our desires and aversions.

Hence imagination is the chief faculty employed in description, invention, and persuasion, and in determining our choice of pursuits.

Different nations, ages, and men, are under the influence of different imaginations or opinions.

Such imaginations, when fortifi ed by habit, do not give way to reason or conviction.

ObjeEts are imagined separately or jointly.

In the separate images of things, -are confidered their real or possible qualities and circumstances.

In their joint images are confider ed their similitude, analogy, or opposition.

Similitude consists in the likeness of parts.

Analogy confifs in the fimilari ty ## SECT. VII. Of Abstraction.

ty of relation and proportion of parts.

Opposition consists in the contra riety of qualities, and proportions, or relations.

Similitude leads to arrangement, and the clasi'ng of objecs together.

Analogy leads to the rhetorical figures of finile, metaphor, and allegory.

Opposition leads to cdifintions, .antithlies, and contrafl.

S E C T. VII.

O'f A?:i;acTio?.

A, ft:a&ion is the stating of quaI hlities a.i circumIftances apart from. i5bjcls, qualities, or circumfiaincs, to which they arc atually joi:'.ed in nature.

'ihlms, in arithmertc and geome try, number and ciantity are Ithted apiart fiom any hltbec.

L;'
.

In abftrad terms, qualities are stated apart from their fubjeds.

In mechanics, motion is stated apart from resistance or friction.

In generic names, qualities in which individuals agree, are stated apart from those that distinguish them.

Abftradion: is in a great measure arbitrary; hence! the various methods of classification followed in natural history.

Abftration is the reverse of i magination:; it, ,is the foundation of general and comprehensive reasoning, not :of description or passion.

Men are sometimes the dupes of their own, abftradions, and confider them as separate, and independent existences.

Abftraation tends to disqualify men for affairs. It is the habit of cbnfidering circumstances apart; while in affairs all circumstances come ## SECT. VIII. Of Reasoning.

come together, and mufft be kept in view at once.

Of Reasoning.
RT Eafoning comprehends claflifi cation of particular fubjecs, investigation, and application of general rules, together with demonftration or proof.

In classification we refer particu lars to certain predicaments, fixed or arbitrary.

In investigation we observe what is common, or ought to be common, in many particular operations.

In the application of rules we show the particulars which are comprehended under them.

In this science consists.
In demonfi'ation, or proof, we employ testimony, or argument.

F 2 Argument Argument is taken, either a priore, or a poftciiore.

Argument a priore, proves or dif proves the fat, from the law, or the efieca from the cause.

Every argument of this fort may be reduced to a perse& fyllogimin, consisting of:itlrce propofitiqns: of which one announces the law, either negative or .pofiive ; anot-her ccmpares the law writh the facc to be proved; and the third affrmi or denies the sac&, from its conformity with or opposition to- the law.

Arguamcnt a, pofJriore, proves or difpro.es the rule,, from the enurneration of particulars.

Every such argument may be re duced to a fyllogifin conifting of two propositions: one is indutdion, or enumeration of fads ; the other afflrms or denies the law, from the concurrence, or want of concurrence, in the particulars brought to cifablilh it.



Of Foresight.

Orefight is the faculty of conjeAuring what is to follow from the past or present.

It requires penetration and saga city: the first, to comprehend all the circumstances of the cafe in question; the second, to perceive what is likely to follow from those circumftances.

Penetration and sagacity are the foundations of good conduct, art, and skill.

Of Pr-opefity.
M EN, like the other animals, are active, from original choice, and propensity.

F 3 They They delight in freedom and ex ercii'; they pine under refiraint, or in the absence of objects fit to excite them.

The activity of man's nature con filPs in propenlity, sentiment, defire, and volition.

Propensities have their effect prior to the experience of pleasure or pain.

They are either animal or rational.

The animal propensities are the appetites to food, sleep, and the propagation of the fpecics.

These appetites are periodical or occasional, and are internsitted when their ends are obtained.

The rational propensities lead to felf-prefervation, to the care of our children, to the union of the sexes, to society, and to excel.

These, like animal appetites, give a direcdion to human nature prior to to any experience of their gratifications.

But, contrary to the analogy of animal appetites and gratifications, they may continueto occupy habitually, without satiety or disgust.

All affedions of kindness are, in their own nature, pleaaint.

Having there natural propenfi ties, we tate objecs under the predicaments of good or of evil as they are supposed conducive or opposite to the purposes of our propensities.

Whatever is thought conducive to preservation, is reckoned good.

Whatever is thought pernicious, is reckoned evil.

Whatever promotes the welfare of society, or of any objec beloved, is therefore supposed good.

What. is pernicious, is supposed.
evil.

Whatever is thought in itself to constitute a perfecion, or to give eminence, is supposed good.

Whatever ## SECT. XI. Of Sentiment *.

Whatever is thought to conffitute imperfecion, or to fink our comparative value, is supposed evil.

Hence the great influence of o pinion on the external pursuits of men.

Of Sentiment '.
Sentiments are pleasant or painful.

The sentiment arising from a sup posed good attained, is pleasant; from a supposed good miffed or forfeited, is painful.

A supposed evil avoided, is pleasant; incurred, is painful.

The pleafire in both these cafes is termed Joy.

See Theory of agreeable sentiments.

The The pain is terried Sorrow, or Grief.

A supposed good in expectation of being gained, is pleasant; in expedation of being loft, is painful.

The pleasure in either of there two cafes is termed Hope.

The pain is termed Fear.
Thus all our sentiments, or pas sions, may be referred to four general heads: Joy, Grief, Hope, and Fear.
But there is a great variety in the sentiments of joy and grief, of hope and fear, corresponding to the nature of the supposed good or evil, and of the propensity by which we are direcded towards it.

The sentiments of those who are occupied chiefly in their own preservation, are, the sense of safety and success, or of danger and difappointment.

The first may comprehend fecurity, exultation, and insolence; the second, second, jealousy, terror, and defpair.

The most painful sentiments of those who are occupied chiefly by their regard to mankind, are alleviated by the pleasures of affeaion, confidence, and good-will.

The sentiments of thote who are occupied chiefly with the confideration of excellencies or defecs in themselves, or in others, are, on the one hand, refpeCing thiemfelves, and their own absolute perfections or defedts, felf-approbation, and elevation of mind; on the other hand, shame, remorse, and dejection.

In refped to comparative advan tages, and superiority to other men, their sentiments are, exultation, vain-glory, insolence, and contempt.

The sentiments of men refpeaing real excellencies in others, are, eiteem, refped, and veneration.

Esteem Esteem is a sentiment of approbation tending to confidence.

Respect is a sentiment of approbation tending to submission.

Veneration is a high degree of refpet.

The sentiments of men refpet ing defecs are, contempt, ridicule, indignation, and rage.

Contempt is a sentiment of dif approbation, tending to indifference or neglect.

Ridicule is a sentiment of difap probation, mixed with mirth or pleasantry.

Satire and Raillery consist in exposing what is ridiculous.

Buffoonery consists in assuming it.

As the sentiment of difapproba tion predominates, ridicule approaches to scorn.

As the sentiment of pleasantry predominates, it approaches to mirth, mirth, and may even be mixed with tenderness.

The scornful are rarely fufceptible of admiration or love.

Indignation is a sentiment of dif approbation, mixed with resentment.

Rage is a sentiment of difapprobation, mixed with hatred.

The sentiments of men refped ing comparative advantages in others, differ according to the state of their affecions, and according as they ftace a comparison with themselves, or with other men.

The superiority of those they love, compared to themselves, produces deference and refpet. 
The superiority of those they hate, so compared, excites envy; of those who are indifferent, excites humiliation, or is a mortification.

The superiority of those they love, compared to others, excites exulta tion ## SECT. XII. Desire and Aversion.

tion; of those they hate, compared to others, excites animosity and regret.

Desire and Aveifon.
*Efire and aversion arise from opinion, founded in experience or fancy.

Mens desires and aversions are various as their opinions.

The most remarkable examples of fcttled or habitual desire, are, feniuality, avarice, ambition, public li)irit, greatness of mind, or tenacity of what is noble and juit.

These desires, though in fomle in flances they carry us far beyond the scope of our original propeniities, have a foundation in rfoe natural propensity, and lead to the objeds which, in our opinion, tend to fulfil its purpose.

G Selnfaiity Sensuality is founded in animal appetites; and implies a purpose of enjoyment even during the intermiffions of appetite.

Avarice is founded in the care of felf-prefervation; but limits it to the desire of riches, or the means of subsistence.

Ambition is the desire of fuiperi ority, supposed to consist in the poffeflion of power or command.

Public spirit is founded in the propensity to society, enlarged into zeal for the rights of a country or of mankind.

Greatness of mind is founded in the propensity to excel, limited to personal qualities and real perfections.


Of Volition.

T Olition is the at of will in free W determinations.
The determination is free whereever it is voluntary.

The motives from which we chufe, do not destroy our freedom; for to ad from motives in the manner we ourselves approve of, to be willing, voluntary, and free, in any action, are synonymous terms.

G 2 INSTI


INSTITUTES

O F
MORAL PHILOSOPHIY.

PART II.
Theory of Mind.



General Olfervations.

ir'HE theory of mind is the I kinowvledge of physical laws, colleced from faet, and applicable to explain appearances.

The intclleCual ,fftem, as well as the material, hath its laws; but it is apprehended that the laws of the intelletual intelledual system are not equally well observed *.

Tlhis apprehension comes from our not confidering the diftincion of laws, as well as of subje's.

The term law is ambiguous.
It sometimes signifies the uniformity of a fat in nature.

In this sense it is employed by natural philosophers 1-.

In this sense chiefly the material system is said to have its laws.

And in this sense every law must be ftritly observed; because it is law only so far as it is observed.
Gravitation is a law only so far as bodies acually gravitate.

But in this sense, too, the intel lecual system hath its laws; for in the operations of mind some fads are uniform.

*Spirit of Laws, book I.

t See Laws of Nature, in the IntrcduiUoa to every system of mechanics.

G 3 In In this sense, therefore, the laws of the intellectual system are equally well oblerved with those of the material.

The term law, however, has a farther signification, and means a rule of choice, which we desire to have uniformly observed.

In this fenit it is employed commonly by moralists and civilians.

In this sense most commonly it is meant, that the intellecual fyflem hath its laws.

And in this sense the law may fubfi-f, without being ftritly obferved: for it is law in consequence of its rectitude, or of the authority from which it proceeds; not in consequence of its being the fact.

But although the more impor tant laws of this fort relate to the intelledual system, yet there are laws of the fame kind relating to the material system.

Such are the expressions of what is is required to elegance, beauty, or utility, in natural fubjeds; or of what is required to perfecion in works of art.

In such refpeds material as well as ilitelledtual fubjeds, may deviate from the law.

In the vegetable and animal king doms there are deformities, diftortions, and diseases; as there are in the intelledual kingdom follies, abfurdities, and crimes.

To avoid, as much as poflible, these ambiguities, laws of the first fort, whether relating to mind or matter, have been termed physical laws; and laws of the second fort, moral laws *.

Common use will authorise this interpretation; although the use of these terms is by no means determined and precise: for frequently, whatever relates to matter, is said to * See Introdution.

be be physical; whatever relates to mind, is said to be moral.

In consequence of this vague use of the term lmoral, any theoretical question relating to mind has been fubifituted for moral philosophy; and speculations of little moment have fipplanted the study of what men ought to be, and of what they ought-to wish, for themselves, for their country, and for mankind.






Enumeration of Phifical Laws.

Laws of the Undejylanding.
TH E history of the understand ing may furnish three principal rules,- or physical laws.

The first relates to the consciousness of ourselves.

The second to the perception of other things.

The third to the comprehenlion of subjects of which we are conicious, or which we perceive.

FIRST LAw.

We are conscious of our existence, operation, and will.

Perception is obtained by the in tervention of media, no way refembling the subjeA of such perception: I. The medium of fenfltion.
2. The medium of signs.
The sensation by means of which we naturally perceive the existence of external fubjeds, has no refemblance to those fubjets.

The signs by which we naturally perceive the existence and meaning of other minds, have no refemblance to the things signified.

Fron this law may be explained the effed of rites in religion; of manners, as well as language, in common life; of title, fortune, and fashion, as grounds of esteem.

Rites indicate devotion.
Manners indicate social difpofitions.

Language Language indicates meaning.
Title and fortune indicate comparative excellence.

Fafllion indicates condition and rank.

Many signs having no refem blance to, nor connection with the things they indicate, may vary in different countries, and change in tihe fame country, while the things they denote continue thefame.

THIRD LAW.

To comprehend any particular fubjecI, is to know some general predicament or class to which it may be referred.

Thus to comprehend the nature of any particular being or quality, is to be able to refer it to tome known species or class.

To comprehend any operation or phenomenon, is to be able to refer it it to some eftabliflied rule, or known law of nature.

Thus we comprehend all the phenomena that can be referred to the laws of gravitation, cohesion, elecricity, and so forth.

From this law may be explained all the phenomena of science, the uses of claffication,: -investigation, and experiment, of hyp6thefis, theory, and system.

To make a new discovery, is ei ther to investigate some law, or to point out' some new application.

Thus Sir Ifaa'i'e Nittot discover ed the'law of refra&ioii,' and applied it to the rainbow, and to the colours of natural bodies.

Dr Franklin applied the laws of electricity to lightning, and to the aurora bore{lis.

The laws of nature are the gene ra and species under which particular fadts are ranged, or the pre dicaments ## SECT. II. Laws of the Will.

dicaments to which they are referred.

Some predicaments have their ge neric names in every language, have been universally admitted, and are coeval with human thought.

Such are, substance, quality, quantity, number, perfection, defed, good, evil, time, place, &c.

Others are more arbitrary, and chosen to render human knowledge methodical and comprehensive.

Such are the clafles and orders of being employed in the method of different natural hifiorians.

Laws of the tIill.
T HE history of the human will may furnifll the three folloiing general rules.

H FIRST

FIRST LAW.

Men are disposed to preserve themselves.

Hence danger alarms, and safety pleases; what is hurtful, repels; what is useful, attracs.

Under this last title men desire the means of subsistence, health, strength, beauty, parts, temper, resolution, &c.

This is commonly termed the law of felf-pr efervation: but so great is the variety of mens opinions, and such the caprice of their passions, that the melancholy and froward seem to be at variance with themselves, and appear to desire what is deftrunive.

Men are disposed to society.
They take part with their fellow creatures, and confider general calamities as matter of regret, general welfare as matter of joy.

This may be termed the rlaw of society ; and is that which qualifies the individual to be the member of a community, inclines him to contribute to the general good, and intitles him to partake in it.

The reality of this law has been disputed: i. Because all the acions of men are not beneficial to society.

2. Because even beneficial actions may be accounted for from other motives.

The actions of men are regulated, not by this law only, but by this combined with every other law of their nature.

H 2 If If the law of felf-prefervation, for the most part, prevail, it does not follow, that the law of society has no effed.

The external efflec, or tendency, of every law, is diversified in different circumstances.

The general tendency of the law of gravitation is, to caufie bodies to approach to each other; as the tendency of the law of society is, to cause men to produce public good, or to abflain from public harm.

But the external result is opposite in opposite circumstances.

Heavy bodies are not always fall ing, nor social natures always ating for the common good.

When bodies are falling, gravi tation accelerates; when placed on a support at reft, it is a pressure; when they are thrown upwards, it is a retardation; when they are moved obliquely, it is a continual change of direction, &c.

The The analogy of- this law may fully illufirate the law of society.

This law, in some cafes, excites to beneficence; in other cafes, only retards mischief. It increases our ardour in aAions beneficial to our fellow-creatures; it refrains or diminifies our ardour in adions hurtful; it gives fatisfadion in one cafe, and remorse in another. And thus the operation of the law of focietv like that of gravitation itself, is always real, though the external refult is not always the fame.

As to the motives from which adions beneficial to mankind proceed, these may be various in various instances; but no person can know, except in his own cafe, that there are no sincere affceions of benevolence and good-will.

H 3 TIIIRD

THIRD LAW.

Men are disposed to better themselves.

They distinguish perfecions from defects: they admire and contemn.

This may be termed the law of ejliaation, or of progrefion: it is an ultimate faa in the nature of man, and not to be explained by any thing that is previously or better known. 1kDOWll.

Excellency, whether absolute or comparative, is the supreme objec of human desire.

Riches, power, and even pleasure, are coveted with extreme ardour, only when they are confidered as the marks of eminence or rank.




The foregoing laws applied hi explail ing the phenomena of hItere/t, Emulation, Pride, Vanity, Probity, and Moral Approbation.

Of Interef.
TNtereftednefs appears in Solicitude about our situation and future profpecss: when in extreme it stifles affecion, and leads to the commission of frauds and of crimes.

This passion is comprehended in the law of felf-prefervation, and is a partial application of that law, founded in an opinion of the great consequence of external things.

Opinions, and their consequences, are more or less prevalent, in pro portion portion to the prevalence of circumftances by which men are led to entertain such opinions.

For this reason intereftednefs is very prevalent.

The opinion on which it is found ed, arises from the following circumftances.

I. The inftincive desire of life.
2. The early prepossession in fa vour of sensual objedts, because they first ingrofs our attention.

3. The continued care of estate or fortune that is necefary whereever property is eftablifled.

4. The rank which riches are supposed to bestow.

From this last consideration, the law of estimation comes to be combined with the law of felf-prefervation, in accounting for the interested paflions of men.

The intercifed consist of two clafies; the prodigal, and the avaricious.

The ## SECT. II. Theory of Emulation.

The prodigal are commonly most rapacious, being urged by the defire of enjoyment.

The avaricious are more cau tious, being restrained by the fear of want.

Interest and felfifhnefs are some times employed as synonymous terms: but the sensual, the proud, the ambitious, the vain-glorious, are not less selfish than the interefted.

And the fault of the interested, consists not in the meafire of care bestowed on themselves, but in the mistake of their own principal concerns.

Theory of Emulation.
EMulation appears in competi tions, heart-burning, and variance.

It It arises mostly in the pursuit of things of mere comparative value.

Such are, riches, renown, power, or rank.

The value of riches is compara tive; for it consists, not in any absolute measure of wealth, but in poffessing more than other men.

Renown consists in being more talked of than others.

Power confits in being able to command other men; and rank, in being of superior station.

They who desire what cannot be affedted by comparison, such as real happiness, and real virtue, apart from the reputation of either, are not addicted to emulation.

Emulation may be directed to useful actions, and have effects serviceable to mankind; but is itself an unhappy disposition, a source of envy, jealousy, and malice.

The emulous are not satisfied with any attainment, while others possess possess an equal, or a superior, measure, of the fame advantage.

The objed of Cxfar's desire was not greatness, or goodness; but to be the first in refped to those articles which the vulgar admired; the first in a village, rather than the fecond at Rome.

The emulous are enemies to each other, and to men of superior reputation. They are, for the most part, vigilant, courageous, and vehement; indulgent to those who are confessedly inferior, but malicious to those who, in point of confideration, are equal or superior to themselves.

They commonly prefer mean company in which they can assume a fiperiority, to better in which they must submit to equality.

Emulation is comprehended in the law of estimation, and arises from an opinion that excellence consists in fupcriority.

S E C T.


S EC T. III.

Of Pride.

Ride: appears in neglea, inattention, contempt, and arrogance.

It is foiunded: therefore in a mean opinion of 6ther meti.: It is comprehended in the law of estimation; for it is in consequence of this law that men either admire or contemn.

Pride, or contemptuouffefs, is in consistent with affetion, candour, or any regard to the rights of mankind.

The desire of perfection, and e ven the love of virtue, have been confounded with pride.

This abuse sometimes proceeds from inattention to propriety of language: Sometimes from affeetation of si gurative gurative speech; as when we fay, decent pride, noble pride, the pride of doing well, &c. Here it implies contempt; but, in a good sense, the contempt of what is unworthy.

At other times this confifion of words is affected, in order to favour a system; as when we would depreciate.virtue, or disprove its reality, by speaking of it in terms which are commonly taken in a bad sense *.

Pride results from the law of esli mation, as an abuse of it,' or an improper contempt of other men.

It is ridiculous to attempt con founding the love of virtue with pride: their tendencies are opposite.

Virtue is a refped for the rights of men, and eileem of what tends to the good of mankind.

Pride is a difrcifeAt for the rights of men, and contempt of mankind..

* Mandciille's works.

I SEC T.


' S, E C T. IV.

Of Vaity.
5V AAnity appears in affectation and ostentation.

The vain affeCt what they think will captivate the attention and merit tihe praise of others.

They are ostentatious of what they suppose constitutes their importance, as of their persons, fortune, equipage, talents, and adventures.

They are gratified by the admiration of others.

Vanity is comprehended in the law of estimation; for it supposes the diftincion of admirable and contemptible, however mifunderflood.

It is thereverfe of pride, over rating the value of other people's opinions, which pride condemns.

The ## SECT. V. Of Probity.

The vain are capable of great efforts of courage and resolution, when supported by public opinion, and when ating in public view; but without this support, are feeble and irresolute.

The attention they pay to other men not proceeding from the heart, but from the desire of consequence and applause, they always fail where the fruits or effedts of real affedtion are expeced, S E C T. V

Of Probity.

P Robity appears in ads of justice Pt and beneficence.

Men: who regard the rights, and feel for the fullierings, of others; who are ever ready to do adts of kindness ; who are faithful and true to the expedations they raise,- are said to have probity.

I 2 Probity Probity implies the love of man kind, founded in a temper that is compafionate, caldid, and liberal.

It is comprehended therefore in the law of society.

Probity may be understood to constitute an excellency, but cannot be the foundation of pride or contemptuoufinefs.

It may be understood to merit applause, but is direted by assection, not by the desire of admiration or attention.

Men of probity prefer integrity to any other kind of supposed excellency ; but frequently have a modest opinion of their own merits.


Of AMoral llpprobation in general.
M Oral approbation is the judge ment formed of characters and actions, as being excellent or jufr.

It is opposed to disapprobation or blame.

The apprehension of excellence; 
or defect, in other subjects, as of beauty or deformity in merely animal or material natures, is accompanied with simple emotions of admiration or contempt: but the apprehension of excellence or defedt in ourfclves, is accompanied with elation of mind, hflame, and remorse; in others, with complacency, veneration, love, pity, indignation, and'
scorn.

Men fond of paradox, have queflioned the reality of moral d.iftinc I 3 tions;S

tions: but expreffidns of praise and blame in every language, the importance of mens acions to mankind, the opposite nature of difpofitions that form the characers of men, the most vehement sentiments of the human heart, which refer to this {ubjec,-filow, that the diftindion of moral good and evil is real, and universally acknowledged.

In treating of moral approbation, four questions may be ieparate!l flated.

I. What do men, for the most part, approve or blame ?

2. By what principle, or confide ration, are they direced, in particular cafes, to bestow their approbations or censures ?

3. What is the proper fubjedt of approbation or censure ?

4. What is the rule or principle by which men ought to judge of moral characters ?

The two first questions are phy fical, fical, and belong to this place,; the two last are moral, and their answer will be comprehended in the.firft or noft general laws of morality.

The subjed of morality has. been greatly perplexed by the blending of these questions together.

The actual errors and corruptions of men, have been muLfered up as so many proofs, that there is nothing which men ought to esteem or desire.

In physical questions, we attend to the sac; in moral questions, to what is good or evil. The fat, however well eftabliflied, and however universal, does not preclude us fi-om conceiving and chifing what is better.

If all men were acuated by in tercft, emulation, pride, or vanity, it would not follow, that probity is no object of esteem or desire. When we are told, therefore, that candour and benevolence are hypocrisy; that courage ## SECT. VII. Of the Object of Moral Approbation.

courage is anger; elevation of mind is. pride; and temperance formality, or affectation,-- we may afl,. whether these allegations are meant as a itate of fads merely, or as examples of what men ought to be ?
The fads may be true; but to chue' a pattern confessedly bad, would be absurd.

Of ths Object of Moral Approbatiobt.

T HE objec of moral approba- tion, is either some disposition of the mind, or some external action.

Probity is the most approved dif position; and the external exprefsions of probity, the most approved acions.

These constitute the whole, or the most essential part, of virtue.

Other ## SECT. VIII. Of the Principle of Moral Approbation.

Other fubjeds may be admired or contemned, but these alone arc the fibjecs of moral approbation.

S E C T. VIII.
Of the Principle of Moral Approba tion.
M Oral approbation is compre hended in the law of eftima tion; and is indeed the principal fa from which we infer the reality of this law; as the vertical pressure and fall of bodies are the principal fads from which, in mechanics, we infer the law of gravitation.

Other desires or affections may lead us variously to bellow our efleem or contempt, but none other will accdiurit for our having esteem and contempt to bestow.

According to this law, men refer the qualities and exertions of their own nature, together with many other other particulars, to .the opposite predicaments of excellency and dese&c.

Yet in this they are not led by any inftindiive or invariable rule: they differ in their choice of characters, and bestow their esteem on different fibjecds.

One man admired Cato; another admired Cafar..

The affecions and desires of men, though different from approbation or esteem, yet warp their judgements, and determine their opinions.

The ambitious and interested fel dom admire what is adverse to their own designs.

Caesar wrote an invective against the memory of Cato; and though.
this, by others, was thought ridiculous *, yet it is probable that he himself was sincere, and really felt * Vid, Cicero Epift. to Atticus, book 12.
ep. 45.

the the zeal of Cato for the preservation of the republic, as matter of differvice and demerit to himself.

'Men are led, by the prepofTcffions of custom, or by superstition, to approve or condemn mere external rites and observances.

They are led by interest, or am bition, to approve of ations favourable to their own designs.

They are led by their situations to admire particular qualities, as the military .or pacific virtues.

They are led by benevolence to approve of qualities that fit men to procure the good of mankind.

So far as the merit, or moral ex cellence, of a man, consists in such qualities, we may venture to affirm, that benevolence, or the law of soeiety, combined with the law of eftimation; is the principle of moral approbation*; and that to beflow * Vid. Lord Shaftelbury's Inquiry into Virtue.

our our esteem on virtue, is to love mankind. .

Systems have differed chiefly by deriving our choice of acions and characters, tome from the law of felf-prefervation, and others from the law of society -': but the fad is, that the laws of felf-prefervation, aiind'f society, when well underftood, coincide in all their tendencies and applications.

Man is by nature a member of society; his safety, and his enjoyment, require that he should be preserved what he is by nature; his perfecion consists in the excellency or measure of his natural abilities and dispositions, or, in other words, it consists in his being an excellent part of the system to which he belongs. So that the effect to mankind flould be the fame, whether F See Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments.

the the individual means to preserve himself, or to preserve his community: with either intention he must cherish the love of mankind, as the most valuable part of his characer.
As this is the foundation of probity, it is that which leads men to give to probity, as such, the preference to every other disposition or habit of mind '.

* Efay on the History of Civil Society, part i. Iet. 6.

-t r TCHT AP



,CH IA P. IV., Of th nare n at d fre pr ofpets of the' Humai' Soil.

Of the Immateriality of the Soul *.

T'HE nature of man has been I universally confidered as mixed, or composed of an animal and intelletual part, of body and mind.

The functions which are re ferred to corporeal organs, belong to the animal nature; those which are not referred to any corporeal organ, belong to -the intellectual nature.

* See Baxter on the Immateriality of the Soul.

Man, Man, in the result of his animal nature, differs from the brutes only in the degree or maniier of what he exhibits; but in that of his intellectual nature, he diners totally, and in kind.

Being decined to ad from obfer vation and experience, not from special inftint, he is, when ignorant, apparently inferior in artifice and power to the other animals; but when knowing, greatly 'fuperior.

That by which he excels other a nimals, is termed his mind, and has been universally distinguished from body.

The properties of mind have no analogy to those of matter: properties of the one are even opposite and contradictory to properties of the other.

Matter is divisible and inert; mind is indivilible and adive.

K 2 What ## SECT. II. Of the Immortality of the Soul.

What! are.called facultics of mind, are its acdive powers.

They. are not diftindt parts of a complicated nature, but..abftractions, under, which the operations of mind are classed.

W Very question relating to a fu. Ljture state, must be solved, from the nature of the foul, from the state of the fad at death, or from principles of religion.

The nature of the foul being in divisible, or not fiubjed. to a diflolution of parts, and annihilation being unknown in the order of nature, it follows, that the foul is physically immortal.

The fat at death is, that the body ceases to be animated, or to give signs of the presence of mind: but but mind being of a different nature, may exist apart.: No argument can be drawn from principles of religion, until these principles be confidered., :.

K 3 INS TI



I N STITUTES

0 F'
MORAL PH LQSOPHY.

P A RT III.
Of the Knowledge of God.

Of the Beinlg of God ".

Of the Universality of this Belief.
, T HE belief of the existence of God has been univerfal.

The cavils of sceptics do not de * See Ray's Wisdom of God in the creation.
Sermons at Boyle's Lefures.

rogate rogate from the univerfalityof this belief, no more than like cavils derogate from the universality of the perception men have of the exilten'ice of matter; for flis'/ilkeSife has been questioned.

This belief does not imply any adequate notion of the Shpreme Being-' Men, for the mioft part, have entertained notions on this subject, unworthy even of human reason.

But the belief that an artist, or author,. exifis, is consistent with mean and improper notions of .his capacity and intentions.

The belief that Homer composed the Iliad, is compatible with inadequate notions of that poet's genius.

The belief that books read at school were composed by men,' is'
coniftent'witih'a notion,' that: even the classics were written 'for the use of children.

S E C T; 

f tlh Foundations of this Belief.

HE belief of God being universal, cannot depend on cir cumftance' peculiar to any age or nation, but'fiiiuft be 'the result of human nature', or'the fuggetion' of circunftances 'that occur in every place and age.

In the: nattire of man, there is a perception of caiifes from the appearance of effects, and of design from the concurrence of means to an end.

Sceptics have not denied the rea lity of these perceptions; they have rather'complained of them,' as the foundation of- general 'and vii''lar errors.

But our knowledge in'ever'y 'fibjea is founded. in some such natu ral ral perception, as in the cafe of what we.know from sensation, from testimony, -and from interpretation.

In any of these cafes, we can as sign no reason for our belief, but that we are by nature made to perceive.

No argument is required to prove, nor can argumenthave any effec to refute, where nature has determined that we fiall continue to believe.

No one can refrain believing, that the eye was made to fee, the ear to hear; that the wing was made for the air, the fin for the water, the foot for the ground; and so forth.

The perception of an end or in tention in the works of men, comprehends the belief of an artist.
The perception of end or intention in the works of nature, comprehends the belief of God, Nature Nature presents final causes whereever our knowledge: extends.

Final causes may; be confidered as the language in which the exiftence of God is revealed to man.

In this language the sign is natu ral, and the interpretation inftinctive.






'i ' ":~''" :" ..:.. . -..

' -CHAP. II.Of the Attributes of God.

S E:C T. I.

Of these Attributes in general.
T HE attributes of God are cha radCers of the Supreme Being fuggefled by his works.

They may be referred to five heads; Unity, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Juflice.

The Unity of God.
T HE perception of final causes implies the belief only of one God, The ## SECT. III. Of Power.

The notion of a plurality of gods is a corruption.

Different nations separately form ed their notions of the.. Deity. On comparing these notions, they did not endeavour to reconcile them to the belief of one supreme being; they formed a lift composed of many gods, having their different attributes and separate. provinces in nature.

S E C'T. 'III.

Of Power.
POwer is the attribute of the first cause; and in the creator of all things, cannot be circumscribed.



Of W/zdoim.
W Rlfdom is the attribute of in telligence; and the belief of ivifdom in the author of nature, is implied in the belief of final causes.

The vwifdom- of God comprehends the knowledge of every nature, of the mutual relations and dependencies of different natures, and of what is best for each, and for the whole.

The Goodngf of God.
T His is the attribute of the creator and preserver of all things.

The proofs of goodness are, L . The i. The creating of sensitive and rational beings.

3. The measures of good which they are made to enjoy.

3. The order established for their preservation.

Without the firif, there would be no object on which goodness could exert itself.

And the numbers of such objects, as well as the enjoyments they are made to receive, are proofs of goodness in the firfc cause.

2. What their numbers or enjoy ments are, cannot be known to us; but the order and tendency of what we know, leads to the belief of universal good.

The lot of man is mixed, but his nature likewise is fitted to a mixcd scene.

He complains of evil in his exter nal circumitances, or in his own nature and conduct.

The firl subjec of complaint is termed termed pk7lfical evil; the second, moral, Physical evil is the dissonance of things to man's desires.

Without fncli diflonance there would be no place for active exertions.

Man's complaints, therefore, of physical evil are not fmptoms of ablblute evil in nature, but the fyimptoms of an active nature in himself properly placed, and having proper excitements to exert its power.

A scene in which there were no apparent evils to be corrected, or, what is equivalent, no accefiion of good to be gained, would be a scene of inaction, adverse to the nature of lln.

Or, in other words, a being that perceived no evil, or had no want, could have no principle of activity.

Man, by being employed as an active power in the order of nature, L 2 is is not made to forego his own happineis.

His happiness does not depend on 'die measure of conveniency he enjoys, but on the part he ads; not on his Eafety, but on the degree of courage he poffefies; not on what he gains for himself or others, but on the degree of ardour and assection he exerts.

Moral evil is the dissonance of man's nature to his conception of perfetion.

Complaints of moral evil are the symptoms of a progrefilive or improving nature.

A being that perceived no moral evil, or no defect, could have no principle of improvement.

To remove the complaints of mo ral evil, it is necessary that men were either freed from all imperfections, or rendered insensible of the imperfecions they have.

The sirs. is impossible: Men must have have the imperfections of created nature.

We know not what is the least possible measure of thefeimperfections.

To be insensible of the imperfec tions he has, would be a blemili in man's nature.

This pungent sense of his own errors and defers, is the source of his complaints, and of his improvements, and is a beauty in his nature.

He is a voluntary agent, destined to ad under the following wife refiraint: That his hurtful dispositions are painful to himself, and his beneficial dispositions are pleasant.

The fuifering, as well as the en joyment, in this cafe, is a proof of beneficence in the power that iniliis it.

3. Every part, in the order of na L I ture, ture, is calculated for the prefervation of the whole.

Things the most remote, are made to concur to the fame salutary purposes.

The order of the planetary system is calculated for the preservation of every being that occupies any part of this system.

The pains, as well as the plea fures, of living and sensitive creatures, tend to their preservation.

The order of nature is preserved by succession, not by perpetuity of life: and whilst the individual is periihing, the species of every animal is safe, and the system of nature is secured from decay.


Of the Jyftice of God.

Uftice is the result of wisdom 1 and goodness.
Justice is goodness impartial and universal; rendering every part subservient to the good of the whole, and calculating the whole for the preservation of its parts; but precluding every part from any enjoyment in what is pernicious to the whole.

The pains and pleasures incident to man's nature, are distributed agreeably to this rule ofjuftice.

For to fum up the whole, Bene volence is always pleasant, malice is always painful.





Of a Future State.
COntrary to the appaarances at death, the human foul has been generally supposed to survive its separation from the body, and to be reserved to a future state of rewards and punishments.

This apprehension is agreeable to the most rational notions of the goodness and justice of God.

That goodness which disposed the Almighty to create, may likewise difipofe him for ever to preserve his intelligent creatures.

There is a continual creation of rational as well as animal natures.

But animal natures are certainly extinguished; why not rational?

The first is necessary. The world would be overstocked with animals, if generations did not die to make way for each other.

But the world of spirits may, without inconvenience, increase for ever.

The desire of immortality is in flinaive, and is a reasonable intimation of what is intended by the author of this desire.

The progress of man's intelligent nature may be continued beyond the attainments of this life.

The government of God is righ teous; but man's inftintive desire of distributive justice is not fulfillcd in this life. Hence the univerfal belief, that wicked men are to receive additional punishments, and good men additional rewards, in afuture state.

" Diverfo itinere, malos a bonis loca tetra, inculta, fmEda, atque " formidolofa, habere *."
* Cato. in Saluft's Hilt. Cat. conspiracy.

INSTI


I NS T I T U T E S

0 F
MORAL PHIILOSOPIY.

PART IV.

Of Moral Laws, and their most general Applications.



Definitions.
T ORAL law, as diftinguiihed firomi physical law, is any general expression of what ought to be.

In this sense, the rules of art, the canons of beauty and propriety, re lating lating to any fubjedc whatever, are to be classed with moral laws '.

Moral law, as referred to intelli gent natures, is any general exprefsion of what ought to be chosen or done.

Mechanical operations proceed without object or opinion.

Animal operations are determined by infiinC.

Rational actions by opinion of what is good.

Hence good, where-ever appre hended or expressed, implies an obligation to determine the choice of every rational being to which it resers.

Moral laws may be confidered under different aspe&s, and diftinguified by different titles.

Confidered in refped to their source, they may be dilfinguifiled 4 See Hutchefon of the Ideas of Beauty and Virtue.

as as original, or natural, and adventitious, or conventional.

Confidered in respect to their sub jets, they may be diftinguifsled by denominations taken from those fubjeds; as laws of religion, or of society; as laws of peace, or of war; as laws political, civil, or criminal.

Confidered in refped to the per sons to whom they are applicable, they are laws of nations, or the laws of particular tates.

Moral philosophy is the know ledge of moral laws refpeding their sources and their applications.

The obligation of every law, whether original or adventitious, general or partial, may be rcfolved into an obligation of the law of nature.

The firif or fundamental law of nature, relative to mankind, is an expreflion expression of the greatest good competent to man's nature.

Subsequent laws are branches and applications of this.

AM C H A P.





Of Good and Evil.

eneral application of these terms.

HE terms good and evil are applied to enjoyment and sus fering, perfecion and defect, profperity and adversity.

Enjoyment and suffering are op pofite conditions of a sentient nature.

Perfertion and defe&t are the op pofite conditions of an improveable or progrcffive nature.

Prosperity and adversity are the opposite circumftances.of an aciive being related to external objecs.


S E C T. If.

Of Eljoyments and S&Uerings.
/ HE enjoyments and susser ings comllpetnt to man's na ture, arc either animal or intellectual.

The firit are mere animal sensa dons of pleafire and pain, or the gratifications and the wants of appetite.

The second are exercise, or pa stime, and languor, affecion and hatred, joy and hope, or grief and fear.

M 2 SECT.

.



Of Perfeieions and Deserts.
MT- HE principal perfections of .L man's nature are, the love of mankind, wisdom, and force of mind.

The principal defects are, ma lice, folly, sensuality, and cowardice.

This confraft is commonly exprelfed in the terms Virtue and Vice.

Of Prosperity and Adversity.

H E circumstances relative to J man's nature that constitute prosperity, are, health, education, security, fortune, and long life.

The ## SECT. V. Variety of Systems in the application of the terms good and evil.

The opposite circumfiances, of ad verfity, are, diieafe, neglect, thraldom, poverty, and death.

ariety of S.ylemzs in the application of the terms good and evil.

Yftems refpeding the applica k tion of thefc terms, may be reduced to three; the Epiczurean, the Peripatetic, and the Stoic.

The Epicureans limited the terms good and evil to enjoyments and sufferings.

They maintained, that animal sense was the primary source of enjoyment; and that intellectual enjoyment is the remembrance or contemplation of this.

The Peripatetics complied with common use in the application of the termsgood and evil. They com M 3 prehended prehended under the first, enjoyment, perfection, and prosperity; under the second, suffering, defect, and adversity. But they held perfetion and defect to be of the greateft moment.

The Stoics limited the terms good and evil to virtue and vice.

They preferred pleasure to pain, and the constituents of prosperity to- those of adversity: but they maintained, that good and evil consifted not in the presence or absence of either, but in the proper habit and disposition of the mind relating to them.

The tenets of the Epicureans and the Stoics, were extremes, and, in the common use of language, equally paradoxical.

The Peripatetics were supported by common opinion.

The Epicureans were fippofed to promote felfilinefs, and indifference to ## SECT. VI. The comparative moment of Good and Evil in their different acceptations.

to mankind, and to fink the pretensions of human nature too low.

The Peripatetics were supposed to promote integrity and moderation.

The Stoics were supposed to pro mote heroism, and the love of mankind; but to raise the pretensions of human nature too high .

The controversy between those schools related to the classification of objects.

It is of more moment to diftin guifl among things, however classed, what is the greatest good or greatest evil.

he comparative mloment of Good and Evil in their diferent acceptations.
A Nimal enjoyments are occafio nal and transitory; they pall on the sense, or must wait the returns of appetite, Sensuality, They occupy, therefore,, but a small portion of human life.

Sensuality, or the attempt to ren der them continual, impairs the power of enjoyment, and produces fottiflmeis.

Sensuality is a distemper of the imagination, whose disgusts, or languor, need to be soothed by a round of amusements and pastime.

The sense of animal pleasure seems destined to excite to action, and to direct man to what is falutary; but not to constitute the enjoyment of human life. Bodily pain is occasional, but not always transient.

It appears destined to. direc men in ihunning what is pernicious.

It is prolonged to a greater mea sure than any bodily pleasure, and Sometimes actually ends only in death.

Suitably to its final cause, the pain remains while the attack on a nimal nimal life continues; and it increases as the danger approaches.

In human life, for the most part, bodily pains are but slightly experienced.

The continued enjoyments of men in human life, arise from their active engagements, their affetions, joys, and hopes.

Men are best amused with exer cifes that engage them most, that awaken their affections, and occupy their talents.

For this reason the more serious and urgent. occupations are to be preferred to the more flight and apparently pleasant.

Men of business have more enjoyment than men of dissipation.

The reverse of amusement is inoccupation and languor.

Affections are pleasant, in pro portion as they are ardent, diffused, and extensive.

Malice is painful, in proportion as as it is diffused, rancorous, and implacable.

Joy and hope are intense and permanent, in proportion as they are founded in just opinions of things.

False opinions lead to transient joy and to disappointment.

Grief, andfear, and disappoint ment, are most frequent, where men most mistake the moment or value of things.

Vehement affection, a&ive en gagement, or passion, suspend the sense of bodily pleasure or pain.

Intellectual enjoyments, in gene ral, are preferable to the animal, as they may be rendered continual, or occupy the greater part of human life.

It appears, upon the whole, that serious engagements, benevolent asfecions, and just opinions, are the preferable source of enjoyments in human life.

It It has been observed, that one of the strongest propensities in human nature is that which tends to persection, or the bettering ourselves.

The phenomena of this propen fity are, emulation, pride, vanity,and moral approbation, magnanimity, and elevation of mind.

Under the influence of this pro penfity, men forego any pleasure, or incur any pain.

Benevolence, or the love of man kind, is the greatest perfection; it is likewise the source of greatest enjoyment.

Wisdom, or a just estimation of things, is the best security against disappointment, despair, and all the wretched paflions.

Temperance is the proper use of enjoyments of every fort.

Fortitude is an antidote to dejec tion and fear, the best security in danger, and the best alleviation of unavoidable sufferings.

The The higher animal pleasure is ra ted, the more temperance, or the proper use of them, must be valued.

The more animal pain appears of moment, the more fortitude, that enables men, with presence of mind, to avoid, or with patience to endure them, is to be valued.

The greatest defects, as well as sufferings, of men, are malice and cowardice, or result from intemperance and folly.

In human nature, therefore, the slate of greatest enjoyment, and least suffering, coincides with the fiate of greatest perfection.

Prosperity is actually valued, on account of its supposed tendency to constitute enjoyment, or to better our state.

Health enables us to attain to the preferable enjoyments and accomplifhments of human life; but is not an absolute security for either.

The The proper use of health is good, the abuse is evil.

Good education is calculated to promote good dispositions, and to bestow valuable accomplishments.

Negle6t has an opposite tendency But neither the best nor the worst education necessarily produce any precise effect.

Security or liberty is best attained under wife political establishments.
It is the result of prevailing juffice, and tends to promote the love of mankind.

This effea, and all the proper uses of liberty, are good.

The abu:e is evil.
Thraldom is in all refpeds the reverse of freedom or security.

Competency of fortune is fufi cient to all the purposes of animal life.

Increase of wealth does not proportionally increase enjoyment.

N It It' often ileads, to sensuality, dif fipation, sloth; pride, and: difdain.; , -. .
' l M; Man is formed for mixed fortune; 
difficulties-; and dangers call forth powers, in the exercise of which his greatest. perfections and his greatest enjoyments consist.
..Mere: life is to him an opportunityl to avail';himfelf ,of the good, and.likewife.to incur the evil, of which his nature is susceptible.
.; The proper use of it is good, the abuse is evil.
:: The value of prosperity in general, depends on the proper use of it.

The proper use of 'things, is a perfecion of human. nature.
. The.defire of perfection, therefore; well.underftood, appears to be the surest guide to enjoyment, ,and to all the advantages of prosperity.

All our enjoyments, besides those of sense, arise from: our -having some pursuit or affecion, to which pleasure pleasure is not the objed, but an acceflion. Thus the pleasures of hunting arise from eagerness to seize the prey; the pleasures of occupation arise from the ardour with which we pursue our object; the pleasures of affection arise from the regard we have for other men; and the pleasure of good actions arises from the esteem of virtue. If pleasure be our sole object, we must forego it in all those instances.

The measure of good which any one possesses, is to be estimated from his personal charater, not from his circumstances, or external means of enjoyment.

In the different denominations of good and evil, it appears that virtue and vice are of the greatest moment.

The first is itself the greatest ad vantage, the fecureft possession, and that which enables men best to em N 2 ploy possessions.

The sec6nd is wretched in itself, and turns every other circumstance into a curse.





C,H A P. III.
Of the fildament law of 'Morali ty, and the fJtbje(ts to 7Which it is applicable, SECT. I.

The Law.
THE great foundation of virtue in the human foul, is probity; 
and the greatest good competent to man's nature, is the love of mankind.

This law may be applied to mind, and to external actions.

In its application to mind, it is a direcion to the attainment of happiness.

In its application to external ac tions, it is a direcion to just and proper conduct.

N3 SECT.


S E CT. II.
.Of the application of the la7vs of Morality to Mind; or of Happiiefs.
BAppinefs is the possession of the greatest good, or the pof session of. a mind benevolent, wife, and courageous.

It is a diftinfion of the personal qualities of men, not of their fituations.

The foundation ofhappinefs, is an affection determinate in its nature, but indefinite in refpea to its ob-, jea.

Among its objecs God is fupreme.

This affeAion being an active principle, requires, or inspires, all the qualities which are requisite to attain its end.

Among Among these qualities wisdom occupies the principal place.

An extensive and just understand ing leads to piety, benevolence, and candour.

Good intentions have not the corresponding effecs, if not properly conduded.

Good intentions, when misled or abused, end in diiguft, or in, a diftaste to virtue.

This disposition requires courage and fortitude; for weak minds are too much occupied with. their own safety to entertain any sincere or vigorous affection.

It requires temperance; for men addicted to fenfuiality or diflipation, are not capable of continued or ferious attachments.

This affecion, when sincere and ardent, naturally occupies the mind .to the exclusion of inferior pleafiures, of personal anxieties, and fears; and is ## SECT. III. Of the degrees of Happiness, and the actual attainments of men.

is therefore a principle of temperance and fortitude.

,S E C T. III.
Of the degrees of Happinefi, and the antual attaiinments of men.

HE definitions of perfec happiness, and of perfect virtue, are the fame: Universal benevolence, unerring wisdom, a force and elevation of mind, which inferior pleasures cannot seduce, and which blameless fufiferings cannot depress.

Men conceive perfedion, but are capable only of improvement.

The conception of perfeAcion is a light to dire& their progress.

'The objec of moral philosophy is, to ascertain this conception.

Philosophers cannot avoid recommending a perfeacion above human nature, nature, unlefs"they submit to recommend defects.

The dispositions of men are va rious, and their forces unequal: it is impossible to ascertain 'the limits of their progress.

They havefailedin ,the diredion they have taken, not in the force with which every. iman,,-afpires to better himse.lf.

One man improves his fortune, or advances .in, rani; another extends his. fame:: it would be easier to improve in the accomplifliments of a.juft and vigorous i ind. 
f Opinions productive of AMifery, or that hinder Ihnpriovement '.

T is unhappy to lay the pretensions of human nature so low as to check its exertions.

It is unhappy to entertain notions of what men actually are, so high, as upon trial to incur disappointment, disgust, or despair of virtue.

It is unhappy to reft our own choice of good qualities on the supposition that we are to meet with such qualities in other men.

It is unhappy to confider perfec tion as the standard by which we are to censure others, not as the rule by which we are to conduc ourselves.

* See Epi&etus by Arrian, and Antoninus's Meditations.

It It is a wretched opinion, that happiness consists in a freedom from trouble, or in having nothing to do.

In consequence of this opinion, men complain of what might employ them agreeably.

By declining every duty, and e very ac'tive engagement, they render life a burden, and they complain that it is so.

By preferring amusement to bu finess, they reject what is fitted to occupy them, and search in vain for something else. to remove their languor.

It is unhappy to entertain an opi nion, that any thing can amuse us better,. than the duties of our ftation, nor than that which we are in the present moment called upon to do. .

It is an unhappy opinion, that beneficence is an effort of felf-denial, or that we lay. our fellow creatures creatures under great obligations by the kindness we do:them.

It is an unhappy opinion, that any thing whatever is preferable to .happiness.

The vulgar, as well as the' learn ed, have their paradoxes: They frequently prefer interest, fame, and power, to acknowledged happiness.

They prefer consideration, or the imputation of worth, to worth itielf.

It is wretched to rely for happiness on what we cannot command.

It is wretched to have an opi nion of good in things which we might forego with indifference, or of evil in things which we might endure with patience.

It is an error to employ terms of admiration or contempt loosely, and without attention to their proper meaning.

We vulgarly fay, that a mlan is the ## SECT. V. Of Opinions, or Circumstances, productive of Happiness, or that lead to Improvement.

the better or the worse, when we mean only that something has happened to his fortune.

Such phrases, we suppose, may be undertfood; but, like many others of the fame kind, they slur over a very absurd apprehension, that confounds external circumflances with personal qualities, and what does not belong to a man with what does.

f Opinions, or Circu.,nfanccs, pro dtip ive of IlT7apilnef, or that lead to Impl'roveilent.

T is happy to value personal qualities above every other con fideration; . and to state perfedion as a guide to ourselves, not as a rule )by which to censure others.

It is happy to rely only on rwhat is in our own power; to value the O engagements engagements of a worthy and ftrenuous mind as our sole good, and the debasements of a malicious and cowardly nature as our sole evil., It is happy to have continually in view, that we are members of society, and of the community of mankind;: that we are instruments in the,hand of God for the good of his creatures; that if we are ill members of society, or unwilling instruments in the hand of God, we do our utmost to counteract our nature, to quit our station, and to undo ourselves.

I am in the flation whuich God has qftguned m?,e, fays Epictetus. With this reflection, a man may be happy in every station; without it, he cannot be happy in any. Is not the appointment of God sufficient to outweigh every other confideration ? This rendered the condition of a slave agreeable to Epifetus, and that of a monarch to Antoni n1ls.


nus. This confideratiodh renders any situation agreeable to a rational nature, which delights not in partial interests, but ini iiiverfal good.: Whoever poflefFes good personal qualities, holds them in dependence only upon Cod: but the circumflances in which men' are placed; the policy or government of their country; their education, knowledge, and habits, - have great influence in forming their characters.

pplication of the Laws of Morality to External Aflions in general.
E Xternal actions, confidered a part from affection or inten tion of mind, are mere movements of the body, constituting neither 0 2 enjoyment enjoyment nor suffering, good nor evil.

But affecion or intention being .good or evil, it follows, that the fame law of morality which requires or forbids the affection, must likewise require or forbid the ex.ternal condut that is supposed to result from it., The law which requires the love of mankind, supported by wisdom, courage, and temperance, likewise requires every external action that is fiited to this affecdion, and to there qualifications.

The law that prohibits malice, remissness, cowardice, or intemperance,. prohibits likewise every external effect of these charaders..


ivefity of Opitions concernilg the Morality of External AClios.
THE difference of moral good and evil cannot be ascertained in the description of mere external actions.

Adtions materially the fame, are in one cafe morally good, in another cafe morally evil. Men are not universally agreed concerning the actions which they require or prohibit in any cafe whatever. What is reckoned innocent or praife-worthy in one country, is reckoned a heinous offence in another. The definitions of theft, murder, or treason, are different in the laws of different countries.

The terms expressing the external duties of men in one language, 03 have ## SECT. VIII. Cause of this Diversity.

have not a precise equivalent in another.

Caifes of this Diveifty.
T His diversity does not arise from any difference of opi nion, or experience, concerning any of the charateriftics of human nature.

All mankind are agreed, thatbe nevolence and courage are good, that malice and cowardice are evil; and if it should be alledged, that any number of men are of contrary opinions, yet every person may, from his own experience, corret the error.

This diversity proceeds from three different causes: I. The difference of the cafe.
2. The different choice of the par ties ## SECT. IX. Difference of the Case.

ties who, are asseted by the external adions.

3. The different interpretation of actions.

S E C T. IX.

Difference of the Cafe.
C Ases change with the perfoni, and with circumflances.

An adion materially the fame is permitted to one person, and forbidden to another: It is the duty of a magistrate to put the guilty to death; this would be criminal in a private party.

A person may kill in his own de fence, but not in different circumstances.

Cafes are varied indefinitely; and rules of adion being general, cannot provide for all the peculiarities of any cafe whatever.

The ## SECT. X. Difference of Choice.

The only direction on which men can rely in every particular cafe, is the discernment of a wife and benevolent mind.

Diference of Choice.
THE different choice of parties interested in the effec of any atiQn, arises from opinion.

One person believes that to be good, for himself, which another person believes to be evil. In their requisition of beneficent adions, they differ accordingly: One man requires as a favour what another would resent as an injury.

There is no external effecA of which men may not entertain contradidory opinions, even of life and of death.

The father among the Efquiimax requires, at a certain age, that his own ## SECT. XI. Difference of Interpretation.

own .children flhould put! 'him to death.

The widow in Europe 'desires to have a good settlement made!by her deceased husband: in India, file desires to be burnt on his funeral pile.

In every cafe, assions are requi red as the effects or exprefflons of kindness and regard,. ! , SEC T. XI.

Difference of hInterpretation.
'N many instances, external ac tions are, in their own nature, indifferent, or of no effect; but are the established signs and expressions of neglet or attention, of good or of ill will, or of foime affection or disposition.

Such are many religious rites in every country, and many ceremonies observed in common life. E
ven ven actions of more consequence, are frequently more regarded on account of their meaning, thai on account of any other effect.

So far as actions are mere expref sions, the choice of them, like that of words, is perfectly arbitrary; and nations may differ from each other in their external observances, as they do in their speech,, without any inconvenience whatever. One nation commends what another condemns, merely because they interpret the fame, or a like acion, differently.

The diversities of manners arising from difference of choice or interpretation, render it difficult to judge of the merits or personal qualities of men, in ages or nations remote from each other.

The vulgar are able to interpret only the manners of their own condition and country; they common ly ly miflake those of a different rank, or of foreigners.

There is in fadt nothing in exter nal manners/which opinion may not render agreeable or disagreeable; and the opinion of one country is not the rule or flandard by which to judge of the manners of another.

The definitions of crimes vary in the law of different countries; because different overt ads are fpecifled as the marks of guilt.

Terms of praise or blame, have not their precise equivalent in different languages; because men combine variously, under different terms, the circumstances from which they infer merit or demerit.

This is consistent with a perfedt agreement of opinion concerning any of those circumnftances apart.


Funldamental Laws of External A2lion.
.. N matters indifferent, we ought I to observe the manners of our country, as we speak its language, or wear its dress.

2. In matters of importance, we ought to chufe what is for the good of mankind, in opposition to opinion and custom.

Thus we ought to do whatever tends to promote virtue, to prevent corruption, and to secure the rights of mankind; and to avoid whatever tends to corrupt or to reduce, and whatever tends to make way for oppression.

When the habits or affections of men change for the better or the worse, they improve or degenerate.

When their customs change from what is innocent, or beneficial to mankind, ## SECT. XIII. Of the different Sanctions under which External Actions are required or prohibited.

mankind, to what is pernicious, they are said not to undergo a change of manners merely, but to be depraved.

If they should be ignorant of the tendency of their own pernicious customs and manners, even this ignorance would be an article of depravity.

S E C T. XIII.
Of the different Siincions uZder which Exterial Alfiolns are reqluied or prohibited.
T HE fanAion of aiiy lavw, is the good or ill annexed to the obfervance, or to the negleDt, of it.

The general fandtion of moral 1iw is, that the observance of it is happiness, and the negleft mifery.

This fandion is variously modifled in the cafe of external action, P by ## SECT. XIV. Of parties to whom the Laws of Morality refer.

by lconfiderations of force, ..or of propriety.' Hence, .
-I. The fanAcion of compulsory law!:i '". ' '
.! ' 'i ..i ,Tle ,fanftion of duty. .
The.fanations of compulsory law are, any: forcible means employed by men to vindicate. their own rights, or.thole of others.
. :The faiftions. of duty: are, any considerations that determine men, from choice, to at properly.

f parties to whom the Laws of Mo rality refer.
r T HE laws of morality may be referred to the conduct of single parties, or to that of collective, bodies.

The conduc of single parties is required, or prohibited, under the special special fandions of compulsory law, or under the fanmtions of duty.

Conduct required or prohibited under the fanaion of compulsory law, is the fubje& of jutifpruidence.

Conduft required or prohibited under the fandion of duty, is the subjet of cafuiitry.

Condu&' prohibited: or required of men in what affecs the; itate and form of: their community, is the subjea of politics. , Communities stated in their re lation to each other, are to be confidered as single parties.

P2 INSTI


/
IN, S T IT U TE S

0 F
MORAL PIJILOSOPHY.

PART V.
Of Jurisprudence.

THn SHE first application of the fundamental law of morality to the acoions of men, is prohibitory, and forbids the commission of wrongs.
Every person being intitled to defend himiclf and his fellow-crea tures, tures, wrongs may be repelled by force; and the prohibition of wrongs is the first compulsory law of nature.

Any article in the state of a man which may be maintained by force or otherwise, is termed his right.

Jurisprudence consists of two parts.

The firit relates to the rights; the second, to the defences of men, P3 CHAP.



Of the Rights of Men in general.

Right is the relation of a person to a thing, in which no al teration ought to be made without his own consent.

Things are the constituents of the person, or the constituents of his state.

The regard to rights is compre hended in the law of felf-prefervation, combined with the law of society; or, in other words, it arises from our disposition to preserve ourselves, and our fellow-creatures.

Wrong is a violation of right.

The sentiment arising from a sense of wrongin our own cafe is resentment; in that of others, is indignation.

No one can have a right to what is not possible, or not real.

The right of one man is exclusive of the right of another, CHAP.



The Law of'Defence in general.
A Right may be maintained by any means that. are effecual and neceflary.

This law of defence includes three clauses: I. That a wrong apprehended may be prevented.

2. That a wrong offered ,may be repelled.

3. That a damage done fliould be repaired.






Diference of Rghts.

General Div/ion.

Ights may be confidered in refpe& to their subjea, or in refpee to their source.

In the first refped, they are said to be personal, or real.

In the second, they are said to be original, or adventitious.

Of Rights Personal.
nErfonal rights subsist in the per son, and are the constituents of his nature.

Persons ## SECT. III. Of Rights Real.

Persons are said to be natural or artificial.

Persons 'natural are single men.
Persons artificial are corporations or states.' "
'

The rights of ,natural persons subsist in the limbs and members of the body, in the faculties and talents of the mind, and the uses of both.

The rights of artificial persons fibfift in their constituent members, their forms, and their laws.

S EC T. III.

Of Rigbhts Real.
R Eal rights fubrift in things of which any person may have the exclurive nfe.

Real rights may be referred to three principal heads: Poffeffin, 'Property, and Command.

PoifefTion ## SECT. IV. Of Original Rights.

Possession constitutes right only while a thing is in actual use.

Property constitutes a' continual right .- .

No one can have a right of posession to the property of another.

Command is a -right to the services or obedience of other: men.

Of Original Rights.
ORiginal rights are the univer -fal..appurtenances of man's nature, and coeval with his being.

The personal rights of men are original.

The right, of the parent to: com mand the infant child is original; but in every other instance, no man has an original right to force the obedience of another, except in obliging him to abRtain or desist from wrongs.


E CT. V.

Of Adventitious Rights.
ADventitious rights are such as accrue variously to men in the course of human life.

Original rights are recognised on being mentioned.

Adventitious rights are matter of discussion, and recognised only so far as they are proved.

In treating of adventitious rights, we mufl not only enumerate their subjects, but likewise the means by which they may be acquired.

Possession, property, and command; are adventitious rights.

The adventitious diftintions in society are founded, for the molt part, on property and command, CHAP.



Of the Laws of Acqtuiition in general.

0 rigl can be acquired by injufftice; or, in other words, by any deed pernicious to mankind.

The means of acquiring any right may be referred to four principal heads: Occupancy, Labour, Convention, and Forfeiture.





Law of Occuipancy.
O Ccupancy is such a relation of a person to a thing, that no other can use the fame thing, without detriment or molestation to the occupier.

In this manner, a person may oc cupy the ground on which he lies, the water he drinks, the air he breathes; the light that shines upon him, the trat of the sea on which he fails ; but no one can occupy the earth, the paiing stream, the atmorphere, or the ocean.

Q CHAP, # CHAP. VII. The Law of Acquisition by Labour.



The Law of Acquiition by Labour.
L Abour is any effort by which a person may, for his own use, fabricate, procure, or improve, any unappropriated subjea.

'The 'right acquired to the fruits of labour, is implied in the:original right all men have to the use of their talents or faculties.

Prior to convention, men do not acquire rights by the observance of any form or ceremony that is of no effecA; for the right acquired is only to the use of what is produced.

Mere accession, or what is not the effet of any care and labour, if there be no convention to the contrary, falls to the first occupier.

The increase of a man's flocks or herds, being the fruits of his care, is his property; but the acceflion of of new lands, or islands, contiguous to his, falls to the first occupier.

A man, by labouring on another's property, cannot annul the other's right; on the contrary, the fruit of his labour, if it cannot be removed without damage to the principal subjet, falls to the proprietor of that fubjecd.

But a person who happens bona fide to employ his labour on the subjeat of another, may remove or enjoy the fruit of his labour; if this can be done without detriment or inconveniency to the other.

Civil conventions accommodate the effects of accession or of labour to the conveniency of parties, and to the policy of particular Rtates.

Q2 C H A P.




The Law of iAcqzluition by Contracf.

The Obligations of Contra, 5 Contraa: is the engagement of JA parties to perform what is supposed to be in their power.

Engagements are made by promiles.

Men by nature rely on the promises of others.

The object of a promise or en gagement becdmes part of a man's state; breach of faith is an injury, and he is intitled to repel it by force.

Here the compulsory law, which in its original form is prohibitory, or negative, becomes positive, re quiring, ## SECT. II. Laws of Contract in general.

quiring, that every just engagement ihould be fulfilled.

Laws of Contrat in general.
I. T H E source of conventional J obligation, is the right of one party to exac a performance upon which another has made him rely.

2. Contrads, therefore, create right only to what depends on the will of contracting parties.

3. To constitute a contract, mu tual promises, or a promise and acceptance, are necessary between parties, acting freely, and poffeiied of the use of their reason.

Although one party has promi fed, if the other has not accepted, the last cannot pretend to have an expectation raised.

fit 2But But mutual promise implies acceptance.

Men who are known not to ad voluntarily, or rationally, cannot raise any reasonable expedtation.

4. A party may ftipu!lte in per son, or by his agent, or melienger, in words, aciions, or signs, that are understood.

5. A person is bound by the fti pulations of a servant, or mefenger, to whom he has given credentials, or whom he has authorised by repeated acknowledgements of his trust.

6. Words are to be interpreted in their most ordinary sense, or in the sense in which it appears from other signs that they were intended to be uifed.

7. An acion of any kind, per formed with a view to raise expectation, or by which it is known that expectations are naturally rai fed, fed, is ftfficient to constitute a contrat.

8. Cuflom is a reasonable ground of expectation ; and therefore is binding on all parties.

Great part of the civil conven tions of men are confrituted by tlie received cultoms of their country.

A practice introduced by force, may become a legal cuflom: for being such as men are reconcileable to, after they are reconciled, and continue to observe it voluntarily, it becomes a matter of convention.

But practices,-or sufferings, to which men are not reconcileable, and with which they are made to comply by force, can never, on the foot of coniuetude, be confidered as matter of convention, but ufurpapation.

S E C T, ## SECT. III. Contracts of different denominations.

ContraEs of diferent denominations.
COntrats may be diftinguiihed as absolute, or conditional; and as single, or reciprocal.

Absolute contracts are conftitu ted by a simple promise and acceptance.

Conditional contracts express pro mise and acceptance under a condition.

Single contracs consist in the promise of one party, and acceptance of the other.

Here one party is stipulating, the other accepting.

Reciprocal contracs consist of mutual promises, and mutual acceptance.

Here each party is both ftipulating and accepting.


f the Exceptions to Cozntrals in ge neral.
A NY promise given is rendered void, by the exceptions of force, .fraud, injustice, or impoffibilitv J ... ..
FIRST EXCEPTION.

Force is constituted by aiual vio lence, or menaces, employed by (the accepting party.

This exception is valid, I. Because a person extorting a promise by force, cannot have a reasonable expectation of its performance being intended.

2. Because the party offering force commits an injury; and instead of acquiring a right, may be prevented, prevented, repelled, or obliged to make reparation.

N. B. This exception does not extend to the cafe of contracts entered into with one party, on account of the violence offered by another.

Nor is this exception admitted by the praLtice of nations in the cafe of any surrender at war, or military capitulation.

Fraud is constituted by the deceit which a party employs to obtain a promise.

This exception is valid, i. Because a party who is known to be deceived concerning what he promises, cannot raise an expecation that he will perform when un-eceived.

2. Because deceit, or imposition, is an injury, and gives a title to reparation.

N. B. This exception does not invalidate the promise made to an innocent party in consequence of the misinformation of another.

Nor does it invalidate any mili tary capitulation, though obtained by stratagem.

THIRD EXCEPTION.

Injustice consists in the wrong which a third party would susser from the performance of a contrat.

There are four different cafes in which this exception may be offered: Cafe I. When neither of the con tracting parties, at the time of ftipulating, was aware of the wrong.

In this cafe the contract is simply void.

Cafe 2. When only the party accepting was aware of the wrong.

In In this cafe, the contract is void; 
and the party accepting has committed an injury against the party stipulating, as well as against the third party, who, if the contrast had takeneffec, was likely to have suffered.

Cafe 3. When only the party ftipulating was aware of the wrong.

If he stipulated with intention to perform, he is injurious to the third party concerned.

If- he stipulated with intention to plead the exception, he is injurious to the party accepting.

Cafe4. When both parties were aware of the injustice.

Both are injurious to the third party concerned.

FOURTH EXCEPTION.

Impossibility extends to every cafe that cannot, in the nature of things, take place; to every article that ex ceeds cecds the power, or that does not depend on the will, of the parties.

This exception, like the forme;r may be offered in four cafes.

Cafe I. When neither contract ing party was aware of the impofiibility; The contract is simply void.
Cafe 2. WVhen only the party ac cepting was aware of the impoflibility.

This ccnduct is either irrational, or may be injurious to the flipulating party, by drawing hinr into fa:res and fruLtlefs attempts.

Cati 3. When only the party fdipulating was aware of the impofli It is injurious to the accepting party, by creating vain expedations.

The 4th cafe, Supposing both parties aware of the impossibility, is altogether irrational and absurd.

R SECT.


xceptions peculiar to Conditional and Reciprocal ContralIs.

L L conditional contracts are A void, if the condition has failed, or is found to be unjust or impossible.

The condition may be a mere contingency, or it may depend on the will of either party.

If a contingency, the parties may be allowed to interpose, as they do in games of skill and dex- '
terity.

Or. they may not be allowed to interpose, as in games of chance.

If the condition depend on the will of the stipulating party, he becomes bound to perform one aftion only in consequence of having performed another.

if If it depend on the will of the accepting party, he acquires a right only in cafe of having performed his condition.

In mutual contracts, a party failing on his part, has no title to exa& performance on the other part.

R 2 CHAP, # CHAP. IX. Of the Law of Acquisition by Forfeiture.


Of the Law of Acqi7itioilJ by Foifei titre.

W,'-7Hoever has done an injury, is W/v bound to repair it. In this manner, the injurious person may have forfeited to another what was formerly his own right.

No man can forfeit by ations casual and involuntary. Such actions, when prejudicial to others, are misfortunes, not injuries.






Of the Law of Acquisition, as appli cable to particular rights, SECT. I.

Of Poefi on.
THis is acquired by occupancy alone.

Of Property.
hT His is acquired, to any fubje&

formerly unappropriated, by labour alone.

The effeCt of prescription in civil society, results from convention, not from occupancy.

R 3 Property Property may be transferred by convention or forfeiture.

A convention transferring property, is a conveyance.

A conveyance consists of consent and delivery.

A party who has obtained con sent Vwithout delivery, may defend, or occupy, the iubject, in right of the former proprietor, not in his own.

Hence it is argued, that the mere consent of a party deceased, without delivery, cannot convey property; because the party deceased having no right, the fubjeat fills to the first occupier.

The force of last wills is an effec of convention among the living, not of right furvivnmg the dead.

f the Right to Conmmand, or Service.

T HE right to command is ac quired by contract or forfeiture.

The contracS between the master and hired servant is a reciprocal contract.

The terms are such as they mu tually flipulate, or such as known cufloms eflablifl.

The civil contract or convention between the magistrate and subjea, or sovereign and people, is likewise reciprocal.

The terms' are such as the par ties stipulate in express charters and Statutes, or such as may be afcertained from known customs.

The social compact, from which, according to some writers, the mutual duties of men in society are to be be deduced, is a mere fition in theory, resembling the fidion in law, by which a plea which arises from one source, is sustained as coming from another.

Thus mutual pleas of guardian and ward, which arose from equity, were sustained in the Roman law as arising from contract.

There never was in reality any contract prior to the eftabliihment of society. Customs, charters, and statutes, which constitute or express the civil conventions of men, are all posterior to the establishment of society.

Fictions of law may be conve nient in arranging civil acions, but are of no use in explaining the laws - of nature; for by the law of nature, every right, and every obligation, is admitted only where it is real, and can receive no confirmation from any fiEtion whatever.

The original rights or men, f a- ied founded in humanity, and in the title of every person to defend himself, are so far from gaining force by being referred to a supposed convention, that they are actually weakened.

Men are equally sensible of their obligation to abstain from wrong of any kind, as from breach of faith. The last is atually comprehended in the first, or is founded upon it.

A right to command is sometimes acquired by forfeiture, when a person who has done a wrong, becomes bound to repair it by his services.

No contrac or forfeiture can de prive a man of all his rights, or render him the property of another.

No one is born a slave ; because every one is born with all his original rights.

No one can become a slave; because no one, from being a person, can, can, in the language of the Roman law, become a thing, or subjea of property.

The supposed property of the master in the slave, therefore, is matter of usurpation, not of right, CHAP.




Of the Law of Defence.

Of the lleans of Defence in general.
BY the law of defence, a person may maintain his right against any other person who wrongs, or is likely to wrong him, by any means that are necessary for that purpose.

The means of defence may be referred to three principal heads: Persuasion, Artifice, and Force.
The law of defence does not au thorife the use of any means that are unnecessarily hurtful to the party against whom they are employed.

A man is intitled only to pre serve ## SECT. II. The case of Single Parties Strangers to each other, and unconnected.

serve his own right: whatever harm he does beyond what is neceffary for this purpose, is an injury.

The law of defence may be ap plied to persons in three different cafes: i. That of single parties supposed firangers, and unconnected.

2. That of fellow-citizens.
3. That of nations.

he cafe. of Single Parties Strage's to each othcr, and ziiconnecictl.
T His cafe is commonly treated of under the title of the fiate of nature; and in tlis state every man is fippofed unconneded with all men.

It is absurd to intitle that tl;e fiate of nature to which men are not naturally dilfpofed, and in wlhicli which they most certainly never were known.

It is a mere supposition, under which certain applications of the law of nature may be abftracyly confidered.

Writers have not recollected, that it was sufficient for the purpose of their reasonings, to suppose any two or more parties unconnecded with each other, though not unconneced with all mankind.

Such parties are pofl'efed of their original rights; but having no convention, can have none of those rights, and none of those obligations, which arise from convention alone.

If either party shall commit an injury againit the other, the injured is intitled to his defence.

It is vain to ask, who is to judge between them ? for all reference to judges is excluded by the lippofition.

S They ## SECT. III. The case of Fellow-Citizens.

They. must ac and judge for themselves; and where persuasion and artifice have failed, or are not likely to succeed, may employ force.

The cafe of Fellow-Citizens.

Ellow-citizens are conneded by civil and political conventions; 
on which are founded a variety of adventitious obligations and rights.

The obligations of fellow-citizens are either tho'e of fellow-fubjeits, or of magistrate and subject.

Fellow-fubjects have tipulated, to refer their differences to the judgement of courts, and to employ, in their defence, the power of the magistrate.

This law admits of the following exceptions: I. Where the judgement of courts cannot be had, nor the power of the magistrate magiltrate interposed, to prevent an injury.

2. Where the relief by civil suit cannot be adequate to the injury apprehended.

Judges have tipulated to decide according to law and justice.

Magistrates have Stipulated to defend the rights of the subjet.

The.magiftrate, as acing in de fence of the state, and of its subjecds, is intitled to repress crimes by restraints and punishments.

He is diredced, in the application of rerraints and punifhiments, by the law of nature, and of convention.

The law of nature, where there is no convention to the contrary, limits the power of the magistrate to what is neceflary to defend the innocent. All restraints or feverities employed beyond these limits, are unlawful.

It is not always expedient in civil S 2 society, society, to carry punifllment to the utmost rigour even of natural law.

The laws of convention are va rious in different states; in some nations permitting arbitrary imprifonment, unlimited severities, and tortures, for every crime, at the diicretion of the magifirate.

Powers of this fort are frequent ly usurpations on the part of the niagiftrate, not his rights.

The rights of the subjec are in danger, when the magistrate either adopts a rule that is uhjuft, or when his decisions are irregular and arbitrary.

S- SECT, ## SECT. IV. The case of Nations.

The cafe of Nations.
AMong nations, the ad of the sovereign, or of those employ ed by the sovereign, is confidered as the adt of the nation.

The ad of any private person is not the adt of the itate, except so far as, in his adtion, he is protedted or acknowledged by the ilate.

A nation may receive an injury in the person of any of its members.

A nation injured, may make re prifals on the persons and effeds of aly, or all, the fubjeds of the offending nation.

Nations who maintain contro verted rights by artifice, or by force, are said to be in a state of war.

War is just only on the fippo S 3 fitio fition of injuries apprehended, ofsered, or perpetrated.

Remonstrances and declarations, where-ever they can be safely employed, fiouald precede hostilities.

The inmmediate objea of war is ,vicory.

The laws of war previous to victory are, 1. Such hoflliities only are law ful as arc necessary to obtain the vicory.

2. Where-ever it is safe to grant an enemy quarter; it is not lawful to refuse it.

3. Breach of faith is exploded in the practice of nations at war, and would be ruinous to mankind.

4. Any party may assist the in jured; but whoever assists the injurious, may be treated as an enemy.

5. The person or effeds of an enemy, where-eve. found, may be seized, seized, if this can be done without detriment to any innocent party.

6. The effeds of a friend going to an enemy, if they would enable him better to carry on the war, may be seized.

7. Captives may be detained while the war continues, and until fatisfadion and security be obtained.

Laws. of war after victory: i. The conqueror may avail him self of his power to preserve his rights, and obtain reparation of a wrong that has been done him.

2. Success in war does not con ftitute a right,; but d1amages. and suffering incurred in war, give a title to indemnification.

3. The conqueror may takefuach precautions, by disabling .his enemy, as give him a proper degree of security for the future.

4. Nations do not acquire a property in the persons of their cap tives, ## SECT. V. Conclusion of Jurisprudence.

tives, 'as they do in effeas lawfully 'eized.

Conclfion of YJurjiprtidence.

Y the maxims of compulsory law, a person may, on every occasion, maintain his right: but from considerations of duty, he is, on many occasions, obliged to forego it.

A person is more concerned to maintain and to exercise the assections of a beneficent mind, than he is to preserve his condition in any other refpe&.

The conventional laws of society, in some inflances, as well as the law of humanity, admit, that the extreme necessity of one party may supersede the right of another.

INS TI


I N S TI T U T E S

0 F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART VI.

Of Cafuifry.



Of the Sanlaions of Duty in general A . LAW of duty is an expref sion of what a person ought to do from choice; and in doing which, he is said to have merit; or in doing the contrary, to have demerit.

The first application of the fun damental law of morality is prolibitory, forbidding the commiifion of wrongs.

The The second is positive, requiring every external effeEt of virtue, or of good-will to mankind.

But adc of good-will or beneficence cannot be extorted by force.

The object of compulsory law, is the preservation of parties exposcd to 'wrongs ; who, in defending themselves, may, even by force, oblige others to desist from injuries.

The object of morality, in what relates to the duties of men, is the virtue of those who at.

Compulfiqn would alienate the affeAions of men.

Favours extorted by force would be robberies.

Whoever employs deception or force, except in his: own defence, or in that of,,his fellow-creatures, commits an injury.

The fancions of duty, are. those of religion, of public repute, and of conscience.





Of the Sanction of Religion.
REligion is :the sentiment of the mind relating to God.

The fandion of religion is its tendency to influence mens condue.

This tendency is of two kinds.
The first is, to make men love wisdom and beneficence, as being the characderiftics of the supreme being, whom they adore; and to make them love their situations, and their duties, as being appointed by providence.

The second is, to make them hope for rewards, and to fear punifhments.

The religious doctrine of rewards and punishments, is a species of compulsory law, extending to all the the thoughts and inclinations, as well as the aaions, of men.

This law, in all its extent, can be safely applied by every peribn only to himself.

When magistrates think them selves armed with the fancion of religion, and intitled to restrain thoughts as well as ations, they attempt what is placed beyond the reach of their power.

Superffition, or the abuse of reli gion, has been accompanied with very fatal effecs: With a misapplication of moral esteem, and the substitution of frivolous rites for moral duties; with cruel animofities of party, and a false apprehension of fancity in any ads of injustice and horror that proceed from a supposed religious zeal.





The Sanizcions of Pitblicl Repuite.
r-Hefe 'fantions include the in L fluence of prevailing opinions and examples, together with'the commendations and censures men beltow on the actions that please or offend them.

The' influence of prevailing opi nions and examples, arises from the social nature of man; and is one condition by which men are fitted to at in companies and obcieties.

The tendency of this influence is good or evil, according to the nature of the opinions or examples that prevail.

Nothing diftinguilhes men of a happy nature more, than that force with which they are fomeimcs able to correct false opinions, and with T wiich which they are always able to refill their contagion.

It is part in the social nature of man, to desire praise, and to shun blame.

This puts it in the power of every person to reward ations agreeable, and.to punifli acions disagreeable, to himself: but as commendation and censure are frequently ill diftributed, it is a great weakness to be guided chiefly by such confiderations.





Of the Sanlclonl of Cofcience.
T His fantion is constituted by the fatisfacdion men have in doing right, and the ihame or remorse which arises from having done wrong.

Men being desirous of personal excellencies, and averse to personal defecs, have satisfaction in actions that tend to the purposes of virtue.

They feel remorse or fllame for actions that tend to the purposes of vice.

The sentiments of conscience are frequently blended with those of superstition or custom,. and, like them, are subjec to error.

It is the object of cafuiffry to pre vent, or to correct, fich errors, by pointing out the real tendencies of virtue and of vice in external actions.

T 2 C HAP.



Of the tendelzcy of Virtue in External Afc7ions '.

Of the diferent branches of Virtue..
IT has been observed, that a fool can neither come into company, nor go out of it, can neither fit, ftiaiid, nor walk, like a man of sense -. It may be said likewise, that a knave can do nothing like a man of probity.

The law of external aciion is so essential to rlorality, that men very frecquently confine the whole of morality to this law.

* Cicero de officiis, lib. I.
j- I1axTims of La Bruyere.

But But virtue is in reality a qualifi cation of the mind; allhough the term equivalent to viirue, in every language, implies all the required effecds and appearances of this qualification.

Its conifituents are, Difpofitior, Skill, Application, and Force.

Corresponding to the number of these constituents, virtue has been divided into four capital branches, called the Cardinal Virtues.

These are, JIice or Probity, Prudence, Telmperance, and Fortitude JYtice, or Probity, is the regard ihown to the rights and happiness, of mankind.

Those effects of juflice which nmere innocence implies, are requi * This, dilv:i)n is fo'natural, that it has al ways preler i : self when we have treated of the felicit) . cellence competent to man's nature.

T 3 red red under the fantion of compulfory law.

Thole that constitute beneficence, are required under the fanfions of duty only.

Prudelce is that discernment by which men diftinguiflh the value of ends, and the fitness of means to obtain them.

Without this qualification, men are not fitted to ad with any measure of steadiness, confiflency, or good effed.

Temperance is abstinence from in ferior pleasures, or amusements, that mislead our pursuits.

No one can apply himself effec tually to any worthy purpose, who is liable to the interruption of mean pleaifres or amusements, that occupy an improper part of his time, that fifle his affecions, or impair his talents.

The maxim of temperance is, That a person having once afcer tained ## SECT. II. Of Duties referred to Probity or Justice.

tained what his bell and happiest engagements are, fliould count every moment loft, that, without neceflity, is otherwise employed.

Fortitude is the power.to with fland opposition, difficulty, and danger.

All the good qualifications of men have a reference to some effect to be produced, and to some difficulty that is to be overcome. Hence difpositions and capacities of any fort are of no avail, without resolution, and force of mind.

Of Duties referred to Probity or J7uJice.

Uties referred to probity, are either private or public.

THE private duties are, 1nzocence, Candozur, Piety, Frieen/Jip, Gra titude, fitude, Liberality, Charity, Civility, and Politeness.

Innocence has been observed to be the object of compulsory law, and is the most indispensable charateriftic of probity.

It implies, betide other effets,.

Veracity and Faithfulness: the firftv opposed to deceit; the second, to perfidy.

Candour is the just allowance gi ven to the pretensions or merits of other men, in opposition to prejudice, or to the suggestions of intereft. 
Piety is the exercise of venera tion and love; first, towards God; next, towards those who by nature or choice are proper objecs of our respeCt and affedion.

The expressions of piety to God are either fixed or arbitrary.

Its fixed expressions are ats of beneficence, which concur with the providence providence of God in promoting the good of his creatures.

Its arbitrary expressions are the different rites eftablified in different countries.

Frienldfip is the beneficence of private parties, proceeding from motives of particular esteem and attachment.

This includes the reciprocal du ties of parent and child, of husband and wife, and of all other private relations.

The duties of the parent are, to maintain, to protect, to educate, his child; and, as far as he is able, to eflablifl and to secure his state or condition.

The duties of the child are, obedience, deference, and gratitude.

Many of the duties of husband and wife are conventional; and, as such, are matter of strict law; but the observance of them muff proceed from the heart.

Consanguinity Consanguinity is a natural tie.

The fortunes of men are commonly involved in those of their family; and relations are, on account of this connecion, among the first or nearest objecs of beneficence.

Gratitude is the return made for favours received.

Men of probity are neither un grateful, nor jealous of ingratitude in others.

To require a base ation under the title of gratitude, is to forfeit the title of benefacor.

The returns due from the grate ful, cannot be ascertained by any precise measure, nor can they be exaded by force.

The intention of the benefacor is more to be regarded, than the value of his benefit.

Were it established, that returns could be exaced by force, it would follow, that benefits could not be diifinguifhed from fees, nor the es fcct fees of gratitude from those of conftraint.

The ingratitude of mankind is sometimes alledged as an excuse for neglecting good offices; but it is the business of a man to perform his own part, not to answer for the returns which others may, or may not, be disposed to make.

Liberality is the free communi cation of what is ours, to oblige others.

Charity is the free communication of what is ours, to relieve the diftressed.

Undiftinguifing charity is pernicious in trading nations.

It is a wife maxim in trading na tions, That no person able to earn his bread lhould be maintained gratuitously.

But charity to those who have no bread, and are unable to earn any, is a duty of the strongest obligation, and and a very important. objec of public concern.

Civility is a guarded behaviour in the ordinary intercourse of society, to avoid giving offence.

Politeness is a behaviour intended to please, or to oblige.

Civility and politeness are com prehended in the general character of good breeding.

To be well:bred, a man must possess discernment, candour, and good will; at least a sincere aversion to offend. The effets of asfetation or design are easily diftinguifhed.

Ill-bred men sometimes affect great politeness; but they ihock and mortify tliofe they pretend to oblige.

Flattery, excessive or insincere profeflions, are vicious.

The sentiments of the heart some times evaporate in words-; and great professions are, even without any intent on intention to deceive, put in place of benefits.

THE public duties of probity are, Allegiance on the part of the subject, Protection on the part of the magiitrate, and Public. Spirit in all parties.

The A:legianee of the subjet, is the fidelity, deference, and fubmifsion, he owes to the magifirate.

The Protclion due from the ma giftrate, is the interposition of 1power to preserve the peace, and to fccure the subjcd in the possession of all his rights.

The Public Spirit due from every member of any community is, i. A faithful discharge of any office intrusted for the public good.

2. A continual preference of pu blic safety, and public good, to feparate interests, or partial confiderations.

U SECT.


S E C T. III.

Duties referred to Prudence.
IT is the object of prhdence, to dire& a man in what he is to wilh for himfeif, for his friend, for his country, and for mankiind.

In this sense,. pudence is the guide or directory in every duty: but in its more limited acceptation, it refers more particularly to the duties which affect a man's slate or condition.

These duties may be referred to the following heads: Decency, Propriety, ModeJly, OEconormy, Decision, and Caution.

Decency is the agreeableness of a person's appearance and carriage to the sense and opinion of other men.

The rules of decency are prohibitory, and forbid whatever would offend, offend, in nudity, filth, or obfcenity.

Propriety is the suitableness of a person's behaviour to his nature, his age, his flation, and 'rnk.

There is in all the external effets of virtue, as being suitable to man's nature, a propriety that may be confidered apart 'from tleir other recommendations. .

Diffidence, and a cautious ap proach to the manners and pretenlions of manhood, are proper to youth. .

Resolution is proper to manlood.
.Calnzefs and Deliberation to age..Dignity and' Refer;ie, without contemptuousness d6 petulance, are proper to men of high station.

Deferencee, without servility, is proper to men of inferior rank.

ModeJ y is' a proper reserve on every fubjeEt of felf-eftimation.

It forbids ostentation of what we U 2 poflefs, possess, of what we have done, or of what we have suffered.

OEconomzy is the proper adjustment of a person's expence to.his fortune.

Where fortune conrtitutes rank and power, ceconomy is required to preserve independence and freedom. , Senfiality and gaming are.advcrfe to good oeconomy..

Decision is a seasonable and refo lute choice of what a person ought to do.

In some cafes, hesitation is equal to a total purpoe of, finaoftion.- Every opportunity is loft, and.every measure comes roo.late.

Caution consists in:a proper atten tion to. all the. difficulties, that. may occur in what a person undertakes.

The great objedts of caution are, not to engage in what is above our strength, nor to commit ourselves to persons that mislead or deceive.


Duties referred to Temperance.
1 Uties referred to temperance J may be comprehended under the heads of Sobriety and Application.

Sobriety is the moderate use of food, and of other animal gratifications.

The general tendency of fenfia lity, is to beget habits of sloth, and neglec of affairs.

The immodeiate use of intoxica ting drugs, or liquors, have these effects in a high degree. It reconciles men, otherwise of an adtive disposition, to inoccupation and idleness.

The debauch of the sexes being sometimes joined with paflion, may occasion a continued or habitual negled of affairs.

Application is the preference of business to amusement.

Bflinefs is supposed to terminate in some serious purpose; amusement in mere pastime.

D)ipation is a weakness of the mind, disabling it from chufing or prosecuting the occupations that would engage it most effeeually, and with mioft advantage.

Duties referred to Fortitude.

r HE duties referred to forti1 tude are, Patience, Intrepidity, and Col.ancy.

Patience is the calm and deliberate suffering of any trouble or pain that occurs in human life.

Peeviflhnefs, the reverse of pa tience, tends to realize imaginary evils, and to increase what is real.

Intrepidity is, firmness, and pre fence ## SECT. VI. Uses of Casuistry.

fence of mind, in the midst of dangers.

Intrepidity is frequently the greateft security in danger .

ColJIancp is perseverance in all pursuits or engagements properly chosen.

The wavering are seldom capable of executing any purpose.

rUes of Cafiifliy.
T HE rules of cafuiflry cannot supersede the judgement and good disposition of a virtuous mind.

Attempts to give casuistry this consequence, have proceeded from superstition, and tended to confirm the most slavish superstition, by multiplying external observances, that mislead the attention, from qualities qualities of the heart, to matters of form.

Good disposition is necessary to the happiness of mankind; and dutiful condut naturally results from good disposition.

It is however of moment to anti cipate, in general rules, the external effecs of virtue.

These rules render the defcrip tion of virtue itself more particular, and more complete. Being supported by the sanCtions of religion, and of public repute, the rules of duty may procure to society the benefit of useful adions, even where they do not procure to the person adting the happiness of a virtuous heart.


Of Merit and Demecrit.
A Ctions are asid to have merit or demerit, according to the na ture and degree of the moral quality they express.

Adtions that express good-will to mankind in the highest degree, have the highest merit.

Hence beneficent actions per formed in the face of dangers, difficulties, and personal sufferings, are allowed to have the liigheft merit.

Actions that express malice, and give examples of mischiefs done without inducement or provocation, are of the highest demerit.

We express our sense of demerit in the different degrees of crimes, offences, and faults.

A crime is an injury done from malice, jealousy, revenge, avarice, or some other passion that sets mankind at variance.

An offence is a wrong done in the gratification of some passion in its own nature consistent with amity.

A fault is a wrong done from inattention or ignorance.

Faults of inattention are culpa ble in proportion to the moment and importance of the subjet.

Faults of ignorance are more or less culpable, as the defea of knowledge argues neglec and inattention.

It is a general maxim, That ig norance of the fact may be admitted as a plea of innocence; but not ignorance of the law.

Ignorance of natural law, or of duty, would be one of the greatest defecs of a rational nature.

INSTI


INSTITUTES

O F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

P A R T VII.

Of Politics.


Introduction.

T appears from the history of mankind, that men have always aced in troops and companies; 
that they have apprehended a good of the community, as well as of the individual; that while they practife arts, each for his own prefervation, they institute political forms, and and unite their forces, for common safety.

It may be proved, that most of the opinions, habits, and pursuits, of men, reiilt from the state of their society; that men are happy in proportion as they love mankind; that their rights and their duties are relative to each other; and, therefore, that their most important concerns are to be found in their mutual relations, and in the state of their communities.

A nation is any independent company or society of men afting under a common direction.

The united force of numbers, and the diredtion under which they adt, is termed the flare.

Nations are happy who are composed of happy men.

Nations are wretched who are composed of unhappy men.

Nations may be confidered in re fpeA

sped to their resources, or in refped to their institutions.

National resources, are the objets of public ceconomy.

National institutions are the objects of political law.

X CHAP.



Of public OEcotnomy.

f National RefSorces in general.

Ational resources include every .LN article that tends to confti,tute the strength of a nation, or that may be employed for its prefervation, Such articles may be referred to three principal heads; People, Wealth, and Revenue.


Of Populolfnes.
r HE value of numbers is pro portioned to their union and character.

Numbers without union or virtue, do not constitute strength.

A people, in consequence of their numbers, sometimes become disunited and corrupted.

If they inhabit a large and exten five territory, they are disunited, and lose fight of their community.
A few ingrofs the management of public affairs, and with-hold from the many every subjea of public zeal, or political occupation. The greater part are thrown into a state of languor and obscurity, and fidfer themselves to be governed at difcretion.

Human nature, in states of a X 2 moderate moderate extent, has prospered and excelled; but in fiates overgrown, has generally declined and degenerated.

If great numbers be crouded in to narrow diftrias, or cities, they are exposed to corruption; become profligate, licentious, seditious, and incapable of public affedtions.

The union of a people depends on the arrangements or dispositions by which their forces may be combined for the service of the slate.

The union of the people in repu blics, arises more from their assection to the community, than from the power eftabliftfed to enforce their services.

In monarchies, it arises from the love of personal dignities, to which individuals aspire in serving the state.

In despotism, it arises entirely from the power that is prepared to enforce the services of the people.

The The charadcer of a people, con fidered as a national resource, is to be estimated from their fitness to reap, and to preserve, or to improve, the advantages of their conititution, and to support their country in pursuit of its objects.

Different characers are required under different forms of government.

Under republics of every fort, high degrees of probity are required; under monarchy, less; and under despotism, least of all.

The principal objecs in every state, next to the political conftituton, are war or commerce.

In warlike nations, men are to be estimated by their hardiness, courage, and discipline.

In commercial nations, men are to be estimated by their industry, and by their fiill in profitable arts.

Commercial nations may value acceflions of art, as the surest means X 3 of ## SECT. III. Of Riches or Wealth.

of gaining accessions of people; for in circumstances otherwise favourable, population keeps pace with the arts, and means of subsistence.

Inlitutions that, by securing property, and by preventing oppression, encourage the Settlement of families, ,and facilitate the rearing of children, are the most favourable to population.

Of Riches or Wlealth.

EN are supposed rich in pofI fessing the means of defence, subsistence, accommodation, andornament.

Wealth is a national resource, because it may be employed in maintaining ufefil or serviceable men, and in supplying the exigencies of tate.

The constituents of wealth may be be confidered in refpeet to their value, and in refpec to their price.

As the use of wealth is to main tain and accommodate men, articles or commodities are valuable in proportion to the numbers they maintain and accommodate.

The means of subsistence are neceffary.

The means of accommodation which contribute to the prefervatioh of men, and to the increase of theii vigour and health, are next in value to the necessaries of life.

But articles of mere ornament are of no value at all.

The luxury of a people is to be estimated from their consumption of mere ornaments.

The price of a commodity is mea fured by the quantity of any other commodity that is commonly, or occasionally, given in exchange for it.

Price is most commonly expressed, and paid, in money.

Hence Hence money is confidered as the equivalent of all commodities, and the constituent of wealth.

But commodities are no less the equivalents of money; and abundance in any one species, whether of money or other commodity, will buy a participation in the whole.

The price of commodities flutu ate; and keep pace with the quantity of money in circulation, with the scarcity of the commodity, with the demand, and with the riches of those who consume it.

Articles of ornament are frequently of the greatest price.

Commodities that are the work of labour, time, and ikill, cannot continue to be fold for less than will maintain the workman, and pay the whole of his advance.

As the value of commodities is measured by the numbers they may maintain, so the cost of a commo dity dity may be estimated by the ntimbers and time employed in producing it.

The wealth of any country is proportioned to its natural advantages, to the industry and 'fill ds its inhabitants, and to the profit ds its trade.

Natural advantages are, good cli mate, fertile foil, and useful materials.

Industry and skill coinprehend all ufeftil arts, agriculture, a-id manufature, in all their branches.

The profit of trade is the profit either of the consumer, of the producer, of the merchant; or of the slate.

The profit of the cbnfuimer con sifts in being supplied with necessary or useful commodities; The profit of the producer, in the vent of superfluities; The profit of the merchant, in the balance remaining, after he has paid colt and expences; The The profit of the Rate, in the in crease of wealth, or the accumulation of commodities in the possession of its members.

Commerce, by accommodating all parties with what they want in exchange for what they can spare, enables and encourages them to increase their produce.

Commerce respecting the state, is either internal or foreign.

Internal commerce is, the ex change of commodities between fubjeds of the fame state.

Foreign commerce is the exchange of commodities between fubjeas of different Rates.

In states of considerable extent, the internal commerce is of more consequence than the foreign commerce.

The importance of foreign com merce, diminishes as the tate extends.

Commerce between nations, may be be confidered in refpet to the balance of price, or the balance of value.

The balance of price commonly stands for the difference fiippofed to remain due by one nation to another, after appretiating the whole goods that have passed in exchange between them.

The balance of value is the dif ference of real value in the whole goods that have passed in exchange.

The profits of commerce are de termined by the balance of value, not by the balance of price.

The nation that has the balance of price against it, may have the balance of value in its favour. It may have received the means of improving its land, and of extending its trade, &c.

The nation that owes the balance of price, will be obliged to part with its money, or some other com modity, modity,. in order to pay. that balance,..

A trade in which a balance of priceis. incurred, cannot be continued, unless. there be a continual.
supply of money,, or other commodcty, bywhich the balance.may be The produce of landis! a, conti nual, and may, be made. an increasing supply., The produce of. mines, or. the importation of.nmoey, may be.continual..

Nations who carry on any.part of their internal trade by credit and. bills, need proportionally less supplies of money.

The..ufe of bills..in circulation tends to extend credit.

Credit is useful or pernicious,.

according to the use that is made of it.

It is useful to an industrious and thriving people. It It is pernicious to the spendthrift and the prodigal.

The expence of remitting money from one country to another, assets the exchange of their coins.

That nation which has occasion to remit most money, must pay this expence, and is said to have the exchange against it.

But as money may be remitted to make profit, it does not .follow from the state of exchange, that a nation is either gainer or loser by trade.

The profits of trade are either mutual or partial.

They are mutual so far as com merce accommodates all parties with what they want, in exchange for what they can spare; and enables each to improve his peculiar materials, and to pursue his peculiar art; and procures to the merchant and carrier an adequate reward for their trouble.

Y In In commerce mutually beneficial, that party gains most who receives the more useful commodity; and who receives the produce of much land, time, and labour, for the produce of less; and who, in conduting his trade, is employed in the more healthful and least corrupting occupations.

The profit of trade is partial, when things of value are exchanged for things of no value.

The following are laws of com merce founded in the preceding considerations.

i. That where profits are mu tual, commerce ihould not be reItrained by either party.

3. That a trade which terminates in giving the means of accommodation and subsistence in exchange for mere ornaments, may be re- rained by the losing party.

3. That monopolies are pernicious to commerce.

4. That ## SECT. IV. Of Revenue.

4. That the state of a nation's wealth is not to be estimatcd from the slate of its coffers, granaries, or wrarehoufes, at any particular time; but from the fertility of its lands, from the numbers, - frugality, induftry, and skill, of its people.

Of Revenllc.

T Hat part of national wealth T which is allotted for purposes of state, is the public revenue.

The public revenue may arise from demesne and unappropriated fubjeds, -or from taxes.

The first is the earliest species of revenue in rude nations; and is suited to their indolence, and ignorance of lucrative arts.

The second is better suited to the indufrty and skill of commercial nations.

Y It It is not the interest of commer cial nations, that any fubjeat should remain unappropriated. While a fabje& remains unappropriated, it is commonly neglected.

Revenue arising from taxation, may increase together with the numbers, wealth, and frugality, of the people.

In judging of the absolute or comparative expediency of different taxes, the following axioms may be admitted.

1, That the exigencies of the Rate must be provided for at any hazard or expence to the fubje&.

2. That in levying taxes, no subjea be unnecessarily burdened.

3. That the security of the sub jed, or that of his property, be not impaired.
* 4. That no useful branch of trade be unnecessarily burdened.

5. That taxes leaft'felt. as grievances be preferred.

6. That 6. That -the leat - burdensome method of collecing taxes be chofen.

N. B. The method of farm ap pears, from experience, to be more burdensome than that of revenueoffice.

Taxes may be referred to four general heads: Capitation, AfTeffinent, Customs, and Excise.

Capitation is a tax on the person, and falling equally on the poor and the rich.'

Capitation may be oppressive to the poor, without levying from the rich what they are able to furnifi to the state.

Capitation is. a symptom of dcfpotic and oppressive government...

Affefmient is a tax on riches, and is proportioned to the estate affeflcd.

Assessments may fall equitably, when property is unequally difiributed, Y 3 Land Land-eftate being most easily as certained and valued, is the propereft subjet of affeflment.

The stock of the merchant is fluduating; and 'attempts to afcertain it might give occasion to frauds, or improperly disclose the secrets of trade.

Customs are taxes imposed on goods in commerce, and advanced by the merchant.

Customs imposed on the necelfa ries of life, are a tax on the poor, and have the effecs of capitation.

Customs imposed on: matters of ornament, or costly accommodation, are a tax on the prodigal, or the rich.

Such taxes are most agreeable to humanity and justice.: Customs are an incumbrance on trade, and may amount to a prohibition of particular articles.

Customs, though advanced by the merchant, fall on the consumer; 
but but being involved in the price of the commodity, are not commonly felt as a tax.

As the merchant muff not only be reimbursed, but have profit on all his advance, it follows, that the earlier in trade cuitoms are paid for any commodity, the heavier they muff fall on the consumer.

Excise is a tax on commodities in ife, and paid by the consumer.

Excise may be rendered a tax, either on the rich or the poor feparately, or on both proportionally.

Excise is less burdensome to the consumer, than an equivalent raifed in customs; but is more likely to be felt as a grievance, and to create more animosity in the subjea against the state.





C A P. III.
Of Political Law -.

Of this Law in gelneral.
W X 7Here nations have occurred in the preceding parts of this system, they have been confidercd only in refpea to the history of their eftabliflments, or in refpe& to the foundations of civil rights, and of civil obligations: In this place they are to be confidered in refpedt to what is expedient in political efcablifhments, or civil conventions.

Political law in any particular community, is the fiatute, custom, * See Inftruaions of the Empress of Ruflfa.
L'Efprit de Loix, torn. i.

or or other convention, on which the institutions of that community are founded.

Political law of nature, is that branch of moral law which expresses what is beneficial in the civil inftitutions of men.

The following are fundamental laws of nature relating to political inititutions.

i. That political institutions are beneficial, in proportion as they contribute to the safety and happiness. of the people.

2. That political inflitutions pro cure the safety of the people, in proportion as they are adapted to the circumstances and charater of the people.

3. That the distribution of office is beneficial, in proportion as it is adapted to the constitution.

4. That political establishments are the most important articles in the external condition of men.


Of the Safety of the People.

Y the people is to be underfood, not any separate clais, but all the members of the community, the magistrate as well as the subje&t.

The safety of the people consists in the secure enjoyment of their rights.
- That the rights of men may be secure, -it is necessary, either that there {hould be no one to invade, or that there fiould be a sufficient power to defend.

The first is not to be expeted in human affairs; the second is the principal object of political eftablifhments.

It has been the object, or the for tune, of some communities, to pofl fess members who might be intrusted with any powers.

At It has been the object of other communities, to grant such powers only as might be intrusted with any men.

These several cafes, real or sup posed, may be intitled, The government of Innocence, of Virtue, and of Law.

Under the goverment of inno cence, or of virtue, matters of form are easily adjusted.

Under the government of law, it is necessary, that the rights and obligations of men flould be clearly expressed.

This is the objed of conventional law.

In every convention is supposed the consent of parties given in person, or by others properly authorifed.

The sovereign is authorised to enaf laws.

Laws relate to the constitution, to civil rights, or to crimes.

The The most perfect laws relating to the constitution, are such as confer on the magistrate power to restrain crimes, and to defend the community; but under limitations fufficient to prevent the abuse of this power.

The most perfet laws relating to civil rights, are such as effecually secure every person in his state.

It is the maxim of civil law, That every person should remain in his possession, until a better title be undoubtedly proved.

Laws relating to crimes, pre scribe the form of trials, and point out the overt ads for which certain punishments are appointed.

The following are maxims of natural law relating to prosecutions.

I. That every person is to be deemed innocent until he is proved to be guilty.

2. That no one thall be obliged to give give evidence that may asset him iclf.

3. That no one shall be tortured into confessions or discoveries of any fort.

4. That no one shall be punished, unless he shall have committed some action in itself pernicious, or fpecially declared by the law to be criminal.

5. That it is better the guilty escape, than that the innocent fussier, 6. That the objec of punifliment be to corred the guilty, 'and to deter others.

7. That the punifliment be not such as would fliock humanity, or disorder ibciety lmore than the crime.

To secure legal rights, it is necef fary that the laws ihould be fridly interpreted and applied.

Under the government of law, discretionary powers are not safely intrusted, except to judges named Z by by the parties; or to juries purged by the challenge of parties, and interested equally to protec the innocent and to punifl the guilty.

In the security of rights consists civil and political liberty.

Liberty is opposed to injustice, not to restraint; for liberty cannot subsist without the supposition of every just restraint.

Natural liberty is not impaired, as sometimes fippofed, by political institutions; but owes its existence to political inititutions, and is impaired only -by usurpations and 'wrongs.

The laws of different communi ties'beftow unequal privileges on their members; but liberty consists ii the secure pofeffion of what the law bestows.

Those are the most salutary laws which distribute the benefits and the burdens of civil society in the most equitable manner to all its members.

Of the Ilappizcfs of a People.
'p HE happiness of a peoplecon fills in the love of their coun try, and in that distribution of rank and station which is best suited to their merits and capacities.

Men who have least private in terest, are best disposed to love their country.

Men who have the fewest adven titious distinctions, of birth or fortune, are most likely to be clafled according to their merits, to be employed suitably to their abilities, and to find the flations in which they are most likely to cultivate their talents, and their virtues.

That a community may be loved in the highest degree, its members flould be relieved of peribnal an z 2 xieties, ## SECT. IV. Of the Fitness of the Institution to the People.

xieties, and occupied in what relates to the public.

They fiould be made to confider the state as the equal parent of all, distributing equal benefits, and requiring equal services.

Where-ever the state confines po litical consideration to a particular order, who sacrifice the rights of others to their own interest or fancyi it cannot be loved.

The reason and the heart of man are best cultivated in arduous situations, and in the exercise of public duties... .

f the FitiLjfs of the-lnftitztionl to the People.

EN of speculation have in vain endeavoured to fix a mo del of government equally adapted to all mankind.

One One people is unfit to govern, or to be governed, in the fame manner with another.

Nations differ in refpec to charadter, and to circumstances.

The character of a people refers to their degree of virtue, or of other principle, on which the state may rely for the discharge of social and political duties.

The circumitances of a people are determined chiefly by their cafual subordination, and by the extent of their country.

Casual subordination is founded in diftintions, original or adventitious.

Original diftindions are, the dil ferences of capacity, disposition, and force.

Adventitious diftindions arise from fortune and birth.

Questions relating to the proprie ty of any political inflitution, can be solved only hypothetically.

Z 3 Such Such questions may be put on four different suppositions.

FIRST SUPPOSITION.

The supposition of a people per fedtly virtuous, distinguished from each other only by their original differences, and forming states of finall extent.

Such a people are fitted to govern themselves.

They may stipulate to be govern ed by the majority of their own number, or occasionally by single men; but to oblige such men by force to resign the sense of their own minds, and to follow that of another, were, by the supposition, to substitute vice for virtue.

Being perfectly virtuous, every one will be willing to bear his {hare of the public burdens, and will receive, in his turn, that confidence and and trust for which he is by his capacity and experience qualified.

They have no adventitious dif tinctions to mar the effed of their personal qualities.

Being of finall extent, the whole may be occasionally or periodically assembled.

They need no precaution against the commiflion of crimes, or the abuses of power.

The sole objec of government is, to assemble, and to direc their force for national purposes.

This, however, is a mere fuppo lition; for no entire nation was ever known to be perfectly virtuous.

A people in whom the virtuous and the vicious are mixed; who admit adventitious distinctions in different different degrees, and form states of various extent.

This is not mere supposition, it is fae, and the most general description of mankind.

If there be no great reparation or diftintion of rank and condition; 
If virtue greatly prevail over vice; 
If the state be of small extent; Such a people are fit for democracy.

Their numbers admit of being assembled in collecive bodies.

Their virtues and their inftitu tions may prevent crimes, and abuses of power.

They may reap the advantages of democracy, in a manner that will more than compensate its inconveniencies.

If such a people be separated into different orders or classes, they are are fitted to aristocracy, mixed republic, or mixed monarchy.

If in two clafTes, one is diffin glifhed from the other by a confiderable superiority, 'they are fit for aristocracy.

Commercial nations of a finall extent are, in the result of diftinctions that arise from the practice of arts, and the unequal diftributionr of property, best fitted to ariftocratical government, or to mixed republic.

The inferior class, if not greatly debated or corrupted, may have a thare in the government, either by a negative on the' determinations of the aristocracy, or by being intrusted,_ not with' an adive part in the government,' ,but only with the choice of those who are to ad for them.

The fame supposition applied'to states of a greater extent, and to a people among whom a greater va riety riety of rank is eftabliffied, will justify the preference of mixed monarchy.

It were happy for mankind, if, together with changes of circumstances, they could always make suitable changes in government.

Where changes of circumstance are gradual, corresponding changes of government take place; but fudden innovations of any fort, precipitate men into situations in which they are not qualified to at.

THI-ID- SUPPOSITIO'N.

:A people on whose vanity, and sense of personal importance, rather than virtue, the .Rate must rely for,. the discharge of the social .and political duties; a people amongst whom a continual adventitious subordination takes place, without any example, or any desire, of equality.

Such Such a people are not fit to govern themselves.

Their subordination muff terminate in a prince or monarch.

They require monarchy as a bond of union, and as a source of honour.

While every one attends to what concerns himself, the monarch, for the preservation of his own person and dignities, muff attend to the public safety, and public order.

The Subordinate ranks will court his favour, and consult their own dignity, by actions, either splendid in themselves, or useful to the slate, whilst they are Serviceable to the king.

The members of the state are drawnh together, and moved in a body, not by their love to the community, or to mankind, but by their veneration for their common fuperior, and by their expectations from their their common source of preferment and honour.

The maxims of honour are not susceptible of sudden changes; and the dignities of family, though for the most part conferred by the prince, are hereditary, and therefore independent.

Both these circumstances .oblige the prince ,to govern according to fixed and determinate laws.

FOURTH SUPPOSITION.

A people perfeUtly vicious, with out sense of honour, .or hereditary distinCtions.

Such a people must be refrained by force. : Every constitution, even that which confides most in the virtue of the subjed, must employ force to repress crimes.

If the whole people be.inclined to commit crimes, and be refirain ed ed only by fear, the profped of prompt and terrifying puniflhments must be continually placed in their view.

This supposition may be employed as an apology for defpotifin.

Where every person is disposed to commit crimes, the fewer that have power, so much the better.

When all power is committed to one person, even supposing himself to be a criminal, it is his interest, for the most part, to restrain the crimes of others.

His severities, or cruelties, by the supposition, can no where affli& the innocent.

His dominions, though, like a prison, committed to the keeping of vile and merciless men, is nevertheless the only fit place to receive those. who cannot be otherwise reitrained fiom injuflice.

But this cafe, like that which was firfl fiated, of a people pcrfed A a ly ly virtuous, is a mere supposition, and never was realised in the characer of any people.

Men are generally as far from the extreme of perfel vice, as they are from that of perfect virtue.

They who contend, that defpo-, tical government is in fadc the best for mankind, proceed upon four suppositions, all equally violent and false.

i. That all men would commit crimes if they durst.

2. That crimes cannot be restrained without discretionary powers.

3. That a person to whom dif cretionary powers are committed, will employ them to repress the crimes of others, but not to commit crimes of his own.

4. That the sole object of govern -ment is, to controul the actions, never to cultivate the nature or form the charaters of men.

These These suppositions are contrary to reason and to experience.

The fad is, that the manners of men are various; and that the fame penal laws, and forms ofjufiice, by which a people may be successfully governed in a virtuous age, will not always be fhfficient to restrain them in ages corrupted.

When the criminal paflions in crease in violence and boldness, it may be necessary to increase the measure of punifllments.

When crimes:multiply, and cri minals are 'enabled, to employ. the forms of law aslthe Subterfuges of iniquity, it may be necessary to alter such defective forms: but it nover can be neceflary to deprive the innocent of all the defences of reason and justice; for the fame reason and justice which protec the innocent, may condemn the guilty.

In times of occasional tumult, popular frenzy, or rebellion, it may Aa 2 be be necessary to treat those who commit such crimes, not as subjeas amenable to the laws, but as enemies, who, by invading the public peace, have deprived every citizen of his safety, and who therefore cannot have the benefit of laws until the public has recovered its security.

Such domestic disorders, like so reign wars, render discretionary power occasionally necefary: but this neceflity is only temporary.

For the most part, even in cor rupte(d.ftates, it.is as much the interest of the fubjeac as of the magifirate, to keep. the peace, and to reprefs-crimes.

Continual defpotifin is never a necessary nor an useful expedient; it is an usurpation, and a national misfortune.

It tends to produce that extremity of vice to which it is fippofed to. be adapted as a remedy.

The ## SECT. V. Of the Distribution of Office fitted to the Constitution.

The objed of defpotical govern ment, is not to secure the subjed in the possession of his rights, but to make him a property; not to suppress vice, but to suppress the higheft and noblest virtues of the heart, public spirit, independence, and courage.

f the Djitribultion of Office fSted to the Coiflitution.

N free governments of every denomination, where law is ne ceffary, the law must be enacted, interpreted, and executed. Hence the offices or functions of state are, legislation, jurifdicion; and execution.

Legislation, under every confti tution of government, is the immediate ad of the sovereign power; 
A a 3 and and cannot be delegated without transferring the sovereignty.

;This rule does not exclude the concurrence of councils, nor the observance of forms suited to the constitution.

Under democracies, the legifla tion is exercised by the collective body; but it is not necessary that the collecive body fliould deliberate, as well as decide.

The collective body may name ienates, or feled councils, to prepare queflions of legislation.

They may vary the form of col ledcing the votes, or of promulgating the law.

They may fix, at discretion, what numbers are required to conffitute a legal assembly, and what proportion of those present will decide any question in the affirmative.

Under ariftocracies, the collective body of those who govern, whether by by elective or hereditary title, must exercise the legislature.

They may at, notwitiftanding, under the fame forms and limitations that have been mentioned as compatible with the sovereignty of the whole people.

Under monarchy, the legislature is excrcifed by the king.

The king stands in need of coun cils; and his legislative power may be qualified by the forms of regiftration, or promulgation, required to give the force of law to his edidts.

In mixed government of any fort, the legislature must be excrcifid by the concurrence of all the collateral powers.

If a law could be enated with out the concurrence of any single power, that power might be suppressed by the others.
.:If the supposed collateral powers were to assemble, and decide que fIions stions of legislation by the majority, any way defined, the government would cease to be mixed.

The sovereignty of collateral powers is compatible with a variety of forms relating to the proposing and the enacting of laws.

Sovereigns of any denomination, who have suffered courts of justice to follow custom as a rule of decision, are to be understood as having eftablifled that custom into law.

Jurifdidion, or the office of judge, is, to interpret the law, and to apply it in particular cafes.

This office, under every confti tution, flould be disjoined from that of legislation.

The sovereign, being accustomed to will, or to command, cannot submit merely to interprets or to follow a rule.

Particular cafes are modified by circumfiances that create prejudice, or excicC pafiion.

The The sovereign, having no fipe rior, may follow prejudice or passion at discretion.

The sovereign having enacted the law, would, under the influence of special motives, make free to difpenfe with it.

Popular or numerous assemblies would be swayed by fadtion.

Princes would be swayed by their passions, and by solicitation.

Two qiueftions may be put relating to judicature: I. Who ought to judge ?
2. Of what. numbers; are courts of juifice bes composed ?

i. Where-ever la*ws are greatly multiplied, the knowlcdge of law becomes a profession.
- No judgement, can be safely gin, ven without' the counsel of those who are knowing in the law.

The office for which counsel is necessary, is that of pointing out the the law, and the whole law, in any particular cafe, Persons who are not lawyers by profession, may interpret and apply a law which is pointed out to them; in the manner of the judges at Rome, and of the juries in Great Britain.

Beside the counsel employed by parties, the public may employ counsel for justice and law. .This is the nature of official judges in Great Britain.

Jurifdidion committed entirely to official judges,';: s attended with the following iinconveniencies.

The official judge being a con tinual magistrate, may entertain the prejudices of the magistrate against the subject , The peculiar prejudices and par tialities of the official judge, if he has any, may be known.

They who enjoy his favour, are tempted to trespass in hopes of im punity, punity, or to commence vexatious suits in hopes of success.

They who apprehend his difplea sure, do not feel themselves secure even in possession of innocence.

These inconveniencies are remo ved, in a great measure, by the eftabliflhment :of judicatures in the Roman form, or in that of juries.

The juryman is equally interested to protec the innocent, and to condemn the guilty.

Juries may therefore be intrusted with some measures of discretionary power, to mitigate the rigours of law, or to supply its defe&s.

Where a people are divided into a number of separate orders and classes, as those of Patrician, Equeftrian, and Plebeian, Lords and Commons, the rights of one order are not safely intrusted to the judgement of another; and it would be expedient, that every party were judged by his peers.

2. Under 2. Under popular or republican governments of any fort, courts of jultice are best composed of few members.

Courts cornpofed of many mem bers carry popular fac'ion and party into the judgement-feat. The individual hopes to screen himself even in judging falsely, under the authority and credit of the whole body.

No one is accountable; no one is conspicuous; all are tempted to humour their party, and to judge at discretion.

Under moinarchy, courts of juftice are belt composed of many.

Here the influence of the crown is more to be dreaded, than the saction of the people.

This influence can less overawe or corrupt numerous bodies, than single men, or a few.

Numerous bodies, in their deli berations, admit of the zeal and ar:;.5 dour dour that animate popular alPmblies; and even whilst they do not judge more impartially than single men would do, they judge with more independence.

The spirit of faction, that in re public is the greatest corruption, in monarchy tends to prevent a greater, servility to those in power.

The office of the executive is, to apply the force of the state for national purposes: i. To give effect to the laws, 2. To defend the community againft foreign enemies.

Occasions on which the executive must be exerted, are either continual or casual; and in cafe of danger from abroad, require secrecy and dispatch.

The sovereign in republican go vernments, consisting of the whole people, or of numerous bodies, cannot exercise the executive.

B b Such Such bodies cannot be continual ly aflembled, nor ready to afiemble at all times.

The resolutions of the executive require more secrecy and dispatch than can be had in any numerous or popular aflemblies.

Affairs that come in course, or that admit of delay, may be committed to senates, or to fele&t councils. Such are the mnanagement of public revenue, negotiations, and treaties.

Affairs that may come fortui toufly, and by fuirprife, that will not admit of delay, must be corn* mitted to single men; as to the ma gifirate, or offcer who has the keeping of the peace, and the leading of armies.

Under monarchy, whether pure or mixed, the king is capable of every branch of the executive.

But he ought to delegate what ever ever tends to render his power terrible or odious; 
To reserve what renders it an objet of reIpecd or alieclion.

The abuses of the executive power are variously relrained under diffrent conlitui-ions.

In rcpublics, they are refriained by the liort dur: tion of o.ilicc in tlhe person of any inlividual, by tlhe vigilance and emulation of his competitors, if not by his own virtue and moderation.

Those were the happiest repu blics, who educated virtuous citizens, to whom any powers might be safely intrusted.

Some of the most important powers, both in Sparta and at Rome, were discretionary.

In monarchy, the abuses of the executive are restrained by the forms of law, and by the privileges of subordinate ranks.

In all constitutions, they may be B b 2 restrained ## SECT. VI. The Importance of Political Institutions.

refrained by having magistrates and ministers accountable, By the integrity of those who contitute the force committed to th d irecion of the executive.

When the armed force is part of the people, it is their interelf, as well as their duty, to refrain from abuse.

he Importance of Political .lfiitu tiolss.
:Y political' infitutions, rights .j. are preserved or invaded, men are placed in the relation of equals or of maftenri:al;p4flave, their crimes are autt4oried-, or reprefied, and ,their manners improved or corrupted.

Political institutions tend to aug ment the good or the evil with -which they are fraught.

Human Human affairs,' in some instances, tend to improvement; iii others, to corruption.

The inftitutioris of 'ien,'in'one cafe, promote; tlieiir'imp-rovemelit; in the other, haften their corruption.

Inflitutions that preserve equali ty, that engage the minds of citizens in public duties, that teach them to estimate rank by the measure of personal qualities, tend to preserve and to cultivate virtue.

On :the contrary, institutions by which men are stripped of their rights, or by which they are made to hold their possessions at difcretion, under which:they are fuppofed governable only by force, and by tIe fear of' puniiihent, tend to beget tyranny and- insolence in'
the sovereign,' servility' and vileness in the subjed; to cover every vijage with paleness *, and.ito fill * Vid. L'Efprit de Loix, liv. 6, c. ', ;: .

every every heart with jealousy or dejection.

The greatest and most extensive benefit which ingle men can bestow, is the eftablillhment or prefervation of wife institutions.

The greateR injury that wickled men can commit, is the overthrow or corruption of such inflitutions.

THE END.


Books printed for A. KINCAID

& W. CREECH, and JOHN
BE L L, Edinburgh.

An Essay on the History of Civil Society. By Adam Ferguson, L L. D.
Profefibr of Moral Philofbphy in the university of Edinburgh. Edit. 4. 8vo.
6s.

The iame book elegantly printed in 4t0. 15s.

An Inquiry into the Human Mind, on the principles of Common Sense.
By Dr Reid. Edit. 3.' 8vo. 5s.

An Appeal to Common Scnfe in be half of Religion. By Dr Oswald.
2 vols. Svo. Io s.

A Diflertation on Miracles: con taining, An examination of the principles advanced by David Hume, Efq; Py Dr Campbell, Edit. 2. Izmo.
3S.

An Efhay on the Nature and Im mutability of Truth, in opposition to Sophiflry and Scepticifin. By Dr Beattie. Edit. 4. 8vo. 6s.

"1k1

L ]i 1 he Minstrel; or, The Progress of Genius, a poem. By the fame author. 4to. Is. 6 d.

Essays on several fubjedts. By David Hume, Efq; 2 vols. 8vo. i2 s.

Elements of Criticifin, 2 vols. 8vo.
By Lord Kames. Edit. 4. 2 s.

An Introduction to the Art of Thinking. By the fame author. Edit. 2. 3 s.

Essays on British Antiquities. By the fame author. I2mo. 2 s. 6 d.

Heads of Letures on Rhetoric and the Belles Lettres. By Dr Blair.

The Theory of Moral Sentiments.

To which is added a Dissertation on the Origin of Language. By Dr Smith. 6 s.

Fables: By Dr Wilkie. Embellifled with beautiful cuts. 4 s.

An Eflay on the Englifl Conftitution. By Dr Gilbert Stuart. 5 s.

An Essay on Taste. By Dr Gerard. I2mo. 3 s.

A Dissertation on the Evidences of Christianity. By the fame author.
6s.
P P I T -P I P L E S

F
Mi 0 R A L

AND
POLITICAL SCIENCE; BEING CHIEFLY A
RETROSPECT of LECTURES delivered in the COLLEGE

of EDINBURGH.
BT ADAM FERGUSON, L.L.D W F.R.S.E.

LATE PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

I N TT O SOLUMES.
IHuc enim pertinet, animal hoc providun, fagax, multiplex, acutum, memlor, plenum rationis et confilii, quem vocamus homincm, praclara quadam conditionC generatum cfe a fummo Dco. CIC. Dn LEGG. Cap. VII.

VO L. II.

E D I N B U R GH: ?.RINTED 1FOR A. STRAH-AN AND T. CADELL, LONDON; AND W. CRE.ECH, EDINBURGH.

I DCC XCII.



CO N T EN TS

OF TIIE
SECOND VOLUME.


Of Moral Law, &c.



Of the Specific Good incident to Human Nature.

SECT. I. INTRODUCTION. - Page SECT. II. Of pleasure and pain. - .
SECT. III. Of beauty and (dformiry, excellence and defe&. - 22
SECT. IV. Of virtue and vice. - 4
SECT. V. Of prosperity and adversity, or the gifts of fortune. -47
SECT. VI. Of happiness and misery. - - 57
SECT. VII. Of the aftual measures and sources of good and evil in human life. 7o SECT. VIII. Of the fame subjea continued. - - 84


Of the Fundamental Law of Morality, its inmediiate Applications and Sandcions.

Snlcr I. Of he lw.v, or firfn lpi::cipl:- of efli:ntion in tlic cllihrtier of m.l. 1
SC-CT. IL. Of the firfl. mand mo01: tc.ll.r.l ipp'i:.'tioII of notr.1l l.s. - I

SciCT. IIr. Of the difliculy which has arisen in accounting for moral approbation. P. 16
Of the difficulty of reconciling the different judgements of men relating to the moirality of external antions. - - 135

SECT. V. Of the fundamental rules of morality relating to external acrions. 149
SECT. VI. Of the fame subjcd continued. - - - 155
Sacr. VII. Of the unequal degrees of merit and demerit in external actions. I59
SECT. VilI. Of the obligations and fanClions of moral law. - - 6

.

Of Jurisprudence, or Compulsory Law. Part I.

SECT. I. Of the principle of compulsory law. - 179
SECT. II. Of the term right in its mofl general acceptation. - - 184
SECT. III. Of the law of defence in general. - - 88
SECT. IV. Of the general titles under which the rights of man may be clafled. I90
SECT. V. Of rights original. - 196
SECT. VI. Of rights adventitious. - - 198
SECT. VII. Of the diflerent sources of adventitious rights. - 200
SECT. VIII. Of occupancy and the species of right that may result from it. 203
SECT. IX. Of labour and the species of right that may result from it. - 207
SECT. X. Of contract, or the principle of conventional obligation. - 214
SECT. XI. Of the lawis of convention, derived from the foregoing principle. 226
SECT. XII. Of the specific obligations andc rights that refule from contrat. 236
SECT. XIII. Of forfeiture and the species of right which results from it. 248

C H A P. IV.

Of Jurisprudence. Part IT.

RefpeAing the Defences of Men.

s
SECT. I. Of the means that may be opposed to injustice in general. - 257
HLcr. II. Of the law of defence, in the cafe of tingle persons, firangers, and unconineced. - - - 63

,rcT. Ilr. Of the cafe of fellow citizens. -- 270
SECr. IV. Of the cafe of nations. - 293
:-,cr Vi, Of the fimer ftbijca continuet, - 3




Of Moral Ation and the CharaCeriftics of a Virtuous and Happy Life.

SECT. I. Of virtue as distinguishable from the the effeas of compulsory law. Page 3 r 5
SECT. II. Of the occasions and characters of human ation in general. 323
SECT. III. Of the charateriftics of prudence. - -332
SECT. IV. Of the charaaeriftics of goodness or j ufice. - 349
SECT. V. Of the charaderiftics of temperance. - - 38
SECT. VI. Of the charaleriftics of fortitude. - 391
SECT. VII. Concluding observations. - - - 4



Of Politics.

SECT. I. Introdu&ion. - - 407
SECT. II. Of the people confidered in refped to numbers. - 409
SECT. III. Of the manners or political character of the people. - 413
SECT. IV. Of the wealth of the people. - - 420
SECT. V. Of the revenue of the ifate. 43r SECT. VI. Of the fame subjeCt continued. - 447
SECT. VII. Of civil or political liberty. - 457
SECT. VIII. Of liberty as it may be affected by the exercise of the legisative power. 467
SECT. IX. Of the judicative power. - - 476

SECT. X. Of the executive power. 4- 48
SECT. XI. Of national felicity. - 495

ERRATA. VOL. II.
Page 89. . 2. for flatcs read flakes. Page 319. Note, at bottom, dde Rex vixit male, Ibid. Note,for ferva read lria ;for defcccrant 364. 1. I5. for principle read principal.
r,. defeccrunt ;for contendant ,. contelndunt. 387. 1. . fir will read will.
92. 1. 27. for fake read the f.kc. 414. I. 6. for I ,ind It.
168. Note, jbr aflriniimius rtad afitingimur. 442. . 26. i/dr being.
199. I. penult, for relation read relations. 448. 1. 21. dz. , 2Id, Or.
224. I. .

. fr ientiment rtad lictimcits. .68.



PRINCIPLES or MORAL AND POLITICAL SCIENCE.

P A R T IL.
Of Moral Law, or the Diflintion of Good and Evil, and its Syflematic Applications.

C H A P. I.
OF THE SPECIFIC GOOD INCIDENT TO HUMAN NATURE.

S E C T I O N I.

Introdutilon.

TIHE diftintion of physical and moral science has been tfated 
PART I.
in the former part of this work; the one being occupied in folving questions of theory or sac, the other in solving queflions of rv right: But, notwithstanding the proposed method required that questions of fad, or mere explanation, should be confidered aVoL, II. A part I C: 
part from questions of etfimation and choice; yet the good 
CHAP.I. f which man is susceptible, and the evil to which he is exposed, having frequently occurred, as sacs of the greateft importance relating to him; and the advancement of moral science itself having made a considerable article in the history of his pursuits and attainments; it was impossible not to touch upon there subjects, in laying the foundation of this more particular difcuflion, in which we are now to proceed.

Having, however, in the former part, chiefly attended to the fats constituent of man's actual slate, and serving to form his capacity and give intimation of his future prospects; we are now, in the continuation of our method, come to a point at which the diftinaion of good and evil, and its applications, are the dired and immediate objeds of our inquiry. But as in the past, where the statement of faA was the principal obje&, we could not always with-hold some view to its consequence; so now, although our principal objedt is to pursue the inference to be drawn from .fads already flated; yet, as we may, by referring to former observations, sometimes incur the charge of repetition; it is hoped that the favour, due to a subjeA so important, may plead in excuse of the necessary references, even if they should be repeated.

Science, in every application of the term, implies the knowledge of some one or more general principles with their applications, whether in direting the will, or in explaining appearances, and connecting together our conceptions of things.

The specific principle of moral science is some general expreflion of what is good, and fit to determine the choice of moral agents in the detail of their condut.

To investigate such a principle relating to man, it will be ne- 
PART Ileefiary to recollea what is known of himself; and of the fituation in which he is placed. Our information is to be collected from his experience of what is agreeable or disagreeable to him, and the result will amount to a choice of that, on which he is chiefly to rely for his happiness, and to a caution against that, of which he is chiefly to beware as leading to misery.

These first and principal points of choice or rejection being fixed, the lines of moral wisdom and precept will flow from them in every direction, whether leading to the discernment of perfonal qualities, the foundations of law, manners, or political eftablifhments.

The diftindion of good and evil originates in the capacity of enjoyment and suffering. Insomuch that, without the intervention of mind, or some feeling nature, all the varieties of matter and form besides, would be indifferent. Good may be defined, that which being enjoyed constitutes happiness; and evil, that which being incurred constitutes misery.

Philosophers of old employed themselves chiefly in search of a supreme good; and the term was familiar in the language of their times. We are told of two principal opinions which were entertained on this subjed. One, that pleasure, another, that virtue was the chief good. But as the patrons of the first could not propose to afterr, that all pleasures were equal, no more could the other mean, that virtue was not a pleasure. They were agreed indeed in the general afrertion, that what they termed virtue was the only secure and true source of enjoyment; but they defcribA 2 ed 
 ed their virtues differently. Though to both it was a state of 

SCT. I. tranquility and exemption from fear and sorrow, this exemption y.'rv was fhppofed by the one to be obtained by a seclusion from care, and by indifference to all the concerns of mankind, whether private or public. By the other, virtue was supposed to consist in the affectionate performance of every good office towards their fellow creatures, and in full resignation to providence for every thing independent of their own choice. Their different schemes of divinity clearly pointed out their opposite plans of morality also.
Both admitted the existence of God. But to one the deity was a retired eflence enjoying itself, and far removed fiom any work of creation or providence *.

The other confidered deity as the intelligent principle of existence and of order in the universe, from whom all intelligence proceeds, and to whom all intelligence will return; whose power is the irresistible energy of goodness and wisdom, ever present and ever active; bellowing on man the faculty of intelligence, and the freedom of choice, that he may learn, in acting for the general good, to imitate the divine nature; and that, in refped to events independent of his will, he may acquiesce in the determinations of providence. " How great is the privilege of man," fays Antoninus, " to have it in his power to do what God will approve, and " to receive with complacency whatever God shall ordain."

In conformity with there principles, one fed recommended feclufion * Oninis enim, per fe, divum natura, necefse'ft Inmnortali avo funmma cum pace fruatur, Semota ab noflris rebus, fejunctaque longe Nam privata dolore omni, privata periclis, Ipfa fliis pollnis opibus, niliil iindiga 1noi ri, Jec bene promcritis capitur nec tangitur ira.

clufion from all the cares of family or slate. The other recom- 

mended an active part in all the concerns of our fellow-creatures, 




and the fleady exertion of a mind, benevolent, courageous, and temperate. Here the feds essentially differed, not in words, as is sometimes alledged, but in the views which they entertained of a plan for the conduct of human life and the choice of their actions.
The Epicurean was a deserter from the cause of his fellow-creatures, and might jutly be reckoned a traitor to the community of nature, of mankind, and even of his country, to which he owed his protection.

The Stoic enlisted himself, as a willing initrument in the hand of God, for the good of his fellow-creatures. For himself, the cares and attentions which this objec required, were his pleafures; and the continued exertion of a beneficent affetion, his welfare and his prosperity.

It is by no means indifferent what opinions we fiall entertain on there fubjecds. Good and evil are known or apprehended by us under a variety of denominations. And happiness or misery are fuppofed.to be constituted by the distribution of there in our lot. If the things we term good be inconsistent one with another, it is surely of consequence to the most unthinking mind to ascertain where the preference is due; and, when this point is determined, to avoid the diftradion of a doubtful choice on any particular occasion. If, on the contrary, the objeds stated under the denomination of good, when well underflood, coincide in their effects, it is rcafbnable that we trace them to this point of coincidence, and reft the projec of happiness or safety, not on any partial and exclusive 'selection ; but on the proper use and conduct of the whole.

The 
 The terms in common use under which we diftinguilh the 
CHAP . I. fubjeCs of desire and aversion, are chiefly P/eafure and Tain, Beau
_F--V- ty and Deformity, Excellence and DefeS, Virtue and Vice, Trofperity and Advetfity; or, in a form more comprehensive, and arising from the distribution of there, Happiness and Misery.
Under one or other of these titles we shall probably find every constituent of good or of evil; and, in following the track of ordinary experience or reason, arrive at a final decision of what is best for mankind, and establish a principle of estimation and choice, upon which to determine every question of right or propriety relating to the affairs of men.





S E C T I 0 N II
Pain, or Thints agreeable and dfagreeable in generalR this title will occur to be mentioned pleasures and 
 sense, of affection and paiion, of active exertion 

and conduct. 

Pleasure and pain, for the most part, are co-relative terms: Where any circumstance is pleasant, the privation of it is painful; and, conversely, where any circumstance is painful, exemption from it is pleasant. Upon this account, when we have specified the one, it will not always be necessary to mention the other.

In the actual arrangements of nature, throughout the animal kingdom, things salutary are pleasant, and things pernicious are painful. Pleasure is made an inducement to the performance of those funtions, which are required to preservation or well being; and pain is employed as a warning to avoid the occasions of deftruction or harm.

When a certain end is obtained in the use of a pleasure, it is observed that the inducement to any farther exertion in that parLr~\j ticular instance is withdrawn; and attempts to prolong or continue the gratification, as they might be pernicious, so they are attended not only with satiety, but even with disgust and pain.

As in this wife and beneficent intitution of nature, to preserve her works, there are pleasures attending all the ordinary and salutary functions of animal life, there are pains, also, which attend whatever is pernicious to the animal frame; and the final cause or purpose is evidently the fame in both; that is, by inviting to what is salutary, by deterring from what is pernicious, to excite the languid animal to what is useful; and to rouse the suffering animal to such efforts as may be effectual to remove the: occasion of harm; and, in either way, to consult his safety.

For this purpose, although the occasions of pain, like the occafions of pleafrule, may be temporary, yet, as it is neceflary that the pain should continue until the cause of harm be removed, or even that the pain fiould increase while the cause of harm is increasing, or the danger to animal life is augmented; there appears to be a sufficient reason why sufferings, -incident to the animal firame, should in many inflanices be of longer duration, and greater intensity, than the corresponding enjoyments or pleasures which arc deftiued to recommend the ordinary functions of life.

It appears, therefore, with refped to animals in general, that the purpole of nature in the distribution of fcnfation, is to provide for the safety of the individual, and the fucceflion of the firecics, at the fame time that an cflablilliment is made for cnjoy3 mentI

ment, so far as is consistent with these ends. In this diitribu- 

tion, there is a present restraint from what would be painful in 
the future; and a present direcion to what may contribute to v.w future enjoyment, as well as safety: And there is a sufficient reward for the performance of fundtions which enter into the course of a regular and well ordered life. The individual, in general, is kindly ainufed and gratified in the ac of preserving himself and continuing his species, and the gratification or amusement, in the cafe of mofl animals, is fitted to occupy a confiderable part in the duration of life.

Man is susceptible of animal pleasure and pain, in a manner which argues the purpose of nature refpeding him, to be nearly the fame as with reifect to other beings endowed with life. He also is deflined to do what is necessary for his preservation: but the mere gratifications of appetite which serve to obtain this purpose, are not fitted to occupy an equal portion of his time; and more is left, in his cafe, to the operation of principles in which he stands distinguished from other parts of the animal kingdom.
XWhen his preservation is secured, the life he preserves frill requires to be otherwise occupied. Like the other animals, he enjoys his food, the supply of his wants, and the gratification of various appetites. But no one ever thought of prolonging the gratifications of hunger, for instance, so as to pass a life of enjoyment at table, as obme animals appear to do in the use of food, at their stall or their pafiure.

If man were not too proud for such a choice, nature has not qualified him to persist in it. The pleafurcs of sense are merely occasional and temporary. They are, in their nature also, mixed and alloyed witl pain. Animals arc to be deterred B soLn 
from what is hurtful, as well as allured to what is salutary; and 

SECT. II. man himself, with all his knowledge of the end in view, muff be 'r\v ^ prompted, in the detail of his aAions, by the admonitions of pain as well as pleasure.

The feeling, which prepares the animal sense to be gratified in the supply of a want, is more or less a feeling of pain; and enjoyment is a mere relief from this feeling. Attempts to prolong the gratification beyond its natural period, bring a new fpecies of pain, in the effect of satiety. Still more, excess of any kind is producive of suffering and harm: So that this source of enjoyment is ever impure, either in refpea to the pain that precedes it, or in refpec to the difgufft and harm that may follow from the unguarded pursuit of enjoyment.

\Vhilff men, therefore, may admire the order of nature in this particular, and comply with it as an article of good sense and propriety, few, who are engaged in the specific purluits of human life, look upon the pleasures of mere sense as matters of principal regard. Moss men become comparatively indifferent to their perfonal accommodations, in proportion as they are engaged in bufiness, either private or public; or in the view of objects that firongly affect them, in behalf of their own honour and interelf, or in the cause of their family, their friend, or their country.

To the other animals, as well as to man, mere exercise is grateful; and the efforts they are led to make for the preservation of life are, on this account, in part, conifituent of their ordinary pleasures. The ends, to which their active pursuits are direcled, are fubjets of hope; and give joy in the profplcc, as well as in the attainment or use. And, although the corrcefoncling appre3 henfions, henfions of ills to be feared, may anticipate the sufferings of for- 

row, yet the system of animal life, in general, is so arranged, 




that, in the exertions required to felf-prefervation, the pleafur- w\
able prevail over the painful; and the general aspea of living nature is expressive of alacrity and joy.

The powers of reflection in the mind of man, that enable him to anticipate the future, as well as to recal the pal, qualify him to enjoy, or expose him to susser, from this quarter, in a much higher degree than any of the other animals. Hence arise the variety of his passions, hope and fear, joy and grief. The foundation of hope is the expectation of some good that is future, and therefore probably in some degree an occasion of fear also. Grief has reference to some evil endured; fear, to an evil apprehended.
Either is a painful state of the mind, in actual distress, or in anxiety and solicitude, disqualified for any present enjoyment beyond what mere hope can supply: But, with refpec to the objects, whether of hope or of fear, the molt agreeable slate of the mind is alacrity in the reasonable exertions they suggest, and in the use of means to obtain or avoid them, which providence has put in our power.

Security is, of all circumstances, the moit conducive to pleasure. Hence the value which po/.eion acquires in pafling into property, that is, in being secured: and the molt agreeable slate of the mind, in this refped, is the consciousness of a blessing of which neither chance nor caprice can deprive us. A blessing which consists alone in the chearful performance of what we are entrusted to do, and in contentment with the scene of action in which we are placed.

B ' Man, 
PART 31 Man has mutch of his employment, as well as the gratifications 

SECT. iII of sense furnifled to him by the concerns of of his animal life. In ~r", there consist that complicated object which he terms his interest; and from thence arise many of the occasions on which he is employed for himself, for his country, and his friend.

The materials, which he firives to amass for his own use, serve him also as the means of beneficence to his fellow creatures. In his intelligent or diftinaive characer, his occupations multiply and vary indefinitely; and the mere supplies of animal life are to him of less consequence, than the exertions of mind in which they engage him. In there his ingenuity and his affections are agreeably engaged in forming his designs, in recolleding his experience of the past, in conducting the present, and in preparing for the future.

It has been well observed, that every exercise of the human faculties, into which malice or fear do not enter as motives, and every exercise which is not carried to some pernicious extreme of fatigue, is in its own nature agreeable *.

" The necessity of a&ion," fays the Rambler, " is not only " demonfrable fiom the fabric of the body, but evident from "observation of the universal practice of mankind t, who, for "the preservation of health," (he should have said for pleafihre,)
" in those whose rank and wealth exempts them from the necel" fity of lucrative labour, have invented sports and diversions, 5' though not of equal use to the world with manual trades, yet of * V. Theorie des Sentimens Agrccble, e See Rambler No. 36.

"of equal fatigue to those who pracife them; and differing on- 

" ly from the drudgeily of the husbandman or manufaturer, 




C as they are a6s of choice, and therefore performed without the s~r-"painful sense of compulsion. The huntfinan rifes early, pur" sues his game through all the dangers and obftruaions of the "chace, swims rivers, and scales precipices, till he returns home ( no less larraffed than the soldier, and has perhaps incurred " sometimes as great hazard of wounds or death; yet he has no " motive to incite his ardour; he is neither fubjecd to the comn"mands of a general, nor dreads any penalties for neglect and disobedience; he has neither profit nor honour to expect from "his perils and his conquests; but toils without the hope of mu"ral or civic garlands, and must content hIimfelf with the praise ( of his tenants or companions."

" But, such is the constitution of man," continues the fame author, " that labour may. be filled its own reward; nor will any ' external incitements be requisite, if it be confidered how much " happincfs is gained, and how much misery is escaped by fre"quent and violent agitation of the body."

This author, in other parts of his work, or throughout the general firain of the whole, represents human life as a firing of iliufions, a transition from hope to hope, never from enjoyment to enjoyment: It is pleasant, therefore, to find him acknowledge a source of present enjoyment, even amidcf drudgery, toil, and dan.ger, so frequently flated by himself as contictuents of misery: It is pleasant to find him acknowledge, that, even labour is its own reward ; and, in this flep at least, lead the way to an opinion, that all the exercises of a manly, and beneficent mind, though a species of labour, may also be their own reward, and not the IcG

PART I[. less a reward to him who labours in them, that he may be a&ing CHArP. I under the influence of an aftection, also, in its own nature comSacG,. 11.
.,-'-v- placent and agreeable.

Even the vulgar are aware that to be happy, they muff be employed, or have something to do; and it is obvious to the most superficial observer; that life is agreeable chiefly to those, who, being engaged in tome juss and honourable pursuit, in any laudable profession, public trust, or employment, do not embarrass themselves with any thing beyond the discharge of their duty. In contrast with these, we may place the examples of others who are ever so intent on the future as to negleCt the present. Who {lirink from the duties of their station, under the notion of trouble, who decline any concern in the welfare of others, as an avocation from the care of their own. They would have something to do: But seem to think that their occupations flould approach the nearest that is possible to idleness. They fly from business; for it seems to be a taik. They do not confider how they may benefit others ; for, that were to neglect themselves: but they swim rivers and scale precipices, because they are at liberty to do so, and because they can afford the expence of horses and dogs.

Living natures in general are diftinguiflled by the exertions they are qualified and difiofed to make. Man, as we observed, ltands foremolt in this difliinction. His exitlence consists in a Series of actlive exertions, and he enjoys the exercise of his faculties in the conduct of affairs, and in bufnefs, no less than in what he is pleased to term anmufement and paltime.

Benevolence is an active principle, and an agreeable slate of the mind, rendering the presence and welfarc of other men an occnaron occasion of pleasure, and fitting the individual to his relation in 

fraternity of natures like his own. 1 he pleasures of society are 


S c.CT. I[.

the exercises of a social nature. They mix with the functions of animal life, and are, in reality, the principal cause of many enjoyments which are supposed to result from the gratifications of fenCe. The pleasures of the table, for instance, are more those of society than of gratified appetite. Whence it is else that the meal, when taken alone is a mere fipply of neceflity; but in company, and in the gaiety of sociable intercourse, is of so much confideration among the enjoyments of life ?

To be enployed is agreeable; but employments differ no less than sensations. The employments of a mild and benevolent asfecion are placid and happy. Those of a rancorous and malicious temper are convulsive and wretched.

Many of the objects which we endeavour to obtain in human life, like the game that is pursued by the hunter, are chiefly to be valued for the chace they occasion. But it is not, therefore, indifferent on what object we bellow our labour. As things visionary or impracticable lead to certain mortification and disappointment, so things depending on chance, or the will of other men, if conceived to be necessary, expose to like disappointment; or, under the apprehension of adverse events, are the occasions of continual anxiety, dependence, and fear.

Things that are not of themselves of any absolute value, but exist merely in being compared with what is poflefed by other men, as domin;ion, precedence, and rank, renowzn, and celebrity ; even riches and fortune, beyond a hat is neceflary to flubfiflence and well-being, engage us in pursuits that are not only precarious in the event, but in their nature ibljccts of competition, jealousy PA.-T 11. jealousy, envy and malice. The operation of parties in these purG AP. I.

CAPT.l suits are mutual impediment and mutual offence; and the Xrxj efforts of one to better himself is confidered as an act of hoftility, or carries the aspea and the insertion of malice to others.

Malice is known to be a slate of extreme suffering or pain; it operates abroad in pernicious effects, and appears on the countenance in peculiar features of deformity and horror. It has perhaps no other source in the human mind, than this unhappy choice of an objet, in which the prosperity and success of one is disappointment and detriment to another. Or if this unhappy choice be sufficient to account for malice, we are forbidden by reason to look for any other cause. It is a maxim in reafbn, that no more causes are to be assigned, than exist in nature, and are sufficient to account for the phenomena X.

We may therefore venture to assume, that malice is no where inftintive, but must have proceeded originally upon some -preconceived notion of competition, of harm to one from the welfare of another, of provocation or fear; and is therefore, for the most part, entertained in the form either of Envy, Reveine, or Yealozfy.

These are the great sources of misery to mankind. Envy is pain infliced by another's good. Revenge is pain to be removed or alleviated, only by another's suffering. And JealoufJ is pain suffered under the apprehension of what another may do or may have done: All of them susceptible of unequal degrees ; but in the slightest degree unhappy, and in the highest degree conftitu*3.%2~~~~~~~ ~~~ent * Vide Newtoni Principia, lib. 3. ab initio.

ent of extreme virulence and of anguish, to which the pretence 

and welfare of a fellow creature alone, may give occasion; and, SCAP. i SscT. I[.

from which a being, who is doomed to society, has no means of ok escape, but by removing the evil of his own disposition.

Besides the propensity of man to join the herd of his species, a disposition, which operates even with the malevolent, and is common to all the gregarious animals; the candid have, in their minds, a principle of affection, and love; a capacity of goodness by which they are disposed or qualified, in different forms, to make a common cause with their fellow-creatures: The distress of another is to them an occasion of commiseration or pity; his welfare an occasion of complacency and joy. To thefociable nature of man, the joint exertions or struggles of numbers in the fame cause together, bring into actual exertion, the highest powers of enjoyment as well as of action.

Commiseration or pity, being a participation ofdiflrefs, implies suffering, and yet is known to be agreeable; insomuch, that the humane do not wish to be relieved oftheirpain otherwise thanby the relief they can give to those they commiserate or pity. They regret the suffering of others; but enjoy their own sympathetic emotions; willingly ihed the tears of compassion, and in this feel, with the poet, that, The broadefl mirth unfeeling folly wears, Is not Jo Jfweet as virtue's very tears.

Pity is prevented, in particular circumtfances, by the prevalence of other paflions, whether indignation, resentment, or fear.
Jllndinaion hardens the heart against those who suSer for any VOL. IL. C fliagrant 
 flagrant crime; resentment against those who have given provo"

SHcAP. I. cation; and fear, though not a disposition to a& offensively, yet vrow hardens the heart against the feelings of candour or pity, more perhaps than any otherpaffion: Hence, among the evils of cowardice we may justly reckon cruelty to the vanquished, no less than inability to contend with those that refilt, or who alarm our fears.

Commiseration or pity, in the candid mind, is beflowed indifcriminately and universally on the innocent who suffers: But benevolence, in its other forms, is particular in its choice, and implies predilecion for an objeC; whether the companion with whom we are familiar, the friend we love, or the country to the %ervice of which we are devoted.

An agreeable intercourse may have place, even with persons unknown; or is easily formed, amidst the first or most general appearances of intelligence and fairness of disposition. The manners of the candid, even among strangers, constitute a mutual exchange of good offices, and in human life are an ordinary and continual source of agreeable sentiments.

In friendflip, benevolence is the engagement of choice, and renders every interest mutual to the parties concerned. The asfetion in which it consists, and the confidence it inspires, conftitute a principal source of security and pleasure.

Over and above there operations of a benevolent affection, man is qualified to entertain the fame disposition, in a form yet more comprehensive. The collective body of men in a country or nation is, to its own members, an object of the moll ardent affecion.

While While the citizen reveres the inititutions and the laws of his coun- 

try, while he rejoices in its prosperity, and laments the calamity or CH.AP LT
distress which befals it, he is often made to forget himself, and to ysacrifice his own interest or safety as an individual, to that of the community inwhich he is included. Interest is frequentlyfuppofed to be the ruling passion of mankind; yet this sacrifice of interest and of life, to the objects of public affection, is frequently made; and, under national establishments that are happily constituted, is not above the reach of ordinary men.

The general tendency of benevolence, like that of the animal propensities, is to preserve the human race, and to render man useful to his fellow creatures; but, while the selfish principles operate to the preservation of the whole, by preserving or consulting the safety of individuals apart, benevolence forms a general band of connection, and is at once a commonofburce of enjoyment and pleasure to many. It renders the participation of other men, in the favours of providence, an occasion of fatisfadion and joy.
While it teems to render the humane a servant to the distressed; the affecionate devoted to the interest of his friend and his country; it renders this fervice,and this devotion also, a principal source of enjoyment to himself: differing from the gratifications to which any mere animal propensity is competent, in being exempt from satiety, and in being fitted, by occupying indefinite portions of time, to fill up the duration of human life, and to become not only the spring of particular and occasional aCtion, but the source and constituent of felicity to those who aCt. So much that, in the course of a sociable and beneficent life, and in the offices of private friendship, or of public fRation, a person may occupy with satisfaction every moment that can be spared from the necessities of his own condition.

C z But, PARtT. II. Butt over and above the pleasurable or painful fate of our feeTl CRAP.I.

S . ings, which arise from the proper or improper discharge of our Y~ ~animal functions; from the purpose to which we employ our faculties, and the manner in which we are affected towards our fellow-creatures; these very circumstances become, by refleion, the source of additional enjoyment or fiiffering. Confcioufilefs of propriety, in the conduct of our natural propensities; attainments of knowledge, or intelleEtual ability; integrity, can.dour, and good-will to our fellow-creatures, are sources of the purest fatisfacion and pleasure. The confcioufilefs of brutality, folly, cowardice, malice, or guilt, on the contrary, is constituent of extreme suffering, in the feelings of flame, and remorse.

It is supremely agreeable to perceive, in the works of nature.

the marks or expreflions of wisdom and goodness, on which we may rely for the happy difpoG1l of all things: And. we may conclude, from the whole of these particulars, that the preferable pleasures of human life consist in sobriety, benignity of temper, or good will to mankind, and beneficent actions, with a perfect confidence in the ,wisdom and goodness of Providence.

The contemplation of beauty and excellence, in whatever subje&, is matter of delight, and forms an agreeable state of the mind.
The obtrusion of ugliness or defect is of a contrary nature : And there are sources of enjoyment and futffering peculiar to man. He alone, among the living natures known to us, appears sensible to the diflinctions of beauty and deformity, of excellence or dcfccA; and he alone, for ought we know, apprehends any gradation of worth in the scale of being. He alone applies the canons of excellence and dcfcd, of merit and demerit, to hiinflf, and to his fcllow-crcaturcs ; finding a most agreeable iate of his mind in the the consciousness of integrity and justice, or the most painful 

and diftrefling reflections in the consciousness of wickedness, de- 

basement, and folly. Complacency and peace of conscience are ^-v expressions of the one; {hame, remorse, and despair, are exprefsions of the other.

The fool may enjoy his folly, and the madman may enjoy his frenzy; but no one will congratulate the persons who are so asfeted with pleasure. The enjoyments of human nature require the warrants of reason and truth; and no person, in his senses,.
can be reconciled to a state, in which he knows his own character to be marked with deformity, meanness, or vice, nor think that he can be truly happy, in the absence of every good quality which can be required to adorn or perfect his nature.

The foundations of a pleasure, so essential to ha-ppiness, merit a separate consideration in the following fedtions.

s'T CnN



S E .C T I 0 III.

Of Beauty and Deformity, Excellence and Defeft.

 T
IN the rational nature of man, there are principles which do not SECT. III. terminate merely in sensibility to pleasure and pain, or in mere active exertions; but consist in a kind of censorial infpedion, over the general tenor of enjoyments and actions; serving to diflinguifh, among pleasures, the elegant and beautiful from the inelegant and deformed; and, among specimens of existence, the persec or excellent, from the defe6ive or imperfect. Such is the discriminating power of intelligence, by which the qualities of things are estimated; by which unequal measures of worth are conceived, and the gradations of excellence assigned in the scale of being.

In the exercise ofthefe reflex and censorial powers, there is great enjoyment and suffering, according as the objects of them are happily or miserably distributed to ourselves or others. Dif git?, indignation, remorse, and fl/ame, are among the pains of which which they render us susceptible; delight, eJfeem, approbation, 

confidence, love, and peace of mind and ofconscience, are among their 



gratifications, or happy effeas. St.

In the discernment of external obje&ts, there arises a Sentiment, which may be expressed in terms of praise or blamre, of eftimation or contempt; and which frequently conflitutes, or sensibly modifies, the general affection of the mind, in respect to the diftinCion of good and evil; for, as good is pleasant, so, also in many instances, is it estimable: As evil is painful, so also is it, in many instances, vile and contemptible.

Of these sentiments, the specific occasions or objets are termed beauty and deformity, excellence and defet.

To perceive beauty or excellence, is to admire or efteemn: And, least there expreflions, which are applicable to fubjecs of the highest nature, flould appear too strong, when applied to matters of inferior consideration, in which some degree of beauty neverthelefs may be admitted; let it be remembered, that it is the fpecies of sentiment, not any measure of the emotion, or degree of merit in its objec, which we are now about to confider.

Admiration and esteem, like benevolence and love, are agreeable sentiments; so much, that, to admire or elteem and to be pleased with an objec, are expressions often mutually fubflituted one for the other.

We are pleated with beauty and excellence; we are displeased with deformity and defect: But all that pleases is not beautiful or excellent; nor all that displeases, deformed or defective. We know 
 know not, however, frequently, how otherwise to express the ,STcT. . pleasure we take in any fubjedl, than by pronouncing it excellent \^Y\^ or beautiful; nor how to express the displeasure we feel, otherwise than by pronouncing the cause of it, ugly or defective. The wonderful organ of human language does not always serve the purpose of discrimination, even where it is of the mofi real importance to state the fubjeas of consideration apart.

We may, nevertheless, endeavour, in this place, to confider beauty and excellence, as distinguishable from other causes of pleasure, by the specific accompanyment of esteem or preference, to which, even if no one should admire, we conceive the object entitled; and to confider deformity and defed as diftinguiflhable fromothercaufes of painby a peculiar fentimentof disapprobation or contempt; of which we conceive them to be proper objects, even if the world should not perceive the defec or the deformity.

These specific Sentiments, differing either in refped to the occafion on which they arise, or the degrees of intensity with which they are felt, have, in every language, a variety of appellations or names. In our language, approbation and diaipprobation, efleem or admiration, opposed to indifference, di/ruft, or contempt, make a part of the terms by which we express them.

The ingenious author of some Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste, has observed, that material fubjets give fenfation and perception of reality; but no emotion or sentiment of beauty or deformity, except so far as they are afrociated with some object of affccion, whether character or disposition of mind; chcarfulnefs or melancholy, wisdom, goodness, or power.

2 If ' Mr Alif,n, If a subjed please, in consequence of its being associated with 
PART H.



some objet of esteem, the delight it affords is properly enough 
classed with the species of sentiment which we are now confider- _v ing; but if it be associated only with utility, safety, or joy, it may please in consequence of this association: But the compound so made up is not any more a subjed of admiration or esteem, than is the pleasurable circumstance by which it is recommended.

Attempts have been made to resolve this principle ofefteem or admiration into tome of the other principles or forms of proceeding, equally familiar in the operations of the human mind; and consequently, to account for the use of there terms, without the necessity of supposing that there is in nature any diftin&ion of excellence, or in us any diftindive faculty by which it is known.
And it should follow, from any theory of this fort, that, in reality, we mistake for esteem some other operation or affecion of mind: but, in such fubflitutions of one species of affection for another, it does not appear that any advantage is gained. We neither can resolve the sentiment of admiration or esteem into any thing better known than itself, nor the good qualities of mind, into any thing that, being more in our power, may hlew us a readier way to the improvement of our nature.

We fiall, therefore, be contented with giving to the sentiments which beauty or excellence occasions, some one of their ordinary names of preference, whether delight, approbation, or esteem.
The fubjets of beauty and excellence thermfclves, in the mean D time, 
PART. Ir. time, though thus agreeing in the class of Sentiments to which sHer. 11. they give occasion, seem to be disjoined in nature; or by us, at leait, to be conceived apart. Beauty is Sometimes said to cover defects; and excellent qualities are said to be concealed under apparent deformities. Beauty frequently strikes, from the firfi and more obvious aspeCt of things; excellence is to be colleced by observation of their eflential qualities. Every person, that enters a room, preSents at once the beauty of which he is poifefled. His excellence, in the mean time, or essential good qualities, are to be known only upon farther acquaintance. These epithets, however, in proportion as the fubjeas of them come to be underflood, gradually approach in their applications, and seem at last to unite in the fame thing. When apparent beauty is found to conceal defecs, it ceases to be admired, or even incurs contempt.
When apparent deformities are found to conceal eflential good qualities, we not only cease to contemn, but, from a principle of retributive justice, are the more inclined in the sequel to admire that we at first overlooked the value of our object, whether person or thing: So that the progress of intelligence in the discernment of excellence and beauty seems to terminate in a point, which unites these epithets into one general ground of preserence; and which, in that cafe, we shall perhaps be more inclined to express in the terms of perfection and excellence, than in that of elegance or beauty, which frill carry a reference to firit and external appearances.

In the system of nature, there is a beauty that belongs to the mechanical, to the - vegetable, the animal, and intelledual kingdoms.

In the mechanical kingdom, the principal, if not the Colc conltituent ftituent of beauty, as the Tere Busier has well observed, is order; 
PART IL



or, as the fame author farther explains this term, the apt combina- 
tion of parts, whetherJimultaneous or /fuccejive, for the attainment '^vof a beneficent purpose.

Mere matter, though perceivable by sense, is in itself indifferent to any affeAion of the mind, except so far as some objec of afetion is associated with it. With an apt combination of parts for a beneficent purpose, are associated the supreme objects of admiration, love, and refped; viz. vwidom, goodness, and power.
The afrociation is not casual, or derived from mere analogy or likeness, but fromthe essential and inseparable relation of cause and effet.

The system of nature is sublime in refpea to the might of its Author. It is beautiful, with respect to the regular fitness of parts for the attainment of their ends, and in refpec to the beneficent purpose which they are fitted to serve. The latter circumstance, above all, is efiential to their beauty.

The fruits of continual exertion, without the regularity that proceeds from a well-concerted design, as in the meaningless activity of children and restless animals, overturning and displacing whatever comes in their way, produces disorder, confusion, and extreme deformity: The regular tradesman shudders at their being admitted into his work-ihop.

A design at the fame time may be perceptible; but, ifdirecled by folly or malice, it is an objec of difgufl or of reprobation, not of admiration or cileem. The figures of birds, beasts, cones, or pyramids, cut out of an evergreen, in the antiquated garden, have D 2 mark marks of design; but frivolous, and contemptible. The piece of CHUA. I.
SE.CT. Ill latuary, of which we are told, in the bull of Phalaris, or in the wr- Apiga or spouse of Nubis, mayhave beenexquifite inthe workmanflip; but the design washideous orcruel: And, as the mere indication of mind is. ambiguous, the indication of perfidy and malice is horrid; beneficence alone, direded by wisdom, is supremely beautiful.

In the material system of nature, the beneficent purpose of its Author is manifest in the accommodations provided for beings diflinguifhed by their organization, or beings endowed with life.
These, in our terrestrial world, are plants, animals, and men.
The elements are disposed to promote the vegetation of plants; and these to furnish their subsistence and place of abode to animals; and the whole to furnish the materials of supply, and the subjeds of thought and contemplation to the living and intelligent nature of man.

In the living kingdom of animals, the fame beneficent purpose, while it extends to the general fyflem, partly terminates also in the animal himself. He is made that he may be gratified, as well as that he may gratify others; and both are essential to the excellence and beauty of his frame: For this his organization is admired, and the prosperous tfate of that organization is so much valued, under the denomination of health.

With refpecA to man, also, the beneficent purpose of nature, so far as we are yet qualified to discern it, terminates in himself; not in the individual confidered apart, but in the subserviency of many to the common cause of the whole. The individual is made that he maybe gratified; but his chief gratification is made to to consist in beneficence, or a participation in the welfare of man- 
PART :iT.
kind. He is an acive power in nature, which cannot suspend CSAc. Ir its exertions, without incurring a state of weariness, suffering, uv./J
and disgust. He is a beneficent power in nature, to whom benevolence is pleasure, malevolence is pain; and who cannot willingly forsake the paths of beneficence, without incurring the chastisement of remorse. His beauty and excellence is a participation, however faintly obtained, of that wisdom and goodness which constitute the splendor and majesty of the works of God.

To perceive beauty, in any material fubje&, is to perceive indications of wisdom and goodness; and, if we are asked, why wisdom and goodness flould be admired ? we may answer, For a reason like to that for which pleasure is coveted; because in itself defireable and good. While other things are desired or esteemed on account of the pleasure they give, or the excellence they constitute, pleasure and excellence are themselves desired or efReemed, on their own account.

In the scale of natures susceptible of excellence or perfection intelligence is supreme, and wisdom and goodness are the fupreme perfections of intelligent being. Their presence, when suggested by the order of nature, awakening the sentiments of adniration, are termed beautiful; but, in the mind itself to which they belong, are more properly termed its excellence, perfection, or merit. Folly and malice, on the other hand, may, in a figurative stile, be termed the deformities of mind; but are more properly referred to the predicaments of defect, guilt, and demerit.

From the whole, there is rcafon to believe, that beauty whienc real 
 real may be' resolved into excellence and, that deformity may be C HAP. I resolved into defect; the one an essential diftincion of good, and 8Ec,. III.

.-y--~ the other of evil: That both, or either, can have existence in mind alone; so that, in this queflion, man is doubly interested: He is concerned in the existence of excellence or beauty, as presenting him with an agreeable object of contemplation and love; but more especially as constituting an admirable slate or condition of nature, attainable by himself.

In the human figure, there is one beauty of form in the ftructure of its organs, or in the found state or configuration of the whole person, indicating exquisite design, wisdom, and goodness, of the Maker.

There is another beauty, consisting in the aspea and exprefsion of the mind, that occupies and actuates this created frame, indicating good sense, equanimity, and benevolence of temper.

In both, it is the beauty of mind that firikes through the form of a work, or the asped of a person: The wisdom and goodness of the Creator, in the one; or the good meaning and temper of his creature, in the other.

Where one of these beauties exists, in any degree, the other may be sensibly wanting. Thus, we are familiar with instances, in which personal defecs are compensated with a favourable expreflion and benevolence of asped; or inflances in which natural advantages are deformed by an aipedt of vanity, malice, or folly.

The antient artifls, in the fcaturcs of Medura, though a Fury, a feigned feigned to themselves the most perfect form; or supposed her 

countenance to be cast in the most exquisite mold of natural beau- SCH. IIr ty; but of an aspeC, derived from the temper within, so terrific and hideous, as to appal the most daring, and even to turn those on whom the looked into stone.

Mind, we have reason to believe, predominates in nature; so that, in a comparative survey of all that exists, whatever is not mind would be as nothing.

It is heat, we are told, that gives spring and agitation to the mechanical world. Remove this ingredient, and all matter would freeze into one solid mass, and become the formless repository of inertia, darkness, and death.

In the fame manner, and with still greater confidence, may we not fay, it is mind that strikes out from the forms of body, in the lovely aspeCts of excellence and beauty ? And it is the diversity of operating minds, in such forms of matter, that gives the diftinction of beauty and deformity to fubjecs otherwise, in their own nature, indifferent.

What were millions, and myriads of millions, of corpuscular particles afiembled in the body of the fun, without the benignant power that renders him the source of heat and of light to furrounding worlds ? What were these worlds without the beneficent impulse that gives them motion, and retains them in their orbits, at a proper diltance from the source of light and of heat ? And what could avail their motions, without this combination of elements on their globes, that fit them for the rcfidence of living natures ?

"The PIARr II. The fame thing, multiplied through innumerable systems, owes 

SECT. IIL its magnificence to the greatness of might and of thought, that J'x. adts in the formation and conduct of such boundless scenes of existence.

The diftinaion of excellence and defecr, so obvious to man in the contemplation of his own nature, and fb easily transferred by association to any of his works or external circumstances, is the radical principle of elevation or progreflion in the human mind, to which there is ever presented, as an object ofdefire, Something higher and better than is poffeIfed at present. This principle, in all its forms, proceeds upon some pre-conceived notion of absolute or comparative excellence, in refped to which the mind is never disposed to acquiesce in its present attainment. Birth, fortune, power, and other constituents of rank, are the circumstances in which the vulgar of every condition strive to excel one another. The dwelling, the furniture, the equipage, and the table of the rich, flatter his vanity more than his sense of pleasure; and stir the emulation more than the appetite of those who admire his condition.

Whoever would govern mankind, if he can command their conception of what is excellent, or lead them to associate honour with the task he wouldhave them to perform, will find no farther difficulty, in procuring from them every sacrifice of pleasure, interest, or safety. This, as we have formerly observed, is the honest man's integrity, and the gentleman's honour, which neither will forego to preserve his fortune or his life. It is the soldier's glory, which renders danger and hardflip agreeable; it is the martyr's crown, which renders extreme suffering, and the profpcCt of death, an occasion of triumph and joy.

On On a subjea of so great importance, and offuch powerful 




effed1s in human life, it behoves us to examine our opinions, and SCCT. III
to be well founded in the conceptions, to which we thus furren- A_
der and deliver up all the other powers of our nature. If there be an excellence or beauty, specific to man, we may presume that, in the contemplation and pofTefiion of it, his supreme good, the most agreeable slate of his nature, and the happiest course of his life is likely to consist.


Of Virtue and Vice.

cHPART W Hen, in the manner of last feAion, we have resolved the excellence and beauty of this created frame into the wisdom and _wrv goodness of God; and return from this contemplation of nature to confider, what is the specific excellence of man; we must recognize in him at once a constitution or form received from his Maker, and together with the gifts of intelligence and free will, a personage and character to be ascribed to himself. In refpea to either, he is distinguished in nothing so much as in this power and disposition to perceive. with delight, an intelligent and beneficent Author in the system of things around him. Were he thus to judge of any human production, his perception of beauty in the work would argue some participation in the genius of its Author. May we not therefore, conceive, that his admiration of what appears in the universe of God, implies some qualification to participate in the godlike principles of beneficence and wisdom. In this system, of which he is a part, the measures of providence are taken, and the design is carried into execution; he too is defiined to ad; But when we confider the magnitude of 1 this this system, and in how many ways, of which he cannot trace 

any tendency to the purpose of universal good, he himself may be affected, his concurrenceinthe design is likely to be merely passive, or rv sofar only as to make him bear with complacency what the general order requires, rather than to call upon him for any ative exertiondireaed to apurpofe so far extended beyond his comprehension.

Even when we confider the world of men and animals, how far extended beyond the reach of any aAive interposition of the individual for its general good, we muff suppose that the character of goodness, applicable to man, in refpet to this objed also, consists in pious resignation to the will of God; or, at most in perfect good will to mankind, in every instance in which the active power of an individual can apply. Fortunately for him, when heads in particular instances, for his friend, his neighbour, his country, or for any of the human race, there occurs, an occafion to praAife and to promote that mutual affection, fidelity, justice, and humanity, which in faA are a common blessing to mankind; insomuch, that for him to adopt and to communicate the effect of these characters, is to aca for the good of his fellow-creatures; and, so far he becomes an able and a willingn iftrument in the hand of God for the beneficent ends of his providence.

The meritof this character, however, is more a subjeA of confcioufnefs, orintuitive judgement, than ofdifculfionor reasoning; and theywho are, in common life, most decided in their choice of good acions, proceed upon the ground of their affections and sentiments, more than upon any information derived by investigation or research. In attempts at science, however, we muff descend to particulars, and endeavour to collect, by induction from the E 2 phenomena 
phenomena of that nature we are confidering, what may be its 
CHAP.I. destination, and what the standard by which its worth is to be ^\,\i eefimated.

Among subjects organized, we have already observed that man is diftinguifled as living and active; among the living and aAive, he is distinguished as intelligent; or endowed with powers of difcernment, apprised of the distinction of good and evil, and invested with freedom of choice. Among the gregarious animals, he is diftinguiflled as associating and political, and conscious of his flation as a member in the community of his fellow creatures. The order of nature itfelfis in a certain degree manifest to him; he is fitted to hold communication with its Author, to apprehend his will, and to become a willing instrument in promoting the ends of his government.

In tfriving to conceive the destination offuch a being, we may with great confidence rejea the idea of its being limited to the preservation of mere animal life, or even, as Epicurus assumed, to the, poffefiion of mere pleasing thoughts or sensations of any fort.
There is an adive charaAcr to be fu stained, and a part to be filled up; firft,inthecommunityof men,who are partners in thejointcaufe of humanity andjuftice. There is a world ofitill and living nature, in the midst of which this active being must acquit hinmfelf, with sensibility in refiped to some, and with circumspection and care refpecing the whole. There is a commanding order of things, to which he must accommodate himself, which he is required to study, and concerned to know; and to which, even where it exceeds his comprehension, he must with fubmillion surrender his will.

To fill up such a part are requiredfgill, diccernment, or knowledge, fit dlif/fitio, application, and foce: Hence the four cardinal dinal virtues, celebrated in the schools of philosophy, Wrdom, 

Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude. 




Wisdom is the virtue of intelligence, or. a just discernment of the considerations on which we are to rely for happiness, and the .undisturbed possession of the faculties which are given for the government, of life. Man, in his character of intelligent being, is active in .a form, and to an extent, greatly superior to any of the other animals. Every quality of his nature is an energy, not a quiescent mode of exiflence; and, whatever be the limits within which he is destined to exert his faculties, within the fame limits, and in the fame form of active exertion, are to be found his excellencies and defeCts, his enjoyments and iufferings.

The lot of man is not, like that of the other animals, at once co.mpletely. furnihed by nature; he is invested with powers, and left toemploy them for his own advantage, or that of his fellowcreatures. He merits the praise of wisdom, or he incurs the imputation.of folly, according to the use which he makes of his intelligent faculties; and in this, perhaps, gives the first and most firiking specimen of the excellence or defect, of which he is susceptible. His powers of conception, when well employed, lay the foundations of wisdom; when misapplied or neglected, lay the foundations of folly; and so far present him to his fellowcreatures, as an object either of efleem and respeCt, or of contempt and derision.

With the exception of a few determinate inflintis,fuch as direct him on particular occafionsto themeans offelfprefervation,or fich as connet, the individual with his kind, man, we have observed, is left to follow the dictatcs of his own obfcrvation, discernment and experience.

PART 11. experience. In nonage or infancy, indeed, he is committed to the SECAT. lI discretion of his parent; but, in the more advanced periods of rYv / life, he is committed to his own. His instincts and appetites are feldomtohim,as they are to the other animals, determinate guides in the application of means to the attainment of his end, or seldom secure him inthe proper choice and measure of his gratifications.
When urged by hunger, though in the midst of plenty, if the fruit or species of food presented to him be new or untried, he imuft proceed with caution in the use of it, and examine well, before he ventures to taste; much more before he ventures to feed on viands unknown, though of the fairest appearance.

Although his gratifications, like those of the other animals, when the purpose of nature is served, frequently determine or pall on the sense; and satiety, even in his cafe, might be fufficient to guard him against excess; yet he is, by an error of his imagination, frequently led to exceed even these limits, and to seek for pleasure, where it is not any longer to be found, in the objec of afatiated appetite. In him,therefore, the defeAs of mitninsC
mufft befupplied by reflection; and, heis tobe taught, by experience and observation alone, to distinguish the real sources of permanent happiness.

As to man, therefore, the errors of his own imagination, as well asthedefecs of hisintind, are occasions of evil, they are tobefupplied orcorrecedbytheproper use of his intelligent powers. And it may be aflred, Are we to confider the intelligence of man as a mere subftitute forthecorreanefs of choice to which the other animals are formed by nature,and to estimate its value, by its apparentdefRination to do for him what inftinC, and the want of imagination, have done for the brutes ? This were to suppose him destined to attain, tain, by a tedious and uncertain process, that of which other ani- 
PART. Ir.
mals are at once possessed by the suggestion of a specific propenfi- SCEHC
ty The bee,' without any other diretion than this, con- ,' '
struts his cell upon a model which the most perfect science of mechanism cannot improve; and posseses that flill, from the first, which in the human species, many ages and successive trials are required to obtain.

Animals, in general, whatever be their diftination, are enabled to fulfil it at once. They acquiesce in their state, or enjoy its advantages, without any sense of its wants or defects. Man, at his outset, beingworfe provided thanany other animal, is accordingly not disposed to acquiesce in his primary slate. The wants or defeces of his first condition seem, in the exercise of his faculties, to press him with all the force of necessity; but, after his first wants or defects are supplied, fancy succeeds to necessity; and, whatever supply he may have gained, or accommodation provided for himself, he is Rill urged with a desire of somewhat beyond the present attainment, and is as little disposed to acquiesce in the highest, as in the lowest slate of his animal accommodation. The spur of impatience to better himself, which, in his rudest condition appears necessary to his preservation, continued on to his slate of highest attainment, seems to form in him a principle of progrefflon, of indefinite or endless extent. He is made intelligent, not merely that he may be able to procure a supply to his animal wants, but his animal wants appear to be multiplied, and his fancy rendered insatiable, that he may find an early scope for the exercise of his intellectual powers, and, by the indefinite pursuit of their ends, make that progress in knowledge, which constitutes so essential a part in the excellence or persection, of which his mind is susceptible.

We- may thus collect the specific excellence of any nature, from S CAP.I its capacity, and from the direction of its progress; and that of wegy^ man, in particular, from his capacity of receiving infdrmation, of improving in discernment and penetration, and from the progress he is qualified to make in these particulars. In him, tihemere continuance of life is a course of observation, and repeated' occasion, on which to exercise those faculties of the mind, which improve in being employed.

Man becomes powerful in the fyflem of nature, in proportion as he becomes knowing or wife: And the species, in this particular, seems well apprised of the standard by which to ascertain its own merits or defects. Signal ability and underfianding are admired, comparative incapacity, and dulness are despised. And there is, therefore, in refped to him no difficulty in collecting the grounds of efeem or contempt, whether we confider a priori what is suited to his destination, or attend to the reception which his qualities meet with in the estimation of his kind.

Philosophers have thought, that every subjec of commendation, to which human nature is competent; every virtue and every constituent of happiness, might be comprised under the title of wi/dom, or the excellence of intelligent being; that, on the contrary every subjeA of dispraise or contempt, every vice and every charaRter of misery, might be comprised under the title of Jolly: But, it is not neceflary, nor perhaps even expedient, thus to force the attributes of human nature, under single appellations, however comprehensive or general. Although it is both wife and profitable to love our fellow creatures, we can Ino more become friend, in the mere fiarch of wifdcom, than we can in search of our interest. Our conflitution -2^~~~~~ in~mufi must have the ingredient ol nformed may improve upon this principle of nature, and 
learn to direct it aright. \

" There are good qualities," fays the Duke de la Rochefoucault, " which degenerate into faults when they are natural, and " others which are never perfect when they are acquired. It is " necessary, for instance, that we should become by reflection " sparing of our money and of our confidence; on the contrary, we should by nature be furnished with benevolence and va" lour." The understanding at the outset has its perfctdion to acquire; the heart is good by the inspiration of nature.

But, in whatever terms we propose to express the standard of estimation relative to man whether wzvdorn, virtue, or goodness of heart, there are various conditions required to the performance of his part, and which muff occur in every statement of qualities, that constitute the specific excellence or perfection of his nature. He is formed for society, and is excellent in the degree in which he possesses the qualifications of an associate and a friend. He is excellent, in the degree in which he loves his fellow creatures; he is defective, in the degree in which he hates them, or is indifferent to their welfare. Benevolence, therefore, is a principal excellence of human nature; and malice an article of extreme vileness or defec. These are the great sources of merit and demerit; of justice and beneficence, on the one hand; of wrong, iniquity, and cruelty, on the other ; a diifintion, to the reality of which mankind in all ages have borne the strongest teflimony: To which, on the one band, they have paid the highest tribute of cfteem and of love ; and, on which, on the other, they have poured forth the highest micafures of contempt and deteflation.

VoL. II. F V'ith 
PART Il. " With refpeA to Temperance, it is a beautiful part, we may again SoCT. TV&. 5i've, in the ceconomy of animal life, that things pernicious are ^Ye painful, and things salutary are pleasant; that even things falutary and pleasant, in the proper use of them become painful, in the abuse, or when carried to excess. Under this constitution of nature, the mere animals are safely directed through life; but man's animal frame is either originally less perfect in this refpedt, or is disturbed by the operations of a fancy, which lead him to look for enjoyments beyond the foundations which nature has laid.

By nature, the gratifications of appetite are occasional, and do not occupy any improper portion of time; but the voluptuary conceives them as a source of continued enjoyment: And fenfuality is a distemper of the imagination, not a disorder in the ballance which nature has established between the animal and the rational part of man's constitution. The voluptuary does notenjoy more than the abstemious ; but he employs more of his time in vain attempts to restore a satiated appetite, and to render that continual, which nature has ordained to be occasional and temporary, As great inequalities of character and estimation result fromn the different degrees in which men avoid the habits of debauchery on the one hand, or gain the habits of a just application to the better pursuits of a rational nature, on the other ; there is, in this particular, much room for wisdom, and much danger from folly. In this, as in many other instances, man is leftined by nature to govern himself, or to make the best of materials which become pernicious, if he abuse or neglect them; and which, to tccure the proper use of them, require his utmost attention andc care.

virtue, among the aCive'qualifications of man, may be referred to the title of application; for the pursuit, which the tenr perate withholds from the mere objecAs of animal gratification W
may be applied to the better and more worthy objects of human life, Sensuality, indeed, for the moss part, is selfish and more solicituois about the gratifications of appetite, than about the concerns of other men; and temperance being an exemption, at least from this principle of felfifhnefs, lays open the mind of man to those incitements of benevolence and candour, from which the difinterefted are prepared to aa. Temperance, therefore, in this point of vi,. . lft, may be reckoned among the primary excellencies of human nature; intemperance or sensuality may be reckoned among its most real defects.

With refped to Fortitude, the fourth in the enumeration of cardinal virtues, we may observe that, in every active nature, besides the disposition, the application, and the measure of ikill, in refped to which such natures may be unequally estimated, there is a measure of force also required to support their adive exertions, and a measure of weakness sufficient to frustrate the purpose of nature, or to betray the confidence that may be placed in the highest measures offkill and of good disposition.

Force of mind has a peculiar reference to the tfate of man, to the difficulties, hardships, and dangers, in the midst of which he is delfined to ad. In the support of what is honourable andjuft, he has sometimes occasion to susser what is inconvenient or painful to his animal frame. In elpoufing the cause of the j.ust, he may incur the animoGty and opposition of the wicked.

F 2 In FART iI. In performing the offices of beneficence to others, he may en
counter with hardihip or danger to himself.

But this circumstance, which seems to reitrain or limit his activity, serves rather to whet his spirit, and increase his ardour in the performance of worthy ascions. The difficulty he surmounts becomes an evidence of the disposition which he approves, and actually endears the object for whose fake he exposes himself. Hence it is, that ingenuous minds are confirmed in the love of virtue, in proportion as it becomes a principle of elevation, of heroism, or magnanimity. These, it is scarcely necefTary to observe, are primary topics of praise, and principal excellencies of human nature, while pufilanimity and cowardice are amongst the lowest subjeds of contempt.

From these particulars, then, we may colle: that the excellence of a man includes the following particulars: WYifdom, or skill to chufe, and to accomplish what he ought to attempt; a benevolent afie7ion, which wisdom is fitted to direc; an application of mind, which inferior considerations cannot divert from its purpose; and a force, which opposition, difficulty, or danger, cannot difinay. And, as the excellent man is wife, beneficent, courageous, and temperate; the defective, on the contrary, is foolish, malicious, cowardly, and sensual. The wife chufe, among their ends, what is best; among the means they employ, what is molt effectual.
The benevolent are committed to theirbefi affedlions; thecourageous are exempted firom the ftffering and the weaknes of fear; the temperate reserve their faculties, and their time, for the best and worthieff occupations of their nature ; and, if from this flatement of the excellence to which human nature is competent, we look back to what has been already obflrved on the illbjec ofpleafure and and pain, we Ihall have reason to conclude, that the Author of 
PART 1L
nature has not only made that most agreeable which is most fa- cATP. I.
lutary; but that more especially conflituent of happiness, which, -y in the estimate of human qualities, is also most excellent, or most highly esteemed.

To be conscious of excellence, from the very nature of approbation and esteem, is a state of enjoyment; and, to be conscious ofvilenefs or defecS, a state of suffering: Or, if these sentiments could be suppressed, still, the constituents of man's specific excellence, T/Iifdom, i7zt/ice, Temperance, and Fortitude, apart from any reflections they may bring, are in themselves, either an exemption from pain, or an acceflion ofpleafure. And providence seems to intend, that this distinCtion, which is the source of elevation, integrity, and goodness, in the mind of man, should be the guide, by which he is most securely led to the highest enjoyments, to which his nature is competent. The excellence and beauty he admires may become an attribute of his own mind; and, whether in reflection or acdion, constitute the most agreeable state of his nature.

If we thus figure to ourselves an aCive intelligent being in the best state of which he is susceptible; this, in refpec to him is to be virtuous. Or, if we lhould be disposed to confider even the excellent mind, in relpedt to its external relations and effeds rather than in refped to its own constitution, we may observe, that the wife, the courageous, the temperate, and the benevolent, are of all others most likely to stand well-affecedl to their fellow-creatures, to the universe, and to the Creator of the world; that none are so likely to recognize the providence and moral government of God, or to fettle religion itself on its best foundations of integrity 
 grityand goodness. But before we proceed to slate the conclusion of 
this argument, in any general exprefiion of the supreme good to W>^v^ which human nature is competent, it is proper to take into our account also, what may occur of prosperity, or of thofeexternal advantages in which the gifts of fortune consist.rosperity and Adversity, or the Gifts and rivations of Fortune, 0o this title may be referred health, Jlrength, birth, riches, and 
PART. Ii.
i- 

tuation or rank in society. The possession of them is coveted, 
and the privation is shunned, for reasons peculiar to each.

Health is to the animal frame, what wisdom and goodness are to the intellecual nature of man, its found and perfect slate.
Strpenth is also the measure of animal power, in surmounting difficulties, and performing the labours that require it. Birth constitutes rank, apart from any consideration of fortune or perfonal qualities. Riches consist in the store which is provided for the supply of animal wants, accommodation, or ornament.

The reasons for which these advantages are severally coveted are extremely ob l'ous. Health is an exemption from the susserings incident to difletfe; and it is a fitness of the living frame for 
 for all its adive exertions. It enhances the value of life, as im
CHAP.. plying all the principles of life in their state of greatest ad~v">>. vantage. This blessing, however positive as it may appear to be, is most sensibly felt in the privation of. it. Ill health and difease greatly increase the difficulties which patience and fortitude have to encounter, and tend to weaken or disqualify the mind for the practice of these virtues.

Strength of body is in some measure an appurtenance of health.

It is unequal in the make of different persons ; but is most entire in any given confcitution, in the most prosperous state of the animal functions. So far as the constituents of wealth are necessary to the preservation of animal life, their value is evidently commenfurate to that of life itself: But it is difficult to draw the line of separation betwixt convenience and absolute necessity, or between articles of convenience and those of mere decorum and fancy. There is a gratification proposed in the use of all or any of them separately, which gives rife to a hasty presumption that men are happy in proportion as they have accummulated the means of such gratifications. The rich can purchase the services of the poor, obtain their attendance and refpeA; and by these circumltances seem to rank in a superior station. Birth is attended with similar advantages; and, although it may have originated in the riches, as well as some heroic diftindion of ancestors, at some distant period, is nevertheless by a wonderful caprice in the imaginations of men, reckoned the more illustrious the farther back that its source, or the original merit from which it is derived is retired fiom the fight.

The possession or privation of these advantages depend upon circumstances which mankind cannot command, nor even enuI nlaerate: merate: They are therefore, independent of the human will. They 

form the occasions on which a person may adopt a proper or im- 




proper conduct; and for this he is accountable, although he is no ways accountable for the event that may follow fi-om his best endeavours. Happily for mankind, in this distribution of their trust, it is observed, even to a proverb, that they are happy or miferable, not in proportion to the measure in which they possess or are deprived of external advantages, but in proportion to the temper of their own minds, the conduct which they themselves have adopted, and the use which they make of the means with which they are furnished by providence.

To the person who abuses his health, it is no advantage ; because he has taken occasion from it to. give scope to his folly or his vice. And if it has encouraged or supported him in the practice of either, although to another it might be the occasion of good, to him it is at least the occasion of evil. To preserve, under the disadvantage of ill health, equanimity and a temper undisturbed; to flbmit with chearfulnefs to the restraints which disease. may impose, serves to disarm this enemy, or render his pretence an occasion of good to the person who can thus acquit himself properly.

The effeds of disease in different persons are no doubt unequal; and in some inflances, whether owing to comparative weakness of mind, or intensity of suffering, it is no doubt sufficient to deprive animal life of its value: But this is rarely the lot or condition of man; nor is it that, against which a person, who would avoid the evils of human life, is most concerned to be on his guard. " You " are afraid officknefs, poverty, and death," fays Epicetus; " but, "if you had been afraid of fear itself, you would have flewn yourse]f better apprised of your real enemy." Difcafe of the G mind 
 mind is more to be dreaded than that of the body: For one that 

is affliced with a gangrene of the flefl, thousands incur the ganLlv\^ grene of envy and malice, or are bloated with vanity and folly.

Bodily strength, as well as health may be abused; and, to those who confider it as an article of vanity, is for the most part an occafion of brutality and extreme folly. Joined to ffrength of mind, it may qualify the hero to ac his part in the field, or in scenes of violence: But strength of mind without it can find many subftitutes; and the herdic part may be acted as well on the sick man's litter as on the warrior's horse.

Riches, it cannot be doubted, derive their value from the use to which they may be employed, in preserving, accommodating, or adorning the state of man, in profit to ourselves or beneficence to others. With riches, as well as birth, there is an association of personal excellence, tending to constitute a superiority of eftimation or rank; and, with poverty, there is an association of comparative defect or meanness. The first accordingly is from a defire of preferment ardently coveted; the other, under a notion of degradation, is carefully flunned.

Among rude nations, although property be acknowledged and unequally distributed, its principal use being to secure the neceffaries of life, and this use being obtained, without being rich, it is difficult to perceive in what consists the advantage of wealth.

A Hottentot," fays Sparman, "is rich, in proportion to the number " of his cattle: But the richest is cloathed, fed, and attended, no bet" ter than the poor; more trinkets ofbrafs, ofihells, orbeads; morefat " in dressing his viLcuals, or in anointing his body: The honour "01or " or advantage of being able to maintain more servants and cow- 

"herds. And the divine pleasure of doing good to his fellow 




" creatures, is that which constitutes the diftintion of rank Sc..
"in this simple race of men."

In the competitions of vanity, riches are more an obje& of oftentation than of enjoyment or use; but, in the breast of the miser, they are associated with safety more than with either of the former considerations. Persons of this description, we are told, even in the midst of plenty, are haunted with the fear of want, whilst they hoard up riches, they refrain from the use of them; and, inflead of affeCting the rank which their wealth might bestow, still cling to their fuppoled pledge of security, under the aspeA ofmeannefs and poverty. Enjoyment, however, is the charm with which riches are supposed to attrat the wishes of ordinary men. It is the spur, under which mankind have striven to improve and to extend all the' arts which tend to the accumulation of wealth.. It is that which caufeth the poor to look up to the rich with sentiments of admiration or envy, and caufeth the rich to look down on the poor with contempt or pity.

But with refpec to enjoyment, there is good reason to believe, that habit reconciles mankind, or renders them indifferent nearly alike to their refpe&ive fortunes. It is not doubted, that the meal of the peasant is equally reliihed with that of his lord; that sleep on a straw matrass is no less undisturbed than on a bed of down, or under a canopy of state: Insomuch that contentment, or the want of it, indifferent conditions of life, are even to a proverb observed to be equal. If the poor be haunted with wiflhes for somewhat beyond his present condition, o also is the rich; and it is probable that the comforts of either G 2 would 
would -be moroe felt in the privation than in the acaual use. The C1A1IP.A. ordinary course of life appears indifferent: They are pleased 

i t1chiefly with -accessions that seem to exceed, or displea'sed with privations that impair the advantages -to which they are accuftomed.

Occasional privations, at the fame time, even of what are -tought the essential comforts of life, -are endured with alacrity and cheerfulness in the midit of any ardent pursuit, whether of business or sport. The ibldier is chearful in the midst of hardship or toil, or in the face of danger, encountered in discharging the honourable duties of his flation. The -hu-ntfmnan incurs almost equal danger with equal alacrity; and, whatever his hardihips may be, has not -any pretence for complaint, because they are voluntary. Compared to either, the ordinary life of-a beggar, which is ever looked on with contempt or pity, -is 'easy, afflluent, and secure.

The enjoyments or sufferings, which we commonly :acr-ibe to riches or poverty, are in reality, in a great measure, derived from the unequal degrees of consideration or esteem with which they are attended. The soldier and the gentleman hunter either gain, or do not lose in point of rank, by the hardships or privations of-eafe -to which they submit. The one is actually raised in his own, and in the efteemn of others, by the danger he bravers; The other too is no way degraded, or rather maintains his ltation by lis contempt of repose, and by his parade of horses and dogs, which makes a part of the diflindion he enjoys among his neighbours.

Nothing is better established in reason, than that the value of external circumf-ances depends on the degree in which they are z~~~~~~2 iC~~~~~~tbfelt.

felt. Prosperity is of no value, to those who 'feel it not; or to 
PARTr 1I.
whorm it only ministers 'ah occasion of peeviflinefs and dif- 


conteiit. -Advetifity is o 'evil 'to those, who -'uffer nothing from ' _r'
it; or who atre 'contented and chearful, in the midst of supposed distress. And, ifthere were no other reason to deny the certainty 'of any effet from external circumfiances, the unsettled opinions of-men, refpediing the happiness of different fituationg, are fuflicient to shew that experience does not warrant our fuppofition of happiness or misery, attached to any particular meafures of fortune. Some conceive happiness to be the lot of those, who are placed in the higher ranks of life; others believe it to be the portion of those who remain in the lower ranks; and many beli'eve, that both are miftaken,-that it belongs to the middle station, 'equally remote from the excesses of luxury, or the pressure of want. In 'the mean time, wherever folly, malice, cowardice, and debauchery are found, there is suffering and mifery to be found also. There are not the necessary appurtenances of any fitnation, whether middling, high, or low; nor is any situation securely exempt from them. The opposite virtues of wisdom, goodness, temperance, and fortitude, are equally a blessing in every situation, wherever they are found; whether on 'the throne of Aurelius, in the servitude 'of Epitetus, or any interme'diate tfation: And, as there is scarcely a situation to be found, in lwhich the four and malignant 'do not complain; no more is there a situation in which the good humoured and chearful are not content.

From these and other appearances, it should seem, that although providence has deflined human life to pass away in the practice of arts ; in transactions and pursuits, which relate to the gifts of fortuhe, as to their immediate object ; that ncverthelefs there is not any prccife meafuire of these gifts required, to enable the 
the pofteflor to pass his time agreeably. To be reasonably and 

SECT V. properly occupied about them is enough: but this occupation rev- may take place in any state of their distribution; and, although it seems to be the institution of nature, relating to mankind, that their adcive exertions fllould originate from the want of a supply to their animalneceffities; yet is it provided, also, that their felicity fllould be a quality of their own affedions and adions, not of the supply they have obtained; that it should not depend on events, or on circumstances in which the conditions of men are so unequal, and so little at their own command.

In confidering man's place and diftintion in the system of nature, we have had occasion to observe; that, being disposed to enjoy his own acive exertions, and to improve by the exercise of his faculties, many apparent comparative defeds of his animal frame, and the wants to which he is fubjeted, have a signal propriety in his lot. To him, difficulty, delay, and danger, are the occasions of ingenuity, perseverance, and courage. He is mafler of his own adtions; but the circumstances, in which he isto ad, arewifely withheldfromhis disposal. Forit beingthenature of an active disposition to press towards every advantage; and to haften the removal of every obftrueion, and of every inconvenience; if this could be done by a wish, there would not any longer be an occasion for adive exertions: And if, on the contrary, the laws of nature were inscrutable, and events no way affected by any means in the power of man to employ, there would be nothing for him to fludy and nothing to be done.

The scene of nature, indeed, is in both these refpecs well suited to man. The powers that operate connot be controuled by his will; but the laws, according to which they proceed, may be known, and ineafures taken to influence the result of their operations, tions. He is encouraged to ply his industry and his skill; and 

his work is not accomplished in single efforts. Upon a difap- 




pointment, he must renew his endeavours; and, even when molt rw/
successful, repeat or follow them up with somewhat farther in the line of his pursuits. The mixed scene ofdifappointment and success ever presents him with a spur to his exertion, with admonitions to care, and incitements to industry, with encouragements to hope or apprehensions of failure; and, furniifhes him with occasions, and with the materials of beneficence to others, as'
well as of profit to hinifelf.

It is particularly happy, in refpea to this institution of his nature, that the conduA, tranfadion, and intercourse, in which the materials of art engage mankind, are agreeable to their aAive disposition, while the measure in which these materials accrue to any one, is in some measure indifferent. All the belt or the worst affections or passions of the human mind, are to be found indifferently wherever mankind are placed. As the active scenes of life may be supported by the healthful and vigorous, the virtues of equanimity, patience, and fortitude, may be practifed by those who labour under all the infirmities of disease or a sickly constitution. As candour and humanity may be practifed by the powerful, towards those who depend on them; so may the corresponding virtues of refped and good will be pratifed by the dependent towards their superiors. Although the gifts of fortune are to those who possess them materials of beneficence, yet they are not the sole materials, nor is this use of them limited to any measure or degree of the possession. The poor man who kindly shews the benighted traveller on his way, may have done an office of more real moment, than fortune may have given the rich occasion to perform in any circumstance of his life. The greatest 
PART. Il. greatest benefa6cors to mankind have been poor; and the great
CHAP.I. eft benefits have been done by with-holding, not by lavishing S/~s" the communications of wealth. Socrates. and Epaminondas, even in times when poverty was frequent, were distinguished among their fellow citizens, by this disadvantage: But the one, by his superior abilities, not only saved his country from a foreign yoke, but raised it to a pitch of glory, which filled the mind of its citizens with sentiments of elevation and of honour. From the other originate the pursuits of moral wisdom, in which all the nations who spoke the language of his country became so eminent; and to him, perhaps, we owe that we are now employed, not in gratifying a mere curiosity, in matters over which we have not any controul; but in fludying the powers of our own nature, the province in which they ought to be exerted.

It was by with-holding, not by an easy payment of a. trifling tax, that Hampden laid the foundations of that political freedom which his country now enjoys: And we may conclude, from the whole of these observations on the gifts of fortune, that they are valuable only in the use which is made of them; and that the proper use is equally valuable in whatever measure those gifts are beflowed or with-held. Providence, in our apprehension has, indefinitely varied the situations of men.: But to an. observer, who can penetrate through the first appearance of things, there is a. condition common to all mankind; that is, a fit scene in which they are to ad, and a felicity to be obtained, by proper aCtion.





Of HappincS and Miery.

IN the variety of denominations which we have been confidering, 

whether pleasure, virtue, or projperity, the objec of those who 

employ these terms, is to mark, in particular instances, the object S >. .
Of choice; or, in the greatest possible measure of all these particulars united together, to express what they conceive to be happiness.

If we have understood the terms aright, and fairly eftimated what is best, in the different denominations of good, and what is worst, or most to be dreaded, under the different denominations of evil, the conclusion of reason, as formed in the consideration of any article apart, will be the fame throughout: That the preferable pleasure, as well as the highest merit, is found in the course of a virtuous life; and the pain most to be dreaded, or the specific defea or debasement of human nature, consists in folly, malice, or cowardice. The gifts of fortune have their use in H being 
 being the means of life and the instruments of virtue, or in fur

SECT. V1. nifing a scene for the exercise of good sense and beneficence; but kr^vw-> they are so far from being an occasion of good to those who abuse them, that this abuse contaminates every other source of enjoyment, disappoints the mind of its better and higher qualifications, impairs its faculties, and multiplies its sufferings and its defecas.

The only question that remains therefore is, under what title we are to felec this supreme or principal good, which is the genuine standard of estimation to mankind, whether under the title of pleafit'e, the proper uses offortune, or virtue.

The general term, Pleasure, includes many particulars of unequal value, and in common language is employed frequently to signify sensuality and dissipation, in contradiftinaion to business or any serious application of the mind. It behoves us, therefore, to specify our pleasure, before we refer to it as the object of choice.
And when we have done so, the particular we have feleced, not pleasure at large, is the proper flandard ofeftimation.

Happiness has its feat in the temper, or is an agreeable state of the mind; and cannot always be confidered as a proper use of external advantages; for it does not always proceed to the production of any external effect. As virtue is the preferable pleasure, so is it also the proper use of the fortune or situation in which we are placed. It is best, then, that we fix our attention immediately on the real good qualities of our own nature, and the virtuous life they support, as the constituents of happiness; and that we confider the debasements of folly, malice, cowardice, intemperance, and a vicious life, as the constituents of misery.

3

Whether Whether these be the sole constituents of happiness or misery, 




we need not be anxious to enquire; for the choice on every oc- SC P. VI.
cafion will be the fame, whether we confider them as the sole or TV
the principal species of good and of evil.

It is of little moment to be told of a good, which we cannot command, or of an evil which we cannot avoid. Our objeA in every cafe, is to make such a choice of the things which are in our power, that is, of our own conduct and actions, as to do the best which the cafe can admit for ourselves or our fellow creatures.

Every circumfiance, in the lot of man, evinces the cafe of a being destined to bear an active part in the living system, to which he belongs. His very subsistence requires such a part.
To obtain it, he must study the laws of nature, invent and practife a variety of arts. He is born in the society of his parents; and, for a considerable period of his life, owes, not only his wellbeing, but his preservation also, to their unwearied and anxious care. So soon as he is fit to act for himself, he is urged, by the most ardent and irresistible pafions, to become the parent of a family in his turn; a condition in which' affections are experienced, more powerful than interest or felf-prefervation. The company of his fellow creatures is ever required to his fatisfadion or pastime. He may be unsociable, but is not solitary; even to behave ill, he must be in society; and if he do not ad from benevolence, he will act from interest to over-reach, or fromambition to command his fellow creatures, or from vanity to be admired, even by those whom he neither esteems nor loves. To such a being, it were vain to prescribe retirement from the cares -H 2 of 
 of human life. If he is not engaged as a friend, he will be SCE-P. .I baited as an enemy; and, if his mind have not the confiderat-,r tions of juilice, humanity, and public good, to occupy him, it will fink into a degree of brutality or languor, the reverse of that tranquillity of mind, andofthofe agreeablethoughts, andemotions which Epicurus proposed to cultivate, in a slate of seclusion from the concerns of society, whether private or public.

Nature has made the subsistence, the safety, and accommodation, of human life to depend upon certain external circumftances and poffeflions, to which men, accordingly, with good reason, direct their attention. They are the objets of art and induftry, and furnish the occasion of invention, and other trials of genius to the mind of man, which is ever busy, and which is at once gratified and improved, by its active exertions.

Many of its efforts are employed in guarding or in accumulating external possessions. The event, or the measure of success, we have observed, is precarious; and, on the whole, independent of this circumstance, mankind exhibit very unequal degrees of happiness or misery. They are happy in applying to their object with proper measures of wisdom, diligence, benignity and forti.
tude. They are miserable in folly, slothfulness, malice, intemperance, or cowardice; but in the different measures in which they attain to the gifts of fortune have equal opportunities for either. It is by the part which he ads, or has ated, that a person is happy or miserable, not by the event of his pursuit, or by the measure of external advantage he has gained: for we muf forever repeat, that, under very great inequalities in refpeA to these advantages, there arc equal examples of enjoyment or of fufferingn 3 It It is happy therefore to fullfil the destination of nature; to ply 


the industry, the invention, theftudy whichfhe has made neceflary 
to our wellbeing; to embrace the objeds of that social affection v '
with which she has inspired our minds; and to confider, that as our state of greatest prosperity, in which we are most effectually employed with benignity towards our fellow creatures, and fubmifsion to the will of God, in whatever he has assigned for our lot.

The happy, under every event, whether of success or disappointment, proceed with alacrity in the difchargeof such offices, and in the pursuit of such objedts as the occasion suggests. The miserable, in profpericy, swell into insolence; or, upon a reverse of fortune, fink into despair, and neglec the good which is in their power, because there is another supposed good which they cannot command.

What is the lesson of reason then to the poor man, who complains of his lot, or rather who enquires what, in the situation which providence has assigned to him, is required to be happy ?
He may be told, " Providence has given to you, and to all other t men, a set of wants; and it is the will of providence that you "proceed to supply them: Be diligent, industrious, and frugal: " Do whatever the present moment requires with benignity and ' fortitude. There are the constituents of happiness, and not " less in your power than they are in the power of your richest "neighbour."

This temper of mind, however, under the flocks of adversity to which men are subjet in the ordinary pufuits of life, may be supposed to be of difficult attainment. It is, nevertheleis, attained by numbers, who, in their ordinary condition, pofeifs the gifts of fortune in lower measures, than that to which many, who fink under strokes of adversity are acually reduced. At any rate, the person who does not possess the virtues which contfitute happiness, must not complain of their inefficacy; for they cannot be supposed to have effect, where they do not exist.

It may not perhaps be asked, what will make the rich man happy ? for he is supposed to be sufficiently happy in being rich.
He must not be dismissed, however, under this apprehension, untill his own sense of the matter is taken. It is probable, that he will deny he is rich; that he will be found to have wants no less numerous than those of his poorer neighbour. Under this aspec of his slate, the lesson ofwifdom to him is precisely the fame as to the former. Be diligent, induRtrious, and frugal, refpeling the management of your own affairs: be candid, ingenuous and humane in your tranfadions with others. Fear not that the event will be such as to deprive you of these blessings: They are the greatest of which human nature is susceptible; and providence has given a place for the enjoyment of them in the lituation of the rich as well as in that of the poor.

If the rich man should acknowledge that he has not any wants; but in this very circumstance should find a source of diflrefs, which is not uncommon in the cafe of those who, as they are pleased to express it, have nothing to do: the misery of such perIbns, they may be told, is not an excess of riches, but a defec of underfianding, and a corruption of heart. The first attempts to correc2 such folly are made in recourse to multiplied amusements and paflimcs; and we mufi, indeed, prefer any species of harmlces divcrfion to the devouring tooth of lifllefs pride, peeviflinefs, or Imel ncholy 3 But it should fceen, that, to a person in this situation ation, it might soon be made evident, that offices of benefit to mankind should be a more effectual amusement to himself, than SECT. I, any mere trifling pastime, which is not attended with any effect v whatever beyond the amusement of the present hour.

If the sick man should complain of his lot, or desire to know by what means he may escape from his sufferings, he may be told to get well as soon as he can; and if this ihould appear to be mockery; because his grievance actually consists in his not being able to get well; on this supposition, the best thing he can do, is manfully to bear what cannot be helped. Fortitude may not eradicate pain; but is surely the belt and happiest expedient to which the sufferer can have recourse in his state; and may, in fad, to the strenuous mind, conflitute a greater blessing, than even that of being exempted from pain. In striving to find an expression or rule by which to diftinguifll the happy, we may venture to asfume two general propositions.

I. The first is, That happiness, whatever be its cause, is itself an attribute of the mind.

II. The second is, That a person, when said to be happy, can justify this assertion only in proportion as his enjoyments are habitual, lasting, and conceived to be secure.

The first of these propositions is too evident to need much illustration; and it is only by a figure offpeech, which in rhetoric is termed the abuse of words that we ever seem to express a contrary opinion. Happiness is peculiar to sentient beings; or is proper 
 proper to mind, the great receptacle of enjoyment and suffering, as 


T cr. VI. well as perfection and defec. When we fay of an external fituati__Y^ on, that it is a happy one, we mean to affirm only, that it is fit to produce happiness in the mind that enjoys it; and thus, by a well known figure, put the supposed cause for the effet.

But in what concerns the mind of man, external causes have not any necessary effe6t. The most fortunate circumstances which imagination can suggest do not produce any agreeable asfecion in the mind of the peevifl or melancholy ; and many circumflances of apparent distress do not fret or discompose the contented and chearful.

Reason, then, teems to require, that we correct this abuse of language; and reserve the appellation of happiness for mind, to which alone it is applicable, and in which it forms the diflindion -of goodness and worth.

In the mean time, it is not disputed, that external circumflances have their value, although they are not sufficient to secure the happiness of those who are placed in them. They include the ordinary means of subsistence and felf-prefervation, and have therefore a value commensurate to the value of life itself, which cannot be preserved without them. But this value, great as it may seem, is still undetermined, until the nature of that life which is preserved shall be specified. It may be happy, and it may be miserable; and, although nature has wifely given an inftincive desire to preserve it upon either supposition, and the objed of infiint is life; yet the sole object of reason is happinefo; and mere life, or the means that preserve it, apart from this object is of a value yet ambiguous or uncertain.

So: So far, there will not probably be any difference of opinion; 


. 


but, if merely to live be no more than a capacity either of happi- 
ness or of misery, we shall be ready to enquire what are the additions which life may receive, that will render it happy on the one hand, or miserable on the other ?

To this queflion, answers will be given as various as the conceptions or ruling passions of men. It is a maxim, that Tafies are not to be contested; and, on the subjeL of happiness, it is scarcely permitted for one man to prescribe for another. To the vulgar, happinels appears to be the portion of the young, the gay, and the prosperous. It flrinks from the touch of the laborious, the severe, and the thoughtful. It is the ilate of a moment. The fame person may be happy or unhappy, and pass from one state to the other as quick as the successions of thought. The boy seeks it at play, and the man ofbufinefs in some event, on which his hopes are suspended.

To such minds the event, while in expectation, gives a profpea of happiness; but, upon its arrival, generally disappoints the hopes which it gave: And they are the happiest amongst ordinary men, who do not dwell upon such disappointments, but at the close of any one pursuit, adopt some new one with equal alacrity.

Is man, therefore, doomed to reft the happiness of every present moment, on the prospect of some future event, which upon trial is found to be illusive ? This, in fact, is the cafe with many of those who have devoted themselves to what they are pleased to call the serious concerns of human life, profit, preferments, or famne; 
 fame; and yet there are persons who have no such serious objeds 
in view, who, without regard to the future, enjoy the exercises 
hr^- 'and occupations of the present hour. Such are the huntsman in his chace; companions in their conversation or play: in all of which the end or the flake is a trifle. But exercises of the mind or the body are highly agreeable, and " labour itself," in the words of the Rambler, " is its own reward."

To a mind conscious of this law of its nature, the objec, it may be thought, should be to exert itself properly upon all occafions; to propose reasonable ends, but never to fink under 'any event, nor even to incur any grievous disappointment, so long as the mind finds occasion to employ itself properly..

The exercises of good sense and of wisdom are, in their own nature, agreeable. They proceed upon a just discernment of objeds, and do not give way to illusive hopes or unmanly fears.
As it is the excellence of a social being to be the friend of thore with whom he associates; so the love of mankind is to man, as such, the principal source of enjoyment albfo Courage and fortitude, being the excellencies of an adlive nature destined to ply in the midst of difficulties, dangers, and hardships, are, to the person who is endowed with them, not less a security for the poifeflion of all the faculties which nature has furnished for such occasions, than an exemption from fear; and an alleviation of the suffering which hardfiip or danger produces, in the timorous or desponding mind.

It may be thought, perhaps, that exemption fiom difficulty or danger is preferable to resolution or force of mind ; and it may may be thought wiser to leek for places of safety from which the PRT II.
causes of fear being removed, there is not any occasion to ex- 

ercife the virtues of intrepidity or courage. r The wife, no doubt, will avoid unnecessary occasions of susfering or of danger; but there, notwithstanding, are, by the appointment of providence, sometimes a part of his lot : And if the fearful could remove every real cause of alarm from human life, where is the place of security in which the coward will not figure to himself objects of fear and distrust ? Where is the bed of roses on which the Sybarite will not find the doubled leaf? Or where are the circumstances of affluence and ease to which the difcontented and the peeviflh may not impute the sufferings of his own fretful temper ?

The virtuous are not deceived, when they avoid the excess of an animal gratification, or reject sensuality as their guide to enjoyment. It is well known, that temperance is eligible, as the proper ceconomy even of animal pleasure; and, the more that such pleasure is valued, the more we lhould value those habits of lite, which preserve the animal organs in a proper state of enjoyment. But temperance is the economy of pleasure, still, in a higher sense than this: It is the economy of the wife; who, knowing the higher purpose of his nature, will not fubinit to beflow an improper part of his time or attention on objecs of inferior consideration or value.

To the second proposition, then, we may fubloin, as its application and its comment, That happiness is constituted in the mind, by the continued habits of wisdom, benevolence, fortitude, .and temperance: And the reader may be addrefled, nearly in the I 2 fame 
 fame terms which the emperor Antoninus addressed to himself; HEA P. V " If you discharge your present duty with diligence, resolution, -Y"_,/ " and benignity, without any bye views; if you adhere to this, "without any farther desires or aversions; completely satisfied " in discharging your present offices, according to nature, and " in the heroic sincerity of all your professions, you will live hap'pily. Now, your doing this none can hinder."

This account of happiness does not preclude any reasonable attention to the ordinary concerns of human life. Nay, requires such attention, as part of the offices of a man, and in the performance of which his happiness confifRs. It precludes only so much dependance of mind on the events of fortune, as disable it for the proper discharge or continuance of its office, with refpet to these or any other object ofreafonable care.

It were unhappy to neglect any means that might tend to obtain the proper end you propose: but it is more unhappy to be so affected with any event whether adverse or prosperous, as to become unfit to continue or repeat the exertions of a diligent and beneficent mind. Such exertions are the foundation on which you are to reft for happiness. Events you may endeavour to obtain or provide ; but they may also happen contrary to your wishes; and your happiness cannot consist in events which you cannot bring about, although it may, and aCtually does, consist in the temper you command and the part you at, through all the variety of events to which you are exposed.

On this subjet, good fJefe need not charge itself with the paradox, which, we are told, was mantained by ostentatious zealots, whether of the Epicurean or the Stoic school, that all external 3 siLtations Situations are equal; and, that the perfec man would be equally 

happy in the bull of Phalaris, as on a bed of roses. 




Fortitude, of a very inferior measure to this, is surely a valuable quality; but, in whatever measure or degree a wife man posiess it, he will not, without necessity, or some adequate inducement, run himself into sufferings of any fort. Such pain or inconvenience, as he has acually incurred, he will be happy to endure, without repining at providence, or intermitting the exercife of his mind and his faculties. If he be in prosperity, he will think the happy part committed to his choice is moderation, equanimity, and beneficence; if, in adversity, the fame virtues still remain to be exercised in the manner which the occasion, prescribes.





S E C T I 0 N VII.

Of the aElcal MeaJfres and Sources of Good and Evil in hzuman Lfe.

 T HE value of virtue, as we have endeavoured to define it, will 
not be questioned: For who can doubt the value of a wisdom, SEcr. VII.
S<Cv-VI which cannot err; of a temper, which is ever joyful and serene, in its exertions for the good of mankind; of a temperance, which no allurement of false pleasure can mislead; or, of a fortitude, which no difficulty or danger can embarrass or appal? This, we may be told, is first to imagine perfect happiness, and then to give it the name of virtue; whilst the whole is ideal, and never realized in the cafe of any human creature.

Such, indeed, is the nature of abftraa science, we systematize our own thoughts, leaving the application to be separately made.
On the subjcd of moral>, more elpecially, we propose to inquire, not what men acually are; but what they ought to be, or what are the ideas, upon which they may, and ought to determine their choice in particular inflances. But, although this be a susficicnt answer to the objetlion which is foietimcs made to moral science, science. as a scheme of visionary and unattainable perfection. It PA RT II
may not be improper to confider what are termed virtues and vices ATP.VIrT.
in the minds of ordinary men; with their various degrees and oc- tv j cafions, in order to shew that there is not any intention to obtrude definitions and divisions for historical sacs; and even, that the imprascicability of perfect virtue is no reafbn why we should abate our endeavours to do well. 'Perfeation is ever to be aimed at, even by those who incur defects; and defeRs alwa.ys to be Ihunned, even by those who come the farthest short of petfec7ion. If the moralist is not to enjoin perfttion, he muff do, what of all things is most contrary to reason, recommend defefls. The conditions of men are extremely unequal ; yet, no one is so high in the scale of being, as that he may not move a ftep higher, and no one so low, as that he may not get into the way of advancement. Although he may not attain to all the perfections of the wife as defcribed in any of the antient sects of philosophy; yet he mray not incur all the mistakes of the foolish, and the fewer the better. Happinefs,it ihould seem from the observations of the last and tome of the preceding fedions, is a term of. praise equivalent to merit, and consisting in the uniform tenor of a virtuous life: But, as honeJly consists in meaning wieill *, it lhould also seem that happiness is within the competence of every human creature: Whence is it, then, in any instance so imperfectly obtained ?. And whence is it, that so many complain it is placed beyond their reach ? They surely do not confider it as an attribute of their own will and affections.

Men of speculation have riflEed a conjecture, that all the difference of genius or characer, which have appeared in the world 3 may : .Laudanl,,.'qtti vello fit f.tis.

may be traced to some casual fuggeftionof Sentiment or thought; 

or to some specific occasion, that stirred the peculiar passion, and k-v- routed the original effort, which, continued into habit, gave the individual his bias to a distinguishing cast of genius or characer through life t. But, without pretending, in this manner, to level the original diftindions of nature, we may venture to assume, that men are much affeCted by early impreflions; and continue to take much of their characters from the notions they entertain, and the habits of thinking they have acquired.

As we may know what a person thinks from his actions, so we may guess how a person will act, from our knowledge of his habitual ways of thinking, let it be conceived, that to live virtuously is to be happy, that to have an evil or malicious thought is misery; and let these ideas be ever present to the mind, as the idea of his treasure is ever present to the miser, or the importance of his own person is ever present to the coxcomb; and the apprehension of a happiness so constituted, will amount to a steady principle of integrity and beneficence; as their refpeaive habits of thinking are, to the miser, and the coxcomb, the essence of avarice, impertinence, and folly.

Self-conceit muff appear in ostentation, or in a continual obtrufion on the notice of other men. The admiration of birth and fortune, in one class of men, may betray itself in pride and contemptuoufiefs, in another class, may appear equally in envy and malice, or in servility or meanness. The temper also re-acs upon the judgement. The chearfulare inclined to think of gay subjects; the melancholy, to entertain gloomy apprehensions of things; as the I' IHelvetius de L' Esprit.

the courageous are inclined to confide in their fellow creatures, 

and the cowardly are inclined to distrust them. 


We are disposed towards the objecs around us, either as the other animals are disposed towards the objedcs of sense, by an original instinct, or blind propensity of nature, or by a relation, peculiar to intelligent being, that of the conception we have formed, or the habit of thinking we have acquired.

Such is the foil, in which the moralist is destined to fow,to plant, and to make his trial of what can be reaped; without being discouraged, because the full bloom of terrestrial paradise is not every where, or perhaps not any where, to be seen on the earth; and the fairest fruits come, mixed with the noisome productions of the wilderness.

Moral science operates for our good, only by mending our conceptions of things, and correAing or preventing the errors from which moral depravity or misery proceeds. The very appellation of good, though no more than a name habitually beflowed upon its subjed, has great effec, on particular occasions, in warping the judgement, and in direting the choice. It was for this reason, probably, that philosophers of old appeared so anxious to fix the application of terms, as well as to store the mind, with just conceptions. They proposed, that the firfc principle of morality fllould eradicate every false apprehension on the subjed of good and evil; and so become sufficient to give ajuft direCtion to the will and affecsions, wherever they proceed on the pre-conceived notion of things.

Epicetus seems to reft the foundations of virtue and happiness on the proper difcernlnent and choice of objeds, which are in VTor. I. K our 
 our own power, in contradistinction to things which are not in 
CHAP.Vl. our power. Among the things in our own power, he reckons 'v ' " our opinions, our pursuits, our desires, and aversions; and, in a word, whatever are our own actions." Among the things not in our own power, he reckons " body, property, reputation, c' command, and, in a word, whatever are not our own aAions "."
Attachment to the first, and indifference to the second, are, according to him, the essence of wifdonl and happiness.

It is surely happy for any one to be conscious that the best things are in his own power: But, in this, the vulgar are frequently deceived; and recur to fortune, as more in their power, than the attainments of a happy mind. They seek for happiness in external accommodations, rather than in any quality or condition of their own nature: and seem to think external circumstances more in their power, than their own acions; or, what is worse, think their own acions of value, only so far as they asset their fortune.

To this ground of diftinAion, which is laid by Epidetus, we may subjoin another, relating to the fame fubjecds; but taken from a different consideration of them, that is, from the confideration of their value, whether real or supposed, which is in some instances abjolute, in other instances merely comparative. Among things of aboflute value, are to be reckoned chiefly the habits of a virtuous life, intelligence, benevolence, temperance, and fortitude ; or, in short, the good qualities which form the best condition of human nature; and which they, who poflefs them, enjoy the more that others partake of the iame bleflings. Among advantages " EiltIct. Encllh dliol, cap. I. Mrs. C.artcr's trallQ.ition.

tages merely comparative, on the contrary, we may reckon pre- 

crdence, and Juperiority, whether of riches or power; and, in a 

word, all the circumstances, in refpet to which the elevation of a, one is deprejzion to another.

In a former fedion, there was an attempt to account for the origin of malice, from an error or defed of understanding, in admitting advantages or disadvantages which are merely comparative, as principal constituents of happiness or misery. Under this apprehension, although a person were by nature disposed to benevolence, he is, by the interference of interests, checked in the effet of this disposition. And, among parties so stated, the celebrity of one being obscurity to another, or the precedence and preferment of one being degradation to the other, they are, in the midst of such pursuits, naturally rivals and competitors, and have more frequent occasions of hatred and distrust than of confidence or good will *. "The king t," fays Baffompierre, "after " he had given the command of his army in Italy to his brother, "bethought him how much the glory to be won in that service " would obscure his own; and, so powerful is jealousy, even a"mong relations, that he took this so firongly into his head, or " rather into his heart, as to deprive him of reft." In this rage for comparative advantages, the success of one is disappointment to another; and the industry of one to better himself a scheme of hostility to those who must fink under his elevation.

From this source are derived, jealousy, envy, and malice, those K 2 waters See Sc. of the Origin of Evil.
t Lewis XIII. and XV.

PART IL waters of bitterness, which flow so plentifully in human life.
SCHC T.iI The wretch, whose principal aim is to surpass other men, joins to k-r\ fufpence, hinderance, disappointment, mortification, and all the the evils of a precarious fortune, the impoflibility of extricating himself, without a total reverse of all his imaginations and thoughts. To become candid and humane, he must change objecs of his hatred and distrust into objedts of good will and benevolence; and confider his fellow creatures in society, as the procurers of much convenience and benefit to himself, not merely as rivals and competitors, under whose prosperity or elevation of rank he is doomed to fink, or incur degradation.

Purify the mind of this taint, and most of the evils in human society are done away. Desire would be placed chiefly on those things which are of absolute value; which any one may possess in thehigheft degree, without detriment to another; or rather, which, being in the possession of one, prove an aid to others in the attainment of like bleflings.

The reputation of virtue, like celebrity in any other way, may engage men in competition and rivalfhip; but virtue itself is promoted by the prevalence of virtue in the world. The lamp of wifidom is lighted by communication with the wife; and benevolence is inspired in the society of the benevolent. Fortitude and temperance gain strength by example. Whoever can reft upon these qualities of supreme value, as the constituents of happiness, finds no occasion on which to feel the unhappy paflions which terminate in malice. He is gratified in the welfare of other men; and wishes for their elevation in goodness and virtue, as he wifnes for the rising of the fun upon the world, as a common belnefit to all who partake in his influence.

3 Antoninus Antoninus was happy, not in wearing the purple, nor in pof- 
PART II

fessing the throne of Cefar; but in the attainments of a iteady 

and beneficent mind. In these he was no man's rival, and was v ready to lhare every blessing, even with those who attempted to supplant him in the empire *.

We err, in deriving the corruptions, which are imputed to great cities and courts, from the love of pleasure, and from the profusion of wealth, with which the love of pleasure is gratified.
The mere voluptuary is innocent, compared to those who are deeply infected with malice, envy, and pride; a generation of evils begot upon emulation, competition, or the apprehension of comparative advantages, whether precedence, titles, or wealth.
Wherever the roots of such evil are planted, the concourse and assemblage of men, from which we should otherwise expeat the praCtice and improvement of every social disposition, but renders the growth of malevolence more copious and rank. Competitors for the lustre of equipage and dress, might have fiept in quiet, or enjoyed tranquillity, at their return from a brilliant assembly, if the lustre of some other person had not proved an eclipse to theirs; or, if his equipage and liveries had not appeared to surpass their own, and to carry away from them the attention of the world.

We may therefore admit, that such errors of the imagination are constituent of moral weakness, and scarcely separable from actual depravity of the heart. If no external confequencc fhotlld follow, we may thank the administration of regular govcrment, which * See his Rcconmcineultiolns to the Senate in behalf of Cafflus.

which checks the tendency of unhappy passions; and applaud the SEC. VI. eftablifled decency of manners, which require certain measures /V or appearances of candour to be preserved, even between parties at variance with one another; and which not only conceal the torment of unhappy passions, but tend, in some degree also, to conciliate good will, by inspiring forbearance, where the tendency of competition is to awaken jealousy, or hatred, and give occasion to offensive behaviour.

The great weight of corruption, proceeding from the jealousy of competitors for riches, power, and court favour, without the counterpoise of external restraints, from decency and good manners, funk the capital of the Roman empire, and the palace of Caesar, into scenes of the most atrocious brutality, perfidy and cruelty: And, it mufft be confessed, that the consideration of such consequences would be sufficient to warn us against like notions of good and evil: or, if men were to form their opinions, not on the evidence of fad, but on the grounds of expedience; nothing can be more evident, than that a conception of happiness, in things out of our own power, or in things of which others are in haste to prevent our enjoyment, by flepping before us, muff be attended with fruitless longings, heart burnings, jealousy and malice. But, if such be the nature of good, relating to us, philosophers, it will be said, may dispose of names as they may think proper, and call any gift of fortune indifferent; but they themifelves will not be the less desirous to pofTefs it.
Nor can men be required to have any other conception of good and evil, than what the real asped of things in nature serves to suggest.

So much is admitted; and the question relating to what is good, whatever whatever notion of things it be most expedient for us to entertain, 

muit recur for solution to the tribunal of fat and experience. 


Let the fad therefore decide! Are men happy or miserable, in the precise degree of their good or ill fortune ; or of their precedence to others ? If so, fortune and precedence are the sole good.
But, if men are found equally happy, or equally miserable, under great varieties of rank and fortune, it is evident that the measure of happiness or misery is not to be taken from thence; and that a wife man will not adopt an opinion, nor countenance a form of expreflon, at once inexpedient and contrary to fact.

In fixing the notions of good, it is not wife to rely for happiness, on things which are not in our own power; on things which are not of any absolute value; but, which please only by comparison with what other men possess, and which therefore engage us in a competition and firife, adverse to the belt and happiest.
qualities of our nature.

Neither is it wife to rely for happiness on the mere pofeffion.

of things, which may be well or ill used, and which, in being abused, are no less the occasion of misery, than in being properly used they are the occasion of happiness.

As happiness is a condition of the affections and temper, mere external situation is not to be confidered as any part of it, farther than the external circumstance is ableto produce that internal con-dition, or happy state of the mind.

The Stoics, proceeding upon one or otler of there maxims, limited the appellation of good to virtue, that of evil to vice alone.

~~~~~~3 TU~~~IJnder 
 Under this limitation, their famous paradox, that pain is no SECT. VII. evil, and the gifts offortune indiferent, meant no more, than that Gs.v. -there was not any moral turpitude in pain; and that the gifts of fortune neither exclude, nor secure, the poffeflion of virtue.
This, indeed, they confidered as sufficient consolation to those who labour under any external inconvenience, whether of adverfity or pain.

As a material on which virtue may operate; as an inflrument of beneficence; as a flake, for which men are to play, and become gainers or losers for themselves or others in the game of human life, they allowed that external possessions have their use, and that they merit the attention of the wife: but to rely on them in any determinate measure. for happiness they mantained to be extreme folly. In pursuance of this docrine, they would not prostitute the denomination of good to any thing that was not virtue; nor permit any thing to be called evil that was not vice; and would not have a man set his heart, or rely for happiness, upon any thing beyond his own province of responsibility or conduct. In this manner they firove to cultivate an elevation of mind which would not owe its good to any contingent circumfiance, nor to any will but its own. They would set at defiance the events of fortune or the caprice of other men. They would not be in fear of any adversity which could not hinder their ading a virtuous part; nor be flattered with a prosperity which could add nothing to the merit of a virtuous life.

The Peripatetics were content to remain on a ftep below these high pretensions. They too held virtue to be the supreme good, and had just maxims of integrity and honour, but comparatively enfeebled enfeebled, as the Stoics alledged, with a notion that even these de- 
 pended on fortune for part of their effects. While they assumed CAP. I.

SEc'. VII.

virtue, or a laudable part to be aced in the community of mankind as the supreme good; and reprobated the recluse tranquility, or selfish enjoyments of the Epicurean, as poison to the foul of man, and death to his best and happiest affedions; whilst they allowed, that the highest measure of fortune never could be brought into competition with any consideration of justice or duty; they still required prosperity, to compleat the felicity even of a virtuous life.

In this argument, the Stoics, though charged with paradox, and themselves the more ordinary butts of ridicule, yet turned this weapon against their antagonits : " You allow," they said, " that " virtue is the constituent of happiness, and even that fortitude " is a virtue; and yet to complete that happiness, you require a " fortune, which virtue despises, and an ease- in which fortitude is not required. You tell us of a good which the thief may " steal from his neighbour; which the miser may lock up in his 6 coffers from all the world; which the glutton may devour at " a meal; which may be denied to the worthy, and lavifled on " the vile. You preach up moderation, and even abstinence, " with refped to this good. You own it is mean to be solicitous " about it; and noble to despise it. You call that a good, therefore, " of which the contempt is wisdom and honour; of which the "privation did not marr the happiness of Epaminondas and " Socrates; nor secure the condition of Darius or Croesus. The " wife man, they said, will acquit himself properly with refpe't ' to the gifts of fortune; but, for his happiness, will rely upon " what he himself does ; not upon what he possesses; upon the I, "general 
 " general resolution, integrity and goodness which are his own; 
 not upon the caprice of other men, nor. upon the measure or 
"degree in which the materials on which he is to work falls to "his hlare."

This may well be confidered as a degree of perfection, far raifed above the ordinary slate of human nature: It is, nevertheless, that, for which it was given, a noble idea, upon which the ingenuous mind cannot too nearly form itself.

Men very commonly susser themselves to depend, for present comfort, upon some diflant object, or the hopes which they entertain of the future. This is no more than a habit of thinking; yet it may produce frivolity and weakness, if not depravity of mind, or neglec of duty. The future seldom comes up to the expectations that were formed of it: But it is the nature or characler of feeble minds, notwithstanding the fallacy ofpaft expectations, to apprehend a ,future, on which, to the neglec of present objects or duties, they still continue to rely.

Material fubjeas, or external circumitances of any kind, except so far as they assec the organs of sense with pleasure or pain, are in their own nature indifferent; and, if beyond this they excite desire or aversion in the mind, it is by means of some quality, whether of good or evil, honour or dcihonour, which are not inherent to the subjec itself; but afrociatec with it, in the conception which the mind entertains. The miser has afrociated happiness with money, in his conception of riches ; and is infatiable of wealth. The usurper has associated honour with power or dominion; and Rficks at no means, whether ofinfinuation or force to obtain his end.

.X~~~
i cZV1~~Whatever Whatever be the habitual conception, and the habitual pursuit, 
PARTr I.



these form the ruling affeaion or passion of the human mind: If 
the objec, in itself, were fitted by nature to excite such affeCion '.Y.
or passion, as the juice of an orange produces the sensation of sweet, the affetions or passions of all men, like the sensation produced on their palate, would be the fame. But, while sensations are uniform, conceptions are various; one person hopes for what, to another, is an objecd of fear: Insomuch, that many have thought themselves justified in concluding, from these appearances, that there is not in reality any standard, by which to rectify or to fix the apprehensions of men. But, as we have found the distinction of good and evil sufficiently efiablifhed in the nature of things, we have only to apply this diftintion, in order to correct any mistake or false apprehension, respeCting the subjeCs of estimation or choice; and, in our endeavour so to profit by the exercise ofreafon, consists the fruit of that information on the subjeCt of good and evil, which it is the objeC of moral science to obtain or convey.


The fame SubjeS continued.
*A Ss pey eiaoras 'xaxss xa a aYOCbss fyeirO EIV Ia : T&5 SE ayvowmCe avspatoNSas~l 3vx Scciu5s Kgexjair^w.

to avoid the imputation of visionary chemes, it be required 

to keep in view the adcual slate of men's minds, as well as the ab"b-rT'^ firaA idea of what they ought to be, we may continue to offer a specimen of the opinions, or habits of thinking, in which the characers of men commonly originate; trusting that a few examples may be sufficient to lead every person in pursuing the fame trad of observation for himself.

There are persons, we know, who do not so much reprobate the vices to which mankind are fubjcq, as depreciate human nature ture itself. This is an unhappy turn of thought, tending to itifle 

the sentiments of humanity or good will towards others, and to S
check the efforts of any ingenuous endeavour in the person who would improve himself. Man is formed to take part in the common cause of his fellow creatures; and he suffers in thinking meanly of their nature: He is formed for progression; and is frufirated in having his pretensions itated so low as to check his exertions. Men will not attempt what they think is altogether visionary and beyond their reach: But, in the gradation of human character, there are every where faults to be corrected, and improvements to be made, of which the finalleft possible effect is ever preferable to none. Socrates believed that men might be disposed to mutual beneficence, and that numbers were so difposed. Aristippus conceived that all pretensions to the-love of others were false; and that every one proposed to be of use only to himself. The one was inclined, by his conception, to benevolence and magnanimity; the other to felfifhnefs and distrust.

There is an error seemingly opposite to this depreciation of human nature; but, in its defecs, also productive of misery. Such is an overweaning conception or imagination of what men actually are, producing an ill founded confidence in the supposed prevalence of generosity, magnanimity, truth, and sincerity, of which the undiftinguiihing assumption not only exposes the mind to folly, disappointment, and other effects of mistake; but leads, in the sequel, to the very opposite extreme of distrust of mankind, and despair of virtue.

To the well-informed and the well-difpofed, virtue is not the less real that vice is frequently opposed to it. The mixed fccncs of human life are its proper flation. Here, it is equally fignalizr,~~~~n ~~cd 
 ed in withfianding the evil, as in co-operating with the good; CHCAPv. and its happiness depends, not upon the content or participation '-xvi 'of others, but on the degree in which it exerts itself.

It is unhappy to reft our choice of good qualities on the supposition that we are to meet with corresponding qualities in other men; to apprehend that candour and humanity are due only to the candid and the humane; or, that want of merit in others will dispense with that justice or liberality of condud, which it is our happiness to maintain for ourselves.

In consequence of such conceptions, we sometimes repent of the good we have done, when, (as we suppose), the parties concerned appear unworthy of kindness: And, in such insfances, the rule of our conduct is taken from what others deserve, not from what is becoming in ourselves. Want of merit in the world is alledged, as an excuse for indifference to mankind; and what is perhaps in us a desire to shift our own duty, is mistaken for the severity of virtue. Instead of ingenuous adors, we become squeamish observers of other men; and, taking offence at their behaviour, indulge animofities little short of malice.

It is unhappy to confider perfecion, more as the flandard by which we may cenfire others, than as the rule by which we are to conduct ourselves.

We are by nature enabled to conceive a measure of excellence beyond what we are able to attain. This, when the flandard is applied to ourselves, may become a source of indefinite progrefsion; but, when applied only to other men, is a pretence for invidious dious censure; insomuch that, a principle, which ought to incite 

in us the choice of good qualities, and a disposition to correct our 




own faults, is employed only as an occasion of contempt or malice towards our fellow creatures. Every ill disposition is unhappy; but the misery is then the most complete, when ill difpofitions set up for censure, and aflume the pretence of holy zeal, or concern for what is right.

It is a wretched opinion, that happiness confilfs in exemption from labour, or in having nothing to do.

This opinion is taken up, perhaps, from the abuse of words, when we contraat the enjoyment of some supposed good with the expectation and pursuit of it. In this contrail, we fancy that enjoyment begins only when labour has ceased; and, in this apprehension, the world is full of expedants, who think, that their happiness is deferred by the labours and toils they undergo in finishing the tafil which Providence has prescribed to them. They sigh for relief fiom trouble, and sometimes obtain it; when, fortunately for the instruction of mankind, they show, by their example, that the languors of in-occupation are more grievous than toil.

The wis' to have nothing to do, is most excufeable in persons who, having labours prescribed by necessity, are frequently urged on to fatigue. The powers of human nature are limited. and require alternate periods of repose as well as exertion ; but, as the too long continuance of labour is grievous, so the continuance of inaAion, beyond the time that is required for repose, is attended with a wearincfs and languour, no lets diflrcfsful than fatigue.

'Fhic 
 The notion, that happiness confiis in relief from any active SECT.VII. engagements, is easily accounted for, also, in the cafe ofthofe ./YV-- who, having a talk to perform, never engage in it willingly. The talk poflibly confines them, and prevents their application to any thing else, while it does not supply those real exertions of mind, which never fail to make the time that is well employed pass away with delight. The person who is thus confined, without being occupied, mistakes his aversion to confinement for an aversion to business; and his longing for a change of occupation he mistakes for a dislike to exertion. Thus, while the school-boy is confined on his form, his heart and his mind are in the playfield. As he does not apply to his lesson, nor even attend to it, while he reads it, he is only confined, not occupied. What we term his aversion to application, and his longing for the hour of dismission, is an ardor for employment; and, in facd, when free to chufe for himself, he betakes him to a labour, in which every muscle of the body, and every faculty of the mind, is firained or exerted to obtain the objeA of some hazardous or toilsome contest.

It is thus common, through life, to be reluctant in business, and fond of amusement: But, while in declining business men seem to reckon any kind of employment a grievance, they, by recourse to hazardous sports and diversions, make ample consefflon that some kind of ative and even serious engagement is indifpenfably neceflary.

The diflincion between business and amusement is perhaps not easily fettled, or consists intirely in this, that business is prescribed by some consideration of interest or duty; and amusement is taken up, in the beginning at leafl, without any such serious concern.

But But if bufnefs be diftinguiihed by the importance of the object, on 

which it proceeds, amusement soon becomes insipid, unless means SHAPi. V
are found sufficiently to interest the mind, and exercise its faculties.
This end, indeed, is obtained by the votaries of play, in creating to themselves a rilk, which far exceeds that of the merchant in the adventures of his trade, or those of the politician in his prorpeds of elevation or power. The hazards incurred by either are infipid, compared to the chances of loss or gain, in which the finished gamester is known to involve himself. Nor is this a refinement only of polished ages. The mere savage, after he is stript of all his other possessions at the gaming table, closes the scene with a throw, on which he flates the freedom of his person *.

Business, to those who are really occupied, may have all the qualities of an agreeable pastime. If it be a diligent performance of the offices incumbent on a man of integrity and virtue, it will join the fatisfaaion of a mind conscious of duty, to that of a mind employed in the exercise of its faculties, and exempt from fear, malice or remorse. So that, to those who decline business for the fake of amusement, it may be laid, that they reject what is fitted to employ them agreeably; and in order to quicken the feelings of a mind which is become languid for want of employment, betake themselves to pursuits in which they become a prey to evil passions. Such is the effect of dissipation, a weakness of the mind which loaths its best occupations, as the sickly stomach is found to loath the most wholesome food.

We may conclude, therefore, that the love of amusement is VOL. IL. M unhappy, * Aleam (quod mirere) fobrii inter ferva exercent, tanta lucrandi perdendive temeritatc, ut cum omnia dcfeccrant, extremo ac novillimo jaclu, de libertate et de corpore contendant. 'ACIT. tie Moribus Grmnan. c. 24.

 unhappy, if it proceed from a notion, that any thing can amuse SC AP'r. . us better than the duties of our station, or that any employment /-rx>v is more to be wished for than that precisely which in the present moment has fallen to our share. If any one have formed such a notion, he may be told to beware of it. It will disqualify him for his best enjoyments and embitter his life with peevishness and melancholy.

It is unhappy to conceive beneficence as an effort of felf-denial; or to conceive that we lay our fellow creatures under great obligations, by the kindness we do them.

This notion refers chiefly to acas of charity or liberality; mn which the beneficent gives to another what might be of use to himself. It were vile to be insensible of such merit; but the person, who gives such proofs of goodness, is himself the last to over-rate its value. " If I have done a kindness to my fellow creatures", fays Antoninus; " is not this itself my benefit? let me "not forget it, nor ever cease to do such things".

To the fame effect, alfo,we may transcribe the following pafTage: " There are some who, when they have done you a good office, "are apt to remind you of it. Others do not mention what they "have done; but have it uppermost in their thoughts, and confider you as their debtor. A third fort do not seem to know "what they have done; but are like the vine which produces its "grapes, and has done, when it hath yielded its proper fruit.

" As the horse when he has finilhed his course; the hound, " when lie has ended his chacc; the bee, when it has made its "honey; fb lie, who is truly a man, perforln a good oflice, 3 '' withollt " without any noise ; and proceeds to the next that occurs to be 
PART. 1I.
" done, as the vine, in its proper season, renews its foliage and 


SiEc.VIII

" its fruit. We ought to be of the number of those, who do S'.I
" not seem to know the good they have done: Nay but ought <' we not to be conscious of beneficent intentions ? Is it not the " property of a social being, to wish well to his fellow creatures.
" Yea, so help me God, to desire, too, that his fellow creatures " should be sensible of his beneficence ? What you fay is true, " yet, if you misapprehend what I said above, you will belong "to one of the former classes, and be among those who are led " aside from perfection by specious reasons. But, if you are "willing to observe the diftindion, that is made between those " first classes and the others, do not be afraid that it will cause " you to fail in any social aAion *".

If virtue, whatever be its external mode of exertion, be itself the excellence or good of human nature, (and we do wrong if we admit of any thing else as virtue) or, if it be, in the intellectual world, what health, and strength, and beauty, are in the animal kingdom ; there is no reason to apprehend, that a fellow creature is obliged to us for being virtuous, any more than he would be obliged to us for being in health.

The offices of a found mind are as natural to the virtuous, as those of a found body are to the healthy. The humane and the candid can never cease to perform the offices of humanity, and candour, although they do not confider, in what degree others may be obliged to them for so doing.

M2 I
* Anton. lib. v. c. 6.

PART IL. It were unhappy to confider virtue as a tafl, confiting ofex

SEc.VIII. ternal performances, enjoined under the fanaion of rewards and w.r\v,'w punishments. We can no more become benevolent, from the hope of reward, or the fear of punishment, than we can posess ourselves of fortitude from the love of ease or aversion to trouble. The ingenuous and high minded believes the reality of future rewards and punifihments; but, if they are any thing different from the poiTefilon or privation of that goodness, to which he aspires, they are mere acceifaries to the considerations from which he ads; they may be useful, in restraining a criminal disposition, but are not necefrary, in direcing or forming the virtuous to his duty ; much less, is a regard to them an essential constituent of his cha-radter.

If the future lot of the righteous be happy, his present condition in the pracice of virtue is so also; and it were absurd, surely, to conceive that a person muff not prefer the good which he may now enjoy, but for fake of a good which he is to enjoy hereafter.

It is unhappy to admit of any consideration in competition with our real good. " There is hardly a man to be found," fays an ingenious observer*, " who would not rather be in pain, to appear "happy, than be really happy, to appear miserable." So familiar are the examples of paradox, even in the conceptions of the vulgar. As they examine their own aspeA by refledCion from a mirror, they judge of their own condition by reflection from other men's thoughts; consult the opinion of others, rather than their own feelings; prefer consideration, or the reputation of worth, to worthiness itself; and do not so much confider how far they dcfervc praise, as how far they polcfs it.

This.
* The Tatler..

This is beginning the work of felicity at the wrong end; la- 




bouring for a fuperftrucure before they have laid a foundation; 
and striving to produce a shadow without any substance.

All men would be happy. The most erroneous paflions miflead from this object only by mistake; and, it is to mistake their own aim, when they would produce abroad the appearance of happiness, before they have poifefled it in the qualities of their own minds. The reality will not fail to carry its external appearances; or, if it ihould be unobserved or mistaken, the disadvantage is comparatively of small account.

It is sufficient refpeA to the opinions of other men, that we are pleased with their testimony, without sacrificing the consciousness of an ingenuous mind to what the world may think, or without preferring the appearances of merit to the real though silent poffeflion of it.

In this, the mistake is doubly to be regretted, as it implies the substitution of a false object for the true one, and the substitution also of what is precarious, and depending on the caprice of others, what is matter of anxiety and disappointment, for an attainable and secure possession. Such is the choice which the vain-glorious has made, in preferring the opinions of other men to the poffeflion of real good qualities in himself, which he might cultivate fecurely, and on which he might rely without any hazard of a difappointment.

It is unhappy to depend for enjoyment on what we cannot command, or to fix our dcfircs on what is beyond our reach.

Thus, 
 It were unhappy to confider virtue as a talk, consisting of ex

SEc.VIII. ternal performances, enjoined under the fantion of rewards and rY" punishments. We can no more become benevolent, from the hope of reward, or the fear of punishment, than we can possess ourselves of fortitude from the love of ease or aversion to trouble. The ingenuous and high minded believes the reality of future rewards and punishments; but, if they are any thing different from the possession or privation of that goodness, to which he aspires, they are mere acceffaries to the considerations from which he ads; they may be useful, in restraining a criminal disposition, but are not neeeffary, in directing or forming the virtuous to his duty ; much less, is a regard to them an essential constituent of his charader.

If the future lot of the righteous be happy, his present condition in the pradtice of virtue is so also; and it were absurd, surely, to conceive that a person mufl not prefer the good which he may now enjoy, but for fake of a good which he is to enjoy hereafter.

It is unhappy to admit of any consideration in competition with our real good. " There is hardly a man to be found," fays an ingenious observer*, " who would not rather be in pain, to appear " happy, than be really happy, to appear miserable." So familiar are the examples of paradox, even in the conceptions of the vulgar. As they examine their own aspeA by reflection from a mirror, they judge of their own condition by reflection from other men's thoughts; consult the opinion of others, rather than their own feelings; prefer consideration, or the reputation of worth, to worthiness itself; and do not so much confider how far they dcefrve praise, as how far they polfffs it.

Tlis.
" Tilu al'nler,.

This is beginning the work of felicity at the wrong end; la- 




bouring for a fuperftrucure before they have laid a foundation; 
and striving to produce a shadow without any substance.

All men would be happy. The most erroneous passions miflead from this object only by mistake; and, it is to miflake their own aim, when they would produce abroad the appearance of happiness, before they have possessed it in the qualities of their own minds. The reality will not fail to carryits external appearances; or, if it lhould be unobserved or mistaken, the disadvantage is comparatively of small account.

It is sufficient refpeA to the opinions of other men, that we are pleased with their testimony, without sacrificing the consciousness of an ingenuous mind to what the world may think, or without preferring the appearances of merit to the real though silent poffeflion of it.

In this, the mistake is doubly to be regretted, as it implies the substitution of a false objec for the true one, and the substitution also of what is precarious, and depending on the caprice of others, what is matter of anxiety and disappointment, for an attainable and secure possession. Such isthe choice which the vain-glorious has made, in preferring the opinions of other men to the pofieffion of real good qualities in himself, which he might cultivate fecurely, and on which he might rely without any hazard of a difappointment.

It is unhappy to depend for enjoyment on what we cannot command, or to fix our dcfires on what is beyond our reach.

Thus, -PART IF. Thus, it were'unhappy for the labouring man, to long for ex

SECT. VII. emption from labour. It were unhappy, in the poor, to aim at nov^ appearing like the rich; to long for an equipage, a retinue, a palace, a table; and think himself excluded froin happiness, in being deprived of these things.

Ambition, or the unwearied desire of something higher than we possess at present, is a principle well suited to the nature of man; and it is, in some one or other of its applications universal to mankind. If it apply to invigorate the practice of virtue, and the exercises of a mind, ingenuous, candid, and humane, this every one has in his power. If it apply to the conduct of ordinary business, whether private or public, still the person so engaged may be well employed for the present; and, if he complain of misery in the absence of his obje&, we may venture to quefiion the wisdom or the temper of his mind.

The ingenuous, the strenuous, and ardent, though we should suppose them not to reflect on the merit of the part which they are acting, are happy in the very exercise of their difpoiitions and powers; and this is so far from being inconsistent with the pursuit of an object, that it requires, or pre-supposes some objet to engage the mind, and give occasion to the exercise of its faculties.

" That the mind of man," fays the Rambler, " is never fa" tisfied with the objecs immediately before it, but is always " breaking away from the present moment, and losing itself in " schemes of future felicity, and that we forget the proper use of ' the time now in our power, to provide for the enjoyment of "that " that which perhaps may never be granted us, has frequent- 

"ly been remarked; and, as this pratice is a commodious sub- S

"jeA of raillery to the gay, and of declamation to the serious, it v/
" has been ridiculed with all the pleasantry of wit, and exagge"rated with all the amplifications of rhetoric. Every instance, " by which its absurdity might appear most flagrant, has been " icudioufly collected; it has been marked with every epithet of " contempt, and all the tropes and figures have been called forth "against it.

Censure is willingly indulged, because it always implies " some superiority: Men please themselves with imagining that "they have made a deeper search, or wider survey, than others, '" and deteted faults and follies, which escape vulgar obfervation," &c.

" This quality of looking forward into futurity," continues the fame author, " seems the unavoidable condition of a being, " whose motions are gradual, and whose life is progressive: As " his powers are limited, he mutt use means for the attainment of " his end, and intend firit what he performs last; as, by conti" nual advances from his first stage of existence, he is perpetually varying the horizon of his profpeas, he must always discover ' new motives of action, new excitements of fear, and allure"ments of desire.

"The end, therefore, which at present calls forth our efforts ",will be found, when it is once gained, to be only one of the means to some remoter end. The natural flights of the human 1' mind arc not from pleasure to pleasure, but from hope to '' hope.

" I-e 
 " He that direcs his steps to a certain point must frequently SECT.VIII. turn his eyes to that place which he firives to reach. He that INs " undergoes the fatigue of labour mufi solace his weariness with "the contemplation of its reward."

So far this author seems to contend for a reliance on the future, as the principal conftittent of present happiness; and it may be difficult to combat any folly, if this Hercules with his club flands in the way to defend it. He may, however, be quoted against himself. "Labour," as he has stated in another place, " is its own reward;" and, in the sequel of the paflage now quotel, he owns, " that some caution against keeping our view " too intent upon remote advantages, is not without its useful" ness"

It is the object of reason, in this matter, to distinguish the objecs to which our views may be safely directed, from those which mislead our desires, and furnish nothing to gratify the mind for the present, besides a vain expecation of the future.

Of the latter kind, are all those objects, which are so far out of our power, that we cannot form any reasonable plan of exertion or application in the pursuit of them. To indulge in the hope or desire offuch things, is that cause of misery, which we are now confidering. Under its effects, the misguided mind is urged by a sense of its wants, but is precluded from any agreeable exercise offaculties, or of power to obtain their supply.

With a better choice of an object, the cafe may be different.
A person may direct hisJieps to a certain point, and frequently 3 turn turn his eyes to that place which hefjrives to reach, while his walk 

is pleasant, and the exercise it gives him is eligible, upon its own SCAT.VI I.
account.

Nor is this any great effort of philosophy, or aim at perfection: It is common in human life, in all its innocent or rational pursuits: It is the course in which men have enjoyed the exercise of their faculties, and by that exercise improved their powers; in which they have been led to observe the system of nature around them, to extend their knowledge, and to multiply arts, whether lucrative or agreeable. It is in the present occupation of their nature they find occasion, whether for opposition or concert, and have their abilities or their disposition to beneficence brought to the test. So that, in numbering the blessings of human life, we may venture to reckon the ad of pursuing its objed, as of more value than the objec pursued; and may rely much more, for happiness, upon the means which are employed for the attainment of our end; than we are to rely upon the end itself, even when obtained: Insomuch that, if any person looking forward to the future is unhappy for the present, we may venture to affirm, either that he has mistaken his object, and fixed his desires on that which does not admit of his taking any reasonable meafures for the attainment of it; or, that if his objed be reafonable, and such as he may pursue with advantage, he has certainly failed in the proper exercise of his faculties, in that course of industry and diligence, which his objet prescribes: Insomuch, that raillery and cenJuire too are very properly applied to those, who, ever intent on thejuture, are unableto enjoy the preJent.

Whatever be the end, which persons of this description propose to thcmfelvcs, their present sufferings imply sloth, ill temper, and VOL. 11 N pusillanimity, 
 pusillanimity; either a want of proper exertion for the attainment CHAI. I. of their end, or the wrong choice of an end which does not ad
SECT. VIII. t w '-y-i mit of any reasonable exertion.

Wherever the faculties are reasonably exerted, if to this we join the exercise of good affections, the sense of innocence and beneficence, magnanimity, courage and temperance, the one an exemption from unreasonable fear, the other an exemption from brutal excesses, the cause of happiness is present, and does not depend upon any thing future.

Persons blessed with alacrity and goodness of disposition, are thus happy in the course of their ordinary pursuits ; and, even while their object is distant. So the boy is gratified at his play, the gentleman at his sport, the plowman at his labour, the tradesman in his workshop, the soldier on his march, the statesman in his office; and each, proportioned to-his alacrity, and to the application he gives to his business. So that, in censuring those who, from their attention to the future, are unhappy at present, it is not the ordinary state of a man, or of a progressive being, that we censure; it is the vice, and the folly of those, who, from sloth or the defects of temper, are disqualified to employ them1elves well for the present.

It were unhappy to think ourselves unable to tfruggle with difficulties, under which others appear to be much at their ease.

In refpec to what nature will bear, one person may serve as a model to another; and teach hint what he may endure or perform. The pecvifli may be apprized of his own ftrcngth, by the example example of numbers who are chearful under hardships, no way 

less grievous than those which cause him to repine. 




Man is not formed to acquiesce in any precise situation. In the befl, he finds something to do; and, in the worst, is then only unhappy, when he suffers his courage and powers of exertion to be overwhelmed. While he exerts himself to remove an inconvenience, he ought to be so far patient under it, as, in his endeavours to procure relief, fully to possess himself and his faculties.

In the variety of conditions incident to mankind, refpeaing the measure of their external supplies and accommodations, we may accordingly observe a wonderful latitude, in the measure of hardfiip or inconvenience to which they can submit, joined with a continual desire of improving their condition, even when at the best. Here is contentment joined to impatience, of that with which they are content. Both are necessary qualifications of man's progressive nature: The disadvantages, under which he labours in any one state of his fortunes, do not disqualify him from proceeding with alacrity, diligence, and ability, in mending his condition; nor does any advantage he ever has gained so far content him, as to terminate any farther exertion of his faculties.

This happy mixture of fortitude under present inconvenience, with a vigorous effort of mind, for the removal of it; although the just balance of temper be frequently overset in the minds of particular men, is, nevertheless, a general charaferiftic of the human species.

The weak are querulous and peevish in their prefint situation, N 2 yet 
 yet do not exert themselves to remove the cause of their susser

SECT.VIII. ing. They fee numbers, on every fide, who bear such a lot as theirs with indifference, and yet are pleated to think themselves singularly wretched. They are so, no doubt; but it is a wretchednefs of temper and opinion, not of external condition.

In such instances, firequently, the mind is wounded, rather in its conception of dignity,, than in its sensation of harm, from the actual effeca of external circumstances. Certain privations are conceived to effect a diminution of rank; and the very pride, which is offended in this diminution, disables the sufFerer from endeavouring to procure his relief. Pride is supine, fullen, and listless; in many other refpets, a principle of misery or sussering; and, in this, a disqualification for any of the efforts, which are required to reform either the characer of the man, or to remove any cause of complaint from abroad.

There are ways of thinking, which mislead and tend to corrupt whole nations at once. False notions of religion, which interpose the authority of -God in behalf of any frivolous or cruel practice; systems of bigotry and intollerance, which set mankind at variance, and lead to persecution and mutual deltruction, on the score of difference in matters of faith or worship; false notions of honour, which promote quarrels, distrust, and mutual wrongs; false notions of liberty, that indispose men to subordination, or public order; false notions of government, that fubfiitute force and discretionary power, for law and jutfice; false notions of rank that attach elevation to mere birth and fortune, exclusive of merit; or that proceed on a notion of eminence, which no public service or lufire of characer can fipply. Under such apprchcnfions, a diflindion or supposcd elevation of rank, which ought ought to incite the mind to noble acions, serves to discourage 

those who would aspire to real greatness; and flatter those who 




think themselves great, with the notion of an exemption from w o the necessity of merit, or of any good quality whatever.

From the example of mankind, in numberless initances, the importance of opinion or habitual conception is obvious. The person who habitually conceives that the church yard is haunted, or that goblins ply in the dark, trembles with fear, where another having no such conception is calm and undisturbed; and the mind, in either cafe, may be said to be the author of its own good, or its harm. The one may susser himself to be infected with that weakness, or the other may be correAed of it, according as they negle& or employ their reason to its proper use.

The opinions which tend to happiness are the reverse of those which tend to misery. In treating of the one, we naturally reser to the other. In opposition to that corrupt itate of apprehension, in which the diftintions of fortune are substituted for those of merit and demerit, we may observe it is happy to be guided in our estimation of persons not by fortune and fashion, but by the merit of intelligence, probity, equanimity, and candour.

In matters of mere inclination or will, it is natural to become in ourselves what we admire in other men. And persons, to whom the standard of estimation is personal worth, have already received the bias of an ingenuous mind to integrity and honour; so much, that toefteem and to love those virtues in others, amounts nearly to a poffeflion of them in ourselves.

To be ready, on all occasions, with difccrnment and truth, in inatterl, 
 matters of duty, to tfate to ourfelves,-This is what I have to do, 
and this is the part for which I am responsible; with a habit of 
-'.~ limiting our own desires to a full and perfect discharge of the office so assigned us, is rather indeed the essence of happiness than a mere conception tending to obtain it.

All men partake in the concerns of ordinary life, and cannot without absurdity neglect their own subsistence and accommodation, the ceconomy of their fortune, the settlement of their families, the defence and welfare of their country; but happy are they who, in such matters, can diftinguifli the part afligned to themselves from the part which Providence has reserved to itself.
To man it is given to exert his natural powers with diligence, benignity, and courage; but the event, in every transaCtion is at the disposal of Providence; and the happiest conception or habit of thinking, of which man is susceptible, is, that the part assigned to him may be equally supported under every change of events, and that events do but form a change of the situation in which he is to adt. Let him sincerely lament the misfortune of his friend or his country; but let him be ready, also, with all his ability, to retrieve such misfortunes.

Life itself, with all its supports, is-precarious and temporary.

The longest liver muff die, and the florteft liver can do no more.
For us, it is happy to know, that our concern is to conduct ourselves well through life, whether it be short or long. Benevolence and courage are sufficient to happiness; malice and cowardice constitute misery, whether the life in which they are incurred be of long or short duration.

It is happy to conceive the integrity, diligence, and fidelity, which which are in our own power, though unobserved by others, as 

the completion of good to ourselves. It is happy to conceive the SEAcT.V I.
debasements of a malicious and cowardly nature, not as matters w of degradation merely in the opinion of other men, but as in themselves the completion and essence of all the evil to which we are exposed.

In the relations of mankind, the brother cannot rightly at the part of a stranger, the citizen the part of an alien, nor the individual, confidered apart from every particular relation, rightly forget that he is a man, and has a common cause with mankind.
On this subjeCt, everyjuft conception is produdcive of happiness, and leads the individual to confider himself as surrounded with objects of affection, and the affetion he bears in his mind as the principal excellence of his own nature.

It is happy to know, that the cause ofjuftice and goodness is secured by infinite wisdom and power; to conceive ourselves as instruments in the hand of God, to be employed for the good of his creatures, and our happiness as confitfing in the willing consent of our minds to be so employed.

The adorable perfecions of God inspire a confidence, a veneration, and love ; which amount, at the fame time, to a conviction, that goodness and wisdom, even in such measures of them as are communicable to created beings, are of the highest value; and the affecion they inspire is in itself a disposition to receive the communication of them.

It i- happy, in every place, to carry in our thoughts, that we are in the situation in which it is the cwill of God that we should 3 act; 
 aa; and that to ad, in such situations, with diligence, integrity, 
and good will to mankind, is the part he requires of us.
S$CT.VlII.

Whoever thus habitually thinks or conceives of himself, is poffefled of religion, virtue, and happiness. This no one can procure for another. It is left by the Almighty for every one only to procure it for himself. Aurelius accordingly procured it for himself, but could not for his son. With this unhappy person, notions imbibed among the meaner domestics of the palace precluded the inftrutions of the father and of the friend.

If happiness were an attainment of the mind, to be acquired as a science or an art is learnt from a master, the teacher might justly be confidered .as the vicegerent of God; and no place could contain the numbers that would flock to his school. But, in this theAlmighty has delegated his power to every person only refpeding himself: But he has provided a discipline, in the result of which, perhaps, even the most depraved may, in the end, become willing to avail themselves of the truit which the Author of their nature has reposed in them. When error, and folly, and profligacy, drained to the bottom of the cup, shall have led the mind to nauseate the draught, better thoughts may arise, and man, thoroughly apprised of what is evil, may become willing to remove it, and intentionally work himself into habits of what he conceives to be good.

Such may be, respeCting the most refiratory fubjedCs, the cffeA of a moral government, which aCually operates in the nature of things, and in a manner of which we have formerly endeavoured to remark obme particulars. Reason and knowledge may halten its effccAs; and for this purpose our feeble cndeavours to to ered the fabric of science, that they who retort to it may pro- 
PART. Ii.
ceed on a just knowledge of their place and destination in the 



system of nature. 

The happy, without incurring either dejection or pride, from events whether prosperous or adverse, rely chiefly on what is ofabsolute value, health of body and soundness of mind; and may reckon, as their highest privilege, the power to preferye, in all the varieties of fortune, a disposition, candid, fearless, temperate, and just. Even among the gifts of fortune, they can observe and enjoy matters of absolute value, in respect to which there is no possible ground of interference or competition: Such are the bleflings which nature has equally provided for all men: The water of the fountain, or of the running stream; the light of the fun; and the vital air of the atmosphere; existence itself, in ihort, or admifsion to behold this magnificent scene of the univerfe;-compared to which, any or all the comparative fuperiorities of one man to another disappear, and are as nothing. Society itself is felt, by the happy, as a common blessing to all its members; and, like the air they breathe, equally necessary to the rich, who would avail themselves of the labour and skill of others, as it is to the poor, who would obtain the reward of their labour.

0 






( I7 )

C H A P. II.
OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF MORALITY, ITS IMMEDI
ATE APPLICATIONS AND SANCTIONS.

S E C T ION I.
 or firfl Trinciple of Efimation in the Character of Maseparately examining the nature of good and evil, under the 
titles ofplea/ure and pain, of beauty and deformity, of excellence and 
 defecl, virtue and vice, of happine/s and miJery; we have endea- 
voured to arrive at some general conception of what is belt for mankind.

O 2 Thefc T II. These articles we have found to differ chiefly in words, but in 

SECT. 1. matter and fubfiance to be nearly the fame. The fame qualities -Y*'X of zvifdom, goodne/s, temrperance, andfortituzde, which conflitute the excellence of human nature, are consfituents also of its beauty and its happiness. The opposite qualities of olly, malice, debauchery, and cowardice, which constitute its defed, conflitute also its deformity, or turpitude, and its misery.

The different appellations in quellion have a reference to different afpeds, under which the subjed may be confidered. Beauty and deformity have a reference to the qualities of good and evil, in refped to their first appearances or asped. Excellence and defe,- virtue and vice, have a reference to their reality in the charader. Happiness and misery have a reference to the itate of enjoyment or suffering, which they conflitute in the mind.

If we fliould endeavour to concentrate this description, or reduce this enumeration of qualities, to some one general principle the most likely to unite the whole, we should be limited in our choice, probably, to one or other of the qualities firli mentioned, in the estimate of charaders ; that is, either to wv/donm, or goodness.

The other two qualities, whether of temperance or fortitude, confidered apart, are less likely to secure the whole. Temzperance, confidered as mere abflinence from improper gratifications, without any positive direction of the mind to a better purpof ; or confidered as restraint from evil, without the formation of a difposition positively good, would constitute a very imperfecl model of excellence or felicity.

Fortitude, confidered as a mere force of mind, without anspecification of a choice or direction, in which that force ifould be employed, might be exerted equally for a wrong as for a right -v purpose; and courage, prompted by folly might be employed for the deftruation of its owner, like the brutal itrength of that wreffler ; who could tear open the cleft of a tree, but who could susser himself at the fame time, to be caught in it.

The term equivalent to wisdom, among the antients, was employed by them to comprehend every article of praise, and enabled them also to comprise the laws of morality in the single recommendation of this quality. In our translation of that term, however, the sense is more limited; and, were we to slate wisdom as the fundamental principle of morality, we should be thought to substitute a prudential choice of our interests for what ought to be matter of affection, and the effusion of a benevolent heart. Mere prudence is an excellence of the understanding only; but virtue includes, as a preferable consideration, the energy and diretion of an amiable and happy disposition.

It is well known that, to secure a proper choice of conduct, on all occasions, good affection or disposition is not less neceffary, than able judgement: Nay, we may be convinced, from experience, that persons of common understanding, with fit difpositions, are less apt to err on trying occasions, than the ablest understanding unsupported by any goodness of heart; or than mere understanding, warped as we may suppose it to be in the defec of good dispositions, by motives of a different tendency.

If I Milo of Crotona.

 If we are, therefore, to contract our description of happiness, 

SECT. I or reduce it to a point, around which the most valuable qualities <^/~\ A of human nature are likely to be collected, we may venture to select that of goodness, or benevolence, as the molt likely to serve our purpose; and, by way of principal or fundamental law of moral vwifdom, may assume, that the greatest good incident to human nature is the love of mankind.

The diffirent forms or afpeds of this disposition, as it may be exercised in pity to the distressed, or in candour and humanity indiscriminately towards all men; as it may be exercised in the mutual confidence of friends, or in the love of a citizen to his country, have been already stated; and although, in this place, its designation in the mind of a man be taken from his relation to mankind, a title under which are comprehended objecs the most intimate to him, and the leait likely to be mistaken by him; yet, the disposition so charaCerifed is in reality a susceptibility of just affection towards every object, whether of pity, refpedt, or veneratiq.n; whether the lowest or the highest that can enter the thoughts of a well disposed and a happy mind.

The love of mankind, on every arduous occasion is an aid to the judgement, in directing the conduct which a wife man is defined to hold: In difficult situations, it is a noble support of courage.
Even the timorous become bold under the instigation of a warm or generous aftrect-ion; the humane, by habits of benevolence, are iecured againit the effect of dilpofitions comparatively inferior or mean; and ordinary men, when routed to feelings of gencrofity or pity, remain insensible to the allurements of inferior plealfrc, or the ilffc'rings of pain.

 therefore, may in some degree be confidereas a principle of wisdom, of fortitude, and temperance; and, as it either inspires or requires for its support every other good >
quality of human nature, we cannot greatly err, in affuming it as the fundamental or primary objec of moral law. Its external effects, expressions, or appearances, are the supreme objecs of esteem and complacency; and its reverse, cruel infenfibility, and malice, recollected in ourselves, or observed in others, are the supreme objects of remorse, of indignation and hatred.

Hence it is, that the murderer is the common object of deteftation to himself and all men; and without waiting for the conviction of external evidence, is so often betrayed by the horrors of remorse which affect his own mind.



S E C T I N II.

Of the firt and more general Applications of Moral Law.

 THE applications of a physical principle are made, either to the 
 formation of theories, and the explanation of phenomena; or to 
-Y,, the production of effeas, and the practice of arts.

Physical science is fruitful of arts, or enables the person who is acquainted with the operative laws of nature, to direct its operations to his own purpose. Moral principle being a just conception or adequate expression of what is good, is fruitful of wisdom and proper conduct. Its first application is to form the temper, to correct false apprehensions of things, to confirm the truth, to cultivate just affection, and to direct the energy of a strenuous mind in external actions, and to induce and confirm all the habits of a virtuous life.

There is one point of view in which the sciences, whether phyfical or moral, unite their effects. That point to which they feverally verally tend, when physical science becomes comprehensive of 

the order of nature, or lays open the view to infinite goodness and 




wisdom ; and moral science, abftraaing from local forms and ob- wv fervances,becomes in the mind a principle of extenfivebenevolence, by which the individual fates himself as a part in the order of nature, and entirely devoted to the will of its Author.

In these points of view, science may be confidered as the higheft attainment of created intelligence, and its nearest approach to a communication with the supreme Creator; an approach, in which, through the medium of knowledge, it receives an impression, and contemplates a form of beauty, the most likely to command its affections.

The diftindions, which we have been confidering, of enjoyment and uffering, of excellence and defed, of happiness and miery, subsist in the mind, and may be conceived as properties of mind, abfiraaed from any external effec or appearance whatever.

At the fame time, as every property of the human mind is a modification of an adive animal, as well as of an intelligent being, as it is a measure of power, or a direction of will, forming the energy of a nature so mixed, and of which the effects must appear wherever the living nature is destined to range or to ply its exertions, we cannot suppose the mind to possess any quality, whether of excellence or defet, that is not attended with a suitable consequence in the tranfadions of life.

Hence it is, that the animal and physical acfions of men present an objedt of moral discernment, and furnifli subject s of commendation and censure, more obvious to most men than even the VOL, I[. P qualities PARr II. qualities of mind itself, when they attempt to conceive such 

CHAPT. 1. qualities apart from external expressions or effec'ts: And, as men, ~\,'P/ in some inflances, do not appear to be assured even of their own thoughts, until they have put them in words; so they are, with much better reason, doubtful of what may be the qualifications of any other person, until he has given to his thoughts and difpositions their effect in his conduc.

- Virtue, therefore, in the mixed nature of man, is at once a condition of his mind, an aspee and carriage of his person, and an ordinary series of adtion, fitted to his situation, as the member of a community, in which the conduc of every particular person contributes its flare to the good or the evil incident to the whole.

So far the subjeCt admits of a general flatement, in which there is no difficulty. In the more particular treatment of it, however, some difficulties have arisen, which it may be proper to slate, before we enter on the detail of moral obligations and duties.

These difficulties relate to the phenomenon of moral approbation, confidered as a subjec of theory; or to the different opinions of men, on the subjed of moral actions and duties, confidered as a flandard of estimation for mankind.

Relating to these subjects, we may enquire, first of all, upon what principle men proceed, in efimating the morality of actions ? Next, Whence the difference of opinion, on the subjea of moral duties ? Whence the real gradations of merit and demerit ?
And, from the observations that may occur, endeavour to col, lcA

leA some fundamental rule or canon of estimation, refpeaing the 

morality of external acions, and the propriety of manners, be- 




fore we proceed to confider the variety of fanaions, under which v such ations are required; or before we enter on the separate departments of science, to which the fludy of morality refers, under the titles ofjuri/prudence, casuistry, and politics.

Of the Difficulty which has arien in accounting for Moral 4pprobation.

 IF, according to the result of our enquiries on the subjea of 
 good and evil, what is required as the excellence or virtue of hu
SCv man nature, also confRitute happiness; and if vice, on the contrary, is to be dreaded as the constituent of misery; there cannot be any doubt of the choice to be made.

But virtue, even to those who are far from confidering it as happiness, is still matter of esteem and respect; and vice, even where the vicious are conceived to possess the good things of this life, is reprobated and condemned: Insomuch, that virtue is approved even by those who depart from it; and vice is disapproved even where it is embraced.

This sentiment, therefore, is of a peculiar nature, not a specimen of mere desire and aversion, directed to a particular objeet; but a censorial ad in the mind of man, having cognizance of a right or a a wrong in the measure or tendency of his own desires or aver- 

sions, even when they have most entirely determined his will. 




Doator Clarke, and some others, confidering virtue as the fitness of man's charater and practice to his own frame, and to his place in the system of nature; and, confidering reason or understanding itself as competent to observe the fitness of things, have assumed human reason as the principle of moral discernment.

This system is nearly the fame with that which, making virtue to consist in the conformity of will to truth, makes reason also the arbiter of right and wrong, as of truth and error.

But these systems have been rejected, as unfit to explain the phenomenon of moral approbation; which, being itself an assection or sentiment of the mind, must be derived from a principle to be fought for among the considerations that influence the will, not among the perceptions of mere intelligence, which go no farther than to remark the existence of things.

Upon this ground, men of speculation have had recourse to various considerations of utility, private or public; offymnpathy, and of moralfenfe; to account for the approbation or disapprobation of actions which they themselves or others perform.

The investigation and application of any one of these principles, joined to the refutation of others, has amounted to treatises, and led to discussions of great length. But the utmost that can be done in this place and in a mere summary slate of so much argument, is to enumerate a few of the principal theories; and endeavour 
 deavour to extricate the mind from the perplexity, which so many 
 discordant accounts of the fame subjed may occasion.

In the mean time, the Regulue Philofophandi, or canons of reason, as they are prescribed in other examples of physical inveftigation, must be fuRtained in this *.

I. We are not to aji1gn, as the caus-e of any appearance, what is not itfeif known as a Jfat in nature.

Upon this principle, we reject hypothesis, or the mere fuppofition of a cause, of whose existence we have not any previous knowledge; as the vortex of Des Cartes is rejeded in accounting for the planetary revolutions.

On this rule, it is probable that none of our theorists will trespass; for, although iome have proposed to account for intelligence itself on the supposition of some occult configuration or motion of material atoms, constituting reflection and thought; yet, as the mind, when so constituted, ever ats upon some confideration known to itself, it is impossible to think of explaining an ad of the mind, in any particular instance, without recurring to some one or other of the considerations, on which the mind is generally known to proceed.

II. We are not to deduce effec s from caumfs, which, though real, are unfit to produce the effec7.

In the conneetion ofcaufe and effec/, in contradiftindion to a mere fortuitous contiguity of circumstances, there is supposed a continual :1 Vide Ncwtoni Principii, lib. iii. ab initio.

continual or inseparable accompanyment of one with the o- 

ther. Wherever the cause exists, there muff the effed exist also. 




And the converse. They are ever to be found together, and in wthe fame proportions.

Upon these principles, acual utility, whether private or public, will not account for the phenomenon of moral approbation.

For, apart at least from any private utility, it must be acknowledged that men approve of virtue, as it was exhibited in scenes long since past, and on occasions in which they could not possibly have any private or interested concern.

The sentiment of approbation, therefore, is certainly not proportioned to the private benefit actually received from the action approved, by the person who approves.

Utility, as it concerns mankind indiscriminately, and without any limitation of persons and times, is certainly more likely to account for this phenomenon.

Virtue is no doubt of a nature to be useful to mankind; but if, under the title of utility, as is probable, we refer to the external effects of virtue, we ihall not find moral approbation keep pace with the aCtual measure of benefit mankind received from this or any other cause.

There are many examples of great utility, in which no subjet of moral approbation is conceived. Land is fertile; a tree is fruitful; a ftcer performs much useful labour; yet, in these there is no subjec of moral esteem. The supposed cause, contrary 
PARTI. trary to rule, is found to exist in many fich inflances, without 
CHAP .IL producing the effect it is brought to explain.

In answer to this objection, it used to be admitted, by the author of this system, " that moral approbation does not extend to "matters of mere physical utility ; or is limited to mind, and its " aive exertions." This limitation, accordingly, may be admitted: But acual utility, even in affections of mind, does not always amount to a fubje .of moral approbation. What more useful in nature, than the disposition of every man to preserve himself; for, on this the safety of the whole depends: Yet its most reasonable effeAs are merely tolerated, seldom applauded as virtue, and often reprobated as felfiihnefs and vice.

This effe&, also, of moral approbation is Sometimes found without the acual utility which is supposed to be its cause.

The mere attempts of a virtuous man to serve his friend, or his country, is an object of moral esteem; not only where he may have failed in his purpose, but even where the event may have been calamitous to himself, or to others. The person, who dies with his friend, in attempting to save him; the person who finks under the ruins of his country, in striving to preserve it; is no less an obje& of moral approbation, than the most successful adventurer in either cause. And, if success, for the moif part, give lustre to enterprize, the tender melancholy that arises from a tragic event, is well known'alfo to enforce the love of virtue, without regard to utility, of which the idea is excluded by the want of success.

It appears plain from there inflances, that moral approbation, 3 though though limited to the exertions of mind, yet does not accompany 
PART. IT.
every useful exertion; nor even where it applies, does it re- 
 

quire any actually useful effect. The will alone is sufficient Y
to procure it: This, in other words, is to admit that benevolence, not acual utility, is the objet of moral approbation: And, concerning this, most parties may be agreed. Even Mr Hutchison, who assumed a moral sense, as being a specific faculty, required to distinguish between moral good and evil, confidered benevolence, nevertheless, as the essence of moral good, or that quality which mankind, by their sense of right and wrong, are enabled to difIinguiih as good.

The benevolent will concur, one with another, in every thing that is for the benefit of mankind; but, in accounting for moral approbation, we must still return to the consideration of that peculiar sentiment of estimation, of which virtue is the objeca.
And the whole must end in a confession, that virtue, of which a principal part is benevolence, is estimable in itself, not merely as the means of obtaining any other end.

If, in the term utility, we include whatever is beneficial, or tends to the benefit of mankind, then is virtue iffelf, or its conftituents of wvifdom, goodness, temperance, and fortitude, the greatest good of which human nature is susceptible: And we only risk misleading the mind from its principal objet, by substituting utility for the more proper expression of a blefling important to the person whose character it is, more than even tothofe on whom any of its external effects are beflowed.

It were prepofierous to cxprefs the value of happiness, by calling 
 ling it useful. Or, if a person who is happy in himself be SHAP rIl thereby disposed to be useful to others, it were prepoRterous to weY-\ fay, that the happiness of one person is valuable only so far as it is useful to another.

Virtue is, no doubt, supremely useful, even in the ordinary sense of this term. Justice, liberality, and charity, appear in adts of beneficence; and render those who are inclined to practife them, the guardians and friends of their fellow creatures.
Even what we term acs of prudence, fortitude, or temperance, though teeming to terminate in the welfare of the person adting, are in fad preservatives of good order, and contribute to the welfare of mankind. The benevolent man is the more serviceable to his fellow creatures, that he is in himself prudent, fober, and intrepid. The opposite vices are deftruaive, pernicious, or unserviceable.

This tendency of virtue has been set forth in colours of glowing and superior eloquence *.

The external effe&s of virtue are acknowledged; but we cannot suppose that the sentiment of love, or refpe&, of which virtue is the objea, is refolveable into a mere consideration of convenience or profit; nor can we overlook its value in conflituting the worth and felicity of those by whom it is possessed, for the fake of a convenience it may procure to others, who, without any merit of their own, may wiflh to derive benefit from the external effets of merit in other men.

Upon * Sce HIime's Moral Eflays.

Upon this principle of utility, the diftinsion of right and 




wrong appears to be resolved into a mere difference of tendency, 
or external effea in the ations of men. In another ingenious rWr attempt to explain the fame phenomenon, the approbation of virtue is resolved into /ympathy, or what may, for ought we know, be a kind of accidental humour in those who approve or condemn a supposed virtuous or vicious action.

Synmpathy, in common language, is limited to commiseration or pity; but, has of late, by men of speculation, been extended to sentiments of congratulation also. It may be supposed either merely inftinAive, and a contagion of sentiment, as when without any knowledge of a cause, we laugh with those who laugh; become gay with the joyful; or fad with the melancholy: Or it may be supposed to proceed from a conception of the occasion or caufewhether joyful, provoking, or melancholy, that is the motive of ation, or objet ofpaffion. And it appears to be in this last sense, that Jympathy is assumed as the principle of moral approbation.

When the observer feels, in a certain degree, the passion or motive by which another is atuated, upon a supposition that the fame thing had happened to himself; this participation of sentiment is supposed to constitute approbation. Thus, when a person complains or exults, if the observer, upon a slate of the cafe, partake in his sorrow or his joy, it is said, that he cannot but approve of it.

If the joy or grief exceed what the observer can go along with, it is condemned as weakness or levity: if it fall short of what the obfervcr is disposcd to feel, it is condemned as insensibility: if 4Q2 nearly 
PART IL: nearly what he himself would feel in a similar cafe, it is efleemed 

SECT. IIi or refpeted as proper; and so on of every other paflion or senti\vYv ment appearing in the conduc of human life.

It may be difficult, in this account of the matter, to fix where the moral quality resides; whether in the person observed, in the observer, or in neither separately, but in the mere concurrence of one with another.

This last, indeed, or a mutual sympathy, may imply that the parties are satisfied with one another; but, in the sense of all mankind besides, their agreement may be wrong: And, if the action of one person need the sympathy of another to justify it, we are still to enquire in what manner is that sympathy itself evinced to be right.

This theory proceeds upon an assumption, that to partake in any passion or sentiment, or to be conscious that we ourselves fliould, in like circumstances, be so affected, is to approve of the motive to action, and to approve of its effects: But it is acknowledged, on all hands, that approbation or disapprobation is a fpecific sentiment, not a species or degree of any other sentiment: That it concerns the right or wrong of other passions, whether original or sympathetic, and therefore enabling the mind, on occafion, to pronounce of sympathy itself, whether it be proper or improper.

If, in judging of this theory, we recur to the maxims of reason already cited A, wef.all find them violated in this, no less than in * Rcgulax Pliilofophandi Ncwtoni.

in the assumption of utility, for a principle of moral approbation. 

That is, the effec will be found without the fuppofedcaufe, and the 
.
cause will be found without its supposed effec. In refped to acts of <\
uncommon bravery, we admire the more for being conscious that we ourselves could not have done so much. Although we are conscious that, in extreme indigence, we ourselves must have asked for relief, yet we do not admire a beggar. Although we are conscious that with money we ourselves should have bought an estate, yet we do not admire the purchaser. Although we sympathize very feelingly with the admirer of a fine woman, we do not mistake his passion for virtue, any more than we mistake for generosity the choice made by him who bought an estate. There is sympathy, as well as utility, without approbation; and there is approbation without either; for we Sometimes have an idea of what we ought to have done, or to have felt, as very different from the part which we aAually take in the feelings of other men. And it is remarkable that sympathy ihould be then only equivalent to approbation, when we sympathise with the benevolent, the disinterested, the courageous, and the just.

But, if it ihould be acknowledged, that, to partake in the sentiment of another is to approve, and not to partake is to disapprove of his conduct, it remains, upon this system, to be flated, by what sympathy it is that we judge of ourselves.
If, by the actual participation of others in our sentiments and acions ;-it should follow, that, in adtions concealed from the world, there flould be no conscience of right or wrong; or that, in aAions submitted to vulgar judgement, we flould be in great danger of error ; the multitude is often ill informed, and otherwife ill qualified to judge of merit. And this indeed is so far acknowledged, . acknowledged, in forming the theory in question, that virtue is not I
referred to the test of actual sympathy, but to the test of a fympaw>r\ thy, imagined and feleCed in the cafe of a well informed and impartial observer.

Here too there is a masterly tone of expreflion *; and, if eloquence were the test of truth, no want of evidence to obtain belief: But, in this reference to a supposed well informed and impartial observer, there is an implied confession, that there is some previous standard of estimation, by which to fele& the judge of our acions; and this standard, by which we are enabled to feled an impartial and well informed fpeAator, to whose judgement we refer, or by which we are enabled to judge of sympathy itself, as well as of every other acion or passion, is that principle of moral approbation, of which we are now in search.

This is not merely a question of fact, as in other examples of physical theory: For we do not enquire what men aAually do in any number of instances; but what they ought to do in every inflance ? what is the principle of moral discernment on which they may safely proceed, whether in judging of others, or in chusing for themselves ?

Sympathy is no doubt a part in the social nature of man. Individuals mutually bestow, and delight to receive it; but, like every other natural disposition, it is susceptible of abuse, and by no means a safe or an adequate principle of estimation. As the presumptuous appreciate others by their own standard, the weak and dependent rife or fall in their own esteem, according to the value that is put upon them by others; but neither one nor the other, surely, should be set up as the models of perfection to mankind.

It * Vide Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments.

It is difficult to name the power by which man is enabled to 




distinguish between right and wrong, without recurring to the ge- S T. ilI.
neric appellation of. ome of his other faculties, asfen/e, perception, vrv or judgement. This power has accordingly been termed a moral sense, or a sense of moral good and evil; and the name has led to an hypothesis or supposition, that as nature, in the cafe of different animals, has superadded to the other principles of sensitive life, some peculiar faculty ofJecing, Jmell, or feeling, as in the lynx's eye, the hound's rioftril, or the spider's touch; as to other qualities of the loadstone, are joined the magnetic polarity and the affinity to iron: So, to the mind of man, over and above the powers cognitive and active, the Maker has given a power judicative, refpeting the merit or demerit of character, and approving or disapproving even the dispositions, from which the moral conduct proceeds,, Lord Shaftesbury sometimes uses the term moral sense, as expreffive of a conscious discernment of moral good and evil, but seems to refer to the fad merely without any thought of an hypothefis to account for the phenomenon of moral approbation.
It was enough, in his apprehension, that the diftintion of moral excellence is real, and that we are by our nature well qualified to perceive it. In this, also, the seas of antient philosophy seem to have acquiesced, without requiring any other account of the matter.

If it be understood, therefore, that difficulties arising on the question of theory, relating to the explanation of the phenomenon of moral approbation, do not amount to any degree of uncertainty in the fact ; and, if it be admitted that moral right and wrong are of the most serious consequence to mankind ; the faculty, .by which we perceive the opposite conditions of men in 3 thi s 1 this particular, may be known by any name that does not tend SEAT. II.I t confound the subjea with others of a different nature.

If moralsenfe, therefore, be no more than a figurative exprefsion, by which to distinguish the discernment of right and wrong, admitting this to be an ultimate fa: in the contfitution of our nature; it may appear nugatory to dispute about words, or to require any other form of expreflion than is fit to point out the faAt in question. And if this fad, though no way susceptible of explanation or proof, being uniform to a great extent in the operations or nature, is itself a law, not a phenomenon; it may no doubt serve as a principle of science, to account for appearances that result from itself, and to diret the pradice of arts throughout the departments in which it prevails.

Thus the laws of motion, gravitation, cohesion, magnetzfm, electricity, fluidity, elasticity, and so forth, which are not explicable upon any principle previously known in nature, are nevertheless received as unquestionable sacs, and with great advantage pursued to their consequences in the order of things. In this pursuit they furnish at once a secure diretion to the pradice of arts, and the most fatisfaaory account of appearances in the terreitrial and solar systems.

Men of speculation were sometimes amused with conjeAures, refpeaing the cause of gravitation, and the intimate nature of other phyjical lawIs; but science made little progress, while these were confidered as phenomena to be explained, and not as principles of science applicable to explain their diversified effeds throughout the physical system.

3 Such Such, also, we may suppose to be the fate of theory, when em- 


ployed to explain the law of estimation in the mind of man. The 
existence of this law is known, as the existence of mind itself is sv known, without any thing previously understood, from which to infer or explain it, or on which toreft our belief of its truth. Its applications, in our judgement of manners, are no less proper than the application of any physical law in accounting for its own fpecific appearances. They enable the moralist, in particular inftances, to ascertain what is good for mankind; and to form a regular system of moral estimation and precept, throughout all the subdivisions of law, of manners, or political in/fitutions.

We may, or may not, conceive the power of discerning between excellence and defe&, as a faculty inherent to intelligent being. To fuchbeing, indeed, it appears essential to be conscious of himself; and in his attainments, whether actually varied,or only conceived to be variable, it may be essential that he confider unequal degrees of excellence and defeR, as measures of the good or the evil of which he himfelfis susceptible. Created intelligence may advance in the use of this discerning faculty, and have a continued approach to the model of divine wisdom; a termination from which its diflance may diminifl, but at which it never can arrive.

The essence of almighty God we must conceive to be most simple ; being that which necessarily exists from eternity. Of his supreme intelligence, we have full evidence in the system of nature; and of his diftinguifhling the opposite conditions of moral good and evil, there is equally irresistible proof.
The diftinlcion of excellence and defcet originates in the unequal R conditions 
PART 1I. conditions of mind, and the discernment of such condition is not CHCAP. I only peculiar, but necessary also to the course which created beings , _r~ of this order are defiined to run. Hunger and thirst, or any other incitement to self preservation, is not more efTential to the animal frame, than the preference of what is perfec, to what is defective, is to the constitution of mind: It is a preservative of reason, a main spring of exertion, and a princple of advancement, in the track of intelligent nature.

H-ence it is that numbers of men, who are far from conceiving virtue as the constituent of happiness, nevertheless confider it as the constituent of excellence and perfection, which they behold with refpec' and esteem.

Man alone in this animal kingdom, for ought we know, apprehends thegradationof excellence in thefcaleofbeing; and, thoughall men are agreed upon the reality of a comparative eminence, in the ascending steps ofthis scale, it may be difficult to assign the principle of estimation, so as tojuftify the preference which is given to one order of being above another. Mr Buffon ascribes this preference to the greater number of relations, which certain orders of being bear to the system of nature around them ". " In the multitude of things " presented * Dans la soule d' objets que nous prefente ce vafte globe dont nous venous de faire la description, dans le nombre infini des differentes prodlutions, dont fa surface eft couverte et peuplie, les animaux tiennent le premier rang, tant par la conformity qu' ils ont avcc nous, que par la fuperiorite que nous leur connoiffons fur les etres vegitans ou inanimes. Les animaux out par leurs fens, par leur forme, par leur movement, bcaucoup plus de rapports avec les choses que les environnent, que n' en ont les vcgetaux; ceux-ci par leur developpcment et par leur diflcrcntes parties, on't aunfl une plus grand nombre dle rapports avec les objets extericurs, que n' en ont les mineraux ou les picrrcs, que n' onl aucune forte du vie ou die movement, ct c'ei. par ce plus grand nombre de rapports que 1' animal fit recllcinent au dellis du vegetal, ct Ic vegctal " presented on this globe; in the infinite number of different 

" productions, with which its surface is covered or peopled, the 

" animals," he observes, " occupy the first orthe highest rank, ,T.V
"c whether by their resemblance to us, or by the superiority L which we perceive in them, to the vegetable or inanimate na" tures. The animals, by their make and by their sensitive and " moving powers, have many more relations to the fubjeas a6 round, than the vegetables have. These, in their turn, by the " unfolding of their parts; by their figure, their organization, "and growth, have many more relations than the minerals, or 6 any mere lifeless mass of matter. And it is by virtue of this " greater number of relations, that the animal is superior to the " vegetable; and the vegetable is superior the mineral. Even we " ourselves, confidered in refpet to the material part of our a frame, are not otherwise superior to the animals, than by a " few relations more, such as accrue to us from the use of the ' hand and the tongue; and, though all the works of God are ( in themselves equally perfect, yet, in our way of conceiving " them, the animal is most compleat; and man the mafler-piece " of all."

This is, perhaps, the firit attempt that ever was made to give a reafonb why animals are reckoned of a higher order than plants, and these of a higher order than minerals or unorganized matter of any fort. And though no one disputes this order of things, yet this attempt to explain it will scarcely appear fatisfadory. Many will vcgetal nu tIceflis du mineral. Nous mcme, a nc confiiIercr que la partie materielle dc noitre ctrc, nous ne f11 mnl e n:udcilr ties anirinauxl que par c clqucqus rapports tlc pinis, tlis iquec ccux que ous tld, nent: Ia la.inuc et 1a minll ; ct cloitjlll les oiivr.igts dl Crc :.ilcur foit cn cux -mcmes tos cg:ailmcmnt parf.iit. I' limal , si'

ai l , i l, tlc IlcIn (1d'
:'l'Icrc( voiri I')ouvr.agc plus co:nplct i' l .l :lurc, c ] ,'r10 1i e n llt l c'. lrclf ' our ! '.

 will be ready to alk, why estimation ihould keep pace with the c 1p'. 1r. number of relations, which a subjea bears to other parts of the /-y'v- world around. One relation, compleatly and beneficently adjusted, may be preferable to many. And, if a beneficent purpose can be obtained by one relation, however simple, the multiplication must appear rather a defec than a beauty. It appears, indeed, that where a number and variety of expedients or relations are wanting to obtain a purpose, the disposition and ability to combine such a variety to one common beneficent end, is a great perfection in the power by whom such arrangementis made.
When man has formed to himself any number of relations to the fubjets around him, such as he bears to the field he has cultivated, the city he has built, the work of any kind he has performed, the law or institution he has adopted; in such relations, indeed, the superiority of his own nature appears: But, in what his Maker has done for him, or for the other animals; in what is done for plants and minerals, it is the majesty of God that we revere; and the relations of things merely inanimate serve only as the fleps, by which we are led to contemplate the wisdom and goodness of the first cause.

In this sense, we already observed, beauty and excellence are ascribed to material fubjeds. And the inequality of rank which appears so real in the system of things, is a mere gradation of the lufire or effect, with which intelligence, or its principal features of goodness and wisdom, are made to appear in the different orders of being. The eloquent naturalist, cited above, seems to drop his arithmetic of relations, when he confiders the pre-eminence of intelligent forms: in the system of nature. For he applies it only to the material part of man; and, in reality, mere number of relations could ill account for the fuperiority of any nature whatever; as the relation between any 3' two two species of being must be mutual, and in point of number at 

least the fame; for so many relations as man has to the system ECAP. II.
of nature around him so many precisely muff the system of na- ->
ture have to him. But no one ever questioned the pre-eminence of intelligent being; ever required an account to be given of it; or desired to know by what faculty it is perceived. Dimenfions are meafired by some flandard quantity of the fame dimension; length, by some standard mreafure of length; and solid content, by some itandard measure of solid dimension; and why not intelligence, also, by some flandard conception of intelligent nature. The degrees to be estimated consist in variable measures of wisdom and goodnes ; and whoever has an idea of these, will judge accordingly of the specimens that approach to the itandard, or of the defecs that come short of it.

Some who have carried the analogy of animal sense and perception into this subjed, have flarted a question, whether moral excellence be not a secondary quality; that is, like the perception of smell, found, or tafle, if it may not proceed from a cause in nature very different from that we conceive * ? But in the esteem of wisdom and goodness, there is not any danger that the quality we conceive is different from the quality that exists, as our conception of found is different from a tremor in the particles of air: for it is the very existing thing itself of which we have a conception, taken indeed from feeble, occasional, and passing fpecimens, but easily abftraded by us from their defecs and imperfeclions, to serve as a flandard of estimation for what we propose as the model of excellence, wherever our judgement applies or wherever a choice is to be made.

It  Vide Lord Kamcs' M\oral EfTys.

 If we are alked, therefore, what is the principle of moral ap

probation in the human mind, we may answer, It is the Idea ~s'-r' of perfecion or excellence, which the intelligent and associated being forms to himself; and to which he refers in every sentiment of esteem or contempt, and in every exprefflon of commendation or censure.

Nay, but mankind are not agreed on this subjet; they differ no less in what they admire, than in what they enjoy. The idea of pefeAion no doubt may be afflciated with fubjeds divested of merit: But notwithstanding the effeA of such association in warping the judgement, virtue is approved as the specific perfection or excellence of man's nature; and as no one ever inquired why perfeAion should be esteemed; it is difficult to conceive why they should look for any other account of moral approbation than this.

From the predilections of birth and fortune,sew, if any, are altogetherblind to the diftintions of wisdom and folly, of benevolence and malice, offobriety and debauchery, of courage and cowardice.
And if these characters of mind could be perceived without the intervention of external signs; the difference of judgement on the fubjecAs of moral good and evil would, in a great measure diffappear; or there, would not be so much diversity of opinion as we observe amongst men, concerning the forms or description of virtue. But the external actions which may result from any given disposition of mind being different in different instances, may occasion a difference of judgement, or a variety of custom and manners ; and fuggell the ncccflity of a principle or fiandard of cflimation, on which their rate of merit or demerit may be aIfecly clabWlilhcd. eV accordingly proceed to the consideration of thcfle particulars.

Of the Dificulty of reconciling the different Judgements of Men relating to the Morality of External .A4ions.

VW HEN the reality of any moral diftinaion is questioned, 

we naturally refer to the general sense of mankind on the subjea. 

To give this evidence, however, its full effet, in supporting the 
reality in question, it is supposed, that mankind ought to be unanimous in their verdied, and agree, not only in admitting, that there is a diftinclion, but agree also in the description of fubjets, or in the choice of particulars, to be ranged under the opposite predicaments of moral good and moral evil.

If men, it may be alleged, have a disposition to felea objets of commmendation and censure, and yet are not agreed in their choice, we must suppose their difference of judgement to arise, not from a want of disposition in them to find out the truth, but from the want of a sufficient difference in the nature of things to lead or to cflablilh their judgement.

Sceptics PA RT 11. Sceptics, accordingly, in-order to repel the evidence of reality 

SECT. IV. in matters of moral diftindsion, refer to the contradictory notions <v ~of mankind, on the subjea of manners.

" Mankind," they observe, " blame in one person, and in one " cafe, what they applaud in another. Thus, to deceive or to ' kill is in one instance condemned, in another is applauded or "permitted. What is held forth as a subjea of praise in one age or country, is overlooked or neglected in another. What, in "one age or nation, is permitted as allowable or innocent, in an" other is reprobated and abhorred, under some denomination " of impiety, incest, or blasphemy %.

" Certain forms of behaviour, forms of expression or gesture, are in one country, or amongst one set of men, required to "good manners, or received with complacency; whilst they are "confidered as an unpardonable injury or insult in other na"tions, or in other companies.

In one nation, we are told,it is reckoned an at of filial piety " for a son to kill his superannuated parent; in other countries, " this, though we flould suppose it to be done with content of the " person suffering, would be detested as a molt horrid instance " of murder and parricide.

" The definitions of crimes vary in the laws of different counC tries: Insomuch, that what is destined to revere puniflment in one w Profana illic omnia, qua; apud nos sacra; rurfurn conceffa apud illos, quxc nobis incclta.

Tacitus de Judreis, Ijilt. lib. v. c. 4.

" one country,is suffered, in another, to efcapewithimpunity,even 

" without censure. Thus, theft, which was punished at Athens, 



" was encouraged in Sparta. CV

' All men are loud in commendations of virtue; but observe " their applications of this term, how different in the detail of " particulars? Among the antientRomans it meant valour a"lone. Among the Jews it meant zeal for their own institutions, " and animosity to the reft of mankind. Among housewives it "means ceconomy and notable industry In Italy it means a taste for antiquities, and curiosities of nature or art."

From the whole of these instances it is proposed to infer, that there is not any certain rule of approbation or disapprobation respeding the manners or behaviour of men. And notwithftanding the essential felicity and merit of wisdom and goodness as qualities of intelligent being, it must be allowed to follow from such varieties of apprehension, refpeding the morality of external acion, that the diftin&ion of right and wrong cannot be taken from the mere physical action itself, or that mere external movements of the body have not the fame power to command our moral feelings, as they have to command our perception of their form and physical effet.

When the ihutters of a window are opened, and the light is admitted, every objed in the room is illuminated; vision is diftinC to all who have organs of fight, and the perceptions of magnitude, figure, and colour are the fame to every one present.
When certain tremors are produced in the air, every ear is struck with the sensation of found; and however one person may differ from another in his conjedures refpeAing its cause, or even reVOL. IL S fpcicing 
PART I. fpessing the musical effed, the tone produced is the fam'e .

o eVery 
 , SHCT IA. one by whom it is heard.

The fame thing may be said with relation to the form and consequence of any aCion or movement of the body. All who are present perceive the fame physical operation, and the fame continuance or change of condition in the subjea affected by such operation. A life may be taken away or preserved in their fight, and there is no difference of perception refpeaing the physical cause or thephyfical consequence. May we not presume, therefore, that if moral right and wrong were equally apart'in the form of an aAion, as is the physical description of it, the perceptions of men in this refpec' also would be equally uniform.

The contrary, however, is observed to be true. The fame physical ation in one initance is applauded as a virtue, in another instance is reprobated as a crime; or rather, to speak with more propriety, where the physical aCtion is the fame, the moral a6tion is altogether different; aid is an objedt of approbation or disapprobation, corresponding to that difference of the moral quality.

For an example,tin which the physical ation may, in repeated instances, continue the fame, while the moral acion is extremely different; we may suppose the death of a iman, 'ffected with a sword, in the manner in which executions in omne countries are performed; in which affaflinations are committed; and battles are fought. In all these instances the physical acion may be precisely the fame, and every fpeCator have the fame perception of it; but the moral adion may be, and frequently is, extremely different.

To To devise the death of a man is criminal in the robber, who, 


to strip the traveller of his properity, attacks him on the high 
way. It is criminal in the faffin, who, from jealousy, revenge ~
or malice prepense in any other form, lays a snare for the life of his neighbour. But in a person who defends himnfelf, in a judge who has condemned a criminal, or in the officer who conducts the-execution of ajufi sentence, the fame physical ation may be innocent; may be the discharge of a duty, or an ad of public juflice. In a soldier, who, at the hazard of his own life, kills the enemy of his country, the material effect produced is precifely the fame, with that which is criminal in the affaifin or in the robber. But the moral action in these instances is extremely different: In te rt t eteeme the fir it is eteemed a of thei merit, in the others it is condemned as of the most atrocious guilt.

Under this teeming difference of judgement refpe&ing the fame acion, there is actually no more difference refpeaing the moral apprehension than there is refpeding the physical effe&.
While every one perceives that a man is killed, every one perceives also that the assassin or the robber did wrong in killing him; that the soldier a&ing in defence of his country, or the officer of justice in execution of a legal sentence, did right. In the assassin or robber this physical at was an aa of malice or rapacity; in the judge, magistrate, or soldier, it was an ad of public justice or heroic valour: And mankind, we may repeat, are as little at variance with refpedt to the moral quality of the adtion in either cafe, as they are with refpea to the mere form or description of the physical operation.

We are familiar with this diftindion between the physical and S 2 the 
 the moral action, under a variation of circumstances which diS
ersify the cafe: And though .the difference of judgement is more yv>r striking in such instances than it is in any other; yet no one thinks himself authorised from thence to question the reality of moral diftintions. There are indeed no specimens of moral good and evil more striking than those which are presented by the- fame physical ation, performed by different persons and in different circumflances; from the motives of benevolence and duty, on the one hand, or of malice and depravity on the other.

Every one is aware of the different judgements to be given where the cafes are different; and togive the variety of judgement an appearance of contradiction in the estimate of moral good and evil, we must have recourse to examples less familiar and in which we are less qualified to distinguish the moral from the physical qualities of an aAion. We are at a loss, for inflance, when we are told, that what is punished as a crime in one country is rewarded or commended as a duty in another; because we are not qualified to perceive in what manner the moral acion, under a different set of manners from our own, should be differently underflood, or in what manner the fame moral action flould result from physical performances extremely different.

This defed, however, may be easily supplied, if we confider, firit of all, that men have different opinions refpeding external objeas, and in one country value that as an honour or a benefit, which in another is rejeded as pernicious, or as an insult: Farther, that many of the actions of men are confidered more as exprejfons of what they mean or intend, than as operations materially beneficial or hurtful. In the first instance, men proceed upon on different notions of what is beneficial or hurtful. In. the o- 

ther they express or interpret their intentions differently. 

In some countries honour is associated with suffering, and it is reckoned a favour to kill, rather with circumstances of torture than otherwise. This is confirmed in our account of the manners of some American nations; and irt the fortitude with which an Indian matron submits to extreme suffering by fire on the funeral pile of her deceased husband. She courts the flames, with a zeal and enthusiasm more ardent than that with which Ihe resorts to the bridal bed, or should mount the throne of fiate in a terrestrial kingdom. Whatever conceptions mankind may have formed of external objeAs and circumstances, as matters of desire or aversion, it is natural for the benevolent to do what he himself and the world around him conceive as a benefit, and to avoid doing to others what they, or he himself, conceives as harm or an insult: And as it is a maxim in law " Volenti non fit injuria"; so it is naturally apprehended, under a variety of opinions refpeaing external objects, that it is beneficent to treat every person in the manner which he himself conceives to be beneficial or kind.

The safety and the justice of this maxim, refpeaing matters of a certain consequence to the welfare of mankind, may no doubt be questioned; and errors of choice, where they do not proceed from malice may be imputed to folly; butthe rulethat every one is tobe fervedor obliged in his own way, ought not to be questioned re fpefing matters of indifference, or of small moment. These are varioufly employed by nations, as the signs or expreflions of good or ill disposition; in the fame manner as, in the use of language, words, 
 words, or articulate founds, are adopted as the signs or expreflions CHaP. 1i.
SECTP. \I. of meaning, intention, or will.

Of this fort, no doubt, is much of the form and ceremonial of common life. It is the form of refpea in Europe to uncover the head: In Japan, we are told, the corresponding form is to drop the flipper, or to uncover the foot. The physical aAion in thlefe instances is different, but the moral aaion is the fame. It is an ad of attention and respect; dispositions equally acceptable, whether expreiled in words, gestures, or signs of any other fort.

Persons, unacquainted with any language but their own, are apt to think the words they use, natural and fixt expressions of things; while the words of a different language they confider as mere jargon, or the result of caprice. In the fame manner, forms of behaviour, different from their own, appear offenlive and irrational, or a perverse substitution of absurd for reasonable manners.

To the ignorant or to the proud, who confider their own cuftoms as a standard for mankind, every deviation from that standard is confidered, not as the use of a different language and form of expression, but as a defeC of reason, and a deviation from propriety and correctness of manners.

Among the varieties of this fort we find actions, gestures, and forms of expression, in their own nature indifferent, entered into the code of civil or religious duties, and enforced under the strongest sanctions of public censure or esteem, or under the strongest denunciations of divine indignation or favour.

x Numberlcfs Numberless ceremonies and observances are adopted in the ri- 


CHaP. I.

tual of different seCs, for the-fame reason that words are adopted 
in the vocabulary of different languages, though with a different V
effect on the minds of ordinary men.

In religion, the rite is supposed to be prescribed by the fame -authority to. which the forms of devotion are addressed. The neglec of it is supposed to constitute offence before that tribunal whose condemnation is fatal. The substitution of- any other rite is supposed to be profane, or an unpardonable insult to the object of worship. Under these apprehensions, arbitrary :signs of devotion are supposed essential to religion; and devia'-tions from the eflablifled pracice, or any variation in the use of such' figns,-is pursued with that vengeance which the zealot thinks necessary to recommend him to God.

In many examples of this fort; as in the use of different languages, the people- have not a different meaning, but merely a difference of the founds in which their meaning is expreifed; so in the-rites of devotion or worship, they admit a variety, not of .the sentiment but of the external performance, which they employ as a sign. or expreflion. And if in the different forms and ceremonies, which they pradife, in their own nature indifferent or innocent, they equally mean to acknowledge and to adore the intelligent power and moral government of God; the zeal with which they condemn and persecute one another, on account of such difference of forms and ceremonies, is no way more rational, than it would be to.fofter national animosity on the score of a different.language or accent of speech.

This 
 words, or articulate founds, are adopted as the signs or expreflions SECT. I. of meaning, intention, or will.

Of this fort, no doubt, is much of the form and ceremonial of common life. It is the form of refpe& in Europe to uncover the head: In Japan, we are told, the corresponding form is to drop the flipper, or to uncover the foot. The physical ation in these instances is different, but the moral adion is the fame. It is an aA of attention and refped; dispositions equally acceptable, whether expressed in words, gestures, or signs of any other fort.

Persons, unacquainted with any language but their own, are apt to think the words they use, natural and fixt expressions of things.; while the words of a different language they confider as mere jargon, or the result of caprice. In the fame manner, forms of behaviour, different from their own, appear offensive and irrational, or a perverse substitution of absurd for reasonable manners.

To the ignorant or to the proud, who confider their own cuftoms as a standard for mankind, every deviation from that standard is confidered, not as the use of a different language and form of expression, but as a defeCt of reason, and a deviation from propriety and correanefs of manners.

Among the varieties of this fort we find ations, gestures, and forms of expression, in their own nature indifferent, entered into the code of civil or religious duties, and enforced under the strongest fanstions of public censure or efleem, or under the strongest denunciations of divine indignation or favour.

Numberless ceremonies and observances are adopted in the ritual of different seas, for tie-fame reason that words are adopted in the vocabulary of different languages, though with a different effec on the minds of ordinary men.

In religion, the rite is supposed to be prescribed by the fame authority to which the forms of devotion are addressed. The neglect of it is supposed to confitute offence before that tribunal whose condemnation is fatal. The substitution of' any other rite is supposed to be profane, or an unpardonable insult to the object of worship. Under these apprehensions, arbitrary :signs. of devotion are supposed essential to religion; and deviat-ions from the established pracice, or any variation in the use of such' signs, is pursued with that vengeance which the..zealot thinks. necessary to recommend him to God.

In many examples of this fort; as in the use of different languages, the 'people- have not a different meaning, but merely a difference of the founds in which their meaning is expressed; so in the-rites of devotion or worship, they admit a variety, not of .the sentiment but of the.external. performance, which they employ as a sign- or expression. And if in the different forms and ceremonies, which they pradife, in their own nature indiffeient or innocent, they equally mean-to acknowledge and to adore the intelligent power and moral government of God; the zeal with which they condemn andi persecute one another, on account of such difference of forms and ceremonies, is no way more rational, than it would beto.fofter national animosity on the score o.a different language or accent of speech.

This PARPT I. This use of external aAion, as a sign for the purpose of mere 
SECT. IV. expression, is not confined to observances in their own nature ^vo altogether indifferent: Men freely incur physical inconvenience for the fake of supposed moral good; and acions, in their phyfical tendency acually pernicious or useful, are often more confidered in refpet to the meaning and intention of those who perform them, than in refpea to the actual benefit or harm, which they are supposed to produce. A kind intention, made known in any trivial matter, operates more powerfully on the affecions, than gifts of the greatest moment, bestowed in a manner less gracious, or less expreflive of kindness.

Injuries are not always measured by the aAual harm which is done, nor malicious intention inferred in the highest degree, from the nature of the weapon with which a person is assaulted. A
gentleman in modern Europe, as we have formerly observed, is more offended with the stroke or threat of a flick, than with the wound of a sword.

These are no more than instances of the power of opinion, and habits of thinking, by which things, in their own nature agreeable or disagreeable, are associated in the fame conception with feelings and qualities of the mind with which they have not any neceffary or original connection.

From the whole of there observations, then, we may conclude, that, without any variation in the ideas of excellence and defet, men may vary in their judgement of external ations. A different person, or the fame person in different circumstances, may at differently, and in this there is nothing to unsettle the judgement ment of moral riht-and wrong. Different opinions relating, to 

external effecas, whether supposed beneficial or hurtful, may lead SCA""Pi" r men, with the fame candid or malicious intention, to' ad and to -/-rv judge very differently. Any adtion, that is confidered merely or chiefly as an expression of will or meaning, may be differently understood in the form of different countries; and in none of these instances is there implied any difference of apprehension relating to the intimate nature of moral good and evil. The first may be termed a difference of the cafe ; the second a difference of opinion; and the third a difference of interpretation.

What is observed of a difference in the laws of different countries, or in the terms of a different language, will be equally found not to affeca-the original or the essential diftindion of moral right and wrong.

We are not to exped, that the laws of any country are to be framed as so many lessons of morality, to inftrud the citizen how he may aA the part of a virtuous man. Laws, whether civil or political, are expedients of policy to adjust the pretensions of parties, and to secure the peace of society. The expedient is accommodated to special circumstances, and calculated to repress the specific disorders peculiarly incident to particular situations.

The higher duties of morality, beneficence, and fortitude can seldom if ever be made the subjed of law. The vilest of moral depravities, envy, and malice, can only be refrained from a few of their overt or most flagrant effects. The law must be contented to restrain such open and flagrant disorders ; and, where the people arc prone to any particular ipecies of irregularity, the law may be VO.I. II. T Ifccially 
PART Il. specially directed to reform it, or even with greater severity pu
nifh, the first approach to such irregularities, and treat such apSLcT. IV.
_TY^'v proaches as a greater crime than even the perpetration of greater evils, to which the people are less disposed, and from which the public therefore has less to apprehend.

In some of the smaller flates of Italy, where family feuds and quarrels so often prevailed, it was made capital, we are told, to shed a single drop of blood in the streets. Where frauds committed on the revenue are more frequent, and more to be apprehended than private robberies, the law naturally direas its severity to the quarter from which the public interest is molt deeply annoyed. And its enacments are to be confidered, not as infirusions of morality, but as the convention of parties particularly situated, and mutually engaged to support the cause of a community, depending on circumstances peculiar to their own situation.

If the law, in this manner is to be confidered as a local expedient provided for the welfare and peace of communities; the language of the people, we may believe, is not always calculated to express the mere abftraac diftinstions of right and wrong ; but to discriminate virtue and vice under such diversities of external form, as they most frequently take in particular circumstances, and under specific fyflems of manners. Fortitude is made to express not mere strength' of mind in the abftrald; but has a reference, at the fame time, to the particular and more ordinary form in which there is occasion to exercise this virtue; whether in heroic patience or military valour. Goodness is not employed to express benevolence in the abflral, but has a rfclrence to the form in which there is the most fi-equent occasion to pracait beneficence, 3 lwhcther whether in charity to the poor, and in relieving the distressed; or in 
PART I r.
aas of public service, and private humanity or candour. 


In every language there is a multiplicity of terms in which general praise and blame are expressed; but of such terms it is observed, that no two are synonymous. There is implied in every term of praise a complication of circumstances. In some principal parts of the combination the terms agree, but in some other part, perhaps, in some minute circumstance of the occasion on which the good qualities are displayed, or of the effect they produce, the meaning of the term is, in some degree, diversified, so that any one of the terms so diftinguified cannot, with propriety, be substituted one for another. Honesty cannot be subftituted for probity, however nearly approaching in their meaning; nor is goodness with propriety fubitituted for either.

In the general appellation of a. good man, beside the more important conditions of humanity, faithfulness, and beneficence,.
which recommend one man to another, there is, in particular Situations, some reference to particular circumstances, to which persons in those situations have peculiar occasion to attend; as, among merchants, the qualities of punctuality and regard to credit, which mutually recommend the parties in their dealings with one another ; in literary societies, learning and genius ; in national councils, and public assemblies, masterly judgement, andt powerful expreflion; in warlike nations, manhood and military valour ; and men, in all these different instances, beRlow the general term of praise, with a particular implication of the circumfiance peculiarly required in their own condition.

Words derived from the fame flock, and palling into dlifeT 2 rent 
 rent languages, thus aflume, in some particular refpe&s, a difleHcAP, t. rent meaning in the application made of them by different na~"v~ tions. As from the honeJium of the Romans, is derived the bonefly of the English, and the honettete of the French; but whoever should translate the one into the other, would lose the meaning of his original, and substitute different circumstances of commendation, in pafiing from one language to another; not because these nations have different ideas of what is commendable; but because they have come to express different articles of commendation in a term of the fame origin.

What is commended by one nation in any given term of praise, is commended by another in a different one; and they disagree in the use of words, not in conceiving the diftinaions of right and wrong; for each is ready to acknowledge the value of what the other commends, as soon as he understands the meaning of the word in which it is commended.





S E C T IO N V.

Of the Fundamental Rules of Morality relating to External Alions.

THE first law of morality, relating to the mind and its assec- 
 tions, requires the love of mankind as the greatest good to which 




human nature is competent: If it should appear that mankind SCV
are not agreed in the description of external actions that flow from this principle, nor in the choice of favours to be expected from the beneficent, it may be asked, by what rule is the friend of mankind to conduct himself ? What is the harm from which he is to abstain, and what the good office which he is to perform to his fellow creature ?

To this question we may answer, in general. that, notwithfianding the varieties of manners, in different ages and nations, and the different interpretation of favours or offences, which in the stile of declamation, may be made to appear so formidable and so perplexing, in the choice of virtuous actions; yet, that mankind in reality do not so far miltake the pernicious for the useful, 
useful, nor the deftrutive for what tends to their preservation, SECA. V. as that the beneficent needs to be at a loss, in determininig what v-ve - is in him a natural effea of benevolence or of good will to his fellow creatures. In every particular society, these points are settled; and few have occasion to transfer their beneficence from one scene to another, in which the constituents of a benefit are differently conceived or differently understood.

Notwithstanding the diversity of opinions which men may be supposed to entertain, with refpe& to the morality of particular aAions, yet, in every age and nation, in every rank and condition of men, there is a rule of propriety, which, though it may be different in different instances, is to each the canon of eftimation, and the principle from which they are to judge. Admitting such differences, then, as they assea particular articles of propriety, this may be laid down as a law of external acion for mankind ;-That, in matters physically indifferent or of small moment, men are to observe the rules established in their own country or in their own condition; as they speak its language and wear its dress: That, in judging of behaviour, in other countries, or in other situations, they are not to estimate proprieties of conduct by the standard of their own manners or cuStoms; but, to allow every nation the free and diftindive use of its own.

This rule applies chiefly, if not wholly, to matters of propriety, decency, and common civility; with refpea to which, it is obvious, that as the objea is to do what is inoffensive, what is agreeable or obliging, it is proper that the person, aAing in matters physically indifferent or of finall moment, lhould consult the opinions of tlofe he would oblige rather than his own.

Even,.

matters not altogether physically indifferent, and i. IT


refpec to which unequal degrees of conveniency or inconvenen- 
cy may be apprehended in the pratice of different nations; it sv would be an error in point of propriety if any one should deviate from the manners of his own country, under pretence that he meant to fubititute what he thought an improvement. He might, in the fame manner, apprehend, that the language of his own country were inferior to that of a neighbour, or the faflion of its dress less convenient; but, any extreme or singular affectation of thus deviating from what is common in such matters, under the notion of exhibiting somewhat superior, is ever itigmatized, or is confidered as the mark of a fool or a coxcomb.

Where nations, or different ranks and conditions of men, vary from one another in such immaterial forms and observances, they are said to differ in point of manners; and, as they are severally to be judged of by the tfandard of their own custom or practice, none has a right to apply that itandard, in eitimating the manners of others. This rule may be applied, not only to matters purely arbitrary, like the forms of salute, or the titles of address, but even to all those matters, to which men though not originally indifferent, are in effed by cuflom or habit, reconcileable, or attached. Though to others from an opposite custom and habit, such examples may appear awkward or absurd, it is not to be expeled of persons in any particular age, nation or rank, that they should have any apprehension in such matters different from that of their own nation, condition, or age.

Men of all ages and nations however have been generally difposed 
 posed to trespass on this rule, and to judge of other men by the SeCP. V Iftand'ard of their own manners and customs. This error is equal
wtx-.~ ly the concomitant of ignorance and of national pride, and few are qualified to diftinguifi what is essential in the character of nations from what is an article of variable, inflitution or custom, and though supposed erroneous, yet consistent with the noblest qualities of the mind. Homer sung of great men, who performed for themselves the functions of butcher and cook, and who served up the mess on which their guests and themselves were to feed; He is therefore faidby a late celebrated wit, to have sung ofcoarfe or inelegant heroes *: But the manners of men are variable in different ages; and the fame virtues and vices, the fame elevation or meannefs,may be exhibited under this or any other variety of manners. The moral of Homer has accordingly been equally admired by those who could hire butlers and cooks to serve them, as by others who themselves dressed and served up their own provisions. In this matter the Roman critic appears to have differed from the French one.

Trojani belli fcriptorem, maxime Lali, Dum tu declamas Rome, Prwne/fe relegi; Qoui quidfit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non, Plenius ac melius Chryfippo et Crantore dicit.

This latitude of judgement, however, relating to the variety of manners, which may be admitted, as consistent with equal or superior degrees of merit in different nations, hath limits bcyond which it cannot be safely carried. Should we suppose a nation to reject what is evidently salutary, and to prefer a cufloin 3 which D* "D' avoir chant, des heros grollierG." This cxprcflion is to be found fomcwhere in Voltairc's W'orks.

which is pernicious; this, no doubt, would come under the de- 


CH1AP. Ir.

nomination ofabfurdity and folly, rather than a mere variety of SEcr'. V
manners: It would furnifl other nations with a subjeC ofjuft ri- _r., dicule or censure, andjuftify the individual, when better informed, in counteracting the practice of his own age or country. The virtuous citizen in such instances strives to preserve his country, although the practice in faihion should tend to its ruin.

Virtue is so far from being valuable, merely on account of its external effets, that the greatest and most beneficial effet it can produce is the communication and propagation of virtue itself; " You will serve your country more," fays Epicetus, " by raising "the fouls, than by enlarging the habitations of your fellow citi" zens." And this is the greatest benefit. which any man can receive from his virtuous neighbour, that he become, like him, wife, courageous, temperate, beneficent, and just.

'Fashion sometimes leads to effeminacy, servility, prodigality, and debauchery. Where nations differ from one another in these refpeds, they are justly said to exhibit, not a difference of manners' merely, but certain degrees of corruption and depravity.
If they should be ignorantor insensible of the pernicious tendency of what they do, even this ignorance or insensibility is a heavy article in the charge of corruption or vice to which they are exposed, and it must be admitted, that the singularity of an individual, which in any instance of mere arbitrary manners were an error and a blemiih, would in such instances as these be a merit and a just topic of praise. .-i'ong the /ailhlefjaithful only he, is made the diflindcion of an angel of light *.

It muff no doubt therefore be eftabliflhed as a rule of action, U that * See Paradifc Lolt.

CAR-T II. that wherever the manners of our country are dangerous to its safeS
ty or have a tendency to. enfeeble or to corrupt the minds of men; .jvMyL to deprive the citizen of his rights; or the innocent of his fecurity; it is our duty to do what is for the good of our fellow creatures, even in opposition to the fashion and cutlomn of the times in which we live..

Some rites in religion, as well as observances in the ceremonial of life, are of a nature physically indifferent, and fit to be retained as mere arbitrary signs or expressions of the affection, which religion or good manners require. But, as there is a merit in resifting pratices extremely inconvenient, though required under the notion of good manners; so there is wisdom in abstaining from ads of cruelty, though required under the notion of devop tion or fantity.

The human sacrifice performed, or the cruel persecutions thathave been prafticed under this notion, did not proceed, like the voluntary sufferings of the enthusiast, upon an idea, that it was good for himself to susser; but upon an idea, that the Deity who requires such victims is jealous, vindicive, and cruel; or is to be gratified with the inflicion of human misery: And such practices,. therefore, are to be counteracted, not merely as a mintake of what is beneficial or salutary, but as a corruption of religion itself; and as a substitution of malice or cruelty, where the mind fhfould be taught only to form to itself models of perfection and.
goodness, as incitements, to veneration and love.





E C T I ON VL

Of the fame Subjet, continued.

IT is observable that, in many things, whether useful or ne- CAP.RT I
ceffary there is a certain measure to be kept preferably to any 
other whether greater or less. The less is defective, and in- '
adequate to the occasion, the greater is excessive and erroneous.
The just mean is learnt by experience; and, when known, is the proper objea of choice.

It is not uncommon to confider virtue itself as a mean between two extremes towards either of which any deviation from the middle path is vice. Thus liberality is confidered as a mean betwixt prodigality and avarice; bravery as a mean betwixt temerity and cowardice; temperance as a mean betwixt hurtful abflinence and pernicious excess.

U z 
 JEst modus in rebus, fitnt certi deniquefines, 

SE

I uos ultra citraque nequiit conjIfere re7tum *.

This method is adopted in one of the most elegant and master-.

ly produAions of antiquity, on the subjec of ethics or manners t; and there is no doubt, that propriety of conduct may be rendered perceptible and evident, not only when single actions are separately described, but also when placed in contrast with any deviation from what is right, whether on the fide of defqea or excess.

Such illustrations, however, if useful in treating of the external effeAs of virtue, may rather serve to mislead, in confidering the excellency or depravity of mind, from which those esfeds proceed.

Wisdom and goodnef are absolute, not relative, fubjeds of etfeem. There may be a. defeS of either, but no excejs.. In the defects of intelligence; there is folly; but, in the highefl measure of which it is fufceptible,.there is no blameable extreme of wisdom. There is no extreme ofjuftice; nor in. the mind, be the quality of whatever denomination,, is there any. extreme of what.
is right.

In practice, indeed, beneficent intention. may produce too, much or too little effect. The proper medium or mean, betwixt the extremes, to be found by observation or experience, is itself * Horace.
- Aristotle's Ethics.

itself derived from a previous knowledge of what is right,; and 
PART I.
is not by any means to be confidered as an original standard of SECrT. Vh choice,. even in matters of external convenience..

Mediocrity is certainly, not always upon its own account, an object of estimation. In matters, rather ornamental than neceffary to human life, it is the reverse of a commendation. In matters of genius, for instance, whether poetry, eloquence, politics,.
or zwar, it is better not to have any pretensions, than to have a mediocrity, which is likely to engage the person poffiefed of it in a.
course, of which he is not likely to attain the end. It is better to follow tamely in the track of others, than to affect the command, or the display of abilities, which mislead or disgust the more, that they substitute a mediocrity of effect, where an. exertion of the.
highest degree is required.

Wherever the mean betwixt two extremes is the preferable objec of choice, it seems to be fixed by its comparative utility, not by any original perception of merit; in mediocrity itself, confidered apart from its use. In the extreme of too little, there is a deset of utility; in the extreme of too much the excess is pernicious: And the salutary, or most useful measure, is that which determines the middle way to be chosen between the extremes: So that we are to look for the rule, by which this mean is to be. diftinguifhed, and the very consideration which recommends it in the circumtfance of its absolute utility,, or fitness to serve the purpose of nature.

If the ill effect of extremes suggest' the expedience of recurring to the proper mean in every instance of human conduct, oime apprehension of the proper measure or end of action is neceifary to 
 to point out the evil of extremes, which confifi in a deviation CH:AP. I from the middle path towards either fide, of excess, or of defe&.

Eie-'._' And, if the consideration of extremes serves to illustrate the mean betwixt them, it is evident that the knowledge of that mean is required to point out the boundaries beyond which all that ;eceeds, or falls ihort, is in extreme, and pernicious.





S E C T.. I 0 N VI

f the unequal Degrees of Merit and Demerit in External AiioRs.
presence of that quality which, whatever it beis the object of moral approbation; demerit, on the contrary, is the absence of such quality; or the presence of any quality V
which is. the object of disapprobation.

From the observations, that have occurred under a few of the'

preceding titles, it should appear,. that neither mediocrity of esfe", sympathy of feelings, nor actual utility, is the specific obje& of moral approbation; that moral good and evil are peculiar to mind; and that the merit of an acion, or the objec of moral approbation in any acion, is the pretence of qualities which conftitute the specific excellence of mind : Such are wsidotm, goodneJfs temperance, and fortitude. That efforts of benevolence, or good will to mankind, properly supported with intellecual ability, application, and resolution, constitute ations morally good. That 2. wralice, 
 malice, however ' direAed or supported, cohftitutes an aCfioa 

.-SECVII. Imorally evil.

-This diflinedion is, to us, not only matter of perception and ,discernment, but awakens a Sentiment or pafion, by which we ;are disposed to accumulate good on the good, and evil on the evil.
While we perceive that beneficence is a blessing, we would willing-y confer additional blessings. Perceiving that malice is a curse, we would willingly infliA additional suffering. This sentiment is partly implied or expressed in the terms of merit .and demerit.

That the good deserves to be rewarded, and the evil to 'be punifhed, is an apprehension which we are born to entertain, and is juflly confidered as a symptom or earnest of the moral government of God, under which men being inspired with a disposition -to difiributive justice, become instruments of Providence for its actual effect. This disposition operates most powerfully, perhaps, in its animosity to what is wrong. The right is firm upon its own foundation, and needs not the prop of extraneous reward; while the wrong seems to call for interposition, to prevent, repel, or repair its effecs.

:Hence it is that wrongs are diftinguified under their refpective denominations of guilt or demerit, more precisely, perhaps, than the opposite degrees of merit. The rigrt, however, also has its gradations, and the accions of men their unequal measures of approbation or efteern. Actions, which indicate good will to mankind in the highest degree, are those commonly which we conceive to be of the highest mtnrit; as the effects of malice pre.penfe are, on the contrary, of the highest dtemerit; and thus the presence of good or ill disposition is not only attended with mo2 ral ral approbation or disapprobation; but the measure of the effect, 

in such instances, is also ever found in just proportion to that of SCEHCA.
the cause.

Perfeveiance in the exercise of any good disposition, is admitted as an evidence of its power; or is the indication of a mind exempt from those pafflons or views which occasionally mislead the will, or interrupt the tenour of a virtuous conduct.

Hence it is, that a beneficent course of life, uniformly pursued; that duties performed in the midst of difficulty, danger, or unmerited obloquy, in the midst of allurements, that wouldfeduce, in the midit ofpain oruffering, that would depress the mind, or daunt the resolution, as they carry evidence of a disposition proportionally vigorous and unihaken, are justly estimated of the highest merit.

Hence it is also, that fuperitious Afceticks having a view to the circumitances that would prove the force of a virtuous affection, if any such actually existed, while they withdraw from the world, and fiun every occasion on which good difpositions towards mankind are exerted, mistake fasting, abtinence, and corporal penances, for articles of merit towards God. They attach the efleem that is due to merit to the circumflances of difficulty or suffering, in which merit if real might shine out with advantage; but which voluntarily incurred, and without any rational object, only give evidence of mifapprehension and folly.

Besides the immediate effets of wisdom and benevolence, which form the higeft order in the scale of merit, there are articles of inferior consideration, such as propriety, decency, civility and X politeness, 
 politeness, which may proceed from a disposition or habit of 

SEcr. Vli. doing that which is agreeable, or of avoiding that which is of' fenfive to others; a disposition in its own nature exquisitely amiable, and whose effeCs are esteemed proportionally to the evidence they bear of its reality; although, from the mere occafions on which it is exerted, the highest measure of virtue could not be inferred.

In comparing such examples together, we find, though without any precise diftintion of name, a gradation in the scale of merit, by which men in the course of life are unequally the objects of approbation-or esteem.

At the fame time, there is a corresponding gradation in the scale of demerit, which is not perhaps more obvious; but is thought to require a more pointed discrimination of names, such as those of crimes, offences, and faults.

Crimes, or actions of the highest demerit, are such as proceed from malice, under any of its ordinary forms, whether of envy, emulation, jealotzfy or revenge; or such as proceed from any habit or passion, as from covetou/nefs, sensuality, or ambition, in gratifying of which the criminal has occasion deliberately to trespass on the rights, or to disturb the. peace of his fellow creatures.

When the crime proceeding from one or other of there motives is committed under circumstances of peculiar trust, or againfl persons peculiarly entitled to refpea and affetion, the atrocity of guilt or degree of demerit is rated accordingly; and pernicious actions, performed deliberately, intentionally or knowingly, though not originally fuggcfted by malice,'yet as they imply great defedc defec of the opposite good dispositions of humanity or candour, 

and thereby give evidence of great depiavity, have a correspond- 



ing degree of demerit.

The person who without having entertained any malice, nevertheless deliberately kills that he may. rob, is jufly reckoned guilty of murder; and he who knowingly performs an action pernicious to his neighbour, though only from a motive of interest or conveniency to himself otherwise allowable, is nevertheless in such intfances, justly reckoned guilty of a heinous crime.

As persons thus deliberately offending are not likely, from mere recollection, to repent of the actions, which, under a recolleded perception of their pernicious nature, they already performed; the peace of society, and the safety ofinnocence, require, that fu ch persons flould be restrained by the fear of punishment; and, if not reclaimable, that they flhould be removed by exile or death from the society they disturb or moles..

What in the scale of reprobation is qualified with the more venial name of offence, may, in Tefpe& to the external effet, be equally hurtful with what is derominated a crime.

Under this title of an offence, the peace of society may be difturbed, or a citizen may susser in his person or effects ; but when this proceeds not from malice, nor from an ordinary habit of indifference to the rights of others, but from a fudderi and occasional emotion or paflion, which may hurry a mind, otherwise difpofed to innocence and good will, into an action pernicious or hurtful to those whom it may concern, the demerit is proportionally alleviated.

X 2 Such 
 Such offenders, on the returns of refletion, are capable of 

SECT. VII. sincere repentance, and they may be reclaimed by such measures '..vY' of punishment or animadversion as awaken their remorse, and put them on their guard against like flips oftemper or effects of provocation.

Under the latter denomination of a fault, we may conceive, and often have occasion to admit, a lower degree of demerit than is implied in either of the former titles. Of this a person may be guilty, if, from ignorance or inadvertency, he shall be the cause of harm to his fellow creatures, although he have not either the deliberate intention of the criminal, nor the unruly passon of the offender.

Faults of inadvertency, or of ignorance may have unequal degrees of demerit. Where the cafe by its general importance, or by any peculiar circumflances of personal concern calls up the attention in a special degree, znadvertency is proportionally inexcufeable, and may jufily incur high measures of punishment.

Ignorance of what, by the general condition of our nature, by our profession, or by any peculiar opportunities of inftrucion, we ought specially to know, becomes faulty in proportion as these circumstances accumulate.

On this account it is a just maxim in the cognizance of crimes, that ignorance of the faa7 may be admitted as a plea of innocence, but that ignorance of the law never can be admitted to juflify what is illegal. Thus a person, who, in lhooting his arrow to a diflance, shall wound his fellow creature, may plead his his ignorance of thefaR, or his ignorance that there was any 

person in the way -of being so wounded; but he cannot plead 
ignorance of the law, or that he did not know it was a crime to Hri injure or wound lis fellow creature.

The law of nature, suggested by the regard which-a man naturally has for mankind, cannot be supposed unknown, without an implication of the greatest depravity; and if any one, accused of an ation pernicious to his neighbour, should plead that he did not know it was wrong to do harm, he would, in that very plea, eftabliih a heavier charge of depravity against himself, than any occasional or transient action could imply.

The fum of this argument is, that although external- actions confidered apart from will, intention, or difpofiion of mind, like mechanical causes of any other fort, may be productive of benefit or harm; yet they do not appear to be veiled with any moral quality, until the movement performed -is traced to its connection with the disposition of mind from which it proceeds. This is admitted not only with refpet to involuntary or convulsive motions, in which the arm of one man, in a fit, may be so thrown about as to wound another: It is admitted, also, with refped to voluntary actions, in which a person may casually, or without any blameable inadvertency be the physical cause of -harm to another.

The diftintion of moral good and evil cannot be ascertained in the.dtfcription of mere external action; nor can the merit or demerit of a man be known until he has acted. Insomuch, that although in abftracion we may take asunder, and slate apart, qualities of the mind and movements of the body, yet these in 3 reality 
 reality are combined together in the conception which men. mu
 tually form of their moral diftincions.


Wisdom and goodness are the constituents of merit; proper and.

beneficent acions are the evidence of wisdom and goodness. A
series of beneficent actions implies benevolence; a series of pernicious actions implies malice; proper conduct implies wisdom; improper conduct implies folly: And, wherever wisdom and goodness exist, proper and beneficent conduc will follow, as the tree produces its fruit, or the cause in any other inflance is followed by its effect.

External action, confidered as a feature of the human character, or as an emanation of good or ill disposition, is a proper subjet of moral approbation or censure, or comes properly within the direction of moral government or law.

The fame law, that recommends the love of mankind as an excellence and a blessing to the mind of man, must likewise recommend beneficent actions under the predicament of moral duty; and the law which reprobates malice muff reprobate pernicious actions also.

When we have thus traced the approbation of external aclions to that wisdom and goodness, which is the source of such actions, we may suppose a question to be put on the subjeC of moral action, the fame as that we fippofed on the subjeCt of natural beauty; If external actions be approved on account of the wifdomr and goodness from which they proceed, on what account are wisdom and goodness themselves approved ? And we may repeat, That wifdlom and goodness are approved on their own account: Or, if this anfwcr fliold not be fatisfilctory, we may change the terms, and fay, That wisdom and goodness are approved approved as contfituents of perfection and happiness, and in this 
PART IL
terminate our series of reasons, which, however continued through CA-P. II.



any number of fleps, must lead at last to Something that is efti- _v mable on its own account.

The husbandman values a manure becaufe-it promotes the sertility of his land. He values fertility on account of its produce; the produce on account of its application to the purposes of subfiflence and accommodation; and these on account of their essec in preserving life; and if he values life, on account of the happiness of which it is fuceptible, still in the end there must be some consideration that is valued on its own account. No series in human affairs is infinite, and every choice which is made of-one thing on account of another, implies, that there is Somewhere, and however remote from the present ground of our choice, an objec that is actually valuable upon its own account.

In -the scale of created beings the intelligent is supreme, and approaches nearest to the eternal source of exitfence and exceellence. If intelligent beings themselves may be unequal, and rife above one another in their unequal approaches to Supreme wisdom and goodness, such gradations acknowledged amount to an acknowledgement also. that in perfed intelligence there is an excellence or a good which is in itself the Supreme objet of veneration and love.





S E C T I N VIIL

Of the Obligation and Sanc7ions of Moral Lawu.

 MORAL law in the most general form, as has been already 

stated, is an expreflion of what is good, and therefore an objec v,~v of choice.

To every rational choice there is an obligation and a fanEnion.

These terms are not synonymous: and yet their distinction is more easily understood than expressed in any other form of words.

Obligation, in the original sense of the term, seems to imply some tie or bond, ' which is incurred by the person obliged; while fanstion implies the consideration by which he is induced to * Obligatio efl juris vinculum, quo, neceflitate aftringimus alicujus rei folvende fecundum noftre civitatis jura.

Infl. Just. lib. III. titulo decimo quarto.

to fulfil that bond. So that, in making a free choice, the reality 

of a good forms the obligation, and the consequence to be 
apprehended forms the fancion. - Or, if a person should vV
fay, that he is 'not obliged to chute what is good, and may, if it so please him, prefer misery to happiness, he may be told, that this is' not the, language of intelligence ; nor can it be seriously held by any one who takes the words in their ordinary meaning.

To the question, therefore, that may arise in this place, Why any one should chute to be virtuous rather than vicious ? It may be answered; Because virtue is happiness, vice is misery; and in this contrast is implied at once all the good of which human nature is susceptible, and all the evil to which it is exposed. In what, therefore, we may be aiked, does integrity differ from what is so loudly complained -of under the notion-of felfihnefs ? In nothing but in that which is of all others the most eflential diftinction,-the wisdom of a choice which is made by the one, and the folly of the other. Those we call selfish endeavour to suppress the belt and happiest sentiments of their nature, and become difaffeced or indifferent to their fellow-creatures; while the virtuous have a common cause with mankind; and, being secure in the enjoyments of an affecdionate temper, partake in the good which providence has dispensed to the whole; and are ever happy in promoting the fame end to the utmost of their power.

Some writers on the subjet of morality, and lawyers for the most part, confider obligation as resulting from the command of a superior, and the fanclion, or cause of compliance, as resulting from the power of that fluperior to enforce his commands.
They are used to confider laws that may be enforced ; and in their Y notion 
 notion of moral obligation, would recur to an authority that is 
 fit to enforce the observance of moral duties.


Buit power employed to determine the will of a free agent mufi operate in presenting motives of choice; in presenting happiness as the reward of fidelity, and misery as the punishment of neglect: And whether this be done by so ordering the nature of things, that virtue shall be its own reward, and vice its own punilhment; or whether it be done by a subsequent ad of will and discretion, in rewarding the -good and punishing the wicked, in a way not previously conneced with the part they have acted, the reality of the obligation, and the sanction is the fame: For if, in the nature of things, moral good be constituent of happiness, and moral evil of misery, what can Almighty power do more to determine the choice of the one and the rejection of the other ? If we conceive any sanction of moral law as different from this, it muff however terminate in the fame effect. For what are the honours and rewards which men bestow upon virtue, or the chains and imprisonment which they award to the wicked ? What is the heaven which religion decrees to the one, or the hell which is provided for the others ? but happiness and misery in other terms, or terms, if you will, in which every one is left to conceive what will operate most on his own apprehensions and feelings.

In the cafe of man, surely, it requires no great effort of underflanding to perceive that widlom, benevolence, temperance, and fortitude are happy qualities; that malice, folly, and cowardice are wretched.

And if it flould be thought necessary to confider moral law as the command of a superior, this may be done without departing fr oll from that original docArine of nature we have ftated,-that moral 
'
good is the pecific excellence and felicity of human nature, and moral 

depravity itsfpecific defeA and .wretchednejs. S

The Sovereign of the universe,. by having made things as they'

are, has given his command, and promulgated his law in behalf of morality; and in every instance of conformity to his law, and in every infraction of it, continues to apply the fandion of happiness and misery. Wisdom, benevolence, fortitude, and temperance, he has said shall be the constituents of happiness; folly, malice, cowardice, and debauchery flall be the constituents of debasement and misery. We may therefore chute to treat of moral obligation as the tie of reason, to prefer what is highly valuable in itself and eligible upon its own account; or we may treat of this obligation as the tie of reason, binding the creature to obey his Creator, in making a choice, in fupport'of which the Creator has exerted, and will continue to. exert, his fovereigpower.

In chufing what is morally good, it is happy to know that we.

obey our Creator; and in obeying our Creator, it is happy to know, that what he commands is the specific good, and felicity of our nature.

To separate these considerations were doubtless of ill effect; and the fanAions of morality would be less powerful upon either principle apart, than they are upon the foundations of both united. Merely to obey. without a sense ofgoodnefs and rectitude in the command, would be greatly llort of that duty which we owe to our beneficent Maker; and the love of virtue is no doubt greatly encouraged by the consideration, that Almighty power, in the eftabliflied order of things, is exerted in its favour.

Y i In 
 In- the genuine alliance of religion and morality, the wisdom 

SErT.VIII. and goodness, which we perceive to be the constituents of hapw ^v piness, are likewise enjoined by the sovereign command of God.

They are preVented to our thoughts, as attributes of the Supreme Being himself, and as' forming in him the objects of reverence and of love; and our'own capacity of attaining, in any degree, to a participation of there qualities is confidered as the highest perfecion or prerogative of our nature.

To the ingenuous mind this constitutes the obligation, and the fanltion, whether of religion itself; or of moral duty. If we should be disposed farther to enquire; by what fandion the profligate may be reclaimed from their profligacy, or by what means those who are disposed to the commission of crimes may be.
acually restrained from disturbing the peace of society ? the anfwer may be difficult.

Mankind from age to age have laboured upon this subject; have urged the reasons of morality; have denounced the vengeance of God against iniquity; have held up the sword ofjuftice, and threatened to exterminate the wicked; and all this, though no doubt with great effect, fill without being able to reclaim the depraved from their vices, or to prevent the commission of crimes.

Happiness is mifunderfsood; religion-is flighted, the movements ofjuftice are flow, and defer the infliction of punishment, till after the wrong is committed.

Men have the concerns of animal life, as well as those of inn.~~~~~~~~~~3 ~telligent telligent being, to care for; and, however evident the co-incidence 




of happinefs-and of duty, neither the degree of this evidence, nor 
that of any other fac,.is at- all times sufficient to guard the imagi- Y
nation against the admiflion of false apprehensions.

In the conceptions of ordinary men, there are advantages, whether of wealth or pleasure, which it is their interest or passion to obtain: But there are means seemingly effectual to obtain these advantages, fromwhich they conceiveit their duty to refrain. They are tempted by the end; they are restrained by the law of morality, which forbids the means. While they continue to think in this manner, the obligation and the fantion of the moral law may, in their apprehension, be either the consciousness of what is right and wrong; the general esteem or contempt of mankind; the awe in which they stand of the supreme Being; or the arm of the magistrate, which is lifted up to prote& the innocent againit the wrongs which they are disposed to commit: So that, in this view of the matter, and as conceived by ordinary men, the fandions of morality may be enumerated under the titles of co7lfcience, public repute, compulory law, and religion.

With refpedt to the first, it may be observed, that persons who diftinguifl between their interest, on the one hand, and their duty on the other, frequently conceive there objeds to be in oppofstion, and fit to diftrad their choice. They frequently feel the consideration of their interest more cogent than that of their duty, but still do not confound these confiderations together, nor lose the fenfe-of moral obligation while they trespass on the maxims of moral law. In departing from their duty, they are fill conscious of its reality, and affecLed with remorse and fllame: So that the fandion of conscience is entire, even when it is negledccl.

It 
 It were irrational in a man to hurt himself; and the neglect of 

this rule is marked with a consciousness of folly. But it has pleased wv ej the Almighty, that we flould hold every person under a different form of obligation required to consult the welfare, or to abstain from the offer of harm to his neighbour. This form of obligation perceived carries with it the fandcion of innocence, amounting to a high measure of fatisfacion in the consciousness of integrity, and a high measure of remorse, of dissatisfaction, and suffering, in-the consciousness of any criminal trespass on the rights of a fellow creature.

With this, in some degree, is conneAed the fanedion of public.

repute also, in which every person apprehends that he is an objeA of esteem or reprobation to other men.

As man is formed for society, he is juffly made to enjoy or to.

susser under the approbation or disapprobation of other men, as.
well as under his own. The complacency, therefore, of his fellow creatures, who esteem and who confide in him, or the aversion with which they reprobate or shun him, are powerful accefsaries to conscience in urging its ditates.

Many articles of decency, or even propriety of manners, are derived from cuflom, or the arbitrary conceptions of men, relating to such matters. For the observance of these articles, public repute is the peculiar fandion. The observance of some determinate forms is of great consequence to public order; and individuals, even in matters of indifference, must not think themselves at liberty to flight the authority of their age and country, in the forms of behaviour, which they are required to observe.

States ]

States or regular communities also have their rights, which they 




are prepared to maintain by force. They have their laws to 
which the magistrate is empowered to compel obedience. For 'V'
these purposes the community is armed, fortresses are built, and military forms, eftabliihed. Tribunals are erected for the trial of crimes; officers are entrufled with public force; chains, fezterx, and publicpriJons,'and the other apparatus of coercion, are provided for the guilty. In these institutions, there is a fandion of force to support the obligation to innocence, to preserve the public peace, and to secure the harmless in the poffeflion of his rights.
Such may be termed the fantion of compulsory law, which, though not in every inflance proper to obtain ats of beneficence, yet in every inflance is applicable to refirain the commission of crimes.

In aid of the magistracy, also, in every well ordered community, inflitutions of religion are wifely adopted, and the authority of religion is impressed on the minds of men. by solemn rites significant of the presence of God and the homage which is due to him.

We may avoid for the present entering into any question relating to the abuse of such intfitutions, whether to the purposes of public tyranny or private gain. We confider them only with a view to their proper use in confirming the obligations to innscence and duty.

Man, we have had occasion to observe, is formed for religion as well as society. I-le is capable of perceiving universal intelligence in the fabric of the universe. '-le perceives in the predi3 ledio 
 leAion forjuftice and innocence, in the horrors at guilt which SHcAPI. are imprelied on his own mind, the will of that fovereign'au^,~v~\ thority which reigns in the system of nature. To him the confcioufiefs of integrity and goodness is peace and amity with God: The confcioufiiefs of depravity and wickedness is rebellion and enmity ; the one rendering existence itself a blessing, in the confidence of present and future protection; the other rendering. life itself a curie, under the horrors of present remorse, and the fear or apprehension of future and impending evils.

Such is religion in the form of mere reflexion as it operates in the mind; in, the form of a public establishment it operates in the manner of compulsory law, with the denunciations of future punifhment and the hopes of future reward. But the government of God, more comprehenlive than the government of man, extends to the mind as well as to external actions, and carries the application of compulsory law to restrain not only the overt acts of iniquity, but even the thoughts, wishes or purposes which may lead to such external effecs; requiring such a guard upon the mind itself as may suppress the first approaches to evil, and induce habits of innocence and of virtue.

Just religion, betides its effects as a restraining principle is in itfelfa source of elevation and ofgoodnefs in the mind of man. In what is the love of God different from the love of goodness itself ?
Or in what is the desire to at a part agreeable to the Supreme Being different from that elevation of mind with which the worthy aspire to perfedion ?

In this enumeration of sanctions, or motives to determine the virtuous choice, included in the general and comprehensive diftindlion tinaion of good and evil. We have mentioned those of confci- PAR'r 1.


ence, of public repute, of religion, and compul/ory law. 

Such then we may conceive to be the practical obligations of men, and such to be the fanstions to which they either do, or ought to, recur in fettling the tenor of their affecions and of their conduat .

In the farther arrangement of our subject, we may avail ourselves of a division that naturally arises from the consideration of these different fantions, and may confider the requisitions of compulsory law; or rights to be supported by force, apart from the maxims of beneficence and duty, which are urged by the other considerations now mentioned. The first will extend to every cafe in which force or compulsion may be properly employed.
The second, to those cafes in which the obligation of moral duty, however strong. cannot properly be enforced, and muff be left to the free will of the agent.

The first may be termed jurisprudence; the second cafulfry, or that part of moral science which relates to action and the characteriftics of a happy life. And to these may be subjoined, under the title of politics, the discussion of material queflions, relating not merely to men as members of society, but to the society itself, in respeCt to its institutions and forms. And under one or other of these titles may be comprised all that yet remains to be done in observance of the method which has been proposed for this work.

Z 


" Juris precepta funt licc: Honefle vivcre, alterum non ledere; fuum cuiqtie ,*ribucreI

Intl. Just. lib. i. par. 3.







C 179 )

CH A P. lIT, OF JURISPRUDENCE OR COMPULSORY LAW.

PART FIRST.

S E CTION I.

Of the Principle of Compulsory Law.

IT is a well known faE, that mankind sometimes employ force 

to obtain the observance of moral laws, and that the right to SlAT. I.
compel the performance of a duty, though not universal in every wv/
cafe, is, at least, in some instances fully acknowledged.

We are now to inveitigate and to ltate the principle from which this right in any cafe can be derived.

2Z 2 It I

 It may be observed, that in all the inflances in which the right SCT. I. of one man to compel another is acknowledged, compulsion,
r-vy-' either in its immediate operation, or in its final effe&, is an ad of defence.

The Sovereign employs force to defend his country against foreign enemies, or to make reprisals for a wrongthat is donetohis subjects. Themagiltrate employsforcetoreprefs crimes; thecitizen to defend his dwelling or his person. And even in exacting the payment of a debt; or in requiring the performance of a contrat, there is no more than an exacion of what is justly due; or, as we shall have occasion to evince, no more than an ad of defence on the part of the exa6tor, maintaining a right of which he is already in possession.

The great principle of morality extends to beneficence, as well as innocence; but from this account of the circumflances in which compulsion is applicable, the principle of compulsory law is limited to the repulsion of wrongs, and to that part in the objec of the moral precept above cited, which forbids one person to be the author of harm to another *.

In search of this or any other principle in nature, by whatever steps we proceed, we must arrive at last at something that is selfevident. And such we may fay is the maxim, That every innocent per/on may defend hinmelf; to which we may join what is equally evident, that every one having power, may employ it in defence of any other innocent person.

To the purpose of defence a sufficient measure of force is required Altcruin non lxdcere.

quired, and in many initances is the only means that can be 

successfully employed. A person disposed to commit an injury 




may not be persuaded to desist from his purpose; nor can he be <
eluded perhaps by any artifice or stratagem; it remains therefore that a force superior to his may be the only means sufficient to restrain him.

In every cafe of defence, force is employed to secure the innocent, rather than to obtain, from those who would injure him, the discharge of a duty. And the specific end of compulsory law being to repel a wrong, the means are adequate and just.

But if any one, instead of disputing the legality of force in a cafe of defence, should contend, that it is not peculiar merely to such cafes, but may be employed, not only in defending a right, but in obtaining any other end beneficial to mankind; that as religion and virtue are confessedly of the highest value, every esfectual means, and force no less than any other, may be employed to obtain them, whether by propagating faith towards God or charity towards men.

These no doubt are blessings, in obtaining of which no effeAtual means are to be spared; but if we wish to promote the cause of religion and virtue, means are to be employed which, inform, the mind, conciliate the affections, and gain the will. To these purpofesfbrce is inadequate. Its effets, on the contrary, are to render the understanding less docile, and to alienate the mind. And it must be rejected as an inflrument ofinftruCion or moral improvement; because it would be irrational to employ means which have a tendency adverie to lhepurpofeforwhich they are employed.

Nay, but force is competent to obtain, even fiom those against whom.

 whom it is employed, the external fruits of faith and charity ! To SCHcI. II this it may be answered, That if these fruits be required as a moral <vy..V good in those who are made to yield them, the reality of any such good may be queflioned; or rather it is evident, that a forced performance of supposed good works does not constitute any good in him who is compelled to perform them. Virtue cannot be forced. It is voluntary, or it does not exist. Faith is sincere; or its profession is a mere hypocrisy.

If the fruit of good works be required in one man for the benefit of another; it is evident that force cannot bejuftly employed for this purpose. Benefits extorted byJorce are robberies, not aas of beneficence.

We may conclude, therefore, that the use of force, which is admissible in the cafe of defence, whether immediate or remote, is also limited to such cafes; and that although men are bound, under every other fanAion of duty, to avoid being authors of harm, yet, that they are, in this duty of abstaining from harm, peculiarly repressible by force also: And from this we may safely assume, that the right of defence is theJpecific principle of compulfory law.

In treating of this fubjeit, accordingly, we are not so much to confider the obligation under which every person lies to be innocent, as to confider the right which every person has to defend himself, and his fellow creature, by every effecdual means in his power.

This right amounts to a permission of whatever may be neceffary to safety, but does not contain any positive injundlion to do all that may be wanted for this purpofc. A person attacked 3 in in his person may kill the aggreflor; but is not required to do 



so much. C . 1.



In the application of our principle, therefore, we endeavour to point out how far the right of defence extends, but do not, in any cafe whatever, pretend to lay the person who defends himself or his neighbour, under any tie of necessity to go to the utmost extent. The citizen, it is admitted,, may kil the housebreaker who alarms his dwelling in the night, but is not required to proceed so far: Nay, on the supposition that he may defend himself and his dwelling, without having recourse to this extremity, he is by the law of nature acually restrained from it.

In conceiving ajuft andcompleataAof defence,we mufi suppose some thing that is to be defended or maintained v and specify the means that may be lawfully employed for this purpose.

That which a person may lawfully defend or maintain is termed his right. The circumstances- under which a right is exposed or invaded may point out the means which are adequate and necessary to its preservation; and the subjec ofjurifprudence or compulsory law, so conceived, admits of being divided into two principal parts, of which one relates to the rights of men, the other to the means of defence.





S E C T I O N II.

Of the Term Right in its most General Acceptation.

 THIS term is sometimes an adjective, employed to distinguish SECP. II. the quality of an ation that is proper or morally good; and, in '~drW this sense, to ascertain what is right, is to apply the principle of moral law to the particular subjea in question.

In our present inquiry, the term right has a different meaning: It is a substantive, the name of a thing, or relation of a person to a thing, and not the mere quality of-an action. It may be reckoned among the fubjeas which are not susceptible of a foimal definition. But, we may recur to the cafes in which it is supposed to exist, and leave the mind to colleCt its meaning from a consideration of the point, to which it refers in all the cafes enumerated.

Thus, a person has a right to the use of his faculties and powers; he has a right to enjoy the light of the fun, and the air 3 of of the atmosphere; he has a right to the use of his property, and 

the fruits ofhis labour. These, are felf-evidentpropofitions, and Ca I'
the meaning of the term right, which occurs in all of them, may _
be collected from its uniform signification in each. Agreeably to this rule, right is the relation of a person to a thing in which no alteration ought to be made, without his own consent.

In this circumlocution, the names ofperfon and thing imply, that a right is the appurtenance of a person, 'or of a being vested with choice and volition, and has reference to the will of such person refpeding the objec of his choice. This objeAc may subsist in the person himself, in his lot or possession, or in any constituent of his being or state whatever.

It is a part in the social nature of man, that rights are to different menmutually objects ofconfideration and acknowledgement.

The concern of a person in his own right, is implied in the principle of felf-prefervation; his concern in the rights of others is implied in the principle offociety, or in the sympathy of man with his fellow creatures.

Wrong is the violation of right; and, the fame concern which interests the mind in the preservation of the one, is a cause of resentment on occasion of the other.

There may be a claim orpretenfion without a right; but a right, whatever be the subjed to which it refers, is exclusive, and susficient to set aside every fuppofeable claim or pretension to the fame fubjedt.

A a Although 
- Although numbers at once may lay claim to a right, there cati 

SECT II. be no more than one to whom it is due; and the objedt of dif>vWY^ cuffion, under opposite claims, is to determine with whom the right lhall be found to exist: So that, although the right of any two or more persons may be questioned, or their pretensions remain undecided, yet every question of right implies, that a just title, wherever it be found, is exclusive of every other claim or pretension whatever.

Although, therefore, in the loose application of words, or in common language, we sometimes use the terms right, claim, or pretension promiscuously; yet, in propriety of expreflion, it is well known, that there may be a pretension or a claim where there is no right, and that a right may remain unclaimed and undecided.

From inattention to the propriety of language, or from a with to make way for a favourite tenet, by the help of some ambiguity, it has been said, that in the state of nature, or prior to convention, all men had equal rights to all things; the meaning must be, that, prior to convention, no right was ascertained; and that as no person had any right, so all men were equal in this refpe&.
How far the position is true even in this sense we ihall have occafion to confider.

In the mean time, we assume, that the right of one person precludes a fuppofeable right in any other person to the fame fubjedt: And so far it is proper that the term be understood, before we proceed to confider the different denominations under which rights may be known. As they differ in refpc to the subjecs jedts in which they are constituted, so they differ also in refpet. 

to the origin or source from which they are derived. 

Among the sources of right we shall find, that the law of defence itself may be numbered; and, upon this account,. before we proceed to confider the diflinction of rights, especially in refpee to their origin, it may be proper to frate the law of defence in its most general terms, as a source to which among others we may have occasion to recur in treating this part of our subjed.


Of the Law of Defence in Generals CHP II ACCORDING to the law of defence a right may be maintained SECT. III. by any means which are ejfeSual and necefary for this purpose.

It were irrational to employ means ineffectual, and it might be cruel in some instances to employ feyerities that might have been spared.

If means are supposed to be necessary, it is implied that the end cannot be obtained without them; and to suppose that a defence is allowed, and yet that the necessary means are prohibited would be to suppose, that the law of nature is inconsistent with itself; proposes the end, and yet forbids the pursuit.

It is true, that in some cafes the necessary means may be so severe, and even so deftrudive to the party against whom they are are employed, that humanity revolts against the use of them ; and- 

persons ofa certain mild disposition may submit to harm, rather 



than employ, for defence, measures of any cruel effed to which vo'w the aggressor may have exposed himself.

In the contest, of parties even the aggressor does not immediately forfeit every right; and there are accordingly limits to the very means of defence that may be employed against him ; but the forbearance of any necessary means of defence however severe, is a voluntary effort of goodness in the person wronged, not such a conceflion as the aggressor may claim as a right due to himself.

As the law of defence, therefore, permits the use of any means which are necessary, so it allows to the person against whom they are employed, an exception in the want ofnecefllty, when means tdeftrutive or harmful are unnecessarily employed againit -him. -'

The objec of law being to maintain a right, every excess .

of harm beyond what is necefiary for this purpose is itself an injury, and gives to the party, suffering under it, a right of defence.
So much is implied in the terms effectual and neccjfary, by which the means of defence are characterized.

Under the general notion of safety are included not only the repufion of a wrong that is offered, but likewise the prevention of a wrong that is apprehended, and the reparation of a damage that has been done; so that the law of defence consists of three clauses.

r/l, That a wrong apprehended may be prevented.

I~X ,~~ 2i2d 
 d, That a wrong offered may be repelled.


.-- -_ 3d, That reparation may be exated of a damage received.

According to the firfl clause, every party may provide himself with the necessary precautions against the harm to which he may think hirnfelf exposed.

According to the second, he may repel an assault, or turn away from himself an evil that is intended or dreaded.

According to the third, he may compel the injurious to make reparation: And in this last clause particularly are found certain claims of right which we are not qualified to discuss, except so far as the clause itself is stated and understood.

It is to be remembered also, that in every queflion of right men are permitted to act as auxiliaries as well as principals, and that where a third party interposes, the law of nature, in all its limitations and clauses, and in every cafe of defence, applies equally to the one as to the other.





S E C T I O N IV.

Of thegeneral titles under which the Rights of Men may be clafed.

IN a fubje& familiar and obvious to every person there is more 

danger that we overlook what is evident, than what may require 

investigation and research. 

After having assumed as a felkevident maxim, that a person may defend himself, it appears unnecessary to subjoin, or it is rather a repetition of the fame thing in other words, to fay, that he may defend his person, the limbs and organs of his body, and exercise the faculties of his mind.-Yet these, in pursuing our subjed methodically. we {hall have occasion to cite; and much depends on their being kept in view, when we would discuss certain questions relating to the origin as well as progress of justice in the affairs of men.

These are original appurtenances of human nature or infiparable from it, and the maxims ofjuftice relating to there subr~~~~~~~~t ~jcds PAR1 II. jedAs imuft- have been coeval with the fubjeds, and inseparable 
 from human nature also.


There cannot therefore have been a time in which man had yet to acquire his right of defence in refpeA to the particulars mentioned, nor a time in which it was not just to refped the person of a man, as much or more than to refpea his poffeflion or his estate.

In this view of the matter, juflice cannot be said to be an artificial virtue, any more than the person of a man to which it refers is artifical. And no time can be afligned for the commencement of a person's right to defend himself different from the time at which he began to exist. In every state of his existence, by whatever name we call it, whether the Rate of nature, the Rate of society or convention, as every one had a right to defend himself, so in every one it would have been wrong to invade that right.

It is absurd therefore to allege, that in any Rate of mankind all men had equal rights to all things, or that the right of any one to defend his own person took its rife from convention. It is indeed probable, that such a doArine never would have been advanced, nor would juflice in the most general and comprehensive terms have been supposed to be an artificial or adventitious virtue; if reasoners had not overlooked the felf-evident rights of the person, and carried their view at once to matters of property in which the right is confefiedly artificial or adventitious.

With refped to fubjetds of poffeflion or property, it is admitted, that until they were possessed by some one, they were open to to any one, and became matter of just possession to the first oc- 


.
cu.pier, 

To there only Mr Hobbes seems to have adverted, when he fays, that in the slate of nature " all men had equal rights to all " things;" and the meaning must be, that no one had any right to any thing until he had occupied it: That occupancy was equally open to all men; but he ought to have subjoined, that after a subjec was fairly possessed, no one had a right to disturb the first occupier in his use of the Iubjetc.

The undeniable evidence of obvious and uncontrovertable truths makes it absurd or impertinent to slate them for information, or in the form of discovery ; but to assume principles, or to adopt conclusions in direc contradiction to such obvious truths may indeed have the merit of novelty, or seem to proceed from profound observation, but is certainly in a much higher degree absurd than the repetition of any truth, however obvious and previously known.

To guard against the first of there errors we may be obliged to incur the second, a'nd attempt the enumeration of rights even under titles to which the attention of all mankind might be taken for granted, without any mention of them.

On this account, then, we begin with observing, that the rights of men may be confidered, either in refpe2 to their subjed, or in refpe& to their origin.

Confidered in refped to their fubje&, they are by lawyers fomce times termed perj/onal and real '.

VoL,. I. B b Confidered * See Blackflone's Commentaries on the Laws of England.

 Confidered in refpe6 to their origin, they may be termed :na.

SECT. 1V. tural and artificial; or, in terms perhaps less apt to be mistaken, '.va ooriginal and adventitious.

Personal rights subsist in the person, and relate to the con-.

ftituents of his nature and frame. Such are the limbs and organs of the body, and the faculties of the mind, with the uses of both, Such is life itself, freedom of innocent ation, and enjoyment of what, without injury to another, is fairly occupied.

Persons are diftingified in'the terms of law under the names of persons natural and persons artficial. The individual is a person natural; corporations, ifates, or any plurality of men adcing collecively, or under any common direCtion, are persons artificial.

In persons of the latter description, political forms, and the conflituent members of the body politic, analogous to the frame and organic parts of the natural body, may be confidered as matter of personal right to the community.

Rights real subsist in things separate from the person, provided they may become fubjeds of exclusive or incompatible use.
Such is the right which a person obtains to the clothes with which he is covered, or to the ground or other subject which he has fairly possessed.

Real rights, or the right to things, may be referred to three principal heads: 'Toq/e4ion,--Troperty,-and Command.

~~~~~~~3 ~~The The right of poseJion subsists only so long as the thing is in 


C'AP. III.

acual use, and may therefore be transient or subjea to intermif- 
sion.

The right of property is exclusive, and continues even during the intermiflions of aAual use; it continues therefore until it has ceased with consent of the proprietor.

The right to command refpeds the services or the obedience supposed due from one person to another.

Rights confidered in refpea to their source, being original or adventitious, it is of moment with refpet to the firif to specify their subjed ; and with refped to the second, to ascertain the titles on which they are founded.





S.s E. C T. I O N V.

Of .Rights Original 
 HE fubjets of original right, being coeval with man, muff 
.
SECT. V. be limited to the constituents of his nature, or the common -'-v-' appurtenances of his kind.

Original rights are therefore personal, and express what every one from his birth is entitled to defend in himself, and what no one has a right to invade in another.

These rights may be modified by alienation or consent ; but, prior to convention of any fort, remain entire, and in one person exactly correspond to those of another.

The existence of every such right is felf-evident: It may be overlooked from inadvertency or design, but being once flated cannot be controverted.

~~~~~~~3 ~Mr Mr Hobbes in laying the foundation of his system appears to 


 have overlooked the original rights of the person: But if they had 
been stated to him, or if he had been asked, whether every person in his supposed slate of nature had not a right to preserve himself ? or whether any person had a right to destroy his innocent neighbour ? it is difficult to conceive, that a person, who acknowledges the obligation of-oneman to keep faith with another, should not acknowledge also his obligation to abstain from any harm to his person.





S 'E C T I N VI.

Of Rights Adventitious.

 IN the term adventitious is implied a preceding period of existCIIA?. III.
SECT.VI. ence, however short, in which the thing adventitious was yet -^
r ' future; a time in which it began to be, and a subsequent period -of its continuance.

In the first period of man's existence, he had his original rights; in a second period those rights may be modified by his own consent, or new rights accrue to him from some aA of his own, or the voluntary deed of some other person concerned.

Original rights are recognised upon being merely flated; adventitious rights require to be supported by evidence, in which the manner of their acquisition is to be cited and confidered.

When a person lays claim to the exclusive use of any subjed, or requires the service and obedience of other men, he may be alked, asked, whence his right is derived ? or by what evidence he is en- 

abled to support his claim? Such right, however fairly conlitu- 




ted, is fiill matter of difcuflion, and the objec of science, in eve- v ry such discussion, is to ascertain by what means a fubje&, not originally matter of right to any one, may become so to some one; or, in other words, if a claim should be laid to any such right, it is material to know by what evidence it may be evinced or supported.

As rights personal, agreeably to the definition which hath been given of them, for the most part are original, or coeval with the existence of the person, so the rights real, such as po/ffie.on, property, or command, are, for the most part adventitious, and may begin ta exist at any period subsequent to the existence of the person and the thing to which they relate; and, as both the person and the thing might have continued to exist, without any apprehended relation of one to the other, we are in the following sections to enquire whence such relation may have arisen; how they are constituted, and how they are to be verified in any particular instance.





Of the difrent Sources of Adventitious -ights.

BEFORE we proceed to affirm whence an adventitious right 

SECT. VII. may arise, it is proper to observe negatively, that it cannot arise ~'^Y . from any ass of injuftite or wrong; nor be contfituted where the thing is impoflible or not real.

Injuflice or wrong has reference to a person injured or wronged, who may defend himself; and to a person committing an injury, or doing a wrong, who, inflead of reaping benefit from his wrong, exposes himself to susser whatever may be necessary to repel his injurious attempt; or whatever may be neceflary to obtain reparation of the harm he may have done.

This negative propofiion were too obvious to need being formally flated, if it were not neceflary to correct a common solecifin in language, by which we are told of the right of conqiiefl, arising from a successful application of mere force, without regard gard to the justice or injuflice of the cause in which that force was 



emp.loyed, 

Where conquest is matter of right, there inuft be supposed a previous title to; the subjeC conquered; and, if such title be verified, the conaqueft amounts to no. more than a. just poffeffon obtained by force..

To this negative proposition, that right cannot arise to an injurious person. from the wrong he has comnmitted ; we ma.y subjoin what is equally evident, that no title, can arise to what is not poflible or not real.

Where either the thing or the person has no existence, there cannot be any relation; Upon this ground, we shall have occasion to observe, that although parties stipulating what is impoflible may, by such proceeding, give rife to tome claim in the one against the other, yet. that there cannot be any obligation to the performance of any such article, however directly stipulated.

In treating the history of adventitious rights, there are two questions which may be separately discussed. The first question relates to things which, prior to the origin of the right in queftion, had not become matter of right to any one ; and the objeEt of science is to ascertain by what means a thing till then open to the first occupier, may have become a matter of exclusive right to some particular person. The second question relates to the transfer or conveyance from one person to another of a right previoufly supposed to exist in the person by whom the conveyance is made.

C c To Res nullius.

202 PRINCIPLES OF MORAL

PART I. To the firit of thefe.queftions we may answer in general, that 

SECT. VII. things belonging to no one may become matter of right to sN.J forne one, either by mere occupancy, or in consequence of labour employed to improve or accommodate the subjed to use. To the second question, we may answer, in like general terms, that a right may be conveyed from one person to another by convention or forfeiture.

We are, therefore, in the following fetions, to define the titles of occupancy, labour, convention, and forfeiture ;and to apply the law of acquisition, founded in there several titles, to the specific rights originating in this law or determinable according to this rule.





: : '

. '.... A , -..

... . :., '; ! S E C T I O N VII.

Of Occupnancy, and the Species of Right that may result from it.
OCCUPANCY is the relation of a person to a thing, such, that 
PART II

.

no other person can use the fame thing without molestation or 
detriment to the occupier.

In this manner a person may occupy the unappropriated ground on which he reposes himself, the spring at which he drinks, or the cover to which he has betaken himself as a ihelter from the storm. In any of these inflances, an attempt to use the fame thing may harm or molest the occupier. He may therefore defend himself againfi any such attempt; or in other words, he has an exclusive right to the. subjeA in question, so long as he continues to occupy it, or retains his poffeflion.

This right, however, does not extend to the prohibition of any aA by which the occupier is not any way diflurbed or aggrieved: S6' that the occupier cannot justly resist another using the fame C c 2 thing 
PART I.
:, thing'wi'th hiimfe;f, if this may' be done without any de'rimnent;.t C-1xP. z! him. -Every -one may breathe the eair of the atmofplhere',enjoyr * r _
, the light and heat of the fun, pass on the highway, and navigate the high Tea with mutual :reed'm from :harm or 'moleftation. ' : .

, ' 7;.( ' ':"-" "D; .ir' .;C, The right that results from occupancy is no more :than:that -of pofleffion, beginning and ceasing with the at of occupying the subjec to the extent described: So that, as this right does not extend to the prohibition of any ad5 by which the occupier is not aggrieved, it evidently does not preclude any one from refting on the fame ground after the first occupier has removed from it; nor preclude a second person from drinking of the fame spring, after the first has ceased drinking; or from having recourse to.
the fame cover, after it has been abandoned by a former occupier.

As the effet of occupancy, therefore, ceases with the acAual'

uife, it does not amount to property, or to any right supposed to continue during the intermilfion of fiich aAual use.

No right in one person to command the services of another can arise from any title of occupancy, supposed to take place without the content of the person whose services are required. To occupy the service of another without his consent, implies the use of force to obtain filch service. Force so employed amounts to an injury; and, instead of conffituting a right, may be resifted on the moss evident principles of the law of felf-defence.

It is jufly held to be a public interest, that fair poffeflion in every instance floucl be as little precarious as possible; and upon ' this thisJ-aoeunst mankind.willingly enter, into .cqnventionas,Jy which 
PARTI1.
fair pofeffiion of a certain, duration is admitped as, property. "
r, r t S -fII.

t ~:;N ;', ,'., ,'. ,,,.; j . ......... .......

........

. .Y .'...........'1..............; *.................................

...

.*

...*

, *. : ,.., /.2q r-!.

iThe !durationn of fuch-,pofreffion in the. laws, of different cpun- ".....

tries is termed prescription, and was unequal in the jurisprudence of different nations, and in refpea to the occupancy of different fubj.els. ..-By:, the. antient law of the Romans, refpeiding some fubjedts,, a fair poffefeion of three years amounted to prefcription.- In our law -and respecting the subjec of land.eftate, forty years fair posse'ssion is required to the fame effect.

It is a maxim in the law of nature felf-evident and uncontroverted, that all fubjeas unoccupied and unappropriated are open to the first occupier. If, therefore, by the state of nature, it be meant to design a state in which nothing is yet occupied or apprdpriated; or if we hold the negation of any right to be an equality of right,. as if we flould fay, that the dead are all equally aiive; or that such as have nothing are allequally rich ; the maxim of Mr Hobbes may be admitted, so far as it relates to matters of adventitious right:" That in the state of nature all men had "equal right to all things."

There could be no rule, by which to fettle any rights which did not exist; but, with refpet to the existing rights of the person coeval with human nature, there certainly was an existing rule, That no one was entitled to injure or moles his neighbour. To this rule mankind have at all times resorted; and by this rule they have generally been governed, notwithstanding the occafional irruptions of force and violence. When they are at any time in a slate of war, this proceeds not from the want of an amicable rule, by which to decide their differences, but from the influence of 
 of passion or error, which inclines Come one or more of the parSEC.V. Il ties to infringe the rule.

Mr Hobbes seems to make the state of war to consist, not so much in adcual hostility, as in the want of any rule by which differences could be amicably terminated, and in the necessary reference of parties to the decision of force alone: But it is evident that the slate of war thus defined did never actualIy exist; and that, in the rnidft of hostilities seemingly the most implacable, nations refer to a standard of right, according to which they plead that the quarrel should be amicably terminated in their own favour.

Mankind, in every state, not only had original rights of the person, but could not continue to exist without proceeding to occupy and possess the means of subsistence and accommodation; and without being engaged in tranfations which amountedto some species of convention or bargain: So that the supposition of a slate, prior even to the origin of adventitious rights, must -. -have been of so short a duration as to resemble an abftraacion of the mind, in which co-existent circumstances are separately conceived; rather than a period of history, during which they actually existed apart.





F: ECT IO N IX.

Of Laborr, and the Species of Right that results from it.

LABOUR, confidered as the origin of a right, is an effort, by pr IL.
prove any unoccupied and unappropriated subjeC. SECT. IX, It is evident that, by the law of nature, a person is not permitted to labour on a subjec occupied, because his labour may be a detriment to the occupier; nor is he permitted to labour on a fubje. appropriated without the content of the proprietor.

Under this title of labour is supposed an effort producyive of some permanent effet, tome fruit 6f invention, of ikill, or of power any way applied; and the labourer having, by the law of nature, an original right to the use of his talents or powers, has, by evident consequence, a right to the effeas produced by any of their applications.

. As 
 As the right of poffeflion continues during the continuance of 
 occupancy, so the right acquired by labour continues together wryi with the subjed produced, and belongs to the producer, until he himfelffhall consent to forego, or transfer it to another.

The right, therefore, which is thus acquired, comes up to the idea of property. It is a right, in the labourer, to the exclusive use of his powers, and of their lawful effects, even during the intermiffions of that use, The right acquired by labour does not determine with possession: This may be discontinued during any period, and may be resumed again: If the subjea be moveable, and during any time mislaid, it may be recovered wherever it is found; if in the pofsession of another, that other may be lawfully forced to restore it.

It may be argued, however, that as the right of property thus originating in labour is limited to the actual effec which that labour has. produced; and, as it is not in the power of man to produce any substance, he cannot by his labour acquire a property in any such fubjedt whatever. Human labour may combine materials together, or give to a substance some new modification or form; and so far the right of the labourer extends: But, as the fubflance itself is not an effee of his labour, whenever he fliall cease to use it, the substance shall be open to the first occupier.

If any dificulty be supposed to arise from such fubtilties of argufnentation, it may be removed by observing, that, although the tlie right of a labouret may exteind only to the form, modifica- PA-RT IL
tion, or improvement, hehas-made, not to the subjed or substance 

which exists itndependent: of his labour ; yet, if no one can occupy SkI.
that, fubjedt or fubflance,. without encroaching upon his right to the modification or improvement, it is evident-,that, ii defeiding his right to the modification, he may exclude every person from occupyiig the substance of which the form or improvement is his' property.

The savage who has wrought a piece of wood into the form of a bow, in-maintaining his right to the form, neceflarily excludes every other person fron the use of the wood. The husbandman, who, in breaking up uncultivated land, has acquired a right to the fruits. of his culture, must, in order to' preserve his right, exclude every other person from occupying the earth or stone of the foil to which his culture has been applied, although he has not in reality produced those substances.

The plea of right resulting from: labour is limited to the right of property alone. When applied to any other species of right, whether a right of possession, or a right to- command,; it is either not necessary, or not adequate. It is not neceflary to constitute a right of poffefion ; nor is it adequate to establish the claim of one perfdn to a right in the services of another.

Poffeflion is valid, because the occupier muff not be diffturbed.

although he may not have bestowed any labour on the fubjedt in possession. Labour, therefore, is not necessary to eftablilh this species of right.

As to the fecoid, or the right to commantd ; if it be D d alked 
PART. IL. aiked, whether this may not result from labour ? -We muff answer'
 in the negative; for, although one person may have taken pains kvY-\ to qualify another for the performance of some specific service; yet we mufft contend, that no right to his service can be founded on this plea. Labour employed by one on the person of another, without his own consent, may be an injury, and cannot be the foundation of a right. If applied with his consent, but without any flipulated conditions, the person to whom any new art is thus communicated, retains all his personal rights, and cannot jutly be forced to work for another. " If you taught me an art, might "such a person plead with his instructor, without having ftipu" lated that 1 ihould employ it for you, it mufi be underitood "that I am free to employ it for myself." Gratitude may incline him to make some return to a benefactor; but the demand of a return may cancel that obligation; and, in answer to such a demand, the apprentice may plead: " If you taught me an art, " that I might employ it for yourself, you cannot plead a benefit "intended to me, nor lay claim to my gratitude; or, if you in" tended a benefit to me, you muit leave me to enjoy its fruits."

A person may innocently labour upon the property of another, without knowing it to be already appropriated. He may give a new form; he may compose a mixture, of which the materials, either entirely, or in part, belong to some other person. In all these instances, the decision of the law of nature is clear and peremptory, that no one is bound to susser a diminution of his right from the ad of another, however free from guile or finiiter intention.

As the party, acting however without guile or malice, cannot be charged with injutfice, the law of nature awards, that the right right of any other party concerned ihould be preserved or reflor- 

ed, with the least possible detriment to the fair and innocent deal- 




er: And this is wifely provided for, in the conventional law of v every well ordered community. But the rule that is adopted, in adjusting the relative claims of parties, on such occasions, may vary at the discretion of those on whom the pradice of law depends. According to the law of the Romans, property thus brought in to dispute, was sometimes made to follow the original subjec, and sometimes the specification or form beflowed upon it. When the materials, as in the cafe of bullion wrought into plate, could be restored to their pristine form, the property was awarded to him to whom the bullion belonged. Where the fpecification, or new form, was of a certain value compared to the subjed on which a work was performed, as in the cafe of a piture, compared to the canvas on which it is painted,.
or in the cafe of a writing compared to the paper or vellum on which it is executed, there the material, from favour to the art which was pradifed upon it, was adjudged to be the property of the artist. Where fubjeas, belonging to two or more different persons, were unwarily mixt by either of them, and could not be again separated, it was awarded, that the mixture should be divided among the parties concerned, in proportion to the fliare of materials which each had in the composition or mixture ; and the least inconvenient manner of terminating a dispute was, in this manner, intended, or provided for in these different infsances.

Labour constitutes a right to property in the effed, which that labour has produced. Although there may have been labour, therefore, in any particular cafe, if there be no permanent effet, there is no subjea of property. Mariners may have navigated the lea; they may have traversed new and unappropriated islands.; but, if thelandis no way changed bythcir labour; the earth, no more I) d 2 than 
 than the trackless ocean, can become a subjed of property to the CRAP. III. person by whom it is merely traversed.


It is nevertheless a custom of some standing, among the nam.

tions of Europe, to claim the dominion of newly discovered lands or islands, as founded in prior discovery, and confirmed alone by iymbolical forms or aas of possession; such as- the ereding of columns, with dates and inscriptions recording the claim of the obvereign, in whose behalf it is made.

- So far as any number of nations have been in.pratice of claiming and acknowledging rights, founded in such forms as these, they mull be underflood to have entered into a fair convention, respecting such fubjecs. A mere symbolical occupancy is valid againft those who have repeatedly availed themselves of the fame plea, and who are. therefore come under an obligation to give way to it in their turn. It is a plea sufficient to exclude those who have agreed to be excluded by it, but not to exclude any firanger who is not a party to any convention in the cafe, whether express or tacit; much less a plea sufficient to deprive the nafive, however rude ,or barbarous, of the inheritance or possession to which he is born.

The right of the claimant, therefore, among the nations of Europe, upon the ground of discovery or symbolical possession, is matter of convention merely among such nations; and cannot be derived, either from the principle of occupancy, or the principle of labour, at least, until the fubje& is adually occupied, or, from the labour bestowed upon it, has received some adtual change or improvement.

3 Suteh Such are the ways in which a subjeC, the right of no one, * 


CHAP.AIII, may become the right of oJme one; either while he occupies it, 
or in consequence of the effea he has produced in it by his labour.

It remains, that we confider by what means the right of one person may be transferred to another, as in convention or forfeiture.

Res nnllins.





S E C T I 0 N X.

Of Contra7t, or the Principle of conventional Obligation.

 A CONVENTION, or contrat, is the mutual content of parties to 
 conflitute, transfer, or reduce a right.


Where two or more persons, therefore, are consenting to the fame or to mutual articles of agreement, they come refpietively or mutually under the obligation of contract.

This obligation, in the cafe of mutual content, is universally acknowledged, or universally pleaded by those who exac the performance of a bargain: Insomuch, that even they who overlook every other foundation of right, acknowledge compact as fufficient to support all the claims of juflice in civil or political society.

The obligation of compact, therefore, mull either be felf-evident, or must be derived from some very obvious and felf-evident ~I~~~~~~ ~~~principlc.

principle. Mr Hobbes denies the existence of any right prior to 

convention; but, it most be owned, that if in this, his opinion CECAT. X
bears hard upon human nature, in denying the original rights of v men, he is exceedingly prompt to sustain the effec of convention in creating every right which men have occasion to plead in society; and his proceeding is to the following purpose.

The first requisite, according to him, in eflablifhing any principle of law with which men are bound to comply, is: " That every " man diveIt himfelfof the right he hath to all things by nature *; " or, as he himself interprets, the supposed right of all men to "all things, it being in effect, as he acknowledges, no better than " if no man had a right to any thing t." The first requisite, in establishing a law of nature, is, that all men consent mutually, that for the future there shall be such a thing as right; " but," continues he, " as this content were utterly vain and of none effet, if this " also were not a law of the fame nature, that every man is ob"liged to Rfand to and perform these covenants he maketh ;"
it appears necessary to establish this obligation in general, before tie content of parties can be supposed to eftablifli it in any -particular inflance.

The breach or violation of covenants, according to this celebrated writer, is thefirfl species of injury; but, to a person who denies the previous existence of injury, in the harm that may be done to the person of a man; it may be difficult to show how.
injurycommencesin this form,andnoother. If hedeny that, prior to convention, * Dc Corporc Politico, Part l 11 Ch;p. iii. Sect. r.

t Ibid. SeC . 2.
t. Ibid. Chap. iii. Sec6. 1.

 convention, there is any obligation to abftaitn from harm; if he 
CHAP-. I1." admits that the violent may wound with his sword; that the inv~ryj fidious may ensnare with his cunning.; why -not that the faith-: less may, to procure an advantage to himself, Letray the confidence he has been able to obtain.

To solve this problem, he has recourse to the following process of reasoning: Not to perform what is contraled for, being what all men call an injury, he proves performance to be binding, because non-performance is an abfiurdity in aEizon, as felf-contradi'lioo is ani abfirdity in argument: "For, as he which is driven to contradict " an assertion by him before maintained, is said to be reduced to " an absurdity, so he that through passion doth or omitteth that " which before he promised to do, or not to omit, is said to com:- mit injustice, and there is in every breach of covenant- a con"' tradiction so called.-He that violateth a covenant, willeth the " doing and not doing of the fame thing at the fame time, which " is a plain contradiction *."

Here, it must be confessed, the argument is diftindly stated; the obligation of contract, and with it, according to this author, all the positive rights of men, are made to reft on the merit of consistency, in preference to inconsistency or felf-contradi&ion.
It were irrational to fay and unsay the fame thing.; therefore, rational beings are bound in their actions to be consistent with' their sayings; that is to fay, they are bound to objerve their contrals.
To do otherwise, would be to unsay in their actions, or in neglet of performance what they had previously said, in terms of a bargain, or in expressions of content.

Such * Ibid. Sct'. 2.

ill accounts for the indignation witwhich a breach offaithis universally confidered by-mankind. He who breaks faith may incur the charge of inconsistency it is true; but how different from the charge of perfidy or trea/bn. The traitor next to the murderer is reckoned the most odious among criminals, and the argument now fiated from Mr Hobbes is the less fit to support the obligation of contrac, or to account for the sentiments with which breach of faith is reprobated, that it would equally apply to evince an obligation where none is admitted, and to fix a criminal imputation where the passions relent; and where a person once inclined to the commiftion of a crime flirinks from guilt and returns to innocence.

Thus,upon the principle of confiftency,as flated by this author, a person having once expressed an intention refpeaing a matter in which he himself alone is concerned, would be bound to fulfil his intention, whatever reason or consideration may have occurred to the contrary. If a person, for instance, has one proposed in his own mind, or mentioned in his talk an intention to carry his goods to market, he is no longer at liberty to withhold them.
If he has threatened to kill his neighbour, his benefactor, or his parent,. he is not at liberty to retraA or to change his mind. In any supposed cafe of this fort, however, mankind would confider the threat as a crime, and the failure of performance, not as a breach of faith, but as the relenting of a mind which had yet some remains of ingenuity, a sense of innocence, and some difposition to atone for the guilt of having ever entertained so atrocious a purpose.

In this account of moral obligation colleced from the ordinary E e sense 
 sense of mankind, we find a clear apprehension of right and wrong HCHA. III. prior to convention. We find an acknowledgment, that conven
^rv ttion itself may be wrong; the completion of it worse; and the breach of it right. As he who has engaged or bargained to commit a murder incurs a certain measure of guilt in the bargain he has made; this measure of guilt he would greatly augment by preserving consistency, or by proceeding. to fulfil his bargain; and under such an unhappy engagement his duty manifestly is to become inconsistent, and to decline the performance.

Some writers who have employed their ingenuity to a better purpose, and who think more favourably of man's physical state than the last we have mentioned, seem willing, nevertheless, to reft the obligations of men in society more upon convention than is necessary; and to reason from this topic of contract, in cafes to which the great injunction of natural law to abfiain from harm is at least equally obvious and equally applicable.

Society itself is by such writers confidered as the refuIt of a bargain, and the relative duties of men in society are traced up to a supposed original compat, on the articles of which volumes have been written*. The intention of writers, in this form of their argument, is no doubt favourable to mankind, and the hypothesis of a conditional obligation is by them recurred to, merely in order that none of the parties in civil society may pretend a right to enjoy his peculiar advantage, without fulfilling also the condition to which he is peculiarly bound, or without contributing what is due from himself, in return for what he expedcs to receive from another. Thus, allegiance and protection being tated, as the reciprocal - Vide Contrat Social of Rousseau.

ciprocal flipulations of magistrate and subjed, the one is not to 

expect allegiance, without adminiftring protection, nor the other to 

expe& proteAion without the proper returns of allegiance. and duty. I '

Were we to enumerate all the obligations of men in society, we should find many, no doubt, which arise from convention express or tacit; but, it is far from being necessary or expedient to refer the whole to this title. The obligation to abstain from harm, and the right of every individual, to the utmost of his power, to defend himself and his fellow creatures, are prior to convention, and are indeed the foundation upon which conventional obligation itself is established.

- Whoever has power may employ it in defending the innocent; and so far, the magistrate having the sword in his hand need not enquire whether the criminal that offends against the peace of his country, has agreed to abfiain from crimes, or has agreed to submit to punishment. In repressing the crimes, and in. giving examples to deter others from the commiflion of them, the magifirate does no more than what every other person, prior to convention, and to the extent of his power, is entitled to do.

But, when the magistrate assumes tohimfelf alone the prerogative of employing force for the repression of crimes; when he tells the injured, that he must not attempt to do himfelfright, but must have recourse to the protection eftabliihed by law; when he requires the fubjedt to part with his fubftance,to defray the expence of a public service; when he assumes the right to positive command, in requiring the innocent to serve his country, as well as in requiring the injurious to abstain from harm; there, no doubt, he must be able to plead a special institution or convention, to which the people have agreed.


I Laws and iniitutions, in every'community, contain: articles of agreement entered into by the parties with whomthey originated, .---- and by their posterity who accede to them ; but such agreements are all of them posterior to the existence of society; and not the foundations upon which society was originally ereAed. 'The esfential obligations of men in society are founded in what nature has done for them, not in what they themselves have agreed to.
perform; and such obligations can receive no confirmation or fanAion from the supposition of a contrac which is merely sictitious, or which did not exist.

The humane author of the treatise on crimes-and' punifliments , founding even the right to punish crimes on a supposed original!
compact, and applying a well known maxim of law,, that comrn 'pads are to be ftridly interpreted, denies any right in the magiCf trate to inflicd punishments more severe than are neceflary to ob'tain the purpose for' which parties contracted; that is, more severe than is necessary to restrain crimes, and to keep the peace offociety.
For this being the obje of parties in forming their compaCt, so far, he argues, every' person in society may be supposed to have acceded to. the contract, and no farther. This, however, is :rio more than a circuitous way of asserting, that the state or its, ma-giftrates have no right to punilh any crime, farther than is neceffary for their own defence, or the defence of the cause entrulted to their charge ; a maxim that does not require consent to make it binding,' but is implied in the first principle of natural. law, which limits the means of defence within the bounds of what.is necessary for the preservation or recovery of a right.

1~i~~~ ~T , Bar'.If * The Marquis Bccarilo.

If we muff admit the supposition of an original compacl; like a PRTII"

bond .of copartnery, constituting the foundation 'offociety,-and 
the first charter of rights to its members ;- as there is nov record of the articles originally framed, there must. now be, inferred from the principles of natural right; for we have no oither source -from which to derive information of what men were likely to :have stipulated or agreed to perform.in a period of which no. vefr .tige remains. .

In the first treaty of peace, by which. men. agreed to live in society together, we are told, accordingly, that they mufft have ftipulated. to abstain from- harm. But whence this information, we may ask-?. Not from, the record of any such stipulation.! Nay, but it may be assumed. from the manifest equity and reason 'of the supposed article. This is, firif, to alledge that a person is bound to be just, because he has bargained' to be so;. and, next,-to presume that he has bargained to abstain from harm, because. it is; just that he do so..

- If we are to suppose, with Mr Hobbes, or as is, in some mea'sure, implied in his refting all the obligations of men in society.
upon a fuppofecl original compaqt, that there is no right and ,no.
obligation prior to convention; it will be difficult, surely, as. the example of Mr Hobbes himfelfwill show, to find a foundation upon which the obligation of contra6t itself may reft.. If-contrat"
be the sole foundation of right, all that, is commonly said of an inherent right in every person to defend himself, or. of an obliga.
tion corresponding to this right on every person .to abstain from harm, mufft. be renounced. The diftinAion, supposed between rights original and adventitious, must be dropt. All the rights of men, whether personal or, real, ate adventitious, and begin with, 
 with the.confent of one man not to disturb the pofleffion of ano
 ther; and, in ihort, no man is obliged, even in the latest hour of wvars' society, to abstain from harm, except so far as by some species of compad he has bound himself so to do.

Such consequences, however, are sufficiently absurd to justify our rejeding the principle on which they are founded; and are probably far from the thoughts of many, who assume the social comjpare, as a Jiflion of law, upon which to reft their decisions in particular instances. To this principle, at any rate, we cannot have recourse in fixing the grounds of conventional obligation. That a compac may be binding, we muff suppose some previous foundation upon which its obligation may reft, whether the consistency to which Mr Hobbes refers, or the original right of every person to defend himself, to which we have so often referred in these disquisitions.

If the rule that forbids the commiflion of harm, or the principle of nature, on which is founded a right of defence, can be applied to the cafe of parties, so far pledging or accepting a faith which is pledged to them, as that, by the breach of this faith they may injure or be injured; it will follow, that they ought to- refrain from that injury; or may repel it,by obliging the party contrading to fulfil the terms of his contract.

By the law of nature, every party may defend his estate from every invasion that is made to impair it. Of the state which may be thus defended, men derive part from the hand of their Maker, which is accordingly to them matter of original right; part from their own a& and deed, as in the cafe of occupancy or labour, already recited; and we may now subjoin, that they 1 : derive derive part of their state also from the engagements in which others 

are bound to them ; or from the faith that others have plighted. aCHP 11I.

-'' ' SCT:X.._

The servant is secure in the engagement of a maiter to pay his wages; the master relies for his accommodation on the engagement of the servant to do his work. The landlord is rich in the engagement of tenants to pay his rents; the tenant bellows his labour, and scatters his feed, trusting to the lease he has received from the landlord.. Even the miser himself, who is disposed to hoard up his wealth, may not have a tingle penny or article of value in his pofleffion. He is rich in the capacity merely of a creditor, and in holding others obliged to pay the principal and interest, in which they are indebted by bond to him.

Such credit, in one man towards another, is -a part of their social nature; and the person who is disposed to abuse his credit may wound or defiroy, by means of that instrument, no less than by the arm of violence, or the sword which he wields in his hand.

If it be admitted, that men are by nature disposed mutually to give and to receive information; that where they have no special cause of diftrufi, they rely on the informations, aflurances, or promises which they receive from others; and that great part in the conduct of every person is determined by informations or ,asfurances so received. If the bewildered traveller, in the dark, turns 'confidently to the right, when he is told that there is a precipice on, the left, it must evidently follow, that to mislead him, or to occasion his harm, by any misinformation, would be equally criminal, as to occasion that harm by any other means.

Hence 
 .Hence we may conclude, that a person being made to rely on 
 the content of another, to constitute or to reduce a right, is not k-001 bound to susser by the other's breach of faith; but may proceed on the principle offelf-defence, to force the performance of a promise which makes a part of his itate; and the principle upon which a person, who has come under any engagement, may be forced to fulfil that engagement, is the fame with that maxim, on which he may be forced to abstain from injury, or harm of any other kind; insomuch, that the first principle of compulsory law, which is in appearance merely prohibitory, may branch into a variety of duties or obligations to do, or to omit to do, whatever may be a fit matter of stipulation betwixt any two or more parties concerned.

To fail in the discharge of such duties is, on many occasions at leaf, termed perfidy or breach of faith, and confidered with a higher degree of abhorrence, than even the injuries that are done by open force. This may, no doubt, proceed from circumstances peculiar to fraud and deceit. The traitor must have carried the maik of innocence to have obtained credit; he has stolen an advantage which he had not the courage openly to force. The contrait of fraud with the mask of innocence, which it wears, the cowardice which is imputed to the person who assumes that mark in order to wound, combine together in awakening the peculiar sentiment of indignation and hatred, with which perfidy or breach of faith is confidered; and which, though they do not make any addition to what is at present the object of our discussion, namely, the rightof every person to defend himfelfagainft such wrongs; yet they they tend greatly to evince that the source of conventional obli- 

gation is much more deeply laid than the mere consistency of CHCP. IIr words and actions, upon which it is founded by the philosopher nr now mentioned.


Of the Laws of Convention derivedfrom theforegoing Trinciple.

PART. 11. FROM the account which has been given of conventional right 

SECT. XI. and obligation, it appears that compact, in every instance, implies '. >-'v a plurality of parties, one at least who comes under an engagement, and one or more to whom the engagement is made, and who accept of it. The first may be termed the party contraCting, the other the party accepting.

In many bargains, the parties may be mutually contracting and accepting; as when one party binds himself to convey a property, accepting a price, and the other binds himself to pay the price, accepting the property. But it is not, at present, or in the prosecution of this argument, neceliary to confider the parties to a double capacitm the principle itatecl, it is evident, that to give a supposed compact the effeEt which we have ascribcd to it, in confsituting a a ight, on the part of one, 

ther, it is necessary that the accepting party mfould be made to 
expec a performance, and that the contracting party should have intentionally done somewhat sufficient to give such expectation.

Without an expecation formed, there is no object of exaction; and, without a person who has intentionally given cause for that expectation, there is no one against whom the exaction may be enforced.

Agreeably to this decision, it appears, that, although the contraAing party may have done what was sufficient to create an expedation, yet if the other party mhould not, at the fame time, do what is sufficient to make known his acceptance, there is in reality no obligation to perform.

The tranfadtion, upon this last supposition, amounts to no more than an offer; and, as the party offering has no intimation of its being accepted, he is at liberty to change his mind, or may have recourse to some other party willing to accept of the offer he has made.

It follows, also, that as a supposed contraAing party is notbound to performance, where acceptance is not sufficiently notified, no more is he bound to fulfil any fali expedations for which he has not laid a foundation.

Upon the principle of convention, so explained, we may ground the following law: That, To co5i/itute a valid contracl, is required the mutual cotfent of parties, acfing freely, and in the exercie of their rational.faculties; F f 2 and 
 and- withfuch means of communication as are fuffcient to make known 
 their thoughts and intentions. :. . :.,, ,. .


In the municipal law of different countries, the forms. ofr convention are prescribed, as in bonds, bills, or promiory notes, which constitute a debt; deeds of conveyance, articles offale, and so forth.
So that, upon the disagreement of parties, the question at issue may be determined by a third party; that is, by the judge before whose tribunal the reality of the obligation may come to be tried, and who must colle& the sense of parties from the form in which they were pleased to express their agreement. But, as the prefcribed form may' ometimes have been observed, where there is nevertheless sufficient cause to set aside the contrat, such cause may be taken into consideration, under the title of an exception, and is often sufficient to repel the plea of the party, who claims the performance of an article, however Stipulated in the legal form.

Such exceptions, in the municipal law of any country, are or may be enumerated under the titles of incapacity,force, fraud, injuflice, and impossibility.

Incapacity may be pleaded against the validity of an obligation, when it appears, that the party, supposed to have consented, was not in the exercise of his reason at the time. Force may be pleaded, when he was known not to ac freely; and fraud, when he was known to be deceived; more especially if the force or the fraud had been employed by the person who afterwards claims performance of the article so obtained.

These exceptions are matter of just and necefTary confideration in courts of law, as ajudge, if directed merely by the forms prescribed, prescribed; might be milled to fuftain'an obligation where it is not 

properlyconftituted. But,in discussions ofthelaw ofnature, where S
a contramt is supposed to consist, not in any prescribed form or mode of expreflion, but in the mutual aflent of parries, aling freely and in the exercise of their reason, the exceptions of force and fraud are precluded in the definition itself; and, where the sac does:not correspond to the definition, what we contend for is not an exception, by which to set aside a contract supposed to subsist, but is a negative plea, by which we deny that any contract ever did exist.

The insane or incapable can raise no expecation. A peifon forced or deceived into a bargain, cannot be expected to fulfil that bargain, when he is at liberty, or has detected the fraud that was employed to' mislead him. He may confider the person who employed such means to circumvent him, as guilty of an injury; and may think himself entitled to reparation, inflead of being bound to perform the articles of a bargain so obtained.

There may, however, be a real aiTent of parties to an article of compact which may afterwards appear to be either injurious to the right of some third party, or in the nature of things impofiible; and in every such cafe, there is a real ground of exception, even upon the general assumptions of the law of nature.

The exception of injuflice may be pleaded to flop execution of an article injurious to a third party, and that of impqgibility to save the party contracing from fruitless attempts to perform what cannot be done.

Under these titles of injuilice and impoqfibility, confidered as exceptions to a contrat, a variety of cafes may be supposed.

3 'i1f 
 xfi, That neither party, at the time of itipulating, was aware CH.P. 11I.
SECT. XI. of the ijufJiice or impojibility. In this cafe the decision is, that L-->-- both parties are bound to drop their petenfions as soon as the exception is known.

A second cafe may be supposed, where only one of the parties, at the time of stipulating, knew of the exception. If the contrafting party alone knew that he was engaging himself to commit an aA of injujlice, he is injurious to the party against whom the wrong is directed. If he alone knew that the performance was impoi/ble, he is unjust to the party accepting, in whom he has endeavoured to raise a vain expectation.

If the party accepting alone, knew that the performance would be unjust, he is, in accepting the offer, injurious to the party likely to susser. If he alone knew that the performance to which he engaged another, was in the nature of things impoflible, his acceptance of such engagement was an injury to the person whom he induced ignorantly so to engage himself in fruitless attempts.

A third cafe may be supposed in which both parties knew of the exception at the time of making their agreement. If the article stipulated was by both parties known to be injurious to a third party, the agreement amounted to a conspiracy against the person concerned. If the article was known by both parties to be impossible at the time of stipulating, there may have been a purpofc, by such sham tranfa&ion, to impose upon some third party, or else the proceeding must be judged altogether irrational and absurd.

In every contract must be supposed a sufficient mode of communication munication between the parties. Language, whether in speech 


'

or writing is the most common, but any other means of ex- 
prefflion, supposed to be mutually understood, will be equally r.y-'
sufficient upon the principles of the law of nature, to establish a conventional, obligation, or right; geefures of any fort understood as signs of declaration or assent; a continued course of action; even single actions may, upon this principle, not only be conceived to express a meaning, but are actually sustained as sufficient expressions .of assent before the courts of law in every civilized nation.

Hence the effea of custom every where admitted as part of the common or the municipal law. Hence the obligation contrated by a shopkeeper, to fell the goods in his shop to those who will pay his price, and the obligation of a person who takes the goods, to pay that price. Hence the obligation of an inn-keeper to accommodate passengers; and the obligation on passengers to pay their bill; although neither one nor the other made any verbal declaration to that effect.

In the ordinary course of things, we look to the future as a continuation of the pait, and confider the custom of the country in which we reside, as an assurance of the terms on which we live with the people of that country.

It is evident in particular, that custom may be pleaded against those who take the benefit of it, where it is favourable to themselves; and who, therefore, may be reasonably supposed willing, in their turn, to comply with it, where it is favourable or beneficial to others.


CHAP.R II In this manner conventions are tacitly formed, and the laws SECTr. XI. of every country consists more of customary practice, established '>_'- by repeated decisions, than of statute or express confiitution of any fort.

It is a maxim of natural justice, that every party observing a custom, in those refpecs in which it is burdensome to himself, is entitled in his turn to expect the observance of it also in those refpeas in which it is beneficial. A person bearing the public burdens of the state, is entitled to its protection ; and a sovereign, granting proteaion, is entitled to allegiance and support.

Convention, though not the foundation or cause of society, as implied in the term of original compa-t, may be supposed almost coeval with. the intercourse of markind. Men do not move in the fame company together, without communications of mind; or intention. These communications become objecs of mutual reliance, and even that party may be charged with breach of faith who has belied the expectations he gave by his amicable looks or pacific behaviour. From the first steps, therefore, that are made in society, conventions may be supposed to go on accumulating in the form ofpracice, if not in the form of statute or express inftitution.

Political eftablifnments, in many instances, originate in force, and prerogatves are assumed which in the first exercise of them were manifeff violations of right. process of time. or at least in the succession of a few ages, acquire the habits of their situation; and succeeding generations may bciled to orms that were forced on their ancestors. They adopt as a custom, and willingly submit to conditions which owed ed their first imposition perhaps to violence. In such cafes, we 


CIAP. Ill, are not always to look -back to the origin of a custom or prac- 
tice, in order to judge of its validity. If it be such as the mind ve of man may by habit be reconciled to, and willing to adopt, it becomes binding on those who have availed themselves of the cuftom, where it is favourable to themselves; and are therefore fairly understood to adopt the conditions of it, where these conditions are reciprocally favourable to others.: Succeeding generations of men are supposed to be comprehended under certain legal eftablifliments, by the deed and inftitution of their ancestors. This is not ftrilly true. Every citizen, as he comes of age, enters upon a scene which his ancestors had prepared for him, but of which the conditions as binding on him cannot be ratified by any one besides himself. He mixes in society, where these conditions are already ratified by others; and he himself in complying with them, and in reaping the benefit of them, gives such assurance of his willingness to accede to the terms already prescribed in his country, as amounts to a ftfficient ratification of the fame terms on his own part. So that citizens, in every regular community, are bound, not by the institution of their anceflors on which they were not consulted, but b'y the consent which they themselves have given. by availing theimfelves of the benefits which result from such institutions.

To the question, therefore, whether persons of one age can bind their poetcrity in ages that follow ? we may answer in the negative. But succeeding ages, nevertheless, becomec bound in acceding to the terms on which they live with their fellow citizens.

TVOL. 1I G g I

1PART 11. In judging of an inflitution, we may repeat, that we are not'fo SECT. XI. much to look to its origin as its actual nature. - Compliance extorted by force does not amount to convention; but justice itself sometimes needs to be enforced, and the wisest institutions, at the time of their first admission, may have been the fruits of compulfion: But, if in the sequel, an establishment be found acceptable, and favourable to the interests of mankind, they do well to abide by it, and, while they do so, no individual can remain in his country, and take the benefit of its laws, without being bound to obey them in his turn.

Thus, it becomes evident, that as it were absurd in science,, like Mr Hobbes, to overlook the original rights of men; so it were no less absurd, like visionary theorifis, in any question of law or state, to refer to mere original rights, as the sole ground of decision. It were absurd, after a person had bought an estate, to rejea the conveyance that was made to him, in order to judge of his title, on such principle of right merely as may be supposed to precede the institution of property.

But, if want of content, in one age,will not preclude the obligation of compac on succeeding ages, or on those who in the fequel voluntarily accede to a practice, no more will the content of anceflors, with whom a pratice originated, bind their pofterity, or those who in the sequel refuse their assent; and, if an institution, however willingly adopted by a former age, prove in the sequel a mere abuse; if it be a continued exercise of injutfice and wrong, supported by force on the one part, and a continued series of suffering and relucant compliance on the other; fulch praAices, however long continued, as they are never ratified by content, they are never cftablifhled on the foot of customary i.~~~~~~~~1 ~praAice, pradtice, nor do they obtain the force of convention. The op- 

pressed, even after any indefinite period of oppression are free to 




procure relief by such means as they are enabled to employ for _r that purpose.

Of thefpecifc Obligation; and Rights that result f-om Contra7.

J 
PART PI1 IEN may bind themselves by contraic to do, or to onit to do, SECT. XII. whatever is within the compass of their will, and not contrary to 'Vr-j tdhe right of any other person; but in matters, concerning one person, which no way depend on the content of another, compaA were misplaced, and cannot have any effect.

In seizing upon things which are open to tle sirs occupier, the conient of others is not required; or, in other words, the right of poflEffion results from occupancy alone, apart from any content.

Poflfsion is fllort of property; because, if the pofiffor nould cease to occupy a ilibjed, he has not any right to exclude another fiom its use. When rclinquiflhed, it is open again to the firfl occupicr, whether the person who formerly pofliced it, or any one elfc.

This This defec, in the right of poffeflion, may be in part supplied 


by the content of all the parties, who had access to the subjet, at 
the time it has ceased to be occupied. And thus, a right of pro- -Y
perty in one person, may be pleaded against all tho-e who consented to forgo their right of occupancy. With respect to such as consent to the property, it is matter of convention; and the person, in whose favour they have given their content, has so far acquired an exclusive right, that, upon any discontinuance of the use, he may refumre it, or even recover his uibject, if found in the pofsession of those who resigned their right of occupancy in his favours, But this right, which is exclusive with refpedt to those, whether few or many, who have confented-to exclude themselves, can never of itself amount to an absolute property, or be exclusive with refpeat to all mankind.

Were we therefore to admit the principle afliimed by Mr Hobbes, that originally all men had equal rights to, all things, and that compat alone could give exclusive right to any thing, it should follow, that universal consent was necessary to give abfolute property, or to conltitute a right special and exclusive in any one to the sole use of the subjec to which he laid claim; and wee might infer, on the fame principle, that, as no such universal consent has ever been obtained, no right of property is yet fully conftituted: MIoreover, that as such universal content never can be obtained, we might alto infer, that the existence of a right, in any one person, exclusive of all other men, is impossible, and that men fill remain, and muff for ever remain, in that original late, in which all Ien had an eqlual right to all things; and iare atclally in a slate of war, to which they arc condemned by the want of any.
amicable rule by whlich to adjulli their di/fcrcnccs.

Althougth 

h Although the idea of universal consent be altogether visionary 
 r SECT. XII yet no one will deny that there is such a right as property, which <r/Wy may originate in the labour bellowecd upon a subjeCt unoccupied and unappropriated. And that when property has thus accrued to any one, it may by compact be conveyed to any other, and continue to pass through any indefinite number of hands.

With refpet to property, therefore, the effect of compac is not the institution of a right, but the conveyance from one to another of a right previously instituted.

Property determines on the death or derelicion of the proprietor. In either cafe, the subjea is open to the first occupier.

Among rude or savage nations, property being attached, for the most part, to moveable articles, as arms, furs, dre/s, or utesjils of any fort; and the principal sign of property being the actual use of the subjeA in which it is conflituted, such articles, when found in the absence of any person who claims the use of them, are readily treated as res nullius, or as things open to the first occupier. Hence, much of the rapacity or injustice which is imputed to men in this slate.

A conveyance of property implies dereliction, but is not complete, without delivery into the hands of the person, in whose favour the conveyance is made. Were a subject merely relinquiflled, it would become open to the first occupier. The person, for whom the property was deflined, might have an action against the former proprietor for not fulfilling his deed of conveyance; but but not againfl a third party, who, proceeding to occupy .the sub- 


CHAP.A'ILr jed relinquished, had not come under any obligation to deliver 
it to lim.

Upon this ground it is obferved,that the mere law of nature will not support a legatee, in claiming the poffeflion of an inheritance from any third party, who may have occupied it on the death of the teftator.-His action could lie only against the person, whose consent he could plead; but that person is no more, and, upon his demise, the subjea in question became open to the firfl occupier, who may not have consented to put the fuppofed-legatee in possession.

But such questions, in the ordinary course of things, are for the most part precluded. Even among rude nations, where property is least established, the family of a person deceased are naturally the firit occupiers of his effeds; and inheritance gets a footing, not upon any principle of right excluding the first occupier, but upon a principle of fad, that the family of the deceased are, for the most part, actually in pofleflion.

Among nations more advanced in the progress of property and: of arts, the will of a person deceased is admitted as a sufficient ground of conveyance to the legatee. This favour is due to the induflry, with which property is acquired; and it has a salutary tendency, among commercial nations, to reward and encourage that induRtry. Upon this footing, the effedt of a last will is derived fiom convention, fich as the living have admitted; not from the destination of a person who is no more, and against whom no action at law can be raised.

A claim of right, founded in compact, is valid only againfl the party 
 party contrating; and the right pertains only to the party acceptCHp. '1I. ing. Such only as have at once a right, in the subjec of compact, i . .Ji and power to dispose of it, are competent to an effecual at of conveyance.

As every person may perform what Jervices he thinks proper, and has power to dispose of his services by previous consent; perfonalfervice is the principal and immediate objeEt of convention.
al obligation.

The right to commnand we have observed, cannot arise from occupancy or fiom labour bestowed. It may arise by co!/fent so far as one person may, by compact, bind himself to obey the commands of another. Thus the artizan has right to the service of his apprentice upon the ground of his indenture. The master has a right to the labour of a fervant'he has hired, and persons ftipulating the performance of any tail; or the supply of any commodity, have a right to all the effects of their contrac.

In the fame manner, we are told that the right of government is founded in the concz/nt of the people; and this though true in many rcfpecs is not true in all. It is true in refipec to all the positive fkrvices and contributions due fioml the subject. If in there the rights of government are questioned they must be evin-ced on the principle of convention exprtcf or tacit: For on that principle alone the right of command can be eflablilhed. The consent of those by whom governiment was fiirf acknowledged is firequent.
ly cxpreitci in formlal capitulations, charters or Iatutes ; and the conleiit of thofi over whom it continues to be exercielle, though tacit, is no less real firom age, to age in the continued acceptance of protection in return for allegiance ancl politica.l duties. 13t a right right to protect the innocent or to restrain crimes, which the ma- 

giflrate by his power,alone,is in condition to exercife,he is likewise s

entitled to hold on the principle of the law of defence alone, and 'yo reed not recur to any supposed content of the people to abitain from crimes.

Amidst the relations in which mankind are placed, by agreement either express or tacit, it may be asked, whether upon the principles of the law of nature the relation of matter and slave, can be justly admitted ?

This relation is understood to be the fame with that of proprietor to the fubjedc of his property, * and seems to have originated in violence or force, and not in content. Barbarous nations make war to enslave their captives, and dispose of them at market, like cattle or other fubjedts of property.

Violent institutions, we have observed, if they be such as men in the sequel are reconciled to, and willingly adopt, may become matter of fair convention and be established in custom. Hlow far the dinftitution of slavery may come under this description is the question which we are now confidering.

It cannot be doubted, that persons may be found under the denomination of slaves, as much in appearance reconciled to their slate, as men are ever observed to be in any other condition of H h life: *K In the language of the Roann law a slave was said to be a ihing and not a per.
on. Servits non ft persona fed res.

ART' II. life: Shall we therefore suppose them to have given their concIcrp. 111. sent to servitude in the full extent of that term ?


To this queRion, we may answer in the negative, for manifold reaforns.

Firi, If the nominal slave may in faa be reconciled to the fpecific command or treatment he has experienced; and, if he be supposed by tacit consent to have agreed to submit to such treatment, the master must be supposed also to have agreed not to change that treatment for any other. The slave has not yet experienced, nor has the master yet attempted, all the uses that may be made of a property; and what has not at all been praaifed, cannot be justified upon the foundation of custom. What has never been tried, cannot be matter of usage. So much for the condition of slaves, who are in appearance reconciled to their lot.

In other infiances, it is well known, that slaves, tho' under good tfage patient and traCtable, are yet by extreme severities driveninto a sense of injury and resentment, which is inconfiftentwith the fuppofition of assent to the pretended condition of unlimited fubjedion.
The inj ured feels himself to be a person, and not a thing; and, tho'
he may seem to content in terms to put his services, his person, and his life, at the discretion of another, yet he cannot abide the essecs of capricious cruelty, without a pungent sense of his wrongs, and a just effort of nature to defend himself. Such sentiments are in reality what charaderife a person, and place him in contradiftintion to a thing or subjeA of property.

The The contrac of mafler and slave, if any such were supposed to 


.

exist, is such, on the part of the slave, as is not consistent with 
free will or the exercise ofreafon. It is the resignation of every 'v thing, in exchange for nothing.

If any one should formally stipulate to forego his right of defence, and debase his mind to the sufferance of every ad of injuftice, this were to betray the want of reason, or at least to betray ignorance of the sense in which terms were employed to ensnare him. If such a compact therefore, were pleaded as the ground of an obligation to unlimited servitude, it should undoubtedly be set aside under the exception offraud on the part of the supposed mafier, or of i/anity on the part of the supposed slave.

But what is fill more than this, a slave, according to the definition adopted, where the institution of slavery took place, and agreeably to the practice of purchase and sale, eftablifled in the market for slaves, is confidered as a thing, and not a person. The supposition is impossible, and cannot be realized by the content of any party, even relating to himself. He may content to do what another commands, within the limits ofpoffibility; but mufl continue to be a person, having original if not acquired rights, and inspired by nature with a disposition to revolt, whenever he is galled with the sense of insufferable injury or wrong.

The claim of a master or proprietor is founded, perhaps, with more plausible appearances, on the fuppofecl forfeiture of personal rights, when the reparation of a wrong may support the exaction of Servitude: A title which yet remains to be confidered, and is the IubjecC of the feRion that follows.

H I1 2 Tan 
 In the mean timne the references which. we have repeatedly SC.T. XII. made to the prerogatives of government, and the allegiance of L---* fuabjetls, may seem fit rather- to start questions, and form difficulties, than to solve them: And we ought not perhaps- to difminifs this queflion, relating to the specific obligations and rights that result from compact, without endeavouring to bring into onme clear point of view the several questions that mayarife, refpecat ing the rights and obligations of men, under any form of subordination or political infittution.

In the firfc place, we may venture to rejec the idea of an origiginal compac7, as it is assumed, either in. the formation of society itself, or in the establishment of any aAual government:. For men must have been already together in society, in order to form any comnpad, and muff have been in the pratice to move in a body, before they can have concerted together for any purpose whatever. And we are juitified, by the history of mankind, in affmn.-ng, That, some species of government being necessary to the peace of society, Providence has kindly ordained, that wherever there is a society, there should be government also, subjed to such correction as the grievances, men experience under it, may lead them to apply "

It is neverthelefa.a manifest principle in the law of nature; th.at a right to command, or an obligation to obey, beyond what is required to the mere prevention of harm, can be founded in consent. alone. The powerful have a right to command any pertbn to abflain from harm ; but not to do any positive fcrvice. There may be a power, therefore, without any right of command to this extent; and, where any such power is cxercifed. it may, in the language * See Iliftory of Political Arts, vol. Ift.

language of Englifli law, be termed a governmlent. de faFto, 


.
though not a government dejure. 

There is indeed, byinftitution of Providence, and by an original diftindion of dependance and power, in every society, a government de jacfo. And the fame may become a government dejure, also, if the parties concerned, upon trial of the situation in which they find themselves placed, agree to the conditions which are required in the exercise of government. If the subj-ed, for inflance, agree to accept of protection, in return for the positive contributions and services required to public safety; in order to make such agreement binding on every individual, it is true that each, on his own part, mufi have aCtually given his consent: For, by the law of nature, no one is engaged by compact, without a content given by himself in person, or by his agent commissioned.
for this purpose.

We may be aflked, then, under what government did the people aflemble in a body, to give the content necelTary to found such a plea ofright to command them ? We may answer: No vhere-.
And yet this is the only plea upon which the right to command can be supported: We are therefore. bound to verify the plea, before we can urge it in behalf of any government whatever.

The content, upon which the right to command is founded may not be prior to the eflabillfhment ofgovernment; but may be obtained under the reasonable exercise of a actual power, to which every person within the community, by accepting of a cnftomarv proteclion, becomes bound to pay the cuflomary allegiance ani ilbrmiflilon. Here is a compact ratified by the leafl amibiguous of all signs, the whole pra.&ice, or continued obftirvance of an oi^ dilry 
 dinary life. The conditions here are ratified, in every age, and by SHAP. Xl. every individual for himself; not merely Stipulated, in any remote srY age, and for a posterity over which the contracting party had not any controul.

It may still, however, be afited, to what length the acquiefcence of parties will carry the rights and obligations, whether of the governing or governed. May the subjet be supposed to acquiefce in discretionary power, or the magistrate entitled to claim unlimited submission? The answer here is the fame as was given to the question of property in a master over his slave. Agreements made known by customary practice can extend only to such pratice, and will not justify any violent ads of discretion of either fide. And even with refpedt to practice, if any a& of injuftice were ever so often repeated, it is not in the nature of things, that the injured should content to be wronged, or agree to place himself at discretion in the power of the injurious. And, if injuries are committed, the continuance of injustice is a mere accumulation of wrongs, not a form of procedure, upon which any right can be founded.

No consent can be pleaded for the exercise of discretionary power in the magiflrate over the subjed, any more than for the existence of property in the master over the slave; because neither can befuppofedto know the condition to which hecontents; and the compat, in either cafe, would imply an act of insanity, or a refignation of every thing in exchange for nothing. As ats of diforder and licence, on the part of the fubjedt, cannot be juflified on the precedent of any acual disorder, no more can adCs of tyrrany and oppression, on the part of government, receive any fanction firol'. any previous prad.ice or abuse of the fame kind.

I-ierc Here, then, we reft the Speculative dodrine, which is no more 

than this, that every party in society may, by mutual praaice, ac- 




quire a right to whatever is pracicable, and a matter of fair agree- -v .
ment; but not to what is wrong, or inconsistent with the safety of mankind. And it is the wisdom of nations, so far to define every right by actual statute, as in every particular question to exclude as much as possible, the influence of passion or partial interest, whether of the governing or governed.

The claim of a right to govern at discretion, or of a priviledge to obey at discretion, before either have any effed, is a mere form of words. And, if exercised only in aCts of beneficence and duty, the discretion in either cafe, would be applauded and loved; but, in acs of disorder and outrage, becomes the claim of a right to do wrong, which is a solecism in terms, and.
absurd.





S E CT IO N XIII.

Of Forfeiture, and the Species of Right vwhich results from it.

BY the law of nature; when a wrong is apprehended, it may SECT.XIII. be prevented; when an injury is offered, it may be repelled; 't~'Yv and, when a damage is incurred, reparation may be exated from the injurious party: Sothat; as a person may bind himself by consent or compact to do; or to omit to do whatever is specified in terms of agreement, so a person, having done an injury, may become bound, in terms of the law of defence, to do, or to supply to the injured party, whatever may be necessary to repair the .damage he has done.

This obligation, on the part of the person who has done a wrong, may be termed forfeiture; and the party having incurred this obligation may become bound to surrender to the injured party, under the title of reparation, what was before his own right.

In pursuing the objec of defence, the party attacked or aggrieved is entitled, by any means efhfccual and necefiary, to prefcrve serve or to recover his state. He has a right to the ufc of means 

which are effectual, but not to the use of means which exceed what 
CHAP.XIIIis necessary, in one cafe, to repel the attack, that is made upon yV
him, or, in another cafe, to repair the damage he has sustained.

These limitations, in the right of defence, are evidently founded in the law of nature; although it may be difficult, in particular instances, to fix or to ascertain their application by any precise rule.

A person, whose right is invaded, may think it necessary to em-.

ploy all his powers in their utmost extent, to repel the invasion; and he may have incurred an injury in his person, in his honour, or in his reputation, of which it may be difficult to estimate the measure, or to adjust the reparation. Even in the cafe of trespass, on fubjeas of real right, as in matters of possession or property, the alarm may not be proportioned to the value of the subjed invadedl, nor can the measure of injury be always ascertained by the quantity oflofs sustained. Theintentionormind with which an attack is made, is often more alarming than the material loss to be apprehended; and insult, in the manner of invasion, may be more injurious than the physical harm it occasions.

With refpet to the variety of cafes that may thus occur, we muif be contented to observe, in general, that a person may be bound, to replace, from his own property, the lots he may have occasioned in the property of another; and that, in cafe of any material damage, he may be bound to render personal services, where he has not effects to answer his forfeiture.

If the injury he has committed assea the good name or reputaI i tion 
 tion of another, he is bound to retradc his calumnies, in the man
 ner most effedual to repair the wrong ie has done.

If he have not only impaired the state of the person wronged, but given just ground of alarm, also, on the subjed of his future behaviour, he is bound to admit of such precaution, as may be sufficient to guard against the danger of which he has given a just apprehension, And the injurious, in particular instances, is justly exposed to such punishment or suffering, as may be neceffary to deter himself or others from repeating the offence.

Nature has happily inspired the mind of man with indignation or resentment of wrongs; and this sentiment may quicken the arm of public juflice: But to render the exercise of public vengeance, and the infliction of punishment agreeable to the principle of natural law, it ought not to exceed the allowable means of defence; or be any other than a reasonable expedient for the suppression of crimes; and this principle contains in itself the rule upon which a just gradation of punishment should be accommodated to the variety and gradations of guilt.

In the first place, as the terms right and wrong are correlative, it may be observed, that where a person has not done a wrong, he cannot be said to have forfeited a right; or in other words, as wrong implies some culpable acion, no forfeiture can ensue where there is no culpability or blame.

Agreeably to this maxim, involuntary or casual incident,, of any fort, although it may be the cause of harm to any one who is placed within reach of its effeis, yet is it to be confidered, not as a wrong, but as a misfortune, equally an objed of regret to the doer, as to the sufferer; and to both equally an objeCt of fu.

ture ture precaution. If a person, for instance, should, by falling 

from a height, hurt or damage the person or property of another, CHCATPIIII
in the way, it is evident, that by such misfortune he might be- ~ -L
come an object of pity, but not of resentment, that the damage sustained could not be imputed to him, nor the reparation of it in justice be exaded from him. So that, although there may be damage, if there be not a crime, there is no just occasion for the inflition of punishment.

In the Roman law, a person was responsible for the trespass committed by his beast, as well as for a trespass committed by himself; but this is just so far only as the damage sustained from a beast, otherwise lawfully kept and useful, could be imputed to negled or culpable inattention, on the part of the owner.

It was admitted, that the owner ought to guard against such trespasses as it was the nature of his beast usually to commit.
These he might foresee, and was bound to prevent: But, if an animal should depart from the usual track of his nature, and trefpass in a manner that was not to be expected from him; if a cow, instead of a trespass on the pasture or standing corn of a neighbour, should, contrary to the natural infina of such animals, become carnivorous, and devour the young of a neighbouring herd: Here the damage could not be imputed to the owner, as the prevention of it could not fall within the province of any ordinary or reasonable degree of care or attention.

The decision of law, in this cafe, evidently proceeds upon a principle, that forfeiture is proportioned to the degrees of demerit, and we may add, that measures of puniflnment, authorised by the law of nature, ought to be regulated upon the fame principle.

Ii 2 To 
 To crimes which originate in malice, or in any deliberate pur
 pose of guilt, sufficiently frong to break through the refiraints of 
wy*re^' conscience or of public repute, a proportional defence and correction must be applied. Where society is alarmed by overt ads of malice or deliberate guilt. sufferings may be justly inlicaed that may strike even the obdurate with awe and terror; or, if the life or liberty of the guilty person should be inconsistent with the public safety, he may no doubt, bejuftly removed by exile or by death.

Offences that arise from sudden gusts of passion, may be restrained or corrected by punishments of inferior degree.

Faults of ignorance or inattention may be corrected by better information, admonition, or even by the experience of an evil thereby incurred.

One order or description of men may be restrained by the fear of ihame or dishonour; to reifrain another pecuniary fine or bodily sufferings may be requisite; and it is not at all necessary, that we should recur to convention, in order to reft upon this basis the obligation of the magistrate not to confound unequal measures'
of guilt or public alarm in the promiscuous application of extreme punishment to offences unequally heinous, or unequally incorrigible; nor is it neceflary to recur to convention, in order to found the right of the subject to plead his exemption, in every cafe where unnecessary or disproportional degrees of severity are employed againft him, We have flated forfeiture among the sources of adventitious rights; and, in confidering what species of right may result from thence, may proceed to obfcrve,.that forfeiture cannot, like occupancy pancy or labour, give title to a subje5t, in which no one before had 
PART IT..
any right. The person forfeitingmuft forfeit only what was his 

own, some poffeflion or property which he may be forced to re- v sign, or some fevice which he may be forced to perform.

It is farther evident, on the principle of the law of nature, that nothing can be lawfully seized or forced, under the title of forfeiture, except it be of a nature fit to repair or to compensate a damage done, and that more cannot be exaced than is necessary for this purpose. This is implied in the general clause of the law of nature, which limits the means of defence to what is esfecaual and neceflary.

A loss of property may be repaired, by an equivalent in property, or service performed. Even injuries which cannot be repaired in kind, as the loss of a limb or bodily organ, may receive some compensation; and alarms may be quieted by some adequate measure of punishment, having a tendency for the future to restrain such crimes. But it is evident, that, in the clause now cited is implied a prohibition of cruelties or ineffcctual feverities, which have not a tendency to repair or to compensate the damage suffered, nor to restrain the repetition of guilt.

Fror hence also we may conclude, that although a person may have forfeited his poffcffion, his property, or his labour, to any amount, yet no one can forfeit all his personal rights, or fiom a perf/n become a thzin or ifbjcc't of property. Criminals. accordingly, in t! e policy of some nations, are condemned to labour, or to confinement for life. In this, however, it is not pretended, that their nature is chainged from a perfbn to a thing, or to a subjec of property. Capricious cruelties having no tendency to prevent EPART 1I. prevent or to redress a wrong, are unlawful even with refpea to SECAT.XIi those who have trefpalfed on the rules ofjuftice.

Among nations of old, captives or prisoners of war were generally sent to the market, or retained as slaves; and from hence was derived the maxim of the Roman law, that a person might become a slave, upon the principle of the law of nations *.

We may admit, that th6fe nations justly confidered individuals as involved in the guilt of their country, as often as a just reparation of wrongs was withheld. But, even upon this supposition, they greatly over-rated the forfeiture; or condemned their captives to a privation, which they had not incurred. They had undoubtedly a right to detain them during the continuance of a war, that they might not return to strengthen their enemy. They had a right to exaA from them any useful service, which they were in condition to perform, towards repairing the wrongs done by their country: Butas this proceeds upon a supposition, that their country had committed an injury, and refused to make reparation, the cafe of every captive was not the fame; and the injurious, who enslaved the fubjees of a nation they had injured, were doubly in the wrong.

We may admit, perhaps, that a person, either in the wrongs done by himself, or as involved in the wrongs done by his country, may incur a forfeiture, such as, that after he has bellowed the labour of a whole life in endeavours to repair it, the effeA may still ' Servus fit jure genLtium.

ftilI be inadequate; and we may admit as an inference from this 
.

supposition, that the claim of right acquired on the part of the in- ScHT.XIIl.
jured, and the obligation incurred on the part of the injurious, r may amount to service for life; but an obligation to service for life is yet far short of slavery.

In the first place, it is limited to such useful performance, as the: captive is able to render, and excludes the inflition of capricious severities, that have no tendency to repair the damage done.

In the discharge of his obligation, the captive is flated as a person and as a moral agent, who, if he be not willing, may be forced to do what is necessary to repair the wrong committed, butnothing more.

In the next place, as the law of nature supposes the person ferv-
ing, yet possessed of all those rights, of which the forfeiture has, no tendency to effeca the reparation in question, it is implied in.
the fame law, that, as often as those rights are invaded, he is entitled to repel the aggression, and to defend himself.

It is still more evident, that no one can be a slave by birth; for;.

even if he were bound to remain in the state of his parent, yet the fate of the parent does not appear, upon any principle of the law, of nature, to amount to slavery, or the privation of every personal right; but, even if this privation could be supposed to have been incurred by any convention or forfeiture, on the part of the parent, the child at his birth is innocent or disengaged, and born to, the poffeflion of all his personal rights.

from the whole, then, we mufi conclude, that the relation of 3 mailcr.

 master and slave is the result of violence, and cannot have arisen, SECTH. XIL like poffeflion, property, or lawful command, upon any just title '- of occupancy, labour, convention, or forfeiture.

A person condemned to service may accommodate himself to such services as he has been made to perform aid to such treat nent as he has been used to receive: But this cannot be interpreted as the conceflton of a right to impose unlimited burdens, or a right to treat him with boundless severities.

One order of men may plead the expediency of holding another in servitude; but men have not a right to impose upon others whatever is expedient to thermfelves; and we must fill conclude, that as no man is by nature the property of another, no more can he become so in any of the ways in which the right of property is acquired.

The conditions of men may be unequal, to any extent; and it may, in various ways, become the lot of one to render service to another: But the law of nature ever prescribes limits ofjuftice or humanity, to the advantage which any one may take of the relation in which he stands to his fellow creature.

So far we have enumerated the rights of men, whether original or adventitious, and have enumerated albo the sources from which adventitious rights are derived or begin to exist, and the means by which they may be conveyed from one to another. It remains that we confider the law of nature, in refped to the second part of its applications, that by which it is proposed to regulate the defences of men.

2. C H- A P.







(. 257 )

CH A P. IV.

OF J UR I S P R U D EN C E, 
PART SECOND, RESPECTING THE DEFENCES OF MEN.

E C T I O N I

Of the Means that may be opposed to Injuflice in general.

HAVING specified a variety of rights, under the different titles 

of petfonal and real, of original and adventitious, with the diffe- CHP. IV.



rent ways in which rights of the latter denomination may be acquired, we proceed next to confider the means by which a right may be defended or mantained.

K k Under 
 Under this title, the laws of war among nations will form a C1AP. IV.
SEC T. IV principal object of consideration and discussion; but as every per<v\ fton having a right, is entitled to some adequate means of defence, we shall ltate the law in its moAt comprehensive form, in which the rights and defences of tingle parties and of fellow citizens are included, no less than those of nations or separate communities.

We have observed, as the first and moss general statement of the law of nature relating to this fubje t; that a right may be maintained; or, in other words, that a wrong may be prevented, an assault repelled, and damage repaired, in any way, that may be effedual and necessary against the injurious party.

In the farther application of this law we are to confider the variety of persons and circumfiances to which it may relate.

Varieties of persons may be comprehended under the titles of perJbns single, frangers to one another, and unconnected; under the title of fellow citizens, and Jeparate nations, or the members of which separate nations are compoted.

The circumstances under which a right is exposed or invaded, may direc us to the means of defence which may be refpedively proper or sufficient on such occasions. In one set of circumstances, or on one occaion, periuafion may be sufficient; in another it may be required to employ deception or ilratagem;; and in a third it may be neceihary to employ force, at any hazard of fiffering to the injurious parry. The means of defence, therefore, may be enumerated under the titles ofperfiUfion, deception, and force. The firflmay take place among friends; the two last 2,zs~~~~~~~ ~~~~arc are lawful only upon the supposition of enmity, and are termed 
PART I.


hoJ/ilitles. SE



5Per/iafon consists in the use of argument, representation or rational inducement of any fort, to obtain the content of the party with whom it is employed. To distinguish persuasion from deception, it is necessary that it Should be limited to the use ofconfiderations founded in truth, or believed by the person who uses them to be of real moment in deliberating on the fubiject refpeding which they are offered. To disguise or conceal the truth, to misrepresent any important circumitance relating to it, or to impose with fallacious argument, is rather to deceive than to perfuade.

Under this limitation, perf/iajon may be employed to obtain a favour no less than to defend or maintain a right; and as they who may be persuaded to do right are not to be confidered as irjurious or maliciously inclined, they are not objecs of punishment, whether punishment be confidered as an example to deter the injurious, or as a precaution to guard against any future criminal attempts.

Persuasion is amicable; but where amicable means are not susficient to preserve a right, h/7filities no doubt are lawful; and among there artifice or deception where sufficient, may be chosen as the least hurtful to the person againit whom it is employed.

Deception or misinformation, in the nature of things, even apart from distant consequences, is pernicious; and to employ it without necessity is an injury. The person against whom it is so employed has iLbhjcct of well-founded complaint ; or may demand r k[ 2 information 
 information of the truth as his right. Even a person who SECH. IV. is put upon his defence, may rejeA the use of disguise or decepcYu tion, as dishonourable means of iafety to himself: But we are not enquiring, in this place, what is the molt honourable part for the injured to ad, but what the supposed injurious person may claim as a right, refpeaing the use of means to be employed against himself.

It is admittted, among the modern nations of Europe, that requifition of right, manifejto, and solemn declarations of war, should precede hoJtilties, or the actual use of force. Disguises and artisices, nevertheless, in certain negociations or tranfadions of state, are employed to gain an advantage, perhaps, without any supposed infringement of this rule.

There is, indeed, a general disposition to reprobate artice or deceit, even when employed to repel an injury, or to frufirate a malicious intention. This proceeds upon an aflociation of baseness or cowardice with every ad of dissimulation or falsehood, which we accordingly reprobate under the denomination of treachery: But this appellation no more applies to the use of stratagem in repelling an injury, than the term murder applies to the use of a sword or deadly weapon in repelling an alrault on the person or property of an innocent man. Ifa person, adcing in his own defence, may receive an afafifin on the point of his fiord, how can it be supposed, that he may not withhold information from him, or even by misinformation mislead him from the execution of his malicious purpose.

The affaflin who pursues an innocent person, in order to murder him, may no doubt be lawfully told, that the person he tecks is is gone to the right, when he is aCtually gone to the left. In this 


'

manner, deception or stratagem is universally admitted as just on 

the principles of the law of nature; and, although persons who consult the reputation of bravery may think that open force is preferable to deception or disguise of any fort; yet, upon the general principle, that rights are to be defended by means the leaR
hurtful to the persons againat whom they are employed, deception and artifice is in general to be preferred to the use of adual force.

The use offorce, it is true, may not always be more severe or destructive in its effecs than the use of deception; but, as force repelled by force is likely to proceed to the highest extremities, it is justly placed as the last resort of the injured in defending their rights, and not to be employed where it is safe to rely on perfuasion or stratagem.

Under this title of force may be included not only the use of arms and accual violence, forcible restraint, and the inflicCtion of punilhment, but even threats, or the denunciation of violence, which may operate on the fears of those against whom they are employed.

Such being the gradation of means, that may be employed in defence of a right, the law of nature is modified, in particular circumstances, by a regard to the choice which is to be made of such means, according to the degree in which they are severally effecual or necessary.

In the applications of this law, also, regard must be had to the dcfcription and relation of perlbns, whethelr frangers and unconrcw7ed, 
 necked, fellow citizens, fparate natiozs, or the members of which eSECr. IV. parate nations are composed.

Of the law, as it applies to the cafe of persons so diversified, it is proposed to offer a few of the molt necessary observations, in the following feations.





S E C T I 0 N IL
Of the Law of Defence, in the Cafe offingle Persons, Strangers and unconneattd.

THE parties to whom the law of defence is to be applied in this 

section, are termed single, because we mean not to confider pecu- 

liarities incident to collective bodies, confidered as such. They S 'v are termedflrangers and unconntSea, because we mean nor, in deciding any queflion that may arise between them, to take into our account the effecd of any previous convention either express or tacit.

In supposing such parties, we abstract from all the peculiarities which occur in the cafe of fellow citizens, under the effect of their municipal laws, civil or political inflitutions. We abftrad from the peculiarities which diversify the cafe of separate nations, modified as it is by previous treaties, claims, or conventions, or by the mode in which collective bodies are made up of the members which severally compose them.

The.

 The cafe, then, which we are now to confider, is supposititious, 

SICTr. 11. and a mere abflradion. So that, in this point of view, the cirL-'-*- cumfrances of a cafe, which in nature arejoined with many other particulars, are to be stated apart, and separately confidered. Such abftratCions are ufefulin argument; but must not, or ought not to be miltaken for matters of fat.

This caution has not always been observed, in treating of the abltradion which we have now made. The cafe of parties, ftrangers and unconneded, has been termed the slate of nature, and even mistaken for historical fad : But, in applying the law of nature to this supposition, it is not by any means necessary to admit, that the whole of the human species ever consisted of parties unconneded, or that men ever existed in a state of individuality, or in a state of estrangement of one from all mankind. The purpose of science is effedually served, by supposing two or more parties so unconneced, although neither be supposed unconneded with the whole species.

The term,/tate of nature, as equivalent to the abftracion which we now make, has been employed by writers, who do not by any means seem disposed to favour the aflimption ofeftrangement from his kind, as the natural itate of man. Dr Blackstone, among others, has made use of that term in the following passage: " If "a man," he fays, " were to be in a state of nature, unconneA" ed with other individuals, there would be no occasion for any other laws than the law of nature and the law of God ; neither " could any other law poflibly exist." But he afterwards subjoins: "Man was formed for focicty;. and, as is demonfirated "by " by the writers on this subjed. is neither capable of living alone, 

" nor indeed has le courage to do it *."

The slate of nature, then, according to this learned and judicious writer, is not the natural flare of man, but a mere abftradion made for the fame purpose for which abftracions are commonly made in the pursuit of science; that we may have a diftina view of certain considerations separately taken, before we'proceed to view them as combined in the aggregate forms under which they are acua]ly presented in nature.

Man, even in his physical lfate, exhibits a fum of many fimultaneous circumflances, whether original and coeval with his being, or, what is nearly the fame thing, immediately consequent upon it. He has occupied something that is useful to him, and has a right of poffeflion; he has laboured to some purpose, and has a right of property; he is a father or a child, the member of a family or some larger society; and the simplest movement he can have made with his fellow creatures, may amount to convention, or some adventitious modification of his original obligations and rights. So that we thall find no actual period ofhiflory in which we can apply the reasonings of this fedion to the species at large, or to any considerable numbers of men.

We may suppose two persons, at the fame time, cast aflhore on some desert island, and such is perhaps the only poflible cafe in which our supposition can be realized ; and our question at present with refped to it is not, what would be mutual inclinaVOL. IS. L 1 tion * Conm,. on the Laws of England. Introd. Scnl. 2.

PART 11.- tion of such persons at their firit meeting, whether to co-opeCH Pp. LV rate as friends, or to encounter as enemies ? This question is no 
A _--^ doubt of consequence in forming our notion of man's deflination, whether to peace or to war, to society or solitude: But that the dccifion in such a cafe might apply to human nature in its fimplefl state ; it might be necefTr-y to set apart any previous effeds of experience or habit, by which either of the parties separately, or both, might be previously disposed to ad a part which nature would not have fuggefled to them prior to such experience or habit.

It cannot be doubted, that in so forlorn and disastrous a slate, each would rather meet with a friend than an enerny, and each would rather make a friend of the person he casually met than an enemy. There is, however, reason to believe, from the principle of caution with which human nature is endowed, even in childhood, and which experience may dired, but does not remove, that such persons would approach one another with mutual circumfpedion and caution, each rather with fear of what he himself might susser, than with any disposition to annoy his fellow creature ; and universally it may be assumed perhaps, that the earlieft sensation of human nature, as Montesquieu has observed, is rather a feeling of weakness and a need of support, than a feeling of strength or a disposition to provoke animosity.

But whatever may be the solution of this or any such physical question, our objec at present is not to determine, what the parties in such a cafe might be inclined to do, but what each would have a right to do for his own preservation and defence. We would slate the decifons of the law of nature on a supposition of the simplest cafe, in which parties are vefled merely with their original rights and the means of defence with which they are ac3 companied: companied: Our decisions; therefore, upon this supposition can 

be little more than a repetition of what has been already flated in 
'the general enunciation of the law; whether respecting the rights of which man is born in possession, or which he is competent to acquire, and the general permission of means effectual, so far as they are necessary for the prefervtion of such rights.

Together with the original appurtenances of human nature, life, limb, and faculty, we mupt likewise admit all those rights, which, even acing separately and unconnetedly, the individual may acquire for himself. We must suppose him entitled to defend not only his organs and powers, but the fruits and effects of them also; entitled to defend his possession, as first occupier of any subjea that accommodates him; or his property in a subjed, as having employed labour to meliorate or to procure it: So that, together with his rights of original poffeflion, he is entitled also to defend his right, to make acquisitions by labour, convention, or otherwise.

If, in the midst of rights so defined, one party shall commit an injury, or give just cause of alarm to another, this other is entitled to his defence and is not restrained in the choice of means, by any consideration betide the general provision of the law of nature already flated; a provision which admits that effectual means may be used, but in which unnecessary ats of cruelty or severity, with refpec to those against whom such means may be employed, are ftriAly prohibited.

Upon the supposition of a difference subsisting between parties otherwise strangers and unconnected, or what is called the Itate of nature, it is sometimes asked, who is to judge or to decide L 1 2 beween.

 between parties in this stare? This in effect is firfl to suppose, 
 that parties having no convention are amenable to no juriSdiction tCa-'-- inferior to the tribunal of God, and afterwards to enquire to what human jurifdidcion such parties are subjed.

They may or may not submit to an arbiter at pleasure; and, though nature has limited the means of defence to those which are necessary, the observance of this limitation, together with the exercise of every other right, would in fact depend on the difcretion and candour of the parties themselves; a cafe in which no provision being made against the paflions or mistakes of men, applications of the law of nature, however clear in theory,.might be very lame and imperfeCt in practice; and such condition of parties, if ever realized, should be deplored as calamitous, or expofcd to much inconvenience and evil.

The inconvenience would suggest, for its remedy, recourse to the judgement and arbitration of some third party, more impartial than either of the persons more immediately concerned. The utility of tome permanent recourse of this fort, would naturally lead to political infsitution, and the establishment of ordinary jurifdidion and protecing power: bo that, while we suppose men to be aflociated from their birth, or otherwise cast into groups together, every difference or dispute would suggest the necessity or utility of political eftablifllment.

Society is the natural fRate of man, and political society is the natural result of his experience in that state of bociety to which he is born. This is not the experience of single persons, or offingle ages. It is an experience, which began with the commencement of every society, and can end only with its final extintion. Political litical effabliflments, accordingly, which began to be formed in 

in the first and simplest ages, continue in a state of gradual for- 




mation, as the experience of every age directs, to the latest period s at which states or communities, in the course of things, are -allowed to arrive.

The people in republics, in the last as well as the first sage of their political union, are devising rules by which to govern themselves.

The monarch continues to fettle terms, on which he proposes to diftribure rewards and punifiments, honour or diigrace, among his fubjecds. And the defpotical master continues to make known the advantage he proposes to himfelfor his people from the exercise of his power; whether in the gratification of a divine benevolence, that of Antoninus; or in the gratification of a brutal appetite like and passion, like those of Caligula and Nero.





S E C T I O N I.

Of the Cafe of fellow Citizens.


 T HS cafe is indefinitely varied in the multiplicity of political SECT. III. forms. Our objec, with respeCt to it, is to enumerate, in general terms, the principal parties of which every political society consists; and to state the obligations and rights, which are eflential to their relation, as members of the fame community.

Civil society is not improperly termed a state of convention; for, although men are acAually in society together, before they enter into any form of bargain or compac; yet, every flep that is made, in the concourfe-of numbers, tends to convention. Every practice continued into cuflom, is fairly interpreted as the faith of parties plighted for the observance of it; and the members of every society, even of the shortest duration, become invested with rights, or fubjeded to obligations, founded in bome ipecies of contraa express or tacit.

But But we now cease to enquire in what form the civil or politi- 


cal compact is ratified, whether by practice, capitulation, or tfa- 

tute. These are the proper study of professional lawyers, to Sa.
whom the supreme authority of their refpeaive communities is the ultimate rule in adjusting the obligations and rights of men.

To the citizen of every particular community, the specific law of his own country is the tenure by which he holds his rights, and the measure of obligations which he is bound to fulfil; but, however the civil institution, in any particular instance, may appear to depart from the law of nature, by adopting modifications, which in their first assumption were optional to the parties concerned; yet, as such modifications are founded in convention, there is not any species of obligation or rightacftually valid in any community, that may not be traced to this its foundation in the law of nature.

There are certain relations of men essential to every fociety.or community confidered as such; and there are certain obligations and duties which may not only be traced to their foundations in the law of nature, but which are to be confidered as immediate objects of that law, and placed, as we now propose to place them, among the cafes to which the law of nature is immediately applicable.

Under every political eflablifhment, there is a relation of magiJrate and i/hije(, and a relation of lellow citizens, which, however diversified in particular intfances, are nevertheless in a certain abftrad point of view common to every etlablifllment, and eflential to the nature of political society itself.

It PtART IL It is our object, at present, therefore, to slate the relative conditions SEC r. III of magistrate and subjec, and the relative condition of fellow sub^~sr'_ jeets in the most general terms, so as to comprehend the obligations and rights which enter into the nature of political society itself confidered as such, without attempting to specify the peculiarities, by which the relations of men, in different inflances, may be diversified.

It is the condition of the magiflrate, in his most abstract point of view, to govern and to protect the subjed: It is the condition of the subject to be governed and protected.

It is the mutual condition of fellow citizens, in the fame abitrad point of view, to be vested with rights, in regard to which they are to one another reciprocal objects of consideration or refpe6t: It is implied, in the character which is common to them all as fellow citizens, that, if any difference arise between them, they recur to the judgement of the magifirate, and that. whereever his interposition can be obtained, and may be effectual for the prevention or redress of wrongs, they are to refiain fiom any application of force on their own part, and to acquiesce in such means of defence, as the magistrate is duly bound to employ for their protection.

The citizen, therefore, in preserving his rights amidst the collifions of different claims and pretensions, resigns into the hands or the magifirate the weapons of defence, which, upon the fuppofition of pdrlierl /'rnger and ulconlnec1ed,, we found the individual entitled to use for himself. And the magiflrate may not only employ the authority with which he is veled, so as to defend the inno3 cent, cent, but lies under an express obligation, so to employ it: whilst 

every other citizen, whatever be the means of defence with which 




he is casually furnished, is restrained from the use of them, pro- s--, vided the interposition of the magistrate can be obtained for his safety.

These are conditions implied in every political eflablifiment, and without which society either cannot be preserved, or cannot be said to have received any political form.

In these conditions, however, the obligations and rights of the parties, so general and so necessary, are derived fiom convention alone. The magistrate has agreed to protect the subjed, otherwise is not bound to this any more than to any other act of beneficence which he may perform at discretion. The citizen has agreed to abide by the judgement of the magistrate, and to refrain from any attempt to do himself right, where the interpofition of the magistrate can be obtained for that purpose; and, although the form, in which such agreements are entered into in different communities, may vary indefinitely, yet the compact, in refpet to its general result, is the fame in every instance; and the parties may equally plead their conventional rights and reciprocal obligations in every community.

We have already had occasion to observe. that the right of the magistrate to interpose in the defence of the innocent, or in the repression of crimes, does not need the fantion ofcompacd, in order to eftablifli it; for this right is common to him, with every other person having power, in whatever manner that power may be conflituted, whether in the strength of his arm, or in the cooperation of numbers that obey his commands.

VOL. IT. M in 1n 
PART Il. In what, then, we may be asked, is the right of the magistrate CH.P. IV.
SECT. III. conventional and peculiar to himself? It is conventional and pecu--" ' liar, in sofar as he alone is entitled to employ his power to this effell, and so far as every other person isreftrained from like application of power, wherever recourse can be had to that of the magistrate. In the absence of the magistrate, or where his aid cannot be obtained, the subjea may defend himself and his fellow citizens; and every individual man, to the utmost of his power, may interpose in the prevention of crimes.

The right of the inagiftrate, therefore, to repress crimes, and to protedt the innocent is prior to convention. His obligation, at the fiame time, not to employ means unnecessarily deftrudive or isvere, even against the person who has incurred his opposition or his censure, is also prior to convention; and there is, as we obleirved upon the foundations of the law of nature, prior to any concert or agreement of parties, a rule for the application of various restraints, and the gradation of punishments.

Crimes, we have observed, are unequally pernicious and dangerous, and unequally alarm the community. The more forcible efforts of defence are justified by the higher degree of alarm which the crime is naturally fitted to give. Some disorders are more easily restrained than others ; and to these an inferior meailre of punilhinent being sufficient, the magistrate is not entitled, by the law of nature, to employ punishments of superior degree.

Different descriptions of men, we have observcd, are governed by different motives. The law of nature will not authorise, with refpet to any one class or order of men, an higher mcafure of pu:2 lifmllelt, nifhment, than is sufficient to restrain them . The fear of torture 
PART IL
or death may be necessary to restrain those who are infenibl.e to 
any other considerations ; while shame, or the fear of.difgracc a- ry lone, may be sufficient to restrain, or to reclaim another order or class of the people.

As nations, by tfatute or .custom, are found to depart from the conditions which the law of nature, prior to convention, has imposed; so they have seldom been found to observe any regular gradation of punishments, or at least to remain within the bounds w\hich simple juflice, in every particular cafe, would prescribe.
They have departed from the law of nature, in the terms of their convention or praaice; and, in the result, sometimes find themselves engaged in forms of administration no less inexpedient than cruel an4 unjust.

If, to the maxims of firin law we may be allowed to subjoin considerations of expedience, it is evident that, by withholding diftincRions in the measure of punishment, we inure the minds of men to confound the higher and lower measures of guilt.
And, if a criminal be to incur the higher measure of puniflment, even for crimes of a lets heinous nature, his cafe, in proceeding to infringe the law, is the fame as if no puniflhments were to be inflidled for the higher crime; and he will therefore prefer it to the lower, if his temptations incline him so to do.

By the law of nature, a magitfrate, in restraining a crime, may proceed to the use of means that may be necessary for that purpose; but this law, infleal of being strained to the utmost pitch of severity, ought rather to give way to considerations, which hut~

M m z nanity 
 manity no leTs than expedience, in many inflances, will fug
 g 
The conceptions of men, on the gradations of demerit and criminality, may be greatly affected by the promiscuous application ofpunifllments. And, although the principle of defence, ftf-itly applied, wouldjuftify that measure ofpunifhment, whatever it may be, which is necefTary to repress the crime, yet prudence, as well as humanity, would in some instances reject this authority, and reprobate the application of a punishment, against which human.
nature would revolt more than even against the crime itself A licentious intercourse of the sexes is highly pernicious, and the highest measure of punishment might perhaps be necessary, and still ineffectual to repress it entirely; but it is evident that, if the punishment of murder were to be applied in this cafe, the remedy or the antidote might be more fIocking to human nature, and even more pernicious to mankind, than the evil itself.

It may be more difficult to restrain a theft committed under the pressure of famine or want, than one committed for gain. It may be more difficult fUill to restrain a theft committed for the relief of a perifling family, than one committed for the supply of perfonal want; yet human nature must revolt at the supposed application of stria law in such cafes; and indeed it is admitted, in the ordinary jurisprudence of all nations, that the extreme neceffity of one person may so far supersede the right of another, as to disarm the power that is provided in civil society to enforce this right.

To succeed in establishing ajuft gradation ofpunifiments, we mull mulR come with reluctance to the ife of extreme severities and a- 

void a precipitant application of punishment in the treatment of 




the lower offences. When flight offences are punished too severe- vm ly, it becomes difficult properly to increase the measure of punifhment for the higher crimes. When under the Roman empire, for inflance, a farcafin on the person of the emperor was punished with death ; it was not pofible to find a proportionate degree of severity for the crimes of perfidy or murder.

But whatever may be the gradation of punifiments adopted, it is evident that the higher measure of suffering, may on occasion, be necessary, and cannot be replaced by the lower or any intermediate degree. There may be crimes, we have observed, bearing evidence of a disposition so depraved, and in appearance so incorrigible, that it may be necessary, by exile or death, to remove the criminal from the society whose peace he alarms, And even, according to the circumstances of his crime, it may be necefiary to distinguish this sacrifice with peculiar marks of reprobation and horror, to operate as an example against the indulgence offimilar dispositions in other men.

It is no doubt poflible in the application of puniflhments to err on the fide of remiffiiefs as well as rigour. Mercy to the alatflin is cruelty to the innocent, who may be exposed to susser by the commiflion of his crimes.

We hear offovereigns to whom the executive powers of law are committed, who, either from miflaken lenity, or friom an apprehension of romcwhat too sacred in the life of man to be taken awayby any human authority, have declared against capital punifliments; or resolvcd. for a time to fuipend the iufe of them. The ol-bjjc PARr II. objeel of government, in the mean-time, is not mercy to criiliCHAFP. 1. nls, but the repression of capital crimes which indanger thelife Sc; "Y' as well as other rights of the innocent. And there is surely no wisdom in declaring that criminals alone, for the future, fiall take the ife of a fellow creature. If the life. of a man is too Eacred to be taken by any human authority, what is the innocent traveller to do, when attacked on the high way with weapons that threaten his life ? what is the fRate to do, when invaded .by a soreign enemy, who forces his way by the deftru6tion of all that oppose him ? What is the soldier to do, when he finds himself under the neceflity to kill, that he may not be killed ? .In hort, what is the niagiftrate himself to do, when he finds the lives of innocent fubjeas in danger from the profligacy of disorderly persons. who are. ready to sacrifice the peace of their country to the gratification of their vicious paflions ? If a life mulf be exposed, either that of the innocent at the discretion of criminals, or that of criminals at the judgement of the magistrate, it is surely evident on whom the choice Ihould fall.

We plead for a just gradation of punifmient, not that the guilty may escape, but that the innocent may be safe, and that no one may be exposed to greater severity than he has actually incurred by his crimes.

From the whole of this argument, then, it appears, that the law of nature, where there is no convention to the contrary, limits the right of the magistrate to the use of such means as are necessary to the defence of the innocent or the prevention of wrongs; that all restraints or severities, employed beyond there limits, arc unlawful; and that, even prior to convention, a rule may be found upon which to erec a just gradation of punifliments.

Although Although convention be not necessary to authorise the ma- 
PART. TI.

giftrare in the discharge of his duty for the repreflion of crimes; SACT. III.
itis by convention that he alone is inverted with the exclusive prero- J
gative of inrerpofing at all times in defence of the innocent. In every well ordered community his powers are acknowledged or in ftituted expressly for this purpose, and fellow citizens are underflood to have agreed to refer their differences to a judge, to forgo the use of force in themselves, and recur to the magistrate for protection.

This fundamental convention of fellow citizens is that which essentially diftinguilies their cafe from that which was confidered in the lait feion. It is that which constitutes the specific advantage of those who have the benefit of political establishments.

The citizen, even when injured, must not do himself right; but must have recourse to the protection of the magistrate for this purlpole.

There are, hovever, exceptions to this salutary rule ; either where, in the nature of things, the interposition of the magiflrate cannot be obtained to prevent a wrong, or where the injury, once sufferec, cannot be repaired by the utmost exertions of his powver.
In every fuclh cafe the fpiit of political institution, which is inspired by a concern for innocence, requires, that the innocent lhould be allowed to defend himself. If this were refuited him, the society to which he has recourse for protection would in fadc become a snare, in which he would be exposed to fufl-'r without any hopes of redress.

It is admitted accordingly, th.t any one ai1Tuclrecl int. hii ;: 
 bitation, or in his person has a right to repel the assault. The 
 maxims of law in different countries may be unequally favour
able to this act of defence, requiring unequal degrees of caution in proceeding to the last extremities. In some it is required, that a person aflaulted should endeavour to escape before he repels force with force: But as an attempt to escape may in some circumftances augment the danger to which the person assaulted is exposed, it appears unjust and cruel to expose him to this additional hazard; and the humanity which seemed to take part with the aggreflor, is indeed more properly due to the person attacked, who ought certainly to be indulged in defending himself at any necessary hazard to the person who aflails him.

A woman who is forcibly attacked in her chastity, or a man who is put to the trial of personal estimation or honour, may receive an injury, which the utmost power of the magistrate cannot afterwards repair. The exception is accordingly admitted, in favour of the private right of defence, on such occasions.

Among these modes of attack, there is a singular species of injury, owing its effect to the caprice of manners in modern times; but of which the effect is extremely revere and injurious, not fifceptible of any legal measurement, nor repairable by all the power of the magistrate.

In consequence of this singular caprice, altogether unknown to the celebrated nations of antiquity, not only aspersions of character, but any single term of reproach, or geflure of insult, so far impairs the eflimation or credit of the person who suffers them; that, if the breach be not repaired, in the way which caprice also directs, he becomes an outcafl from the society, in which his condition dition depends on the esteem in which he is held. Applications PARr i.
to the courts ofjuftice, for reparation, would only increase the S
dishonour. False aspersions may be removed by the clearefl evi- Gdence of truth; but this would not remove the dishonour of having suffered them to be made. An accusation may be known to be true or false; its effect, however, in this cafe, does not depend upon the degree in which it is believed, but upon the degree of tameness with which it is received. Even calumny hurts, not by the imputation of any criminal charge, but rather by the imputation of cowardice, implied in the manner of receiving it; and the defence which caprice has provided for this mode of attack, is a display of courage, not a refutation of any false accusation. The accusation may be true; but the courageous vindicates his honour: The accusation may-be false; but the coward is overwhelmed with disgrace. Even the injured is denied the use of firatagem or surprise, in his own defence.
He must meet his antagonist, however injurious, upon equal terms; and, if he would preserve his honour, muff pass through the hazard of a single combat for that purpose. His charad-er for integrity may be blasted or entire; but his estimation, in point of honour, is independent of either condition.

In this example, the deviation from reason is monllrous; but the dignity ofjuftice is made to stoop to the caprice of fafhion; and, so long as the private injury is suffered to have its essect, and the petulance or folly of one person may drive another from his place in society; so long as the magistrate cannot preserve the citizen in his state; so long the injured citizen mufl be allowed to defend himself, and to adopt the only means which are esfecAual for that purpose.

VOL. Ir. N To PARr 11. To reform this abuse, has been justly confidered as an object C.iHkp. IV
SECr II. of great importance in the policy of modern nations: But at-*-.- tempts to this purpose have begun, perhaps, at the wrong end, by denunciations of severity against those who, finding their honour invaded, take the ordinary way of preventing or repairing the wrong with which they are attacked. If men are by vulgar capri-ce made accefible to an injury of the mofi serious nature, to an injury which the magistrate cannot repair, it is by no means just to restrain them from the only means of defence that is left in their power. This being evident to the general sense of mankind, the only effect of severities denounced by the law, in most countries, against the injured, as well as the aggrefror, has been to oblige courts ofjuftice to fall upon measures to evade the rigour of that very law they are required to apply.

If any thing could be done, to deprive unmerited affronts of their efficacy in the opinion of those who determine what fliall be a gentleman's reception in the world, the evil might probably soon give way, and the sensibility of honour be changed into a contempt of offences which are now admitted to have the most fatal cites.

We sometimes congratulate ourselves on the influence of this practice, as it tends to polish our manners, and restrain the violent fiom offensive brutalities, to which paflions may lead in the intercourse of society. We do not confider, however, that we owe our sensibility to such offences to the imputation of cowardice, which is made to accompany the sufferance of them; and that, without this imputation, unmerited infhlts would pass in society, like the noise of a scold, in which no one is ever pleased to to think himself affronted, and which he therefore hears with 

contempt or indifference CHP. I1I.



-wCrimes that proceed from the affectation of bravery, 'are not to be repressed by the fear of punifllment. The threats of law, in such cafes, give the quarrelsome a double opportunity of diftinguiiling himself. He braves his antagonist, and he braves the law. Even if he should be puniflled, his fufferingdoes not degrade him in the opinion of the people; for the people, like himself, admire bravery, even where it tends to disturb the public peace.

Absurdity is more likely to cure itself, by being suffered to incur its extreme, than by being kept within certain bounds, which serve to conceal the extent of its folly; and duelling, like other fafllions, is likely to wear itself out when it becomes an affectation of the vulgar, and ceases to diftinguifl those who are termed men of fashion.

If there be in our times a progress towards this point of reformation, we have reason, in the mean time to regret the condition of those, perhaps the least deserving of any such fate, who may susser under the prevalence of a folly, of which they cannot always avoid the effecs.

Were the law to diftinguifll the aggrefbr, in the first approachi to a quarrel, just marks of disgrace affixed to the person in whom the offence originated, might perhaps inspire every party with caution to avoid a quarrel, and have better effcis than any fbri:lLc ircllraints applied to check the afflccation of courage. It is not va-lour to Ibrave dil grace; and, if the law fhlould colndemn 1an ;r'clllr' to oifmc lecics of infamly, the faillion of fUckini) for loN n l2 1;;-'

nour, by rashness in giving provocation, might be restrained by S(Apc .
I . the profpet of an opposite effec.

It might be difficult, indeed, in many cafes, to fix the charge of aggressor upon either of the parties in a quarrel: But the belt effect of law is not merely to give the decision where an occasion of trial has arisen, but to prevent such occasions, from an apprehenlion of a decision that may be given. All that the law, indeed, can do, is to lay down a rule, and leave juries to apply it to the bell of their judgement, on the circumstances of every particular cafe. The rule, even before it is applied, would have its effect on the minds of those who are exposed to get into quarrels, and who, by avoiding the imputation of being the first aggrefior, might prevent the first steps towards an offensive dispute.

Juries, too, in some instances, might be able to fix the charge of aggreffior, so as to increase the effect of the law by real examples of ignominy and disgrace. We pity the person who is forced into a quarrel, to vindicate his honour; but we detest the bully who is ever forward in giving rife to such quarrels; and any disgrace which the law might award for such characters would be supported by the general opinion and consent of all reafonable men.

These are queflions of political wisdom, rather than of ftrica law; but are flared with advantage, when the laws to which they refer are under consideration.

Such, then, we may conceive to be the prerogative of a magiftratc, in refhraining crimes and offences. It is in part prior to convention, and a concomitant merely of his power. It is limitI c(l ed to him alone, by the convention of fellow citizens, in which PARiTr i 


they have agreed to wave their right of personal redress, and re- 
cur to established tribunals for judgement in their differences, and to the power of the magistrate for his protecion, in maintaining or in recovering a right; a convention, the articles of which, in whatever form they be stipulated, whether of statute or customary practice, are eiential to the relation of fellow citizens in every cafe whatever; still admitting, indeed, the exceptions we have mentioned in cafes to which the interposition of the magistrate cannot be effectual, or cannot extend.

Members of the fame community are thus understood to have their conventional obligations, relating not only to matters of right and wrong that may come into question between them, but also in relation to certain poftive duties which they owe to the community, and of which the magistrate is appointed to infped the performance.

Political establishments cannot subsist without the support of their members, contributing either by their means or by their personal services to the public defence, or to the arrangements which may be neceflary for public prosperity. In the very nature of political focicty, therefore, convention to this amount is implied.

Under this general title of political convention, may be included every law and eftabliflied custom relating to the prerogative of the magistrate, whether supreme or subordinate, or relating to the privilege of the subjed, of whatever rank or condition.

There 
 There are, in most communities that have made any progress 

SECT. 11L in political arts, certain primary articles, which may be termed Yr> fundamental laws of the consfitution. In these articles the description of the sovereign power, whether a King, Nobles, or majority of the people, is either given or aflumed. The powers to be exercised, and forms of proceeding are ascertained. The immunities, as well as the duties of the subjed, are specified.

Such fundamental laws, or conventions, are neither the foundations upon which society was originally formed, nor do they always follow soon after its firfl institution. They come in the sequel of circumstances into which men have pafied, without any view to political establishments, as in the sequel of casual subordination of ranks, arising from personal qualities, birth, education, orfortune: They are sometimes the result of amicable deliberations, and sometimes such as prevaling parties may have obtained by force. Mankind are known to live for many ages in society together, before they are sensible of the inconveniences, whether arising from the abuse of prerogative or the abuse of privilege, for which political law is intended as a remedy. The evils have bometimes taken a deep root, before the attempt is made to remove them ; and civil war is frequently the prelude to the eftablifilment of order upon any permanent footing. Thus the great charter in England; many of the political capitulations in Germany, the pacification of parties at Rome, and what may be termed the fundamental political law in the instance of many other flates, was the result of war or contention that arofc afcer many ages ofbociety had elapscd.

Political efcablifllncents in f ne ilanccs appearl to have no oiier folundatiothn thanui (lonf , or a Iucccflion ofads whichl imply, X that.

that parties acquiesce, in the state of their country, or in the 

forms according to which its affairs proceed; and in justifying 
the exertions of government in such instances for promoting the Y
public welfare, we seldom look farther than to the aAual tendency of administration to the public advantage.

It is a part in the social nature of man, to hold the adcion of a fellow creature, as jultified on the principle of benevolence, made known in acts of public utility; but any claim of right to extort benefits, cannot, prior to convention, be admitted, without leading to consequences extremely dangerous and hurtful to the cause of society. If benefits were to be enforced, beneficence would cease to be known as a virtue, and what ought to be a voluntary ad of good will would become the effect of mere compulsion.

The use of compulsion, upon the principle of mere utility, would become a very dangerous precedent. The powerful could easily obtrude this plea, wherever they thought proper to exert their violence, and under pretence of extorting public benefits, the greatest of public -evils might arise in a want of security to those very rights which government itself is eflabliffied to maintain. The people is not safe, if the magistrate may not only, restrain crimes and difbrders, but also exac contribution and actual service, beyond what he is authorised to demand by special contract, statute, or custom.

Any right in the magistrate or sovereign to exaC contribution, or politive service of any fort, fiom the fblject, being founded in convention alone; we may conicler the differcnt constitutions ofgovernllcnt as b no any compacts diver-fifed in the terms; orasfo many barg ails in which the parties are varioully bound, or in which, in.

 in returnfor what they are engaged to perform, they accept of un

SHer. IT. equal conditions. The terms may be unequally expedient; unew\^-r 4qually favourable to any of the parties, or to human nature in general. They may have been suggested by the relation in which parties were occasionally placed, as when the prerogatives of monarchy or aristocracy arose by degrees from the continued diftinCtion of families, and the advantage of hereditary possession.

The terms to which some of the parties submit may have even been imposed by actual force; but in all communities, so far as a right to enforce the performance of public service is supposed, we mufl be able to derive this right, either from the original principle of self defence, or from the principle of contract, on which alone one human creature is bound or may be forced to serve another.

It may asked, then, on what principle of justice are we to reft the exercise of compulsory law, in the cafe of governments which are known to have originated, and which continue to subsist, in force or violence alone ? On this foundation it is admitted, that no conventional right can arise. But it is well known in the history of nations, that at one time the leader has forced his followers to submission; that at another time the follower has extorted privilege fiom his leader; that conditions so obtained have been exprefred in statute, or gone into customary practice; and that the effects of compulsion have thus become articles of a legal constitution, of which the validity is never questioned by any of the parties concerned.

The possibility offuch a cafe has been already stated, in confidering custom as one of the forms in which conventional obligations tions 'arise. A condition, at first imposed by force may be 

such, it was observed, as that men;fhall be reconciled to it, conti- 




nue- to observe it willingly and freely, insomuch, that a person L
conforming to it, on his own part, has the most reasonable expectations of a suitable return in the. conduct of others.

This reasoning, however, will not apply, where any party in society assumes to itself an advantage, or fubjeds any other to inconvenience of such a nature,as that,although compliance may continue to be forced; yet the sufferer is not reconciled to his condition, nor ever willingly contents to the observance of it.
He does no more than he is forced to do; and the violence to which he submits, in every subsequent period of a mere impofition, has the fame character of usurpation which it had at the first. Such, no doubt, is the character of defpotical tyrrany, by whatever party it be assumed, or exerted in discretionary ads of injustice or cruelty, over the persons and properties of other men.

Under this title of continued usurpation, we have already ftated the claims of a master, refpeating his supposed property in the person of a slave; a claim which, we observed, cannot be founded on any principle of justice acknowledged in the law of nature.

A people, in the fame manner, from considerations of danger, may submit to the claims oftyrrany, whether usurped by the leader of a military band, or by the majority of a disorderly people, and they may acquiesce in one species of evil from the apprehension of a worse; but such government,whether of long or of short duration, we may observe, in answer to any of the questions now or formerly stated, is not founded in any maxim of right whatever. The 0 o principles 
PART lI. ' in returrnfdf what they are engaged to perform, they accept ofunScAT. IV. equal conditions. The terms may be'unequally expedient; unewv * -qually favourable to any of the parties, or to human nature in ge-, neral. They may have been suggested by the relation in which parties were occasionally placed, as when the prerogatives of monarchy or aristocracy arose by degrees from the continued diftintion of families, and the advantage of hereditary possession.

The terms to which some of the parties submit may have even been imposed by actual force; but in all communities, so far as a right to enforce the performance of public service is supposed, we must be able to derive this right, either from the original principle of self defence, or from the principle of contract, on which alone one human creature is bound or may be forced to serve another.

It may asked, then, on what principle ofjuffice are we to reft the exercise of compulsory law, in the cafe of governments which are known to have originated, and which continue to subsist, in force or violence alone ? On this foundation it is admitted, that no conventional right can arise. But it is well known in the history of nations, that at one time the leader has forced his followers to fubmiflion; that at another time the follower has extorted privilege from his leader; that conditions so obtained have been expressed in statute, or gone into customary pradice; and that the effects of compulsion have thus become articles of a legal constitution, of which the validity is never questioned by any of the parties concerned.

The possibility of such a cafe has been already flated, in confidering custom as one of the forms in which conventional obligations tions tarife. A condition, at firif imposed by force may be 

such, it was observed, as that men shall be reconciled to it, conti- 




nue. to observe it willingly and freely, insomuch, that a person .
conforming to it, on his own part, has the most reasonable expectations of a suitable return in the conduct of others.

This reasoning, however, will not apply, where any party in society assumes to itself an advantage, or fubjeds any other to inconvenience of such a nature,as that, although compliance may continue to be forced; yet the sufferer is not reconciled to his condition, nor ever willingly contents to. the observance of it.
He does no more than he is forced to do; and the violence to which he submits, in every subsequent period of a mere impofition, has the fame character of usurpation which it had at the first. Such, no doubt, is the charaAer of defpotical tyrrany, by whatever party it be assumed, or exerted in discretionary ads of injustice or cruelty, over the persons and properties of other men.

Under this title of continued usurpation, we have already ftated the claims of a master, refpedting his supposed property in the person of a slave; a claim which, we observed, cannot be founded on any principle of justice acknowledged in the law of nature.

A people, in the fame manner, from considerations of danger, may submit to the claims oftyrrany, whether usurped by the leader of a military band, or by the majority of a disorderly people, and they may acquiesce in one species of evil from the apprehension of a worse; but such government,whether of long or of short duration, we may observe, in answer to any of the questions now or formerly stated, is not founded in any maxim of right whatever. The 0 o principles PAR II. principless of human nature, liowever long ftifed by violence, SAC. :iL are ever repugnant to such usurpations; and, like the force .~-%V ' of a spring wound up, 'fill exert a pressure against the power that restrains them. Hence, in perfeA consistence with natural justice, though not always-with prudence or expedience, we may vindicate the sudden or gradual reform of abuses, which for ages may have pofiefled. in appearance the authority of law and political infiitution.

When we look back to the origin of government, as there is no where an original right of one person to command another, except so far as is necessary to restrain him from. harm, we have recourse to convention as the only principle upon which a right.
to command can accrue to one, or an obligation to- obey can be incurred by another.

Prior to such convention, we fay, that' rovereignty is lodged in the multitude; but, when we bring these words to the tell of any rational application, they amount to no more than this, that, prior to convention, every one has a right to dispose of himself, so far as is consistent with the safety of others: And that the multitude have this right, because made up of individuals, each of whom is possessed of it; but, in what form the multitude is to exercise it, as a colleAcive body, must depend on agreement to which individuals assent. Prior to convention, the majority has not any right to command the minority, more than any one individual has to command another.

In the abith'adt decisions of natural law, refpeding the obligation of reciprocal contracts, the failure of one party dissolves the obligation of another. So far, the matter is adjusted, in words even between the sovereign and subjed. In prac'ice, a too, too,- the sovereign has a ready provision made to enforce the 


Cal.v. 1V.

rights ;of government against the refraaory fubjeat, and the S PCT. T1.
-aghts of one, individual against the wrongs of another; but, vswhen the prerogatives which are given for protection, are employed to oppress, what new power can be found to redress the grievance? It is necessary, perhaps, that law should be silent on this head, or take its precautions in wife limitations of government rather than propose to resist its abuse.

This is accordingly the great problem of political wisdom, and ;a principal test of national felicity- But after all that can be contrived, or deliberately thought of, for -this purpose, something must be left to the powerful inftinds of nature. When the multitude, whose interelts so much it is to have a fettled government, tear down the power by which themselves are protected, we muff suppose that they are either seized with madness, or that by wrongs they are driven to despair. In either cafe, maxims of science and reason. or principles ofjuftice are inculcated in vain. The reasoner is every where surrounded with precipices. If he maintain, that the people, in every cafe, should obey, he delivers over the subjet to be oppressed and injured at difcretiol.

If he admit that the people, in any cafe, may resist; as there is none but the party himself to judge of the cafe, all government will teem to be held at the discretion of those who ought to obey it.

So far are we from being able to state any speculative or abftraa position that may not be abused. And so far are we left to the powerful inftinas of nature, for our diretion in matters of the greatefl moment. When the florm threatens, the benighted traveller will take flelter wherever he can find it; and, when rhe roof cracks over his head, he will fly from under it into the 0 o 2 mid l 
 midst of the storm. He need not recur to any maxim of law for 
 this purpose: The power of necellity is superior to law; and the wow inflint of nature drives to its end, with a force which speculative maxims can neither withstand nor diret.

Attempts to find any regular counterpoise to the weight of defpotifin, when every ordinary form is warped to the purpose of injulfice, have perplexed the most ingenious minds, or Sometimes suggested a docrine which can scarcely be applied beyond the form of words in which it is flated. That, as power originates with the multitude, that is, with the individuals of whom the multitude is composed, they have a right to reclaim it, wherever it is abused; or, if they are bound by the terms of a political contract, to submit to government; these terms are reciprocal, and the contract may be broken of either fide: If on that of the : overeign, the power is again that of the multitude, and may be . recalled.

Such maxims in speculation cost nothing but the words in which to express them; but, in practice, we muit remember, that, as the multitude never can be assembled, this maxim in esfed puts the sword in the hands of every individual, to employ it for himself. And the fate of mankind, in such inltances, must depend on what we term accident, or the character of those who gain the ascendant, or are able to prescribe new forms ofprpceeding, after numbers are tired of the disorders which have attended the suspension of the old.





S E C T O N IV.
L

Of the Cafe of Nations.

THE human species, though disposed to associate, is disposed to 

separation also. It is ever found in divisions and compartments, 

under the denomination of families, tribes, nations, or hordes. v~.
And of there the very least are rarely, without compulsion, or some urgent considerations of safety or expedience, made to coalefce in greater numbers, or, beyond the ties of acquaintance or consanguinity, submit to aa under any common direcion.

There is, however, in the nature of things, sufficient provision made to assemble the species, or to form the combination of indefinite numbers.

Men are, by their dispositions and their faculties, qualified to make the necefiary arrangements for the conduct of society however enlarged. And, however relu&ant in every fuccefilvc flop, they actually pass over the bounds of personal acquaintance or Qa personal 
 personal relation and numbers, however unknown to one another, 
CHAP.IV. ufffer themselves to be formed into nations and empires of the .SY> 1 greateit extent.

But, with refped to the objecs of our present diffcuflion, any Jeparate company or society of men aming under a common direEfion, may be termed a nation: For any plurality of men so united, in the language of lawyers, is an artificial person, having power to act, and rights to defend.

In the intercourse of separate nations there being no government or common magistrate to whom they are subjec, their cafe is, or may be nearly the fame with that which was supposed in a preceding fedion under the relation of parties irangers and unconneSted. They are subjet to the law of nature alone, however it may be modified by special conventions, and the law'of nature for this reason is also termed the law of nations. In their differences or disagreements they may appeal to the judgement of neutral powers; but if a difference is not otherwise removed, they may have recourse to war and the decision of arms.

The law of nations, which proceeds upon the supposition of peace when their is no existing offence, proceeds upon the supposition of war when differences arise that cannot be otherwise reconciled ; and is therefore, relatively to such occasions, termed also the law of peace and of war.

The last of these titles is that under which the learned Grotius has treated of the law of nature; and persons who have recourse to this author will have occasion to feledt fiom his redundancy what is necessary rather than to seek for additional information on the subject. Possessed of thejuft principle of cbmpulfory law, he he has applied it in a most ample detail, but so intermixed with 

quotations from the cuflom and practice of different ages, with C^. IV.
considerations of duty, as well as right; that his work becomes -r'
a system of ethics, and the history of opinions and customs, rather than a simple dedution and application of the principles of conpulfory law. His quotations, indeed, are interesting, so far as we are concerned to. know what men and nations have thought and praftifed, on the subjet of their mutual obligations and rights; although their opinions are not of sufficient authority in eftabliihing the principles, or in directing the applications of justice.

The most admired nations of antiquity were erroneous in their docrines,. and unfortunate in their praAcices relating to this important subjee. In war, the hostilities they praflifed were often unnecessarily deftrudive; and the servitude to which they deftined their captives was altogether unfounded on any principle of juflice. So that, what we have to learn from the example they have set in there particulars, is rather what we ought to avoid, than what we may imitate or quote as authority in decisions of natural law.

We are, in this refpe, certainly more happy in modern times.

War is made with little national animosity, and battles are fought without any personal exasperation of those who are engaged : So that partiesl are, almnot in the very heat of a contest, ready to liften to the dictates of humanity or rcafon; and there is no branch of pracical justice, which we may rccommend with more hopes of success, than that which reflrains nations at war, from unnccefitary severities against one another.

The EAR 1. The artificial persons, of whom we are now to treat, confider

S<:'.' [V. ed internally, or in refpen to their conflituent members, consist A'n.' of fellow citizens, magifirates, and fubjeds: Confidered externally, or in respect of one nation to another, they have their separate rights, whether original or acquired; may avail themselves of such rights; and guard them, by such means as are in their power, againft any species of infringement or wrong.

Among the rights of nations, acquired or adventitious, may be reckoned the Stipulations of treaty, or the conditions of acknowledged custom. These several articles of right, every nation lies under an obligation to observe, refpeding its neighbour, and is entitled to maintain refpeAing itself. In their disputes, they may have recourse to persuasion or reason; but, if reason should fail, their final resort is to stratagem or force.

Such is the state of war between nations; a state in which itis allowed, that former conventions cease to be binding, and that a nation aggrieved may avail itself of every means in its power to obtain redress; but, if the grounds of war be lawful, on the fide of the one party, they must be unlawful on the part of the other; and all that we fay, concerning the rights of war, in the application of force, is true only upon the supposition that the grounds of the war itself are just: Insomuch that, in stating the maxims of law, on this fubje&, we endeavour to express only the rights ofthofe who are entitled to plead the juflice of their cause.

Wars may originate in rapacity, emulation, or malice, in error or tifapprehenfion of right; they may be of indefinite continuance, or even form the ordinary slate of contiguous nations. The fadt in in these refpeds, is matter of history, and admits of indefinite PAR rI.
variations; but we are, in this place, to confider merely upon SECat. Iv.what supposition the ad ofhoftility, in any one nation, may be -v just; to what extent lawful hostilities may be carried, or within what limits they are circumscribed, even to nations who are entitled to use them in the highest degree : But, before we proceed to this principal objec of disquisition, it is proper to confider queftions which relate particularly to the cafe of nations, as they are, in their manner of adcing or suffering, diftinguifihed from single men.

As the persons of whom we are now to treat, include a plurality of individuals, having each a principle of willa and activity centered in himself, as well as a common cause, in which the members composing the community may jointly a't, or susser in a body; two principal questions may arise concerning them: First, what actions, proceeding from the members of a community, are to be confidered as acs of the community itself? And, secondly, In whose person may the community be supposed to receive an injury; and from whom, in cafe of an injury received, may the community exac repation?

To the fitrft question, we may answer, That the sovereign of the slate, of whatever description, whether a monarch or national assembly, is ever supposed to ac for the community, and his actions are ever chargeable as aCtions of that body of which he is the head. In his title of sovereignty is implied a general flbftitution of his acAs, for aCts of that nation, of which the supreme direction is committed to him. To this we may add, that the action of any individual, if employed by the fovercign, or colnlmil: P p sioned 
 sioned by the public so to act, or if generally understood to aa CH AP. V. for his country, will also involve, as a party in all his proceedings, .ryw the community to which he belongs.

But, as private citizens may offend against the peace of their own country, as well as against that of a foreign nation, flates are not answerable for the offence of particular fubjedts, farther than they previously authorise their conduct, or avow and proteat the offender after the fat. Thus, pirates committing depredations on the high seas, are confidered as private criminals, and amenable to the penal laws of their own country, whilst letters of marque, or private ships of war, authorised by public commission, or publicly received into port with their prizes, and protected in the uife of them, are justly confidered as involving their country in the hostilities they have committed, whether unlauvfUl or juzlty pi ovoked.

To the second question, wre may answer, That a nation may receive an injury in the person or effects of any citizen: That, in the cafe of wrongs so received, the injured party may exact reparation. and make reprisals on the person or effects of any subjec or member of the injurious nation: And, in refpe& to both quefcions, it is evident, that as a nation may be chargeable with a wrong committed by any of its members, whether authorised or merely protected, so the injurious nation may be coerced or forced to make reparation by means that immediately af-ctd the privatc interest of any of its citizens, as well as by means that assea the community at large; insomuch, that the law of defence, in is application to the cafe of nations, will bear, that a conmulunity iljured, whethler in any of its public intcrefis, or in the pcrfo'i person of any of its members, has a just claim to redress, and 

may make reprnfals on the public, or on the persons and effets S CAP 1V
of any or all the members of the offending nation. r Vi, VK. i( N



S E C T I 0 N V.

The fame Subjedl continued.

PART 1I. A national councils are composed of members differing in their 
CHAP IV. opinions and dispositions; and often flucuatingin their resolutions, SECT. V according to the influence of contending parties, communities cannot be known to one another, as individuals are known, under any permanent characer of tried affection and fidelity. Nations are, therefore, almost in every instance, mutual objeds ofjealousy and diflruft; and must think themselves safe so far only, as they are severally in condition to maintain their refpecive rights.
They must keep a watchful eye on the powers by which they may be annoyed from abroad, no less than attend to the means of dcfence with which they are furnished at home. Their independance must cease to exist, the moment it is held at the disfretion of any foreign power: what a neighbour, therefore, is about to gain, may be to them no less a fubjcdc of alarm, than what they thcmfblvcs are about to lose; and a war may be juflly underI talken, taken, by one state, to check the dangerous progress of another; 

as well as to make any other provision necessary to its own pre- 

servation.

This may render the question of right and wrong between nations extremely complicated, and suspend or perplex the decisions ofj uftice refpeiing the cause of a war.

In cafes of manifest aggrefflon the right of nations, like that of individuals, to defend themselves is obvious, and injustice in the first ftep of the war communicates a like character of wrong ;to every succeeding operation in the conduct of it; but in questions of mere caution or diflruft, it is difficult to determine how far one nation may justly oppose the progress of another, and in doing so be fuppofedto ad on principles ofmeredefence;or at what precise point they may be said to ad offensively, and to become aggreiTors in any quarrel that may arise between them.

The Romans may have been vindicated in requiring the Carthaginans to evacuate Sicily and Sardinia, but not in taking pofsession themselves of those islands, much less afterwards in requiring the Carthaginians to remove their city to an inconvenient distance from the Lea.

In questions of this kind men of the greatest integrity may bL

partial to their own country, and such is the force with which nature has direcred rival nations to pull against one another, that it would be dangerous in the councils of either to effccA an impartial part; while an cnemy is flriking, the sword of a fiiend nmol not be held in fifpencc.

In 
 In the quarrels of nations, therefore, much allowance is to be 

SECT. V. made for the mistake or misapprehension of parties, and even for t__> ithe caution with which it is proper, in national councils, to guard against the claims of a rival, even if he should appear to be supported by justice., If one nation employ force in support of its claims, however just, the nation attacked is entitled to resist every attempt to reduce it under the power of another; and is not safe, even in making a j uft conceflion, while its powers of defending itself are brought into hazard.

For these reasons, we may wave the question of justice, in the cause of a war, as depending on the actual circumstances of the particular cafe, and confider nations, acing without guile or premeditated malice of either fide, as entitled to the privileges of a fair defence.

The means of defence were, in a former feaion, referred to three separate titles, pelfuafion, Jiratagemn, and force.

The firit, it was said, may be employed among friends, and in obtaining a favour, as well as in repelling an injury. In cafes where it may be used with success, or where it may be safe to warn an enemy of a claim, that may be supported by force againft him, it is no doubt required, that proper representations should be made, as the least hurtful means that can be employed in urging a claim of right.

The Romans, for the most part, by previous complaint and requisition of their right, proposed to ifanLtify their cause, and to I give give at least an appearance ofjuftice to the hostilities which they 

were about to commence. The manifesto and declaration of war, 




which generally precedes hostilities in modern Europe, may be V
practised with the fame effect; but they are not ftrlCly required by the law of nature, in every cafe whatever. A nation that has taken the advantage offurprife, in committing an injury, cannot complain if the fame advantage be taken of itself in making reprifals.

Declarations may operate merely as a warning to put the injurious party on his guard, and enable him the better to perfit in the wrong he has done, a supposition on which the praAice is not at all necessary, or derivable from any principle of natural justice.

Among nations, however, like those of Europe, in which the fubjeds of different states are involved together in commercial connexions, and though innocent of any public wrong, are so much exposed to susser by the errors of those who govern their refpeCive countries, it is at leafd humane, if not in ifrid law required, that a certain warning of their danger should precede the actual hostilities by which they are exposed to susser, and of the causes of which they are perfedly innocent.

This consideration, it is hoped, may long recommend the practice of declaring war before the atual commencement of holtilities, among the modern nations of Europe, who, indeed, by the continuance of it, and by cullom, have given the expecation of it in some mcafure the authority of convention or compaA.

Strnatajem 
 Stratagem, implying some species of deception, is more the reSHAP. IV. fort of an enemy than of a friend. It may be employed in mifwJv^ leading the injurious from his aim, or in obtaining from him concefflons which he might not otherwise be willing to make.

On this fubjest, we have already confidered the scruples that may arise refpeting the use of deception, and the preference which the brave may give to the use of open force, even in obtaining redress of their wrongs; but we did not find, that the injurious can take any just exception to the use of Jlratagem, or complain that he is deceived when the effed is merely to counterac the wrong he commits. There is, however, one form in which deception is reprobated by mankind in general, even in the midit of hostilities, and under the utmost animosity of a national contest.

Althoughit be allowed to mislead an enemy by false appearances, and even by false informations, it is not allowed to enter into illufive treaties, or to stipulate articles for the fake of an advantage to be gained by a subsequent breach of faith.

It is allowed that hostilities cancel the obligation of preceding conventions, but not the obligation of treaties that may be entered into after commencement of a war. Hence.the sacred regard that is paid to cartels, refpeding the treatment or exchange of prisoners, the capitulations or treaties of surrender which take place in the midst of military operations, the quarter granted to an enemy who lays down his arms, or the fieedom that is given to a prisoner, upon his parole of honour not to fcrve until he is fairly exchanged.

these instances, the faith plighted, though even to an enemy, and under the operation of force, is held, by the general con- lent of all civilized nations, to be sacred in the highest degree. -The obligation, though poflibly not founded in the principle of ftrid law, certainly refts on a principle of humanity, absolutely necessary to the welfare of mankind, as without it, the calamities of war, once begun, could scarcely ever be brought to an end.
Peace itself refts upon the faith of a treaty concluded, while nations were yet at war; and, if it were admitted that such treaties could be entered into, and concluded merely to deceive an enemy, and draw him into a snare, it is evident, that the only means left to mankind, by which to flop the issues of blood, without the sinal extermination of an enemy, would be cut off, and two nations at war would be obliged to persist in hoflilities to the utter deftrucion of one or the other.

On this ground, breach of faith, even during war, is reprobated among civilized nations; and indeed, the advantage that might be derived from it, in any particular instance, would be more than counterbalanced by the general distrust which the faithless would incur, in cafes where it might be their interest to have credit given to their declarations or professions.

Force is the ordinary and ultimate resort of nations who cannot fettle their differences upon amicable terms. But, even in this last resort, the law of nature, we have observed, directs a choice to be made offuch means, as being effectual, are least hurtful to the parties against whom they are employed. The effec to be aimed at is the redress of a wrong; and any harm done, even to VO. I. Q.q an 
 an enemy, beyond what is necessary to this effec, we have observed, SeCH. V. is itself a wrong, and by the law of nature forbidden.

In applying this maxim to the cafe of nations at war, or in determining what may be lawful in the choice of hostilities, we are to confider the object in view, and the state into which it is proposed to reduce an injurious party, in order to obtain the ends of justice.

Whatever may have been the subjed in contest, the immediate objed of hftilities employedby either party, is to reduce an antagonift to a Rtate of concession, so that he, may no longer resist what is claimed as a right. This is the situation into which one party is reduced by a defeat; and the advantage gained by it accrues to the other, by having vanquilhed his enemy.

The first or immediate object of military operations, then, being to obtain the viAory, a second is, to employ the advantage gained, so as to preserve, secure, or recover the right which was originally in question. And the state of war between nations may may be divided into two periods; the firit, that which precedes; the second, that which comes after the vicory. In the first period, parties are still contending; in the second, one or other is in condition to enforce his demands, or both, tired of the contest, wifi for an accommodation.

With refpea to the firit period, or during the contest of parties, it is evident, that as hostilities are lawful only in preserving a right, or in obtaining wrong; so, in the choice of hostilitics, such only are to be deemed lawful as are necessary to obtain the vidcorhis This maxim in Speculation is bundantly clear, but in practice 


it is often difficult to apply it; for, while one party resists or 
presses with all his force, and takes every opportunity to flrength- V
en himself and to weaken his antagonist, the other party will think himself juflified in employing every means in his power to counterac operations, of which he knows not the precise extent.

Contending nations, for the most part, thus urged by an apprehension of what an enemy may be devising against them, proceed at once to extremities; use weapons and engines the nmoft deftrucive, and employ means the molf likely to reduce their enemy to submission, without any Scrupulous enquiry into the degree in which such means may be necessary, provided they are likely to be effecual for obtaining the purpose to which they are employed.

It is happy in the practice of nations when means of a.

deftrudive nature, such as the use of poisoned weapons, infeding the springs or supply of provisions, breach of faith, or any other deftrudive measures, tending to surprise an enemy, without giving him the option of submission, are so far reprobated, as that neither party thinks of employing them, nor apprehends that they are ever to be employed against himself. In favour of such practice the law of nature is clear and peremptory: That the party attacked ought, if pofible, to have open before him the extent of his danger, as that alone may be fuflicient to obtain the conccflion which conflitutes the end of the war.

,Qq 2 During During the period of contest, to whatever extremity an enemy 

SECT. V that refilts may be urged, it is evident, from the general prin _-wa/.J ciple which limits the operations of war to such means as are necessary to obtain the viaory, that an enemy who submits or yields, is thereby entitled to quarter. The end of the war, with refpea to him, is already obtained; and to refute quarter, is justly confidered amongst civilized nations as an obje3 ofdeteftation and horror, Prisoners taken in the course of a war are, agreeably to the diCtates of natural law, disarmed and secured, that they may not return to strengthen the enemy: But as cruelties pradCifed towards them have not any tendency to procure or to haften the victory, it is not lawful to withhold subsistence or reasonable accommodation in the manner of treating them.

The expence of fubfifling prisoners of war may indeed become an addition to the damage already sustained from an enemy, and may accordingly become ajuft matter of charge against the party whose wrongs give rife to the contest; but against whomsoever this question may be decided, it is evident, from the general observations already made, relating to the faith that is to be kept even with an enemy, that cartels or treaties of any fort, for the mutual accommodation of prisoners, are matters of strict obligation.

We speak not now of the regard which brave men and virtuous citizens mutually have for one another, though engaged on oppofite fides of a national quarrel. This is an article not of Rtrict law, but of personal generolity, of poliflcd manners, or of can2 dour, dour, honourable for those who observe it rather than matter of 

right, which may be always exated by those towards whom it is 



observed.

It is a well known maxim in the law of nature, that injurious parties have no right to exac the performance of any promise they may have extorted in pursuance of a wrong previously done.
Thus a robber, who has taken a traveller's money on the high way, if he flould extort a promise of secrecy, has no right to exad the performance of such promise.

Upon this principle it should seem, that, in the course of a war, engagements contracted with the injurious party are not binding; or do not bestow any right on such injurious party to exact the performance.

Notwithflanding the evidence of this maxim, nations, moved by the consideration of its fatal consequences, have almost univerfally consented to forego the exceptions of force or injustice'
otherwise valid, to repel the obligation of treaties entered into during the continuance of a war, and have consented to hold the faith of such treaties equally, if not more sacred than that of convention even between nations at peace. It is on the faith of this content, that the afperities of war are foftcned towards individuals, that the prevailing party, on every particular occasion, may refrain from unnecessary severity towards an enemy, may spare the vanquished, and release the captive. Upon the faith of this maxim, even during the animofities of war, a way is kept open for the return of peace; and the party aggrieved, even having an enemy in his power. is prevailed upon to sheathe the sword, and rely upon a promise of that enemy to repair the wrong 
 During the period of contest, to whatever extremity an enemy C i-AP. IV.
SECT. V that refills may be urged, it is evident, from the general prinr/'-y'' ciple which limits the operations of war to such means as are necefary to obtain the victory, that-an enemy who submits or yields, is thereby entitled to quarter. The end of the war, with refpe& to him, is already obtained; and to refuse quarter, is justly confidered amongst civilized nations as an object ofdeteftation and horror, Prisoners taken in the course of a war are, agreeably to the dictates of natural law, disarmed and secured, that they may not return to itrengthen the enemy: But as cruelties praftifed towards them have not any tendency to procure or to haften the viAory, it is not lawful to withhold subsistence or reasonable accommodation in the manner of treating them.

The expence of subsisting prisoners of war may indeed become an addition to the damage already sustained from an enemy, and may accordingly become ajuft matter of charge against the party whore wrongs give rife to the contest; but against whomsoever this question may be decided, it is evident, from the general observations already made, relating to the faith that is to be kept even with an enemy, that cartels or treaties of any fort, for the mutual accommodation of prisoners, are matters of ftrii obligation.

We speak not now of the regard which brave men and virtuous citizens mutually have for one another, though engaged on op.
polite fides of a national quarrel. This is an article not of ftrid law, but of personal generoiiry, of polifled manners, or of can2 dour, dour, honourable for those who observe. it rather than. matter of 

right, which may be always exaCed by those towards whom it is 



observed. Sr It is a well known maxim in the law of nature, that injurious parties have no right to exadc the performance of any promise they may have extorted in pursuance of a wrong previously done.
Thus a robber, who has taken a traveller's money on the high way, if he fllould extort a promise of secrecy, has no right to exaft the performance of such promise.

Upon this principle it should seem, that, in the course of a war, engagements contracted with the injurious party are not binding; or do not bestow any right on such injurious party to exaA the performance.

Notwithstanding the evidence of this maxim, nations, moved by the consideration of its fatal consequences, have almof.r univerfally consented to forego the exceptions of force or injustice'
otherwise valid, to repel the obligation of treaties entered into during the continuance of a war, and have consented to hold the faith of such treaties equally, if not more sacred than. that of convention even between nations at peace. It is on the faith of this content, that the afperities of war are softened towards individuals, that the prevailing party, on every particular occasion, may refrain from unnecessary severity towards an enemy, may spare the vanquished, and release the captive. Upon the faith of this maxim, even during the animofities of war, a way is kept open for the return of peace; and the party aggrieved, even having an enemy in his power. is prevailed upon to fleathe the sword, and rely upon a promise of that enemy to repair the wrong P T II. wrong he has done, and to preserve the peace undiiturbed for the CGH.,.IV. future.


It is evident, in the abffrac point of view, that while parties are at war, it is lawful to assist the innocent; but, that any person giving aid to the guilty, becomes an accomplice in his crime.
Upon this principle, parties at war, asserting their claim of right against an enemy, have an equal claim against the auxiliary, or againft any nation giving refuge, protection, or support to an enemy; but parties, unconcerned, may repel the attempts which are made to engage them in a quarrel, refpeaing which they are disposed to preserve their neutrality.

Neither of the parties at war may lawfully seize the effects of a neutral person, in order to employ them against his enemy; but, if the effeds of a friend are deffined for the use of an enemy, and are such as may enable him the better to carry on the war, they may be lawfully seized.

If an enemy receive protection in the port or fortress of a neutral power, he may be lawfully pursued, and forced even in that retreat. With refped to such matters, however, contiguous nations having frequent intercourse, whether in peace or war, by their ordinary practice, give fandion to customs, in some inftances unequally agreeable or disagreeable to the original tenets of natural law.

the modern nations of Europe, the effecs of a friend going to an enemy may be seized, if they are such as would enable that enemy the better t n the war; and the cffeds effeCts of an enemy may be seized on board the ship of a friend, 



provided the ship is restored with freight and other expences. 

In the operations of war at land, an enemy may be pursued into the territory, and forced to surrender in the fortress of a neus tral power; but, in the operations of war by lea, neutral ports are held to be sacred, and the protetion they give is extended to Lome indefinite distance, at which their signals can be understood, or to which guns from the shore may be supposed to reach.

In this diftinaion, which is made between the liberties that'

may be taken with the land fortresses and Lea ports of an enemy, the rule is no doubt capricious, and the reverse of that which the law of nature seems to inculcate. By the maxims of this law, an injured party may pursue his redress by any means which are consistent with the safety of others who are not concerned in the wrong of which he complains. There is, or may be, evident rea-son to bar his entrance into the territory of a neutral power, or to, bar his laying siege to a fortress in which an enemy may have ta-ken refuge, as this cannot be done without damage to -the territory on which he enters, or demolition to the works he would force; but there is no reason why he may not approach the coast or enter the port of a neutral power, and there force his antagonist, by means which no way assea the interest of the neutral party in.
question. The only probable reason that can be afligned for the origin of this diftindion is, that neutral powers are better prepared to keep the peace of their ports against the force of intruders by sea, than they are prepared to keep the peace of their territory against the force of great powers collected to make war on their fiontiers; that therefore they urge their right in the one cafe,.
:.ld forgo it in the other..

Suclih 
PART. I Such are a few of the principal points to which the law of na

SCT. V. ture applies, in what we flated as the firit period of a war, while _'/'~Y'n parties yet contend for the ascendant or the victory. If the events of the war nave been such as incline either or both parties to make the concessions necessary to an accommodation, they are come to the second period, in the sequel of victory, which was supposed to be the first or immediate objedt of hostilities.

In this state of parties, the victor has acquired a power to enforce his right, but, refpeding the cause or subje&t of the quarrel, does not become vefled with any right that did not originally subsist, or that has not arisen in the way of additional claim of compensation for the damage sustained in the course of the war.

The victorious, if his general claim be just, is now in condition to enforce it; he is in condition, also, to enforce compensation for whatever he may have suffered in vindicating his right; and may lawfully require securities, or take precautions for his future safety. But, as the success of arms cannot change wrong into right, and as the innocent is not less entitled tojuflice, for being unable to resist the violence that is offered to him, any supposed right of conquest, arising from the success of a war, is a mere folecifin in language, and the reverse of any just tenet of natural law.

The fortune of war is Sometimes favourable to the injurious, and may place either of the parties concerned in poffeflion of advantages which they have not any right to retain, either in virtue of their original claim, in virtue of compensation for damage sustained in the war, or as securities required to their future safety.
On these suppositions, conquest can bestow no right i and it is fbrtunate tunate in the practice of nations, when, either from a principle 

of moderation, or from an apprehension that neutral powers might 


SE-CT. V.

interpoie to check the abuse of their advantages, they employ their ry conquefis only to secure themselves in the polfeffion of their rights.

Among other advantages of civilization and public juflice in modern Europe, we have reason to congratulate ourselves -upon this, that conquests are seldom undertaken, and acquisitions feldom retained, except updn the ground of some plausible or probable claim, on which the subjea in question was originally feized or demanded.

R r /





( 3X5 )

CH A P. V.
OF MORAL ACTION, AND THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A VIKR
TUOUS AND HAPPY LIFE.

Of Virtue, as diflingulJhable from the EffeSs of Compulsory Law..
manner, as has been attempted in the two laschapters, we may trace the outlines of jurisprudence or compul- fory law from a first principle in nature, as we pursue a series of -v>
mathematical theorems from an axiom or definition previously assumed or underflood. Our theories, in either cafe, no way asfed the the physical state of things otherwise than they are apR r 2 plicable 
 applicable by assumption of circumstances, or by some degree of SJCAP. V. approximation in the cafes which actually take place.

The object of compulsory law is defence; and to obtain this end force is perfecAly adequate: But the objec of morality in general is different: It is to inspire virtuous dispositions, and render that frate of the person we would defend not only secure, but otherwife eilentially happy.

When the law is thus conceived, as divided into two separate tables; the one containing a prohibition of wrongs, the other requiring positive acts of beneficence, the fandions are supposed to be distinguishable also, under titles of perse& and imperfect obligation. The use of words is .no doubt in some measure arbitrary; but it ought not to be implied in any words we employ, that a rule, merely becauSe it may be enforced, is in any degree more binding than the consideration of what is in itself an article of wisdom, as constituent of good to mankind.

Justice is said to be the object ofcompulfory law; and it is so, no doubt, in refpedt to many of its external effects: But, confidered as an article offupreme felicity to the person who willingly observes it. justice is no less above the reach of compulsion; than is the whole of that guardian afficdion, which renders man towards his fellow creatures not only unwilling to be the cause of harm, but active also in yielding the fruits of beneficence. The person who abslains fiom harm, merely because he may be forced to do so, is in no degree comprehended under any description of virtue, and in respeCt to the good at which morality aims, may be confidered as a wretch and an outcast from mankind.

3 Force Force may operate in practice, by presenting evils which deter 


from iniquity; but vice itself is a greater evil than any that force 

can inflict; and the obligation to humanity and candour, there- fore, is as perfect as the fear of evil or the consideration of human felicity can make it. A person who deliberates on the choice of his conduct, will not always find himself more powerfully determined to respect what may be called the right of one fellow creature, than he is to relieve the distress, or cordially to embrace the merits of another '. An orphan, it is said, was found almost naked, lying on the grave of his parent, of whom he had been recently deprived; the person who found him, we shall suppose, was passing to an appointment, at which he was about to discharge a debt: But this object fixed his mind; he employed his money in procuring relief and protection for him; and his creditor for the time was disappointed. Will any one reprobate this act of humanity, as interfering with a matter of more perfect obligation ? Even the courts of law, as we have had occasion to observe, can admit the extreme neceflity of one peribn as valid to suspend the right of another. Thus, a person about to perifli for want of food, is allowed to save himself by recourse to the property of another; and the plea of humanity is held to be more sacred than that of an absolute and exclusive right. Vhy flould not humanity therefore be enforced? If it be the primary good incident to human nature, why should it not be obtained by any means the most effecual for this purpose? There is not, indeed, any reason why it flould not be effectually obtained; and if force could be effectual to inspire benevolence, even * Vid. Prix (dlifribuis ct propofcs par Ia Socictc Royale d' Agriculture, dans fa fcancc publi(quc tniiue a l>.aris c 3 Dccembre, 1791.

 even the sword and the- mace ihould be employed to make men 
love one another. But benevolence is a modification of will, Amp which no application of force can procure: Even the external effet, if obtained in this manner, would lose the character of virtue. A beneficent action, which, when free, is liberality or charity on the part of those who practise it, would, under the application of force, be changed into extortion or robbery on the part of those who should so exac the performance of it for their own advantage. To bestow the felicity of a willing mind, force is not only inadequate, but, by alienating the affections of those againfi whom it is employed,wouldhavea contrary tendency.

All that the magistrate can do in this matter is, by shutting the door to disorder and vice, to endeavour to fifle the ill dispositions of men; and by securing the paths of integrity, and marking them with considerations of distinction and honour, to facilitate and encourage the choice of virtue, and to give scope to the belt difpositions which nature has furnilhed, or which the ingenuous mind is able to cultivate in itself.

We are now to confider not the applications of force, but the felicity of a willing mind. What is the bell and most happy condition of human life ? What most agreeable to the law of God and the general sense of men ingenuous and. well informed ? The confiderations which lead to this choice, if benevolence be supposed to need any excitement to its own pursuits, have been already enumerated under the titles of conscience, religion, and.public rputle.
But these may not be sufficient without all the other accompaniments of a well informed, as well as benevolent mind.

ConJcience, indeed, for the most part will approve the acls of 3 beneficence beneficence and reprobate the effeAs of malice: But piejudice, 

on particular occasions, may assume the name of conscience. 




And men are not always virtuous in doing what they themfelvs ry conceive to be right. A person who has incurred a mifchivous error, may have his own approbation, while he is in reality an obje& ofjuft deteRation and horror; and the merit he assumes to himself in the face of better information, argues a mind depraved at once in its judgements as will as affections. Even the furious zealot who is pleaSed to inculcate his doctrines under terrors of the rack and the fire, may think that he is acive in the cause of truth, or in propagating a faith which is necessary to the salvation of mankind. Or the Mufsleman, who thinks it a duty, -;hen the standard of Mahomet is eredced, to plunge his dagger in the breast of any Jew or Chriflian that is within his reach, may flatter himself that he has the fanaion of conscience for the outrage he commits on humanity and justice.

Under the title of public repute, or a deference to the sense of mankind, we may in general be directed to a harmless and beneficent course of life; but not always securely to this effect.
Vain glory and mean popularity are Sometimes grafted on this principle, and as often mislead the condut of men, or embitter the moments of life with jealousy or disappointment. In private the silence of fame is often the belt repute, as at Athens, that woman was said to merit the highest praise of whom no rumour either good or bad ever went abroad *. And to the father of a family also, who, by the conftitutiori of his country, is neither a flatefinan * Vid. Thucidides lib. ii. co 45. Rex vixit male qui natus morienfque fefellit.

PART IT. ftaefiman nor a wariour, nor placed in any public profession, SECT. I. the silence of fame is itself a laudable diftindion *.

Under the title of religion we admire and love the conceiveable perfedions of the supreme Being: But bigotry and fuperflition may assume the name of religion, and substitute ads of opprefsion and cruelty towards men for ads of duty towards God.

We mutt not therefore trust to whatever may bear the name of religion or conscience, or to what may have a temporary vogue in the world for our direction in the paths of a just and manly virtue. Every advantage of a benevolent mind and well informed understanding are conducive to this purpose, and the charaderiftics of a virtuous life, frequently revolved in the mind may have a salutary tendency to the fame effed. To delineate the features of virtue is an agreeable talk, and, when happily performed, is favourably received by mankind. Even they who in pradice are least observant of the models presented to them, nevertheless bear witness to the truth of an observation which Cicero has quoted from Plato. That if virtue could be rendered maniJeJl to the eyes of men, it ,would excite the Nec vixit male qui natus rnorienfque fefe!lit.

Upon this idea of a virtue retired in modest silence and indifference to fame, there is wanting for the inftrution of mankind, a biographical collcfion containing exam.
pies of men who havebeen able to fill up the years of a happy life with occupations annd duties which gave continual fatisfacRion, without any wifl to extend their celebrity.
It might be difficult indeed to colled materials for such a work, and few are enough lovers of mankind and indifferent to fame to be qualified for the execution of it. If vIr Additon had betaken liimfclf to this task, his country that owes him so mluch would have owed him still more than for any of his acual fcrviccs.

the most wonderful pa^on of love and desire of u.wfdonm . Its lessons 

are happily received through the channels of ingenuous literature C HAP. V.
and the fine arts, no less than in the way of formal inftrucion. r Of the first, there are many proofs in the works of diflinguifled genius, whether, ancient or modern in which qualifications dwIhich serve to accomplish the author serve also to inftruc the world *. Of the other, there are also valuable remains of antiquity in the Memorabilia of Socrates; the Ethics ofAriftotle; the offices of Cicero; and still more in the remains of Epitetus and Marcus Aurelius. In our own language also there are many valuable compositions on the subjec. Some on that of manners, and the ordinary concerns of human life, having appeared periodically at different times of this century, frill continue to be read with more than the pleasure of novelty. Others that have been delivered by persons in holy orders, and in the discharge of their sacred functions. With these, in any instance, I do not compete: But in my attempt to touch this copious subjec, of which I cannot by any means hope to fill up the detail; I am ambitious to show that there is a science of manners or of Ethics, no !ess than of Jurisprudence or of Politics, and for this purpose S s would + Forman quidem ipfam, Marce fill ; & tanquam faciem honefii vides, que, si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles ainores, ut ait Plato, excitaret fapientia, Cic. de OJf ficiis, lib. i. c. 5.

* Scribendi rede fapere eft et principium et sons.

Rem tibi Socratic- poterunt ofnendere charta, Verbaque proviilmir rem non invita fequentur.
Qui didicit patrii quid debeat et quid amicis; QuIo (it anore parens, quo fiater amandus et hofpcs; Qod fit conlir-ipti, (quod judicis officium, qux: Partes in bcllurn ifli; ducis ille prorc<co Rcdcre perimTru fcit convcnliclntia cuiquc.

.ART II. would willingly point out a method, bywhich to derive the SECT. I. offices or duties of a virtuous life from principles at once so ~'~ comprehensive and unqueffionably evident, as to enable every person to fill up the detail for himself.





S E C T I 0 N Ir.

Of the Occafjons and Charac7ers of Human Altoi'n in general.

WE have laboured in former fedions, to have the characters, 

whether good qualities, or defects of mind diftincly conceived, as CIAP. V.
constituting, on the one hand, the happiness and good, or, on the 
other, the misery and ill, of intelligent being. In these charadcers' ,- '
of the mind subsists the diftindion of good and evil. Corporeal adions are diftinguiflled only as their effecls and external exprefsions.

So much to be observed is perhaps neceflary to a right underftanding of the subjed. At the fame time, it must be admitted, that any individual mind, however possessed of its higheft perfections, if, without means of communication with other minds, would be no more than a single and separate existence, not a member in any community of beings; not active to any beneficent purpose; nor even having any scope for the exercise of its best dispositions and faculties.

S s z The 
PART. 11. The Author of nature, so far as we know, has not so disjoined 

SCCT. II. individuals from one another in any part of his works. There '.'vow. is an affinity and combination of minds, as well as of material substances. The chain of communication extends from one to many, fiom species to species, and even fiom world to world, throughout the intellectual as well as material system of nature.
In our limited views of the intellectual world, there is a medium, through which individuals give and receive intimation of their meaning, and on which they jointly work with mutual difpofitions to concert or opposition. How this chain of communication may be formed, betwixt intelligent beings different from man, or how it may be supplied in a slate any way different from the present, we know not; but, in the present condition of man's intelligent being, his communication with other minds is esseced by means of his animal frame. Through this medium, minds mutually know and are known to one another. Among the fubjees that affect the animal nature, they find confsituents of interest or self preservation, on which they are industrious.
They encounter with one another in the fame or opposite pursuits, and find materials that may be employed as means of beneficence or harm, of co-operation and opposition, according as they are disposed to adt the partof friends or of enemies.

We have already indulged the idea, that this scene of animal life, is but the opening of a boundless course, in which man is deftined to pursue the objecs of his intelligent nature : By means of animal perceptions, the first rays of information or knowledge are made to. dawn upon his foul; he is made to perceive the world in which he is a part; and, in the edifice of nature, in which he is ]odlgcj lodged is not, like the other animals, merely an indweller; but is 

partly let into the reason of its contrivance, not merely urged by in- CHIAP. V.
ftin&, but qualified to deliberate on the choice of his ations, whe- - _
ther in obtaining a convenience to himself, or in procuring a benefit. to his fellow creatures.

These occasions of aCtion, making so material an article in the history of the human species, have been already stated; and the pursuits or exertions of mind, to which they give rife, have been enumerated under the refpetive titles of arts, commercial, political, and intelleclual. The first are employed on fubjets required to supply the wants and necessities of animal life; the second relate to the order offociety, or the relations of men acting in collective bodies; and the third relate to the exercises and attainments of mind, in the use and improvement of its diftinAive powers.

When, in the sequel of this ltatement, we confider how far the intellectual powers of man are short of the degrees which he himself is able to conceive, we were naturally led to suppose, that there are, in the universe of God, much higher forms of intelligence than his. At the fame time, we cannot but think, that even he is of no mean rank in the scale of being; for to him is allotted one of the primary planets, and what, under this title, may be reckoned a seventh part of this solar or planetary world. Here, then, is a mighty apparatus made for his accommodation; and our belt way of reconciling so much consequence in the system of nature, with so much littleness in the present attainments osman, is,'by supposing this terrestrial sphere which he occupies, and probably many such, to be nurseries for the great world of intelligent being: And in this supposition we may learn to refi)ec the present scene of things, however fecmingly fiivolous, as a prelude to 3 t hl 
PART Il. the higher parts of a drama, for which men are deilined to prepare SCHCAT. V. in palling through the offices, employments, and duties of the vrYowk1 present life.

Under one or other of the titles now mentioned, and formerly treated more at large, we may suppose the present occasions of human action to be comprehended; and, if it be good for man to aA his part, it is certainly required, in .constituting that good, that the occasions of action mhould be attended to, and well underfiood. The external Situations of men may be varied indefinitely, by the unequal pof/eflion of things conducive to convenience or self preservation, or by the unequal distribution of materials on which the powers of wisdom and goodness may be employed; and we may know that happiness or misery is not proportioned to the measure in which such things are poffiefed, but to the right or wrong use of them, and to the wisdom or folly of the part which is aded with refpca to them. Yet, as the work is not likely to be well executed where the materials are neglected, philosophy, which bids us attend to our duty, as the principal object in human life, has no tendency to make us overlook .or neglect the occafions to which the propriety of our conduct relates.

In general it is supposed, that means are fnbordinate to the end, for which they are employed; and from this rule it fhllould follow, that the industry and ingenuity, the sobriety and fortitude, prafifed by a man in the pursuits of fortune;. that the benevolent affeCtion, exercised in adcs of liberality or charity, ihould be of inferior consideration to the wealth which he means to acquire in thie one cafe, or to the favour and relief which he means to, bhctow in th.e other. In the estimate of human concerns, howCVCe'

ever, the contrary is true. Where human virtue is the means, 

and external advantage the end, we know from experience, that ScAP. V.
the means are of more Value than the end, and constitute the -x happiness of human life, in.whatever measure the end be obtained, or even where in the event it is frustrated. To this purpose, it is observed by Cato, in Cicero's dialogue concerning the fupreme good, that, although human ation is directed to certain external ends of accommodation or safety, which he enumerates, yet that, from the action itself there results a confideracion of much greater moment, than the end or purpose to which the action itself was directed A. In the productions of men, materials are oflefs value than the ingenious design and execution of the work. And in acts of good will to mankind, the external effeA
is inferior to the affection of a generous and beneficent heart.

The great object of reason, however, in there observations, is not to detach men from a proper attention to the occasions of action, but to qualify them, however the scenes may differ, to ac their part with propriety, or to prevent them from thinking that their good consists in mere situation, or in the materials they employ; and not in the nature of the part which they themselves are free to ad, in every situation, and with refpea co any material.

To few it is left to determine what course of life they shall pursue. The conduct of patrimonial interests, the cares of family, the duties of public or private station, are to most men fuffioient to mark the line or direction in which they are to pass through * Cicero de Finiibus, lib. iii. cnp. 6.

 through life. But, to bear the chara&ers of an ingenuous or hap

py mind, it is not necesSary that the situation or line of life should wer-. be pecifically adapted. This blessing is attainable in every fituation, and is the gift of God to every rational creature who knows how to discharge the present duties of his station with diligence, benignity, and courage.

Different institutions of society engage their members in different pursuits. Under some institutions, it is the prevailing object of paflion to become rich; in others, to obtain precedence and titles, or to make a ihow of rank and fortune derived from ancestors. In others, it is the prevailing passion to be diftinguiihed in the classes of statesmen, of warriors, or orators. But in the scene of human life, be it constituted by whatever direcion of public opinion, the wife, the ingenuous, and the beneficent will frill find their place; and it were dangerous or absurd to waste, in vain expostulations, the spirit, which ought to operate in the belt use of our situation, whatever it may be.

In a little village of the Alps, the attendants of Caesar could perceive that even there, as well as at Rome, there might be 'parties and a contest for rank: And he himself could there also apprehend the usual objects of his ambition, superiority of power, in refpea to which, he would rather be thefiry? in that village than thefkcond at Rome. In every department of human life, if there be a vice to be flunned, there is also a virtue to be pradifcd; and what every man is chiefly concerned to know, is that, even in his village, or in his place, there is occasion to exercise the character of a noble and ingenuous mind, as well as a danger to be incurred on the fide of folly and of vice.

Philofoplicrl.

Philosophers would variously teach us; Come to refer our actions, 
PART I.

Ct


and to limit ourviews, to privateor separate gratifications; to court 
an exemption from care and solicitude on the concerns of other men; and to fill up the moments of life with the least poflible trouble or avocation from our own personal slate and enjoyments, But nature seems to require that we seek for the interesting scenes of human life; that we confider our own, and the cause of mankind, as common; that we confider our sociable dispositions as the better part of ourselves; and that we willingly seize the occasions which exercise the powers of a wife and beneficent mind.

Reason, pretended or real, may thus dispose or indispose us for the scene which providence has opened before us. But nature'
has provided, that the individual can no where shake himself loose of his species, and that if he does not bear his part in society as a friend, he must susser as an enemy.

The vefiel, on board of which all men are embarked, mutt be managed and wrought by the common skill and labour of the crew, and none can be indulged in exemptions, which, if all were to plead and obtain, would end in the ruin and deftruaion of the whole. " I would reap," fays Aristippus, " what other people " sow, I would enjoy my pleasures in a city which others have "built, and labour to preserve". This confidered as the choice of an individual may be cunning; but offered as a scheme of philosophy for mankind, is more absurd than language can express. If the slothful mariner, in his wisdom, fly fiom tLe helm or hfrink from his watch on the deck, what is to become of the vessel in which he is embarked, and in which the scene of his T t private 
 private enjoyments, or interests, however real, is likely upon this 
plan to be of short continuance.


Animals are observed to have their- native propensities, from which there results a diftindtive asped and manner of life.
This observation will apply no less to man. He tools distinguished from his birth. He is destined to know himself, to observe and to chufe among the ends of pursuit, and his asped is different according to the choice he has made, and according to the ability or temper with which he persists in that choice.

Every situation may try the fiill of the person who is placed in it; may try his disposition to beneficence, or his neglect of other men, his fortitude and his application to objects that merit the principal flareofhis attention. Skill, dipo/ition, application, andforce, are accordingly the qualifications to which we referred, as requifites in the formation of an adcive character. And, with a view to which, morality has been divided into a corresponding number of parts or branches, which are termed the Cardinal Virtues, to wit, prudence or wilfdom, goodness orjuflice; temperance and fortitude. This arrangement of the subjed is familiar in common language, as well as in the schools of morality, and points out a method in which we may continue to pursue what remains to be observed on the external charad6eriftics of a virtuous life.

7Wisdom is the virtue or excellence of the understanding, by which a person is rkilful in the choice of his objedts, and in the means of obtaining his end.

Goodnef is the excellence or virtue of a good difpoition, firom which men venerate the rights and feel for the sufferings of their fellow fellow creatures, from which they are averse to be the authors 

of harm, from which they are ever faithful and true to the expeAa- S

tions they have raised, and ever ready, by aats of kindness and vY/
good will, to prevent even the wishes of those who by nature or accident are made to depend on their will.

7emperance is the proper choice of our pursuits and applications ; or such a measurement and regulation of inferior gratifications and desires as is consistent with the higher and better occupations of our rational nature.

Fortitude is that firength of mind which enables the virtuous man to withstand opposition, to contend with difficulty, and to possess himself in the midst of danger. It is the foundation of'
magnanimity, which, when a person is called upon to perform any of the more arduous duties of life, inspires a courage superior to the consideration of inferior interests or concerns. Its principle in the mind is an essential constituent ofhappinefs; not only as it qualifies men to encounter with ease any real difficulty, distress, or danger, but as it is an antidote to those imaginary fears and mis-apprehensions which constitute weakness, and a principal article of meanness or suffering.

Such being the cardinal virtues, forming what we may confider as the first and most general arrangement of the moral duties, we proceed to confider their consequences, or the more particular habits and exertions in which they severally consist. In doing this, the first or most general title in each division will serve as a principle, from which the inftrudions of moral propriety relating to the several parts may be drawn.


Of the CharaSerfiics of Prudence or Wisdom.

 W ISDOM being a discernment of the ends which we ought to citap. V.
SCleT. II pursue, and of the means moit effecual for the attainment of rvu' them, it ihould seem to include every virtue. For, on the fovereign direction of a mind perfectly apprised of its good, and of the manner in which that good is to be secured, we may safely rely for the retitude and propriety of our conduc in every inDance.

Wisdom was accordingly so confidered by the antient philofophers; and, in the imaginary description of a wife man, every conceivable perfection of human nature was included.

We are thus disposed, for the molt part, to simplify our conceptions, and to seek for tome fundamental principle from which, if we secure it, every other requisite will follow; but the reality of any such principle, even in the government of human nature, xay may be doubted. The love of mankind, which we have affum- 

ed as the nearest approach to a general principle of virtue, re- 

quires the direction of wisdom and the support of courage. SEc. L
Wisdom also requires the reality of a benevolent affetion, which even the befi discernment of what ought to be done, on particular occasions, cannot supersede.

Among the happiest effeas of wisdom, we may reckon the proper diretion which a benevolent disposition itself may receive towards the attainment of its end; but if in this, wisdom or prudence is ~subservient to goodness, the benevolent affections are often the best security that judgement itself thall not err: For they often lead to the genuine point of integrity and honour, when a cold discernment of what is proper for the occasion might fail of its aim.

Wisdom, Rated as one among the cardinal virtues, refers chiefly to those duties which refult:from reflection, and which terminate in preserving the state and character of the individual unimpaired, Such are decency, propriety, iodeJiy, oeconomy, deci/ion, and caution.

These being the characaeriftics of prudence, and the external marks of a confidlerate mind, or the effects of habit acquired, together with experience in the progress of reason, they are among the virtues which the Duke de la Rochefoucault supposes to owe their merit to reflection, and to embellifl a charaCter the more for being acquired. But, even here, there is a partiality to natural, parts, of which, under the notion of superior genius or great ability, men court the reputation, even where they incur its neglect or acknowledge its abuse. It is that which is supposed to give to the 
 the ftatefinan or warrior his superior lufire; that which elevates E
CHAP II* the orator, the poet, and fine artist of every description, above the .-~,.v ordinary ranks of men; and we have the folly frequently to eftimate a merit which ought to consist in a proper use of our faculties, by the mere pofiefiion of a talent, with too little regard to the salutary effecs which it ought to produce.

The value of wisdom, however great, is more evident perhaps in its contrast with folly, than when separately stated. " A fool,"
fays La Bruyere, " cannot look, nor Rand, nor walk like a man "of sense. The contrast thus appears in the most trivial, as well " as most important occasions of human life, in every feature of " the countenance, and every action and gesture of the body.
" The fool is mortified in being told of his folly, and feels the " imputation of it as a grievous reproach."

WVhat then are these characters. When we attempt to analyfe them, the diftincion, ihould appear to arise, on the one hand, from a discernment of what ought to be done, and from a habit of doing it; on the other, from a mistake, or want of discernment of the objeCt, of the occalion, and 6f the place, or from a habit of being occupied on occasions of serious business with objets of inferior value. Such is the folly of the coxcomb, the vain-glorious, the avaricious, the spendthrift, and the prodigal, the contemptuous, and the proud.

Wisdom is the discernment of what a man ought to wifli for himself, for his friend, for his country, and for mankind. And supposing a disposition to at well in all there relations, it is the ability with which lie may acquit himfilf well on the different 3 occasions occasions to which they give rife. It has, in every person,' a par- 

ticular reference to the conduc of his own affairs. He may, in- S:T.AP- I
deed, confider his benevolence, or good will towards others, as one \
of the most important articles in the predicament of what belongs to himself; but such affedions belong more properly to their feparate articles of goodness orjuitice.

Decency, confidered apart from every other principle of moral obligation, though an article of wisdom, is that of which the external or physical effects are ofleaft imoment to human life. It is direded chiefly to save appearances, and gives evidence of a mind cautious to avoid what is evil, in matters which, either by opinion, custom, or natural sensibility, are rather offensive than hurtful to others. Its rules, therefore, are prohibitory, and its offices sometimes consist in avoiding before others, what, when alone, may be innocent, or perhaps i-eceffary.

There are men, who, under an affectation of being superior to trifles, susser themselves to trespass on the rules of decency; but offence unnecessarily given to our fellow creatures, whatever be the manner of it, is not a trifle; and the poet has justly observed that " Want of deceicy is want of sense." The observance of this duty, as it is dictated either by the inftiriis of nature, or by the cultom of our country, is important, as the presence of one man is important to another, and the reception which a person meets in society is important to himself The objects of prohibition, which come under this article, might be summed up under three titles, nudity, filth, and obfcenty ; but of there the boundaries are sufficiently marked in the cuflom or manners of every nation orage; and togointoany detail with rcifpe to 
 to them would be, in rome measure to offend against the duty SHAT. V. which we mean to enjoin.

Propriety is the suitableness of action to the person who ads; to the occasion; and to the place: so that, although it comprehends decency, because what is proper is also decent, it proceeds upon a principle yet more extensive and less depending on local apprehenfions and cufloms. Indecency is chargeable only in the prefence of others; impropriety may be incurred by a person when alone, as often as he neglecs what is due to himself or to his fellow creature, or as often as he incurs what is unsuitable to the part he has to sustain, either in refpeC to rank, profefion, or age.

There is a propriety, as well as decency, in all the external effects of virtue: In all the effects, for instance of good sense, benevolence, and resolution, these are proper to human nature as such, and constitute the principal graces or recommendations of the human characer; but it is proper to limit our observations on this article of propriety, to particulars which are derived from this confideration alone.

Among'the proprietes ofhigh rank, we may reckon the conditions which are peculiarly requisite to preserve refpet; that reserve which avoids improper familiarities; that candour, which guards against petulance, contemptuoufnefi, affetation, orfcorn.

It is proper, that the claim to superior refped flhould be supported byfuperior accomplishments of manners and candour; by a superior tfeadinefs and moderation in all occasional emotions and passions, whether ofjorrow, anger, mirth, orjoy.

Tile The genuine expreflions or effets of refpet constitute the 




proprieties of inferior flation, in its relation to that which is 
superior. -.

Refped naturally carries,a mixture of good will and affetion, which breaks forth in the well regulated plainness of truth, rather than in flattery or continual assent. There is a certain ingenuity.
required to render a person capable of affection and refpe&t It begins with giving a dignity to the manners of those who are poffedfed of it, and its attentions bear the molt honourable teftimony to the elevation of those towards whom it is dire&ed.

The conceflions of the servile are the effects of baseness, interef,.

orfear, and are proper objetes of dil-rufi, not of predileslion, or favour.

In the society of ingenuous men, however unequal in point of rank, there is a candour, which, in respeCt to freedom, in refped to the disposition to oblige, to receive, and to give information, tends to bring the parties on a foot of equality. It is indeed impossible that, in the societies of men, atual advantage of any fort; should cease to have its effe6t; but, in the. company of the wife, there is no formal intention to extend, nor any jealous anxiety to support that effect; and the difiindtions' of rank appear more in the attention of the superior to encourage, and in the inferior not to abuse that. freedom of conversation, which constitutes the.
charm of society.

Professions too have their proprieties, which are ever required, not only in formal and professional appearances, but even in the U u moil 
 most familiar and unguarded moments of life. -This- might SCHOA. IV be illuitrated by referring to the sentiments of men refpeting.
weY\ the proprieties of character, in different instances ; but the example of what is commonly required to the propriety of manner, in those who are vested with holy orders, may be sufficient.
While others are indulged in harmless levities, persons of this profefiion ihould be at all times not only innocent, but considerate to avoid even the slightest approach to offence.

Among the proprieties of age we may reckon,. that diffidence is proper to youth, resolution to manhood, and tranquillity to the last flages of life. The young are yet learning to be men, and ought not to assume the confidence of manhood, until they have laid the foundations on which. it may securely reft.

In manhood, it is proper that a person enter on his part with decision and resolution..

In old age, the vivacity with which pafflons operate in youth or manhood being impaired by the experience or the decline: of years, obj.ects appear in their comparative measures of importance; and the deliberate mind of the aged is better prepared to. inform.
and to advise than to. ad..

MIodely seems to be akin to diffidenae, and; they are iometines mistaken one for the other;. but they are plainly diftina. The decisive and resolute may be modest, but are not diffident.

Modesty is the proper measure of our claim or pretension to, consideration or preference relatively to other men. It is a, guard gurad which wisdo.m sets over the conceptions ofperfonal impor- 

tance, in which every person apart is apt to assume too Mn'tih for 

himfe i. 

himself. -
This conceit or conception of importance, when not properly restrained, is, in the language of a neighbouring country, termed./flfvove *. From this motive, the fool is at all hazards inclined to bring himself forward into view, and not only to avail himself of.any advantage he may have, but to affect more than is real. He is ready to abate of the candour which he owes to others, while he exceeds in the measure of consideration which he claims for himself.

Modefly is founded in natural disposition, as well as in reflection or reason, and therefore holds a middle place among the different kinds of virtue distinguished in the pafTage that has been formerly quoted from the Duke de la Rochefoucault. The natural disposition to this virtue, as well as to justice, is benevolence or the love of mankind. Hence men owe to nature their disposition to receive with favour the pretensions of others, and to rejoice at advantages superior to their own; while they learn from experience to guard against the effecs of partially to themselves, and to avoid intruding their own advantages, however real, upon the attention of others.

Self-defence, in the cafe of an attack, will justify the modest in a fair and manly representation of their rights, but does not authorise unprovoked or unnecessary ostentation of what they possess ; of what they have done; or of what they have suffered; much less the affctation of sentiments or qualities.by which they U u 2 would * Amour proprc.

 would deceive the world into a belief of their own consequence, SECT'. 1 beyond its ea afure eafreor degree.

*-e' \ I.
"

Oeconomy is the proper use of what fortune has bellowed, whether in the fruits of labour or inheritance.

The term is Sometimes 'employed as synonymous with parcimony' or frugality; and these, indeed, are the oeconomy of certain conditions, but no more than a particular form of this virtue accommodated to fmali resources. In great fortune, the proper ceconomy is not parcimonious, but sumptuous and libe ral.

In every estate, no 'doubt, it is proper ceconomy to accommodate expence or consumption to the supply which fortune asfords. The most ample supply may be exceeded by a wafle that is not refrained within proper limits: So that, whether to the poor or to the rich, the neglec of ceconomy will have its pernicious effects. If, to the poor, fortune be no more than the means of subsistence, a frugal use of such means is necessary to felf-preferation. If, to the rich, it constitute rank and power, a proper adjustment of expence to the measure of fortune is in their cafe necessary, to avoid dependance and degradation.

Moralilfs have talked to much of the vanity of fortune, and of its inefficacy to happiness, that they may be fufpeded of encouraging a dangerous neglect of affairs; a neglec by which the labourer may incur indigence and beggary; the trader incur bankruptcy; and those of the highest rank incur much embarrassment, or fink from their flation.

It It were indeed far from wisdom not to avoid such confe- 
PART.-II'



quences ;-but if, notwithstanding every reason able effort of dili- 
gence to avoid them, they should be incurred, wisdom no doubt A'
has its offices in that as in every other emergency. In every event, diligence, equanimity, and fortitude, continue to be the highest measure of happiness of which any given state is fufceptible.

Whether any one has strength sufficient, as the philosophers of old conceived or feigned of the 9Wije Man, to be as happy under a disagreeable reverse of fortune as in the highest profperity, may be quetfioned;. and every one may answer from an estimate of the strength of his own mind: But it cannot be doubted that the wife will endeavour to avail himself of his faculties, of his temper and resolution, in the manner most likely to support him, and to repel this or any other cause of distress to which he may be exposed. But if philosophy have taught him to believe, that virtue alone is happiness, he must not forget upon any event which befalls him, that the proper use of his fortune is a virtue, and therefore a part, at least, in that very happiness on which he is taught to rely ; so that whoever neglects the proper ceconomy of his affairs, whether he err with the miser in penury, or with the spendthrift in prodigality, cannot plead the authority of philosophy for the folly he commits in either extreme.

The folly of the miser consists in the admiration of riches, without availing himfelfcftheir use, whetherin accommodation to himfelfor in benefit to others, or rather itconfifts in sacrificing every advantage of wealth to the passion of merely securing the poffeflion.
The folly of the spendthrift proceeds from the opposite defec't; from a disposition, 
disposition to waste in the gratifications of vanity and sensuality 

SCcT. III or from a disposition to riik in hazardous adventures, whether of *vxj business or play, the means of subsistence, the securities of inde~

pendance, or rank, and the materials of beneficence.

The vain expend their fortunes, and part with them in order to prove the poifietion. The sensual multiply expensive contrivances to procure an enjoyment which palls on the sense the more it is courted, or which, carried to extremes, impairs the faculties of the mind, and begets inattention to affairs. In those who depend on their labour for subsistence, sensuality is an improperconsumption of what they acquire: It occasions a waste of time and forms a habit of indolence and sloth, the reverse of that induflry on which the success of their labour depends.

The wants of nature are easily supplied, and the gratification of uncorrupted appetite is fully consistent with the higher and better pursuits of human life: But the voluptuary in acquiring habits inconsistent with these pursuits, is debauched by his imagination rather than by the force of his appetite, or by the solicitations of sense. Appetite is confined within narrow limits, and would leave the mind at leisure to employ itself otherwise, if it were not prevented by the seeking for continued enjoyment where it is not to be found; and in which imagination, because it never is gratified, is always insatiablt to anity and sensuality. dangerous adventures in business or play are most likely to mar the difiofition to ceconomy, or lead to the improper uses of wealth. The produce of chance is generally sudden, and, when great, takes the minds of ordinary men unprepared for the proper ufc of what they may have gained. The metimes extreme as 

well as sudden. When favourable they intoxicate, and easily 
plunge those on whom they have fallen into farther and flill more vinconsiderate adventures; and scarcely admit of any bounds to their course, short of some fatal reverie, which cuts off the source even of any farther adventure, and leads to despair.

In the enumeration of virtues which belong to the understanding, or to the Superintending exercise ofwifdom, were mentioned decision, and caution, habits of a seemingly opposite tendency,, but equally necessary to obtain the ends of prudence.

DeciJon is a seasonable and resolute- choice ofwhat the occasion'

requires. In the defed of this virtue, and by improper delays,.
every opportunity is loft, and every measure comes too late.
Wavering and fluctuation in the execution of any purpose are equal to a total inaction, or, by improper delay until the occafionl is past, incur the double disadvantage of a labour bestowed, and of its disappointment or loss.

Every art may have its deliberations, and the artist will decide'

with advantage in proportion to his skill in the particular department to which he is bred. The decision which wisdom requires is a part in the business of mankind; aeque pauperibus prodefJ, locupletibus tque; and although a certain felicity of decision in great affairs is the peculiar character of superior genius, yet the steps.
of integrity that do not waver in the conduct of human life, are'
attainable by such. faculties of reason as ordinary men posess.

Cicero apprehends, that the questions on which we may hefitate in our ordinary conduct may be extended to five in number; FART II. ber; of which only three had been mentioned by Panetius, whose CH,]. V.
SECT III. method he professes to follow in treating this subjea of offices \'T- or moral duties. The firif question is, Whether the adion proposed be right or wrong ? The second, Whether it contribute to our interest ? And the third may arise where interefs seems to interfere with duty, if it should be made a question which to preser ? To these three he subjoins the two following; first: Of two things that are praise worthy, which flould be preferred? 2d, i r, of two things supposed to be useful, which is most for our interest ?

In queflions of the first kind, relating to right and wrong, conscience is the arbiter, and is for the most part ever ready to decide. Benevolence will lead us to aim at effects which tend to the good of mankind; and a principal object of deliberation in such cafes is to distinguish with judgement, in what we may actually serve our fellow creatures, by contributing to their safety, their welfare, their inftruaion, and the good order of the societies to which they belong.

Questions of comparative utility, whether refpeaing our own advantage or that of other men, are often more problematical than mere questions ofjuflice or right. Such questions occur in private and in public affairs, in the tranfaiions of merchants, in the conducd of armies, in the deliberation of senates and councils of slate. In all these departments genius or natural ability is conspicuous ; but in every measure of natural ability, there is recourse to experience; and inftrudtion, which being necessary even to the most able, may bring accessions of wisdom also to those who are by nature of inferior capacity.

The The question, of a choice to be made betwixt interfering con- 




fiderations of interest and duty, is not to be admitted upon any 
principle of morality; and although we sometimes feel for the r prefon who is required to make great sacrifice of interest to the observance of his duty, we acknowledge the evidence he gives, in making that choice, of decided integrity and virtue ; but fiould scarcely admit of an excuse if he had aced otherwise.

As to the additional questions proposed by Cicero, they coincide nearly with the two first queflions which had been proposed by Panetius the original whom he professes to follow. Upon the fame principle, by which we determine what is right in contradiftindion to what is wrong, we may determine what is moit firiAly binding when we are prefied by calls of duty, of which only one in some particular circumstances can be answered. And in questions of comparative utility, we must proceed in determining what is most useful, upon considerations which lead us to diftinguifll the opposite measures of profit and lots.

Difficulties of choice are often great in questions that admit of delay and of the most deliberate discussion, but fill greater in cafes that come by surprise and require immediate decision.
These are the trials of superior genius, requiring even together with that natural advantage the proper ufe,.of experience; and as experience is necefTary in the exertions of the highest capacity, so it may be useful to the lowest, and furniih that measure of prudence and wisdom of which ordinary men are hufceptible.
From the experience of the pall, men are qualified to forccaft what is likely to happen in the future. And may thus be prepared for difficulties, or reaIdy to decide upon theml before thcy arrive.

V ol.. It. x Ev nts, 
PART 1I. Events, indeed, in the course of human affairs, are never de

SECT. 11. terminable in the fame manner with the events that regularly vvrj succeed one another in the mechanical system of nature. We know precisely at what hour the fun will rife to-morrow, but what action the caprice of thought and passion may lead a human creature to perform, at that or any other hour, is more than human foresight can reach, with any confidence above that of mere conjeAure.

Where events are contingent, it is an objec of prudence to admit into our account the different emergencies that may pofsibly happen, and to fettle what our judgement and resolutions should be on the different suppositions which our experience may lead us to make; so that even in cafes of apparent surprise we may, in some degree, have the advantage of premeditation and deliberate choice.

Caution consists in a proper attention to the difficulties likely ta arise in any business or pursuit in which we are about to engage.
It is a principal feature of prudence, and what indeed in a great measure engrosses the name. We forecast the difficulty and expence of an undertaking, that we may not engage in what is above our strength. We attend to the characters of those with whom we are about to act, or whom we are about to employ; that we may not confide in persons who, either from want of capacity or good faith, are unfit to. be trusted.

The paths of human life are firewed with difficulties, and the cautious endeavour to foresee them, not that they may in every instance avoid, but that theymaybe the better prepared to encounter them. The virtue which they pradtife is to be carefully diflinguifhlcd(

guifhed, from the weakness by which the timid or irresolute de- 
PART IT
cines every duty, and in proportion as it appears to be hazardous 
or difficult. Caution is, in contracliftincdionto this weakness, a Sr resolute purpose of action, and a colleted slate of the mind in which difficulties are foreseen, and proper measures are taken to surmount them.

As it is virtuous and noble to proceed in our duty, undismayedby difficulty or danger, so it is wife to forecast the circumstances in which we are about to engage, that we may be prepared to acquit ourselves properly. Inthis refpeA caution is not an attribute of fear, but is conneted with intrepidity, contfancy, perseverance, and a temper undisturbed in the course we have chosen to pursue, in all matters alike, whether trivial or important.

Such is the lesson which Epidetus would teach us to apply on occasions, however trivial. that may poftibly try the temper. As an example, he refers to the public baths which were generally crouded at Rome by a promiscuous concourse of people. " When " you are going about any action," he fays, " remind yourself " of what nature the action is . If you are going to bathe, re"present to yourself the things which usually happen in the " bath; some persons puflhing and crouding, some dashing the " water, others giving abusive language, and others flealing; " and thus you will more safely go about the action *".

The objec of caution, according to this celebrated moralist, is not to prevent our engaging in aCtions that are proper for us to perform, but to enable us to conduCt ourselves properly in the X x 2 duties See Mrs Carter's Trannlation of Epitlctus.

 duties to which we are called by justice, humanity, expedience 
or necessity, however attended with difficult, hazardous, or difY-yua ' agreeable circumstances.



S E C T I N IV.

Of the CharaSceryitcs of Goodness, or Jf7licc.

AS iWifdom is the specific atrribute of Intelligence; GoodneJf is 

the attribute of mind also beneficently disposed towards others. 




WVe may conceive intelligent beings employed on the fubjeds of thought, either without encountering any objecs of affection; or, without having any concern in the itate of such objects, farther than to ascertain their reality; to diftinguifl their qualities; and to class them under general or specific appellations: In either cafe, this supreme order of intelligent nature would prelent but a partial view ofitfelf. But, if we should suppose an individual who is part of a community, yet indifferent to the charater of his fellow creature, or indifferent to the good or the ill of which they are susceptible; in fucl a person, we Ihould lill not perceive any thing to be loved, and scarcely to be admired, even in the poiTefion of the higlheft mncafires of penetration, memory, or o*tcr con P.ituents:s of intell.CtluCal power.

Or Or if we flould proceed from the supposition of indifference to PEAT V' that of malice and cruelty, or if we fould suppose intelledtual a, SECT. IV. bility employed to devise mischief, and to sport with the afflitiions V of others ; intelligence itself, or ingenious device, thus perceived only in the abuse of it, would be an objec not of indifference, but ofdeteflation and horror.

Intelligence on the contrary, that is busy in observing just objects of affecdion, and possessed of a sensibility, to which no being iufceptible of happiness or misery is indifferent; a mind, which is ingenious in performing aas of beneficence, hears that charadcer of goodness of which the veftiges-are so deeply marked in the order of nature itself, and of which the participation is so eflential to that virtue of which we would now enumerate the branches or efe'cts.

This in the idiom of our language is termed, the virtue of the Leart; in the language of a neighbouring nation, joined with a just elevation of nature, it is termed the nobleness of the forul (La beaute de 1' ame;) and is indeed the principal grace of the human character; whether in the conduA of life, or in the productions of genius. Hence the sovereignty of Homer among the poets of every age; the high rank of Efchylus, Sophocles, and Euripides among the tragic poets; of Tacitus among the hiflorians; of Shakespeare, and Milton among the poets of our island; of Plato, Antoninus, and Montesquieu among the philosophers of every age.

To these may be emphatically applied the adage of Chremes, in crence ; I am a man, and nothing human is indTerent to me *.

Wherever * Ilomo fimn ; humani nilhil a me alinnurn puto.

Wherever men of this genius touch on the concerns of man- cPART I.: kind, the most lively colours of good and evil are brought into 
view; and what they themselves feel on the subjed, is, without' _Y-..
any formal recommendation communicated to others t. Without this advantage, the brightness of mere wit however dazzling, is but transient; and seldom outlives the period of its novelty: With it works of ingenuity keep poffeftlon of the heart, and retain their powers undiminiihed from age to age; in these the innocent and the just can recognize his patron, or his friend; and enjoys a participation of sentiments, in which he finds his nature raised to a Species of godlike benevolence to the world around him.

Goodness in the conduct of life, is an aversion to be the cause of harm; it ig veneration and love to the worthy; it is candour, and a desire to redeem the most defeAive; it is pity to the diftrefled, and congratulation to the happy; it is that disposition, from which a man, observing the rights of his fellow creatures, shuns every violation of them with the most sacred regard; from which he feels for their sufferings, and is ever ready to relieve them; fi-om which he is faithful arid true to his profeflions, or engagements, and ever ready, by ads of kindness and good will, to.

prevent, t To him the mighty mother did unveil.

Her awful Face: The dauntless child Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled.
This pencil take, fle said, whose colours clear Richly paint the vernal year: Thine too these keys immortal boy: This can unlock the gates of joy; Of horror that, and thrilling fears, Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic tears.

Gray',' Ode on the Prov'r/; f P cer''y.

 prevent or to outrun the wiflles of those who by nature or acci

SEHCT I. dent are placed within reach of his influence.

The duties of goodness, confidered in refpec to their principle, may be classed under two divisions; of which the one includes all the modifications of Innocence, of which we have fuppofed the faneion to admit the applications of compulsory law; the other comprehends all the modifications of Beneficence, from which the applications of compulsory law are excluded.

There is a certain magnanimity with which the noble minded, in refpec to the good offices required from their fellow creatures, limit their own pretensions to the mere effects ofjuftice and of truth; but in performing such offices on their own part, confider the highest acs of generosity and kindness as no more than the discharge of a debt that is due to mankind.. While they confider as benefaCtors to themselves, and fully entitled to efteem and gratitude, the person who is cautious of harm, and who respeCts the rights of his fellow creatures, they are ever ready to prevent the desires, or anticipate the wiihes of those who are placed in their way.

In referring to the offices of goodness, as they may be separately comprised under the titles of Innocence and Beneficence, we may confider Fidelity, Veracity, Civility as modifications of the first; Tiety, TePjonal Attachments, Gratitude, Liberality, Charity and Tolitcncfs as modifications of the secon in xtending this title to all the offices of civil and political society, it will include the reciprocal duties of magiflrat.
m]iiu:..it munity of which he is a member. These may be termed the pu- 
PART. I1.
blic offices of goodness; and to compleat the enumeration of its 
branches or parts will come to be stated in their place.

With refpea to fidelity, confidered as an article of mere innocence, we may refer to what has been already observed on the principle of convention; that to break faith is an injury to the person with whom it was plighted. And it is an injury which the innocent will avoid, from motives of mere humanity, without regard to the fanaion of compulsory law, or the force that may be justly applied to obtain the performance of a contract.
The faithful, accordingly, carry the observance of this duty into many tranfacions which the arm of the magistrate cannot reach.
They would feel themselves chargeable with guilt if they neglected to fulfil, so far as may be in their power, any expecation which they have occasionally raised, or if they fliould fail in the discharge of a trust for which any one has been reasonably made to rely on them.

As error and mistake are in the nature of things pernicious, as they weaken or mislead the mind, and in the conduCt of life may produce indefinite mischief; veracity too, as well as fidelity, is to be reckoned among the necessary conditions of a virtuous life.
This duty is to be observed not only where the immediate effets of mistake are detrimental, in refpeA to the estate or fortune of the person deceived, but even where by misrepresentation or exaggeration it tends to asset the mind with false conceptions of things whether momentuous or trivial. The innocent abides by the truth, because it would be a crime to deceive any one to his hurt. A man of fnfe will not deceive, because it were folly to Y y discredit 
 discredit himself; and if fidion were indifferent to any of thefi ClcrAP IV. effects, it is at least impertinent and idle.


This duty of veracity, however, does not exclude the use of fable, parable, or supposition, employed in illustration of any moral or physical truth, nor does it preclude the use of profefied fiction, as in poetry, to multiply agreeable and rational conceptions of the imagination, without any intention to obtrude fable for truth, or fidion for reality.

It is not necessary to observe perhaps that the innocent, whose veracity is guarded by the single consideration, that it were injurious to mislead the conceptions of other men in any cafe whatever, will refrain with detestation from the least approach to calumny or false aspersion on the name and reputation of his neighbour. Aversion, to be the author of harm, will not only reitrain him from propagating invidious reports, but will inspire him with mercy even to thole of whom the conduc may have been offensive; he will not press down the load of reproach even Where it has been incurred, and will strive to hide the error that Is pafl, or the fault that may in the future be corrected.

Candour also is truth, but it is the truth that proceeds from humanity and fairness of mind ; it is the just allowance which is given to the pretensions or merits of other men, even in circumflances, which to the uncandid would render them objects of hatred, as well as opposition.

The candid would conduc competition, and even refentmen itfclf, with the least ponible detriment to those who are the ob-t jerts of either. I-e will admit a fail, even where it is unfavours~r .~lc~able able to his own claims. He will be more guarded in censuring 

an opponent than even an indifferent perfon.-Where it is not CAP. V.
necessary to blame, he will be silent; where praise is due, he '
will acknowledge it; and will distrust any prepossession in himself by which he may be inclined to exaggerate the faults of an enemy.

At the fame time, unfincere and affeded commendation of those we inwardly hate or despise, is not entitled to the praise of candour. This virtue is an effort of truth and veracity as well as beneficence. It spurns the unworthy, and scorns the affectation of lenity that is assumed from weakness, or employed by cunning, the better to ensnare or circumvent an opponent.

In competitions of interest, the generous and the humane are seldom vehement; in competitions of esteem, they are not apt to be jealous; and the security with which the candid proceeds, is generally proportioned to his magnanimity, and his desire to poffess the constituents of real merit in himself, rather than to derive, whether in reputation or profit, the external fruits or effects of consideration from others.

Ci'vility is a guarded behaviour to avoid offence even in the inferior concerns of human life. It is commonly joined with politenefs in the character of good breeding, and these virtues or accomplishments are so far connected as they are both the effects of goodness, obferveable in matters supposed to be comparatively of linall moment. They are however frequently and not improperly distinguished. The civil avoids to give offence, or any pofitive molestation in the ordinary concourse of men; the polite endeavours to furnifll matter of fatisfaAion and pleasure. The Yy2 fy it 
 first therefore is an article of mere innocence, the other aspires to 
effedts of beneficence and positive service.


The civil are careful not to offend by any effects of inattention or neglec, by any contemptuous reception of what others think or feel ,whether by contradiction unnecessarily harsh, by any insult of vanity, affecation of precedence, or superiority of any fort. When ungracious office is necessary, they endeavour to perform it in the least painful manner, and qualify accidental offences with the most unfeigned desire to atone for them.

Where good understanding and good disposition are united, civility will not be wanting. It is not the exclusi-ve appurtenance of any rank or condition, but the feature of considerate humanity, wherever it be found: It diitinguifhed the keeper of the prison at Athens, in adminiflering the poison to Socrates*, no less than the great emperor Aurelius, in his ordinary manner-: To him nothing was indifferent in the conduct of life; and even a lesson of civility he had received was reckoned among the favours of Providence; not rudely to criticife ' The particulars here alluded to, are told by Plato in the Phaedo nearly as follows, After Socrates came from the bath, he was feated, and continued silent, when the keeper.accofted him in these words, " I know Socrates, that you will not blame me; " but those who are in fault, and whose orders I am bound to obey. In you I have " always met with humanity and mildness of temper, very different from most cl"
" those who are sent to this place. In doing my duty, I am commonly treated with " rage and curses; but, I have not this to expeat from you; I trust you know what " my orders are; it is now time to take the draught; and so farewell, be recon" cilcd as you may to what cannot be helped." In fa-ying this, he turned about to depart, and burst into tears. Ilow civil the man is! said Socrates, It was thlis he would frequently come to amufl me with his tallk, and strove to oblige mc; ;and now how kin(lly his tears are flIed : But let us mind hit, direcions. Io Crito, it ;':i drauglit b. miscd, cause it to be brought.

ticife any solecism or impropriety of expression or pronuncia- 

tion; but in continuing the conversation, to pronounce the word 



' again, in a proper manner, either by way of answer or enquiry; _,c'.

or as if to confirm what was said, and not as anxious about the " expression; or in short, by some other skilful address to set the "person right "." But, with whatever degree of simplicity it may operate, it is still pereceptible to those who can distinguish the genuine, tho' seemingly feeble or negligent expressions of a benevolent mind. The ingenious peasant is civil, no less than the well educated gentleman, if together with a disposition not to offend, there be understanding to diftinguifl what would be offensive: But where either of these qualifications is wanting, men are apt to measure the obligations of duty by the mere external effec, and either do not know in what they are rude, or think themselves entitled to do or to fay whatever does not materially asseA the person or property of those with whom they converse.

Civility is a habit very generallyacquired in the practice offociety,.

where experience and knowledge of the world conspire to enforce the duties of good sense and of innocence. Here it may be confidered as artificial, and they who are disposed to violate the rules of good breeding accordingly charge the well bred with infincerity or falsehood. In their opinion, rudeness alone is sincere ; andi a mannerly attention not to offend in trifles, a mere mall- of hypocrify.

The rude who are so apt to think an attention to others the eftcC.

of hypocrisy or falsehood, are equally inclined to confider the civilities which arc paid to themfclves, as a tribute of confllcration (V lit.

 due to their personal importance or special merit; but the crimes 
of rapine and murder are not a more certain, though a more perSzcT. IV. .

a _ ~nicious evidence of a base and ungenerous mind.

Civility, confidered merely as the habit of avoiding offence, is the first and most indifpenfible part of good breeding; and may give to a conversation in which there is no solicitude to please, or design to flatter, all the form which is necessary to render it highly agreeable as well as inftrudive.

So far this branch of goodness, confifling in reluctance to be the author of harm, may appear to be a mere negation of evil, an exemption from malice, or any of its external effects; but when we confider, among the general duties of candour, what a guard is necessary to secure the mind against the formation of prejudices; to secure it against the effects of real or apparent provocation; or what force of mind is required to preserve it untainted with jealousy or envy, in the competitions of men, as well as to prevent any external effed of these malignant dispositions; it is evident, that the modifications of innocence are not to be supported without high measures of regard, and good will to mankind. It is even easier on many occasions to perform the most splendid acts of beneficence, than it is upon all occasions to maintain this uniform tenor of an innocent and unoffending life.

Beneficence, nevertheless, is supposed to be raised a ftep higher in the scale of the virtues than mere innocence, which terminates in refraining from harm. The catalogue of the blessed is accordingly made up by the poet, of such, as bypofitive efforts of benevolence benevolence or magnanimity have promoted the progress, or 

contributed to the welfare of mankind. 




Among the modifications of benevolence, piety to Almighty God, is justly entitled to the first, and the highest place.

This affetion of mind is susceptible of indefinite gradations, beginning in this its highest pitch, modified by veneration only, without the possibility of any beneficent effet towards its objet, and descending from thence, to what may be confidered as its ordinary tenor among created beings, where the objec, though esteemed or refpeaed, may also on occasion inspire tenderness, or move commiseration and pity.

Wherever true benevolence operates, and the being of God is perceived, there piety to him must operate also; not as a principle of beneficence towards its object, but as the first and most esfential form of an affeAion, of which the objecs are wisdom and goodness in the degree, whether supreme or Subordinate, in which they are conceived to exist.

This affection constitutes religion in the human mind, and has its external expreflions and effecs also. It is naturally expressed in terms, and in rites of adoration. " What else can I, " fays Epitetus, a lame old man do, but sing hymns to God. If " I were a nightingale, I would ad the part of a nightingale: "If I were a swan, the part of a swan. But since I am a reaf ionable creature, it is my duty to praise God. 'This is my bu.
finess; * HIic manus ob patriam pugnindo vuliera paffi, Quique pii vates, ct lhlocbo ligna canebnilt, ]nvelitas aut qui vitani cxcolucre per artes, ()uillqu fuli meinorcs alios fccre cmerelndo.

V,"irgil, Lib. 6to.

 " finess,, I do it. Nor will I ever desert this post as long as it is 
CHAP- V.- g vouchsafed me; and I exhort you to join in the fame song *."


lj ' It has a natural effect in rendering man the friend of mankind, ,being the family of a common parent, to whom the highest duty, that .can be rendered is beneficence to the creatures he has made: So that the man who flates himself as a willing instrument in the hand of his Maker for the good of his fellow creatures, is he whose piety renders the most acceptable service to God.

Although piety in its proper acceptation is a sentiment of religion, the term is nevertheless, by a kind of figure, employed to signify any high measure of veneration or love which we pay to any of our fellow creatures who are raised above the ordinary rank of men in our veneration or esteem. Thus it is piety in the child to love his parent. It is piety in the dutiful citizen to love and refpec the j ut and beneficent magistrate who, more by his wisdom and his care than by his power, appears to be the vicegerent of God.

But in every infsance of good will to men, the effeCs of a benevolent disposition may reach the objec of it in beneficent and positive services; and may be confidered among the charaaeriftics of asocial attachment, upon whatever ground of connection it be formed.

Under this title we may confider the relations of consanguinity, of neighbourhood or acquaintance, as well as attachments of predilection and choice, more properly termed the connection of fiicnds.

Carter's translation, Book i.. 1the relation of consanguinity men are not at liberty to chufe 

their objets. They may be associated together without esteem, 
affecion, or confidence: yet there are certain duties which God 's and nature seem to require in the benevolent towards his kindred, although he may not apprehend any personal merit on which to ground any particular esteem or affetion.

The child cannot chufe what fort of parent he would have, nor are the wifles of the parent always gratified in the character of his child. Brothers are placed in the fame rank together by the appointment of nature, in which their choice is not consulted; yet in all these instances there is a duty which nature has imposed, and in exemption from which, even the plea of demerit in the person to whomn the duty refers cannot be admitted. The parent must not abandon or neglect even his profligate child, nor the child fail in attention and refped to the parent, even of whose failings and weaknesses he is most sensible. Brothers must not shrink from one another, even in cafes of high demerit, nor leave, as a firanger might be left, even the guilty to perish unaflifted under the effects of his guilt. The ties of consanguinity seem to be intended by nature as a special bond of society by which the dulleft of men are mutually pointed out to one another as objects of conii!:ration, even if they fliould not be sensible to the ties of humanity or merit under which they are placed to other men.

This principle, indeed, is perhaps more firequently abused as a source ofundue partiality to those of our own kindred, or as afource of ur:c;andid animosity to others or neglect of their merits, than it is ever nitirely wanting in the disposition of individuals towards VOL. I[. Z z the 
 the family of which they are members, and in whose fate they 
are themselves in some measure involved.


Among the examples of personal attachment, that which proceeds on the sympathy of affetions directed to the fame worthy objeds ; on the predilection of merit and unlimited confidence, is that which peculiarly merits the appellation of FriendJhip, and in which the parties may be said figuratively to have but one heart, one mind, and one interest.

In forming this connection the highest measures of probity are required. Virtue, operating in the minds of different men, may concur in all its external effecs, but folly and vice are jarring and incongruous principles, which, in the degree in which they take place, render men unworthy and incapable of this facred connecion.

Intimacies of a different kind, consisting merely in acquaintance, or in a habit of associating together, are commonly enough known under the title of friendship: But the maxims or precepts which are applicable to one measure or degree of connection cannot be safely or properly transferred to another. There cannot be any reserve, for instance, in that entire affection and confidence which we suppose betwixt friends, and no limit to their friendly exertions, without a breach or forfeiture of the rights which friendship implies. In connections of inferior degree, it may be sufficient not to offend or not to neglect the uruies of iumanity which occasions present; In this inflance, a, nore active principle is required, and the occasions of personal iervice not only taken when offered, but industriously fought for.

We We are told of a maxim which rome of the wife have prefcrib- 
PART 1.
ed, and others have reprobated: " Live with your friend as with 


'4 - 

" one who may become an enemy". This maxim is prudent in the ST V
occasional co-operations of interest or party. The person who supports me to day, because it is his interest to do so, may.wifl.
to overthrow me to morrow, if an opposition ofintereft should take place. It may be prudent, therefore, not to furnish him as a friend with arms, which he may afterwards turn against me as an enemy. But this maxim, applied to the cafe of parties united by mutual conviction of unalterable worth, entire affection, and unlimited confidence, would be altogether preposterous, and cannot be adopted without discontinuing the connecion of friendihip, or tifling the affecion in which it consists.

Friendihip or intimacy, of whatever degree, presupposes acquaintance or rome occasional conneCtion, in which the parties have an opportunity of being mutually known. Among such connections, Con/anguinity no doubt is one, under which parties have occasion to give the most sensible proof of the degree in which they are mutually or severally qualified to become objects of confidence and affection. Nature has given to the parent a predilection for his child, which affections of the purest friendship may equal, but cannot exceed; and the return on the part of the child, being the natural recoil of the most tender affection, is scarcely avoidable; but still sentiments of this nature are distinguishable from the attachments founded in the preference of esteem and the freedom of choice. The friend who has mistaken his object, and become attached to a person unworthy of his affection, may become cold and indifferent as boon as he has detected his error ; but the parent weeps when he has made such a discovery Z z 2 refjpcAing 
 refpeCing his child, and the child is abashed when he cannot 
vindicate the character of his parent.


The fortunes of men are sometimes involved in those of their kindred: Although we distinguish therefore the specific principle of consanguinity from indiscriminate affection and good will to mankind, yet it appears, that nature in planting the instinctive asfecRions which unite the members of a family together, and which may extend to a numerous kindred, has in this manner, sown the feeds of a boundless society. Or seeming only to connec individuals of a narrow circle together, has formed a chain, whose links being continued in every direction, extend far beyond where personal acquaintance or choice would reach.

Happiness, we have had occasion to observe, is an attribute of the mind, and benevolence, in the several forms of which it is capable, is a principle constituent of this attribute or condition of mind. It is happy to meet with an object of affection. It is happy to perceive the returns of confidence and love. The external effets and expreflions of such reciprocal dispositions in the minds of men are highly agreeable, and may be of the greatest use; but till, in eitimating the happiness of friendship, we return to the mutual affection itself which takes place between friends, and is the principal constituent of its value. The external effecs of benevolence may be intermitted for want of occafion, but the affection itself cannot grow cold without causing the enjoyment it brings to cease.

In confidering connections of choice, the first subject of cafuiftry or moral inflruction mufi relate to the choice itelf, or the difccrnment of its proper object.

As As the proofs of merit may be slowly collected, it is evident, 
PART. ir.



that confidence of the highest degree is to be cautiously given, 
and in the result of time and continued experience. The first re- 'yquifite in the charater of a friend, doubtless, is probity and good intention. Intimacy with the profligate is a snare to the innocent.

A second quality, and likewise in a high degree necessary, is underfRanding, or what is commonly termed good sense. 1 he society of fools is the accumulation of folly. Whoever is deficient in point of judgement or understanding may hurt where he means to serve, and often from mere weakness of mind, without any intention to betray, fails in the trust which is reposecd in hiim.

The ingenuous will value the affection of his friend more than any of its external effeas ; but in gratifying the sense of his own mind, will be ever attentive to observe in what manner he may be useful to his friend, and it is in bearing the important character of a beneficent and trusty aflociate, that persons are most likely to win the affeAion and confidence of those with whom they are deffined to act.

The worth of a man is made known by its extcrnal effects ; ant though external effect is subordinate in value to the affection of mind, yet neither this nor any other connection in the -minds of men could exist otherwise, than by means of the external efltcht and appearanccs which cause themn to be mutually known.

To a young man, who complained that he had no friends, and w'r3

 was generally neglected, " Confider," said Socrates, "what CScA. IV " are your own merits. Are you of such value to mankind, as that ScTr. IV.

vvY " any one should single you out as an object of prediledion and " friendship ? If you were of such value, the world knows its in"terests too well, to neglect or overlook you. Shew yourself a"ble and willing to act the part of a friend, you will find many "to solicit your favours, and some who will deserve your high' eft confidence."

A person, who in the manner of this young man laid claim to the attention and friendship of others as matter of interest to himself, was very properly called upon to confider in what degree he bestowed upon the interest of others that consideration which he required to his own; but the fires of affection and benevolence, which are kindled in the human breast on occasion of external marks of affection and good will, greatly surpass in value those external occasions on which they are kindled.

Gratitude, the third article in our enumeration of the characteriftics of beneficence, is in the mind of the grateful the sense of a benefit received, and among the external duties of life it is an effort to repay with affection the favours which have been done.

Benefits may take place between firangers and persons un_

known, and may proceed from any occasional emotion of good will or compassion, as well as from established sentiments of perfonal attachment. But wherever an aA of kindness is done, a proper return is conceived to be due; it is conceived to be due to a flranger or person unknown, who has done a good office, even more than to a relation or a friend.

As the sense of an injury done to ourselves is different from the I sentiment sentiment of indignation at wrongs in general, so the sense of a PAR'r II.
benefit received is different from the general approbation or es- CHcP IV.
teem of beneficence; and where acual favours are conferred, we conceive a species of debt to be contracted by the person who has received the obligation; we Sometimes pass from the idea of a debt of gratitude, as it is sometimes called, to the requisition of penal flatutes by which we would enforce the discharge of it.
Such we are told was the policy of some ancient nations, who in their wisdom, "highly worthy of imitation," did not neglect to punish the ungrateful, any more than those who were guilty of any other crime pernicious to society.

There is not however sufficient reason to believe, that such was ever the adcual policy of any nation whatever. Such a policy would tend to place the relation of parties who bestowed or accepted a benefit upon a very different footing from that upon which beneficence and even gratitude are supposed to proceed.
Where the law would enforce the returns of good will, it would be difficult to diftinguifhi an ad of kindness from an intereited loan; or the acceptance of a favour from the contracting of a debt. For this purpose of law the precise value of a benefit ought to be fixed, in order to estimate the return; and the prosped of gain, or the necessity of compliance, substituted for kindness in the exchange of good offices, would totally alter the nature both of the benefit and of the return. A benefit offered might be confidered as a snare to be carefully shunned, until the measure of the expeced return was ascertained; and in this manner, what ought to be the spontaneous effcds of benevolence could not be distinguished from the traffic of interef, In 
 In r-efpecC to this duty ofgratitzude, tlerefore, as well as in respect 

Sic'r IV. to every other act of beneficence, the necessity of keeping diftincd '-~ the fandions of morality from those of compulsory law is extremely evident. We enforce the payment of a debt, that persons in pofl'efion of property may be safe to lend; but we only commend or enjoin the duties of gratitude, that the benevolent assections may have their natural ;cope in the societies of men.

Whloever tr-ives to enhance the value of a benefit which he himself may have done, and urges the claim of gratitude too far, offends againt i-he moral principle of beneficence,notlefs than he who appears insensible of the kindness he has received, and there is not in the nature of things furer evidence of a mind that deserves no return, than that of upbraiding others with the benefits which we Iuppose ourselves to have conferred.

Liberality is a characer of unreserved beneficence in matters agreeable or obliging to others. It is a natural, effect of difintereftednefs or cordial affection, but is observed to be unequal in persons perhaps originally of equal good dispositions, when warped by different habits in different conditions of life. Men become illiberal in a state of dependence, under personal awe and under the neceflity of attending to fordid or trivial confiderations. They escape this defet in opposite circumstances, of indcpendance, fi-eecom, or exemption from fordid concerns: And there is a certain force of mind above it in all situations.

The cflfe of external condition is to give scope to original diilofition, not to infjpire it. Ihe country gentleman, without any uncommondegrees ofgencrofity, surrounds his dwcllinii, with pilcafilcre pleasure grounds, and substitutes ornament for gain. He would 

make every one feel, in the manner of expending his fortune 


ScrT. IV.

how little he regards the returns of profit. And yet, even in this, he retains what may be termed a fordid prediletion for subjects which he is pleased to call his own. Beauty is no man's property, and may be made to pervade the face of a country without regard to this circumstance. The liberal may bestow it on fubjets of public concern, on high-ways, bridges, barren hills covered with wood, andopublic places adorned with monuments of diflinguifhed men or distinguished events; and all this without expecing any returns of admiration or profit.
As the Almighty makes his fun to fline on the evil and on the good, the liberal is not checked by any supposed want of merit in mankind; he can restore a plantation which the mifchievous idler has destroyed: restore its number on the mile-stone which has been defaced, or repair the parapet which has been broke down.

Such might be termed the luxury of a liberal mind in great wealth: But liberality is not, as we are Sometimes inclined to suppose, peculiar to the rich, nor limited to the bestowing of gifts or the conferring of favours. A person may be liberal in his commendations of merit, in his conceflions to a rival, in his manner of treating an enemy, in his neglect of petty advantages, in his impartial and indiscriminate attention to persons entitled to his regard, and in the general frankness of manner with which he transacts any business, without jealousy or mean diltruft, and without any harth interpretation of the words or acions of those with whom he is concerned. IIe may be liberal in doing with a cordial alacrity even what the law would oblige him to do.
The character of liberality, in Ihort, is that freedom and nobleVOL. 11. A a a nets 
 ness of manner with which the ingenuous upon every occaflon 
do what is right; not as a part they have fludied, or a task to 
_ which they submit, but as a part which is natural to them, and as a pleasure in which they indulge themselves without design or reflection.

The proceedings of a liberal mind at the fame time are the expressions of an upright intention; and far from being indifcrinmi nate in the choice of their objects, the liberal spurn and awe the unworthy with the fame irrefiftable effect that they gain or encourage persons of an opposite charadter; they appear indeed to be secured from mirtake in the choice of their objects, only by a kind of inftindive discernment, without difficulty, hesitation, or anxious reflection..

Charity is the character of beneficence exhibited in. relieving the distressid. It proceeds from that specific form of benevolence which is termed commiseration or pity. As the distresses of men are various, the motives of humanity in the different tranfactions of life-may operate to a variety of effects. From fuch.motives the generous victor may spare the vanquished and release the captive, as the charitable will feed the hungry, clothe the naked, or visit the sick.

In the variety of distresses incident to human life, the rich may have their share and their claim to.relief as well as the poor; though in the common use of this term, it is limited to those ads of beneficence which the rich are peculiarly in condition to perform, and of which the poor may receive the benefit.

Wherever Wherever property is established, it comes of course to be un- 




equally distributed. It accumulates in the possession of some, and 
is entirely wanting to others. As this inequality may be traced to vo its origin in the unequal dispositions of men to industry and frugality, as well as more casual advantages, so it serves to maintain, in the most prosperous and wealthy societies, some remains of that necessity which nature has intended for the species as a spur to their industry and incentive to labour. If the wealthy are relieved from the necessity of toil, or may chufe the objects of their pursuit, the poor still remain subjea to this neceflity; and few are exempted from every application that may contribute to enlarge the stock or promote the welfare of their community.

The inferior ranks of men, even where they are not urged by neceflity, are, by ambition, and by friving to gain for themselves the advantages which they observe in the possession of the rich, excited to promote or increase the wealth of their country.

As we may venture to assume that the wealth of nations consifts in the labour of the poor, or in the industry and ingenuity of those who are desirous to make for themselves acquisitions of fortune; so to the poor, health, strength, and whatever else qualifies men for daily labour and successful pursuits, are the inheritance which nature has provided, and the use which they make of that inheritance is the source of wealth and prosperity to the community of which they are members.

If the use of industry or labour could be entirely superseded in any society, or, in other words, if the poor could be supported .3 A a a z gratuitously, 
 gratuitously, this would be to fruitrate the purpose of nature, in 
rendering toil and the exercises of ingenuity necessary to man; verbi it would be to cut off the sources of wealth, and, under pretence of relieving the diftrefled, it would be to reject the condition upon which alone Nature has provided, that the wants of the species in general fiall be relieved.

For there reasons, poverty alone is far from being a sufficient recommendation to charity, and the undiftinguifhing practice of this virtue would be highly pernicious; as by enabling the poor to subsist in idleness, it would deprive them of one great prefervative of their innocence, and a principal constituent of happi.
ness, the habit of regular industry; and deprive the community of its best resource, the labour of its members.

It is a wife maxim therefore in every -well ordered society, that no person able to earn his bread, fliould be maintained gratuitoufly; that the feeble should be assisted in supporting themselves, but that they only who have no bread, and are unable to earn it, flould be maintained by charity. This indeed is a condition to which the industrious poor, or such as depend for subfiftence on their daily labour are frequently reduced; whether by old age, disease, or misfortunes. In every such cafe, they have a claim not only upon the humanity and compassion of the rich, but upon the juflice and good policy of their country also.

Their claim upon the humanity of those who have it in their power to relieve them, is doubtlcef irresistible; but it is of too ferious and important a nature in the view of good policy, to relt the provision of the ncceffitous poor entirely upon this principle.

As As the labour they bellow when able to work, may be conrider- PAtrT IT.
ed as employed in the public service; it is but just, that the pub- 




lic ihould charge itself with the care of those, who by age or miffortunes are become unable to subsist themselves.

In whatever manner public provision is to be made for the neceffitous poor, whether by Hospitals and places of public reception, or by distributing the supplies of necessity to the private habitations of those who are entitled to receive them, is a question rather of public ceconomy and good policy, than of moral duty.

We may however observe on this fubjedt, that where the public has provided most effectually for the relief of iuch neceflities as are publickly known, itill much remains to be done in private charity; there must still be many persons who, although they cannot or will not eftablifl their claim to a public support, may be so well known to individuals, as to entitle them to all the attention which humanity and compassion can befiow. In such cafes frequently the benevolent have an opportunity to tafle the sweetest fruits of beneficence, where it is at once proper to bestow, and to conceal its effecs.

Beneficence, under most of the characters we have now mentioned, whether friezlu/Ijip, gratitude, liberality,, or charilt, may be fuppoled productive of some material eefet, and be sensibly ufi:ful to those who are the objects of it. The benevolent affections, however, may subsist where such effects are seldom wanted, and where good will, esteem, or the manners they produce, are neverthclcis the principal ftirce of enjoyment: Andt goodnels may operatc with signal advantage, where the ef-ect is no more than the exprcfllon by which the beneficent intcntion is known.

Goodlncf, 
 Goodness, we have observed, in the form of civility, may be con

SECT. IV. fidered as an article of mere innocence, or the effec of a difpofi' - ~tion to avoid offence. In the form of politeness, it is a positive disposition to oblige; a disposition, in the exercise of which the benevolent find occasion of good offices, where neither the profit, nor the safety, nor the personal accommodation of parties are at tfake. It my operate on every occasion, in efforts of attention, good will and refpe&t; when we confer, or when we withhold the objects of choice or request. The first is done with a liberal promptitude, the other with an unaffeced regret.

The polite is attentive to the habits, expectations, and feelings of those with whom he converses: He would prevent their requests, by anticipating the effects; and would conceal his own wants, where the knowledge of them might importune or distress those to whom he is unwilling to be troublesome.

The-duties of politeness, compared with-thofe of other virtues, carry the idea of flight obligation. They are termed good manners, because we confider the manner more than the effect, and they are supposed to terminate in some trifling forms, which any one that is willing may acquire by rote. There are no doubt some pretensions to good breeding, of which these observations are true, but confidered as an article of beneficence, there is not any duty in which good sense, sincere benevolence, and candour are more necessary.

Without discernment, the affeCtation of politeness becomes a source of molestation and trouble; without benevolence, it is a mere ostentation of superior breeding. Its forms, like the words of of a language, may have been arbitrary in the original use of 

them, but when established, convey the meaning of persons, who SHAc. IV.
speak, in a way that entitles them to esteem and confidence, or, on the contrary, renders them objecs of disgust or offence.

As the language, so the manners of particular societies may difser; and as a person may not be able to speak with propriety where the language is foreign to him, so he may not appear with accompliihed politeness where he is unacquainted with the ordinary forms of behaviour, or where le is altogether unpractifed in the oblervance of them.

Whatever the habits of society may be in. such matters,. they are no' doubt soonest and most effedually acquired where the intercourse of men is most close and frequent; and the manner of this intercourse, confidered apart from any actual effet, is supposed most important.

From this consideration it appears that the name of politeness, both in Greek and in Latin, took its origin from an idea, that to be polite was to have the manners of the town, in contradiftinction to those of the country *..

Apart from the consideration that the feelings and wishes of men may be better understood in the habits and manners of one society, than they are in those of another; it is certain, that where societies differ in point of manners, on whichever fide the advantage of superior intelligence may lie, persons of the best difposition * In Greek the polite was tcrmed ArIos, and in Latin Urbaztn,; and from the i.!.ter of these terms, we confider urbanity in contradiftinition to rusticity.

 position may appear defeCtive in politeness, where the manner of CHat,. V.
SC1cT. 1V. shewing it is not famliliar to them; but this no more incapaci.
ksr'a tates the peasant for politeness in the city, than the citizen for politeness in the country. If the peasant appears rustic in the town, the citizen may appear frivolous, ignorant, or affected in the country; and of the two that person is most deficient in breeding, who is farthest gone in the mistake, that the local habits of a society to which he himself is accustomed, are the ftandard of good manners to mankind.

The real standard of manners, so far as it can be collected fiom external expressions, is the ingenuity, candour, and dilpofition to oblige, from which those manners proceed.

The habits which the mind may have acquired in those important refpeds, may be traced to the objects ofefliunation, which men in different societies have been led to adopt. In societies where men are taught to confider themselves as competitors, and every advantage they gain as comparative to that of some other person, the conscientious may be faithful and true to his engagements, in what he is pleased to think matters of real concern; but the emulation in which he has been nursed is a fretful paflion; and politeness, under its influence, cannot be any other than an effect of disguise. The interefled and fordid make no allowance for good or ill offices that neither fill nor empty the pocket.
Wkith such persons as these, even virtue itfelfis illiberal, and kindness unmannerly.

For this character ofgoodnefs, which is diftinguifed in the offices of mere good breeding, it should leem, chat we imuft refort to the company of thoie who are Icaft actuated by fordid cares, cares, by personal jealousies, or by any consideration of interest 
PART. 11.
which in the ordinary society of men can be brought into question. 




In company of this fort, men are accustomed to lay a proper itrefs _
on the effecds of good sense and benevolence, however little their fortunes may be affeled by them. Whilit in societies of a different description, they run the hazard of an opposite character; may be just and beneficent in what they term articles of moment, but from an affected indifference, or real insensibility to whatthey confider as matters of inferior value, are fullen, contemptuous, or negligent on may occasions, on which benevolence and good will might contribute essentially to the happiness of human life.

Men are thus likely to be polite where the habits of life are likely to be liberal; that is, where benevolence is not ftifledby fordid cares, oppreaffed with dependence, awed by subjection or mean apprehensions of danger. We are to look for this character, therefore, in the higher ranks of life, or to hold the defect least excufable if it be wanting there. It is not indeed a necessary accompaniment of riches or luxury; it is found amidst the poverty of rude nations, and in the society of men leait acquainted with the arts of accommodation. There ignorance of the ordinary conitituents of interest secures the mind from the meanness of fordid and illiberal competitions, and the very savage, exempted firom the teasing regards of personal vanity by his passion for the real and superior diftintions of courage and fortitude, preserves, we are told,* in the society of his equals, a good breeding and refpeAful attention that is not excelled in the higher circles of polifled society. It is part of his dignity to remain unmoved by novelties, to be serious and courteous in his ordinary manners, B b b and * Vid. Cllarlevoix's account of thc original Natives of North Anmerica 
 poftion may appear defective in politeness, where the manner of 

SECT. V. flmewing it is not familiar to them; but this no more incapaci.

ry~ tates the peasant for politeness in the city, than the citizen for politeness in the country. If the peasant appears rustic in the town, the citizen may appear frivolous, ignorant, or affeded in the country; and of the two that person is most deficient in breeding, who is farthest gone in the mistake, that the local habits of a society to which he himself is accustomed, are the flandard of good manners to mankind.

The real standard of manners, so far as it can be collected from external expressions, is the ingenuity, candour, and difpofition to oblige, from which those manners proceed.

The habits which the mind may have acquired in those important refpeds, may be traced to the objecs of eftiination, which men in different societies have been led to adopt. In societies where men are taught to confider themselves as competitors, and every advantage they gain as comparative to that of some other person, the conscientious may be faithful and true to his engagements, in what he is pleated to think matters of real concern; but the emulation in which he has been nurted is a fretful passion; and politeness, under its influence, cannot be any other than an effect of disguise. The interefled and fordid make no allowance for good or ill offices that neither fill nor empty the pocket.
'With such persons as these, even virtue itfelfis illiberal, and kindness unmannerly.

For this character of goodness, which is distinguished in the offices of mere good breeding, it should 1'eem, that we muff reIort to the company of those who are lcall actuated by fordid cares, cares, by personal jealousies, or by any consideration of interest 

which in the ordinary society of men can be brought into question. 




In company of this fort, men are accustomed to lay a proper stress on the effects of good sense and benevolence, however little their fortunes may be affeded by them. Whilst in societies of a different description, they run the hazard of an opposite character; may be just and beneficent in what they term articles of moment, but from an affeded indifference, or real insensibility to whatthey confider as matters of inferior value, are fullen, contemptuous, or negligent on may occasions, on which benevolence and good will might contribute essentially to the happiness of human life.

Men are thus likely to be polite where the habits of life are likely to be liberal; that is, where benevolence is not ftifledby fordid cares, oppreaffed with dependence, awed by subjection or mean apprehensions of danger. We are to look for this character, therefore, in the higher ranks of life, or to hold the defec least excufable if it be wanting there. It is not indeed a necessary accompaniment of riches or luxury; it is found amidst the poverty of rude nations, and in the society of men least acquainted with the arts of accommodation. There ignorance of the ordinary constituents of interest secures the mind from the meanness of fordid and illiberal competitions, and the very savage, exempted from the teasing regards of personal vanity by his passion for the real and superior distinctions of courage and fortitude, preserves, we are told,* in the society of his equals, a good breeding and refpeAful attention that is not excelled in the higher circles of poliflied society. It is part of his dignity to remain unmoved by novelties, to be serious and courteous in his ordinary manners, B b b and * Vid. Cllirlevoix's account of the original Naltivs of North Anmerice, 
 and he is no less agreeable and insinuating in the character of a 
friend, than he is terrible and dangerous in that of an enemy.


To need nothing and to possess eyery thing are, perhaps, equally favourable to that liberality and politeness of manners which we commonly confider rather as the polish, than as the essential conlituent of goodness. The naked inhabitant of the Pelew Islands accordingly appeared to posess all the attention to oblige, and all the relu&ance to intrude or importune, which, in the polite circles of Europe, distinguish the accomplished gentleman.

To what purpose then, it may be alked, should we know all this; if the models of good behaviour may be taken even from those who are least inftruted in the use of them.

Men are happy sometimes in the absence of incentives to evil: But where evil obtrudes, it is the nature of man to aa from what he knows to be good, and in opposition to what he conceives to be evil. Where he cannot be ignorant, it is proper he Should not be deceived, and where his virtue is in question, he should be accustomed to revolve in his mind the real constituents of a virtuous life.

The observations now made on the charaaeriftics of justice and goodness, relate to human nature at large, in whatever relation of fellow citizen, or alien, of inagiftrate, or subjet. As the benevolent will be humane to his fellow creature in every relation, in that of fellow citizen he will be candid and beneficent; in that of magistrate he will be diligent and inflexibly just; in that of subjed he will be refpedful and orderly.

Tor To these we allude under title of the public offices or duties 

ofjuftice and goodness, comprehending protection on the part of 




the magistrate, allegiance on the part of the subjed, and public spirit the common duty of citizens in every rank or condition of life.

The relations of men in society, confidered in refped to their origin, are frequently casual. In their progress they acquire the force of convention; and as constituting the form on which the peace and wellfare of society depends, are to the benevolent the most real and the principal objedcs of attention and refpedt.

The dutiful and just citizen may on occasion confider what lhe has a right to enforce, that he may exac no more; but does not so much confider what he him self may be forced to do, as what in goodwill to his fellow creatures, he ought to perform.

On the part of the subjea, and under the title of Allegiance, are included Fidelity, Deference, and Submijion to the will of the Sovereign or Magistrate. This is the head of the society, and is therefore an oltenfible or principal object of that affection we bear to the society itself; his virtues are the securities and bleflings; his authority is the source of peace andgood order to the whole.

Unhappy is that fubje&, who can mistake for Liberty, a difrefpct to the person of the magistrate; and who can perceive no beauty in the gradation of influence, or diftincion of ranks, in wvhich providence has made the order of society to confifl.

B 1 b 2 Equall y 
PART iI. Equally unhappy on the other part, is that magistrate or foveS(IcT. IV. reign, who can mistake the intitutional powers of his Situation sv~ for a concession of property to him in the persons, effects, or services of the people. He has power indeed to do harm, as well as good; but this is not peculiar to him; the robber and the aflaffin partakes in it with him, and with this single difference, that the latter in his attempt to do wrong exposes himself more; and where the mischief is equal, is to the whole amount of his courage the better man. But as the actions of men in every relation are mutually important, and as every one has it in his power, so no one is exempt from hazard or risk in his attempt to do harm. The tyrant is fearful in the midIt of his guards, and many of his cruelties are mere acs of precaution against the resentment he has already incurred.

But if power be Sometimes observed to corrupt those who are entrusted with it, the benevolent magistrate or sovereign has greater advantages towards forming his mind to humanity andjuftice, than those of more private flation. The concerns of his fellow creatures are more immediately his own: The commonwealth upon one account or other, is ever present to his mind: The prosperity of the people is prosperity to him; and the disposition most natural for him to feel, is that of a parent towards the family in whose welfare his own is involved.

The force with which he is armed, is that of the community, and reminds him of the use to which it should be employed.
If there be a law of Nature or State on which he founds his prerogative, the fame law is no leTs sacred in its application to the privilege or protection of the meanest citizen.

.3 Public Public spirit, or the preference of public to partial confide- 




ration, is a duty incumbent on every member of the community 
alike. w'

Under every form of a society, the individual does a real service to the public by the reasonable and proper care of his own preservation, by attention to the welfare of his family, and by a diligent observance of what belongs to his rank, his profeflion, or condition of life. An immediate view to the public is unequally required under different constitutions of government; most under democratical governments; and least under absolute monarchies, where public deliberations are limited to the councils of a Prince.
But wherever just precautions are taken in the national establishment for the safety and wellfare of the people, it is happy for every individual to know and enjoy the advantages of his own situation, without giving way to that restless spirit, which in the absence of any real grievance would aim at fanciful refinements of.
Law or State.







Of the Charaierftics of Temperance.

 THIS virtue, in the general description of it, implies that difen
gagement from mean pursuits and gratifications, which gives to SECT. V. the mind full command of its faculties in the preferable occupations of a rational nature. It is the peculiar attribute of a being, in which animal and intellectual powers unite, and is the proper adj uftment and effect offuchpower in the general tenor of a happy life.

Mere animals when compared to man, we have observed, proceed more by regulated infiindcs leading to the specific materials which they have occasion to use, and terminating in a measured application or enjoyment of these materials. They seldom err in the choice of their objects, and seldom exceed in the measure of their gratifications; whereas the principle of animal appetite in human nature, though inftincive also, and equally correct in the end for which it is given, is less circumfcribedin the use of means, or is more fubjct to err under the influence of imagination or opinion ; these when miftakcn for rcfobn, serve only to miflc:la ?, the the animal dispositions, which they assec to guide: Insomuch, that 

when the conceptions of mind are false, the animal appetites are the 



more apt to go wrong for being joined with an intellecual principle.

To man therefore, neither the first conceptions of his mind, nor the inftints of his animal frame are a sufficient guide to the course of life he ought to pursue. These conceptions and inftints are themselves a province fubjeted to the superintending power of intelligence, and requiring to be governed with circumfpetion and caution.

This mixt nature of man is beautifully allegorised by Plato, under the image of a Team,in which animals prone to the earth, or wild beafis of a spirit, fiery, restive, and unruly are yoked together with coursers of a celestial breed: These struggle to maintain a better or more elevated course, than that into which they are dragged, whether downwards or astray, by the others with which they are combined in the team.

To whatever length we may pursue this allegory, we must observe, that among the animal appetites there is not any one fuperfluous, nor any one which should be entirely suppressed. The frame of nature is beautifully confiruaed, and its movements make an admirable part in the order of things. There is no reason to reprobate any of its enjoyments merely as such.

Mankind indeed, in different ages or nations have varied in.

their conceptons on this subjed. They would repress one sett of animal enjoyments, and authorise another. If in one quarter of the globe, the gratifications of the table arc left at discretion, those of the sexes are restrained. Or if under the sanCtion of religion, certain meats and the use of fermented liquors arc prohibited ; polyga nmy 
 polygamy, or a kind of fyfematic debauch of the rexes, is admit
CHAP . V ted as a privilege of the true believer.

VWhether men derive their apprehenfidn in such matters, as they sometimes derive their conception in other fubjeds, fromthe fuggelion of occasions which we do not perceive, and which we therefore, term caprice; or whether they are led by considerations of expedience and utility peculiar to their climate, or manner of life, the conceptions themselves, when generally entertained, give rife to maxims of decency which are no doubt to be treated with that refped which individuals ever owe to the manners of their refpetive times and countries. And although men of reflection may diflinguifh what is arbitrary in the manners of those with whom they live, they are not on this account by any means entitled to neglea the obfervarice of them.

The informations of reason are not sufficient to dired the steps of ordinary men; nor are the marks which cuflom has affixed in particular situations to give warning of the dangers to which morality is exposed, altogether superfluous, even to men of fuperior discernment and wisdom.

It is however proper to observe in charaderifing the virtue of temperance, that in the general application of its rules to mankind, it is not limited by the local or temporary apprehension of any nation or age: That it is not to be defined by the peculiar restraint or indulgence which is adopted in the East or in the Weft, but is such a freedom of mind from the dominion of inferior appetites and habits, as enable the person poflefied of it to pursue the better occupations of a beneficent and intelligent jnind, The The cardinal virtues, we have observed, may be comprised un- 




der the denominations of Jkill, diljpoition, application, and force. CSET. V.
tiJfdom is the skill of the virtuous to obtain the ends of benefi- cence; Goodnejs is the disposition to purlue these ends and so far as the animal appetites unrestrained might impede the mind in its better pursuits; Temperance may be confidered as essential to the application or diligence required in performing the duties of a virtuous life.

Under habits of sensuality, whether in deviling the means of enjoyment, in urging enjoyment itself to satiety, or in attempts to restore the satiated appetite, there is a necefary waste of time.
And in the diminution of health, or intellectual faculty impaired by debauch, a disqualification ensues for any better application of mind: So that man, without a proper guard upon himself in this particular, might be entirely diverted from the objects of his rational nature, deprived of his understanding, or funk into a state of brutality more disorderly than is any where else exhibited in the animal kingdom..

Mere forbearance or ascetic severity, however, is not fuficient to prevent or to correc this evil. Abstinence may be extremen and no lets than the opposite vice of excess, enfeeble the living fi-ame and impair the energy of the rational powers ; nor is mere fbbriety, however regulated, fiflicient in this important respect to completc the merit of a virtuous charaaer. The inifer is fober from penury, or that he may save hlis money; the fhia'per is fober, that he may succeed iln Ifoe firoke of his art, and overeach or circumvent thole who are lets guarded in their manner oflifb, VOL. 1[. C Cc c T

 To have the merit of temperance, it is necessary that the sup

SEcP. V. posed recess from animal gratifications ihould be employed in a better way; in a diligent discharge of ordinary duties; in purfuing a rational course of life, and in the exercises of intelligence which lead to the attainments of wisdom and promote the progrefs which human nature is destined to make.

Temperance, therefore, may be confidered as consisting of two branches, sobriety or reflraint from excess, and application or a proper direction of mind. To the first are opposed Debauchery and Senfitality; to the second Dinpation or Sloth.

To a person apprised of the higher enjoyments and occupations of a rational nature, it is not difficult to restrain the mere animal appetites within reasonable bounds. Their gratifications are not in tleir nature calculated to occupy a long or improper portion of time. When their purpose is obtained, they cease to importune; nature gives warning of approaching excess in feelings of satiety, disgust, or of positive pain; and although the glutton, without attending to these admonitions, may hurry his meal into surfeit or fatal excess; yet, in general, mere appetite is not the source from which intemperance is most likely to arise.

Sensuality is a disorder of the mind; it results from the imagination, and is a project of obtaining a continual enjoyment wvhere nature has given no more than a capacity of occasional and temporary pleasure.

An agrceable infiltion is fitt-ed by nature to allure the ani;::1 to lcrfobrml the fl ions which arc required for the prclirvation vation of her work. But attempts to prolong or to accumulate 

such pleasures, for the moR part wear out or impair the very fa- 


SEc'i. V.

culty by which they might be enjoyed at their reafbnable periods ; -.' J
or if this eiFect Illould not follow, the intervals of mere sensual gratification require to be supplied by some amusement or pastime of a different kind, as conversation, exercise, or play: So much, that if the voluptuary appears to pass his time agreeably, his principal enjoyments are of a nature very different from those of any mere sensuality, and actually consist in applications or exercifes that amuse the mind.

Under this imposition of fancy, or misapplication of language, which refers all human as will as animal enjoyment to sense, it is not uncommon to call that a life of animal pleasure, which is in sac a life of mental occupation or social anufement; and although the specific enjoyment of human nature on many occasions consists in its being rationally employed, it is common to confider the more serious engagements of life as an oppreflion or interruption to pleasure.

In consequence of such misapprehensions men. are doubly mifled, they are turned away from that which constitutes the merit and felicity of their nature, to objets which are inadequate to their purpose ; and which, to fill up the moments of human life agreeably, must be pieced out with what they term amusements, and which are in reality mental engagements, though of a value inferior to those which they rejec as a burden.

The disposition of human nature in the mean time is favourable to the attainment of proper habits, if we are successful in removing those which are improper. An exemption from sloth nccefihrily implies activity: We can fiarcely refrain from one C c c 3 Ic.

 set of pursuits without betaking ourselves to some other; so that .
S(sT. V. mere relief from the habits of sensuality, or the longings for aniir>v' mal pleasure, may of itself lead to better applications of mind.

Mlany circumstances concur to recommend beneficence, and to interest men in the welfare of their fellow creatures ; and if they be not debauched by habits of a different tendency, they are likely to move in the track of their duty as the most natural path in which they fliould go.

The greatest danger to which the ingenuous are exposed in making a choice of their active engagements, is that of neglecing business for the fake of mere amufernent or paflime, in which, without finking into sloth or sensuality, they form habits of diffipation equally fatal to the higher and better engagements ofthe mind. They lose the faculty of'ferious exertion, and shrink from any thing that has the asped of business, as the sickly stomach loaths the appearance of wholesome food.

As it is difficult to ascertain the distinction betwixt amusement and business, the one by a very natural figure is easily fubftituted for the other. Thus " Bufine/," fays Sir William Temple, "is the tlivifion of man ;" and there is no doubt, that persons who betake themselves with alacrity to any serious occupation, thereby are more effectually amused or diverted than those who affect a life altogether composed of dissipation and pastimes.

The human mind is not amused without an object, and the nearer that its object, in the interefl it creates or the ardour it excites, approaches to what arc termed the important afflirs of IiF,, the more cffietual the anmufieent or pleasure it brings. The dillfpa'ted, accordingly, while they fly from bufnefs as an application of too too serious a nature, find some other interest or paflion to corn- 

'mand their attention ; and are in sac the more entertained, that 




their faculties are intensely employed, and their affedtions warm- .
ly engaged.

The gamester hazards his fortune, or the hunter exposes his life; and both, in order to be amused, require the highest measures of exertion, of eagerness, and agitation of mind. When familiarity with an object has lessened the ardour it brings, they seek for occasions to renew their interest, and to awaken their passion: They strive to do for themselves what nature has fufimciently done for the whole of the human race; they create a necessity of labour, and an occasion for the exertion of their powers. Of this fort, the huntfmnan may observe that nature has stored human life with abundance of game; and the gamester may observe, that she has proffered to mankind in every situation, a stake for which they may play; and if they are pleased to join the satisfaction of promoting the welfare of others with that of preserving and accommodating themselves, they will find little occasion to rack their invention for pastime or concerted amusements; nor will they be led to imagine any thing more pleasant to be done, than that which they are in the present moment, and by the proprieties of their station called upon to do.

This were the genuine result of temperance; a well direCted acivity of mind, exempted from the dreams of the voluptuary, or the difi iiation of the idle. It would confifl in a proper use of what is prepared for the purposes of animal life, and in the habit of applying to what are the proper engagements or occun.ations of a. rational nature.

CART. IV In youth, we are for the most part unwilling to apply to any Scr. V. thing that does not promise immediate gratification or pleasure: L/v^ And this disposition, if indulged, leads to a habit of dissipation for life: It lays the foundation of a frivolous manhood, and a wretched old age, about to depart from the paths of this mortal scene without leaving any honourable track behind. It were happy, if in youth we could be persuaded, that the care of parents and tutors to give proper habits of application, though at firit difgreeable, is in the way to future fatisfaaion and pleasure; or if we could be made sensible at this time of life, that we are not more interetfed to acquire knowledge, or receive information, than we are to form habits of diligence,. and a just direction of the mind to the pursuit of those pleasures, which are at once henourable, permanent, and just.





S E C T I 0 N VI.

Of the Charac7er/ics of Fortitude.
To the requisites of an acive charaaer, which we have been 
PART II



confidering, it is necessary to subjoin that of a forcible or resolute 
mind : Under this title, Fortitude is required to fill up the fum of v'x the virtues.

In mere body, there is a force constituted by resistance to change; in animal life, it is courage and muscular strength; in free agents, it is a determinate choice of conduct unaltered by difficulty, fuflering, or danger.

It is not required that the resolute mind should be insensible to the warnings which, in the form of pain, nature has given of the ills to which the animal nature is exposed, nor does it require the negleA of such warnings, or of the means that may be employed 'or safety in consequence of them; but as the duties of human life eSrequently call upon the virtuous to pass throughi nconvenicn-% ties, 
 cies, and to incur danger or pain in the conduct of some worthy 
CHAPp V. pursuit, the quality of a mind possessed of itself, and undifturb,- --- ed in the exercise of its faculties is required to complete the charaCter of virtue.

In this fccne of difficulty and danger, the acRor cannot proceed with a mind that is deficient in fortitude, any more than the archer can ihoot with a bow that wants elasticity or itrength.

Among the principal characeriftics of this virtue may be reckoned Rejol;tion, Intrepidity, Patience, and Constancy.

In all these instances, no doubt, force of mind, like strength of body, may be employed to an ill, as well as to agood purpose; but as mere abfiincnce from animal pleasure, without a proper application of mind to better pursuits, does not constitute temperance, so neither does exemption from fear or impatience conftitute the virtue of fortitucie.

The ignorant are sometimes fearless, because they know not their danger. The criminal is daring, from the force of some vicious pafion ; but fortitude is the itrength of integrity that is 'fuftered by a conscience void of offence, and is as far removed fr-onm the audacity or impudence of the profligate, as it is from rthe bat:ncLfs of the coward.

F.s,'.;z: cn is the courage with which the virtuous proceeds in his colribc of' bCnIeficceI towards his fiiend, his country, or his icllow crcauCre, in any circulmflances that require his aid. It was rn ily cxl'rd'ldcl by the three ili-aelites, in answer to the king of a')) Ion wvlwo tlireatlenlcd to c.al. theml into the imidfl of a 1)urnI In, ing fiery furnace, if they did not worship the golden image which 

he had set up: And who is that God, he said, " that shall deliver SCAP. V.
"you out of my hands?"" We are not careful, they said, Ne- vC
" buchadnezar to answer thee in this matter: If it be so, the God " ,whom weferve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, " and he will deliver us out of thine hand, 0 King; but if not, be it " known unto thee, 0 King, that we will notferve thy Gods nor " worjhip the golden image which thou hayt set up". Here was a resolution expressed not in the confidence of escape or safety, but in the sentiment of a daring integrity which no menace could shake. And the benevolent is resolute when a friend or an innocent sufferer requires his aid, because affefion or commiferation is more powerful than interest or even felf-prefervation.
And the fame virtue of fortitude may be known, though with legs evidence and on flighter occasions, by the voluntary hazard of suffering, or inconvenience in the discharge of any duty whatever.

Intrepidity is tranquillity and presence of mind in the midst of danger. It is opposed to that perturbation offear or terror by which the weak minded are disqualified to acquit themselves properly or to extricate themselves from the dangers in which they are involved. Without intrepidity, enterprise is rashness, and serves only to lead the feeble minded into situations in which they are not qualified to ad.

As the intrepid continue to possess themselves or to have the use of their faculties in the midst of danger, intrepidity is not only an exemption from the sufferings of fear or terror, but is the best security also against the evils with which any danger is supposed to threaten. It enables the person alarmed to take the best D d d measures 
 measures for safety, or to employ the best and most vigorous SECHA. V means of refinance.


In proportion as we are ardent in the cause of our fellow creatures, we are less apt to be disturbed by considerations of inconvenience or danger that asset ourselves ; so much that a generous or tender affeAion is itself in fbme measure a principle of fortitude, and prepares the mind for a courageous discharge of its duty.
The female parent, even in the most timorous species of animals, is observed to be bold and fearless in defence of her young.

For the poor 'wren, 'The mofl diminutive of birds, wiillfight (Her young ones in her neJf,) againji the owl '.

And it is under a sense of indignation at the commission of iniquity, or in the ardour of enthusiasm for the good of their country, that men are observed to make the greatest efforts of intrepidity and courage: In so much, that as fortitude is a necefiary support in every virtuous enterprize, the consciousness of integrity, and a generous resolution, is the true incentive to courageous and ardent exertion of mind.

Patience may have a reference to any adual suffering from which there is not an immediate prospect of relief. The patient endures what cannot be helped without exasperating the fore with the fruitless irritations of a peevifli and fretful disposition.

In ' Shakcfpeare in Macbeath.

In the order of nature, and in directing the animals to the PAST IL

means of their own preservation, pain is employed perhaps with 
more power and efficacy even than pleasure. External causes that v threaten to wound or to hurt, give warning by the infliction of pain: Diseases that announce the profpeat of Death give an alarm in the fame manner; and the suffering is made to increase while the danger continues, or is not to be removed but by a removal of the cause that annoys.

According to this general law of nature, no living creature is exempted from pain; but to acknowledge the beneficent purpose for which it is inflicted, and to employ the mind without peevishness -or discontent, to obtain that purpose is a principal charaaerifiic of that virtue of fortitude which we are now confidering.

Patience in suffering, like intrepidity in danger, is the best alleviation of the evil to which it refers, and that which enables the mind to make the molt successful efforts in obtaining relief.

The effe&c of pain in causing diffrefs is in a great measure proportioned to the apprehension with which it is received. The timorous patient flirinks from the surgeon's knife before it has touched his fore, and has already suffered in imagination before the sense could be affected. The fearless on the contrary are hardy in bearing what they disdain to fear. The mind, it is well known, under any vehement emotion of affection or passion is insensible to wounds or pain, and even the diftrefTed may be diverted from their sufferings by any objecA that warmly interelfs the D d d 2 mlind 
 mind. Patience therefore, we may believe, is greatly aided by 
CHAP,.V. an exemption from fear. And this virtue is impaired by me8ECT. VI.
kty,/ lancholy or other peevish and fretful passions, even more than by any defec of firmness or strength in the animal frame.

Sentiment and occupation of mind, suspend the effea of mere sensation, while a certain vacancy of thought, and habitual indifference to objecs that give any ardour to the mind, leave it entirely to be occupied by the slightest feelings of bodily sense.

To correct the foul therefore of its weaknesses, whether fear or melancholy; to set the order of nature in its proper light; to occupy the mind with this and other objects of a just affection, appear to be the proper means to strengthen it in bearing the inconveniences and pains to which human life is exposed.

Patience, it must be confeiled, in many instances appears to be the gift of nature; but in whatever measure it be given, it may frill be improved by those who are sensible of its value, and who do not easily forego what they admire and wish to possess. The martyr and the hero are no doubt Supported in teeming paroxyfms of suffering, by the sense of honour they have attached to the part they perform.

ConJfancy is that force of mind by which we persevere in pursuits properly begun, or engagements properly made. It is opposed to wavering or unneceflary fluctuation of choice.

An ill choice ought no doubt to be correcled. But in order to prevent the necessity of change, proper caution ought to be employed before we form our engagements. There is a time for deliberation, deliberation, and then it is proper to give every consideration its 

due regard. A choice well made is the proper antidote to wa- CSEHcT. A
vering and inconstancy, which proceed from the want of any Cfixt conception of the object at which we aim; and which conflitutes a weakness of mind subjet to disgust or weariness from any difficulty or disappointment for which we are not fully prepared. The inconstant are known to drop even the pursuits in which they are successful in order to exchange them for somewhat else, which they have not tried, and of which the principal recommendation is that of being new. They are of course by too frequent a change of their objecs unable to effect any valuable purpose whatever.

To persist in our engagements is often a material article ofjuftice, and a matter of right which the parties concerned are entitled to exac. To persevere without wavering or disgust in pursuits which are properly chosen is necessary to the success of them.
For this reason, even if a better choice ihould appear than that which we have actually made, it is seldom wife to change a pursuit in which we have made any considerable advance, to begin another in which all our labours are again to be renewed.

But this virtue of fortitude, which lays the foundation of all the proprieties we have mentioned, whether, re/olution, intrepidity, patience, or conJfancy, has a value in itself, independant of the purpose which it enables the person possessed of it to pursue and obtain. It is, in many inflances, an exemption from suffering or an alleviation of pain. It opens the mind to the influence of its best affections, and gives it the possession of itself and its faculties on trying occasions.

Fear 
PARTr 11. Fear next to malice is the greatest bane to the human heart; it 

SECT. VI. is a state of suffering, degradation, and weakness, or adifqualificas'," on tion for the practice of any virtue. The coward is too anxious for himself to entertain any generous affection for others, and too feeble in his resolution to give any adequate effect to the purpose he forms. He is mean and abject in adversity, insolent in profperity, and cruel in urging the effect of his jealousy or fears againft any object of there passions, which he may have got in his power.

There are no conditions of the mind that appear more evidently in the person, than those opposite characters of a resolute and cowardly nature. The one bears the aspeC of elevation, even in the retreats of modesty, or in the midst of adversity ; the other is presumptuous, or abjec, merely as the occasion gives or withholds the advantages of fortune, which he is ever ready to feel and to abufe. The prepossession of mankind, therefore, in favour of courage, and in contempt of cowardice is well founded in nature; the first no doubt may be abused, and the latter may serve on occafion to render men tractable and submissive to the powers by which they are governed; but, as we are not to reject a blessing merely to avoid the abuse of it, neither are to adopt a great evil for the fake of a trifling convenience.

Courage, it is true, may be abused ; it is neverthclefs, though not an absolute security against ill dispositions and vicious habits, an aptitude for all the nobler affections of the human heart, as well as a force by which the mind is enabled to support itself in the pur(uit of its worthiest objects.

We We have observed, that a generous affection is in some mea- 
PART. r.

sure a principle of courage; the converse also is true; the cou- 
rageous, in proportion as they are secure upon their own account, ''
have minds susceptible of a proper concern for others; and the benevolent become insensible of personal inconvenience or danger, in proportion as they are engaged in the exercise of beneficent affeCtion towards their fellow creatures: Insomuch, that the characters ofgenerofity and courage are in their nature allied, and in their exertions mutually strengthen or confirm each other.
Magnanimity is the joint result of both, it is the effeca of goodness and probity, raised above the consideration of interests, of dangers, or fuffierings, which are apt to embarrass the condut of ordinary men. The magnanimous fleer through impediment or danger, at which the ordinary pilot would lower his fails; they turn upon an enemy, from whom the ordinary warrior would retreat; they spare the vanquished, whom the ordinary victor would facrifice to his fears or resentments; they commend an oponent, to whom an ordinary rival would not allow any merit; and that elevation of mind which they possess, is, at once, a principal foundation and a support of all the virtues.

The ingenuous, by aspiring to what is noble, is led to practise the virtues which constitute the excellence of human nature, and by his refblution and force of mind supports the efforts, and persifts in the course of life into which he is led by his best difpofitions.





S E CT I O N VII.

Concluding Observations.

 W E have thus, in pursuance of the method proposed at the out
CHAP.V. set of this work, attempted to state the atual diftintion of man SYT.V in the system of nature; his powers of discernment and choice; his pursuits and attainments, the progress he is fitted to make, and of which the direction and effec for the present is committed to himself; but of which the final termination is, we trust, far removed from his view.

We have inquired, how far any diftinlion of moral good and evil is manifest to such powers of perception as ours, and coincides with the diftinaion of enjoyment and suffering, of perfection and defed, of which our nature is susceptible; and last of all have confidered in what form the diftindion of good and evil should operate in the choice and external actions of men; from the whole ofthefe fans and observations itriving to evince, that, as there is in the frame of man a state of Health, Strength, and Beaui tty ty, eligible upon its own account; so there is in the forin of his intel- 

ligent being, and in the pursuits of his active life, a scheme of iy- CHAT. Vi dom, GoodneJ/, Temperance, and Fortitude, which, apart from any rev consideration of the past or the future, is in the present, and in every moment of his existence the preferable itate of his nature.

But in return for such labours as these, we may be told, that we only perpetuate the mistake which is common to many, who, in amusing themselves and others with such inquiries, have formed schemes of perfection, to be admired indeed; but far above the reach of mankind. That, as in our general account of perfection we far exceed what human nature is fit to attain, so in the detail of our precepts and rules, we would substitute a concerted manner, for the principles of benevolence and wisdom, which when present supersede the necessity of rules, and when wanting, are ill supplied by any ritual or external forms of behaviour: That in talking so much of virtue, we fland aloof from the world in which it ought to be pradtifed, and aflume the importance of wisdom in mere words and technical forms of expression. It was thus, we may be told that philosophers in antient times affeCed a language, a manner, and dress peculiar to their refpedive feds; and hung out the supposed colours of wisdom, with little regard to its real pofieffion or use.

This charge may be true of many, and the error pointed out in it is a just object of caution to every one who would avail him1clf of the fruits of a scientific education, without incurring its abuse. The ancient feds in philosophy, have been likened to the modern feds of religion rather than to the varieties of opinion in matters of philosophy that have been entertaiuied in moldern times. Sedaries are ever ready to value themselves more on their proffflion of faith, than on their pradicc; and are E c ' fonctcr 
 fonder of any mnyftery or paradox they have adopted, than of the 
plainest and most important dictates of reason or goodfenfe. We 
- i~ must not however confound under this censure those examples of sublime and accomplifled virtue, which shone forth amidfi the pretensions and ridiculous formalities with which philosophy in the persons of many of its professors may have been disgraced.
It was in the reign of Aurelius, that Lucian gave loose to his fatire on this subject, and it was by this philosopher, in return for his ingenuity, chat he was proteted and employed in the provinces.

It inuft indeed be admitted, that to erea philosophy into a prosession, of which the votary is diffinguiflable from the reft of mankind, otherwise than by a superiority which good education may give in any department of life, and by a blameless or beneficent intercourse with other men, is to miflake its nature. In the school, and in our attempts to think comprehensively and juffly, we are led into system ; but in reaping the fruits of a culture thus applied to the mind, it may be expected that on every particular occasion we should acquit ourselves properly, without any formal display of our general knowledge. It were piteous indeed, to carry nothing with us from hence into the world, but formal pretensions and technical terms. To this the manners of the world are fortunately repugnant, and perhaps lead to an error in the opposite extreme, that of aflfeing indifference to considerations of virtue, which we inwardly and justly esteem. To talk of morality in the fashionable world', is said to be quoting the ten commandments.
And pretensions are so far fromnbeing received as merit, that perfois of the mofl honourable nature do well to avoid any unnecessary parade of their principles or system of adion.

A

* i 1 rc tilh author alludcs to what was a fafliion in his own times, although it mny tnow eIh.ips bi clhanlljd.

A person who has learned his exercises, may be known by his 


'carriage, without retaining the itiffnefs or formality of the school; S CT.V. V.
and his movements, when most graceful, appear to be the efFecs of mere inattention and negligence. Nor need we scruple to carry this observation lby analogy into the moist serious considerations of a manly and beneficent life. Virtue itfelfis then most perfeX, when it does not appear to have been learned or assumed as a merit; but is such as the person who praAifes it cannot depart from, even in the most negligent moments of life: This, however, we must not suppose to be the fruit of aAual negled or indifference to what is right: The master artist, in every infiance, derives the accompliflled freedom of his calling, not from the negligence with which he seems to practise it, but from an accornplifhled underfranding of its graces, and a habit of correAtnefs carefully acquired in practice: And the manners of an accomplished man in beneficence and candour, however little it may be necessary to difplay the system he has formed on these fubjedCs, must not be entrusted to chance.

PerfeAion is no where to be found lfort of the infinite mind; but progression is the gift of God to all his intelligent creatures, and is within the competence of the lowest of mankind. There needs not the genius of Hannibal or Scipio to detea the faife notion of happiness, of honour, or personal diitinlion, whichi miflead the fool and the coxcomb. Men of humble capacity may learn to think jullfy on these fubjeds : And as far as wifstom depends on a just conception of familiar objcls, it is the nature of created mind in the course of experience and observation to improve its sagacity, and to make continual approach to the higheft mrcafure of intclletual ability of which it is fufccptible. The E e c 2 vorld 
 world is far from being so unreasonable, as to expect from every 

individual the utmost perfedlion of which human nature is susk-.v^>^ ceptible; nor of any individual, in every action of his life, a full display of all the good qualities of which he himself is pofleffed.
But the virtue of goodness, whether operating in mere innocence, or in beneficence, is surely improveable, if not actually acquired by habit.

It is that which we commonly enough express in the distinctive denomination of a gentleman, when employed as a term of praise; it implies a certain caution to avoid what is hurtful, or offnfive to others, liberality, and humanity, or attention to oblige, and to anticipate the wifles of the modest and unafliming. The conversation of gentlemen is accordingly a scene of satisfation and ease, not of strife, and competition for superiority: And this we impute to their breeding, and to the lessons of a dignified rank, not to any original difference of disposition- or temper.

The attainments of men are actually unequal, and the individual differs from himself, at different periods of his life.

Whether the inequalities of men, as some have alledged, may be traced to mere casual circumstances, engaging them in different efforts and pursuits, may be left undetermined. Or without venturing an assertion so little susceptible of proof, we cannot doubt, that if the fame person differs fiom himself at different times, it is in consequence of the efforts he makes, or neglects to make, and of the habits of thinking or of acting he has formed. Good offices conciliate the minds of men ; and .to have lived with the beneficent and the candid, tends to inspire benevolence and can1don r.

It It is a vulgar obiervation, that we are inclined to love those on 


whom we have conferred a benefit, more than those from whom 
we have received one. And the interpretation of this fat is vJ
somewhat malicious; to wit, that we are more tenacious of the obligations we have laid upon others, than of those which have been laid on ourselves. But in whatever way it be understood, the fact is important. Every one has it in his power to do a good office, though not always to receive one; and according to this observation therefore, has that in his power which is most effectual to his own happiness, or the goodness of his own difpofitions.

Fortitude and temperance grow upon the mind, in the continued pratice of there virtues. The veteran becomes calm in the midst of a hardship, or danger, to which he is accustomed.
And the strenuous mind, in any worthy pursuit, becomes fuperior to the allurements of pleasure, or the languors of sloth.

We have thus, on the supposition of an improveable nature in man, endeavoured to specify what he has to vwifl for himself, for his f'iend, and for mankind. And the model proposed for him cannot be improper, if it lead him to fliun any evil to which he is alcually cxpofed, or to attain any good which is placed 'within his reach.

It flill remains for a subjea of separate inquiry, to confider ztjhat the citizen has to wifj sori his country. And what is that public good, which in every community ought to be the object of political institution, and which, when obtained, ought to reconcile every individual to his slate in society, whether it be his lot to govern, or be governed.

CIAIP.





( 47 )

C H A P. VI.

F P o L. T I C S.
S E C T I 0 N I.

Introduction.
W E have already confidered society and government, or na- 


CHIAP. VI.

tional establishments, in refpe6 to their origin and their progress, SEaT. I.
we are now to confider them in refpet2 to the good and evil of rvY
which they are fuceptible, or the comparative advantage in refpet to which they are unequal, 'Under 
PART. IT. Under this notion we may treat of Population, /Manners, and SECT. I. Wealth, of Civil and Political Liberty, with all its accompany^" mnents in raising the characer and genius of a people.

Opinions on the subjec1 of public, no less than of private good are of much importance to mankind. As error and mistake, relating to the one, involve the mind in folly, fuftering, and diffappointment; so, in relation to the other, they would involve whole nations in disorder and riot, or in scenes of degradation and oppreflion.





S E C T IO N Ii.

Of the Teople confidered in RefjecS to Numbers.

THI E goodness of God is manifest in the form and extent of 

his works. Of there, so far as they are known to us, the most CIAP. V.



excellent is man, exhibiting the effects of Divine Goodness in the _,, multitude of his species, and in the laws of nature, which are eflablifled for their preservation, accommodation and increase.

The number in which we flhould wifi mankind to exist, is limited only by the extent of place for their residence, and of'provision sufficient for their subsistence and accommodation; and it is indeed commonly observed, or admitted, that the numbers of mankind in every situation do multiply up to the means of their fubfiftencc.

To extend these limits is good ; to narrow or contract them is evil; but although the increase of numbers may be thus conlilcrcd as an objct of defirc, and although we may wifl, in every F1 fs inflance, P. RT. 1I. inflance, that the people should multiply, yet it does not follow, SECT. 7I. that we ought to wish the species thus indefinitely multiplied, D-"vo- to be united also into one and the fame community.

The formation of families, and the continuance of their mnembers together for a certain time, are physically necessary to the preservation of the human race; but the union of numberless families into one society, is so far from being equally necelTary, that the number of families so united may be reduced indefinitely, in a perfect consistence with every advantage of the mere social life.

But nature, in giving to man the highest place in the scale of active existence has multiplied the occasions on which he is to exert both his animal and his intelligent powers. Besides the physical wants and necessities, which are left for him to supply, besides the advantages which are left to be gained by his industry and his application, the very vices and follies incident to one part of the species, create employment for another, and the divilions of men mutually furnish objects of caution, and occasions of action, from which no part is exempted, and ori which every separate society must regulate its eftablifiments, and eflimate the value of its numbers.

Mankind are exposed to dissention and quarrels, whether from the influence of irregular paflions or miflaken apprehensions of right and wrong. And as the possibility of discord and war is thus entailed upon human nature, no nation, however inoffcnfive in its own purposes, or however wife in its measures, is entitled to think itself exempted from the common lot of mankind; or to to suppose that its rights are safe without the precautions that are 

necefiary to secure them. Sc AT.V.

Siicr. t1.

In this point of view, we may confider the increase of the human species not only as an object of general benevolence, but as a matter of expedience also in the cafe of every particular frate. We may wifl that our country should be populous; or increase in numbers indefinitely, the better to sustain the national contests in which they may be engaged.

In every nation, the people may be confidered in two respects.

First, as forming the object for whose fake the society is inftituted, and for whose fake it ought to be preserved.

And next, as affording the means by which the society is so formned and preserved.

In the first point of view, -Salus populi, fuprema lex eflo, is the.

fundamental principle of political science. If the people be happy, we have no title to enquire to what other purpose they serve, for this itself is the purpose of all human eftabliflhments.

At the fame time, the people may be confidered as the strength and support of their community; and although, in the first point of view, every interest is subordinate to theirs, yet in this second point of view, they must accommodate themselves to the interefls of slate ; and if there be any paradox in this manner of stating the ilbjcl, it ariics from our confidering the end of political cilablinhimnts, and the means of obtaining that end, as separate r diflindl, \whereas tihey arc in this cafe the fiule.

F f f 2 Eflabliflnments 
PART HI Eftabliflments are meant for the good of the people, and the CrHA V. I.
SCrT. -1. people also serve to support their eftabliflment. The greatest ---i' X measure of happiness bestowed on the people, is that by which they are the means of making a happy community; and if the members of a community accommodate themselves to what is bell for the state, this is no more than to be, and to do, what is molt for their own preservation and welfare.

If the citizen on occasion must submit to personal hardship for the benefit of his country, uch in fadr is to him the occasion on which he is to reap the happiest fruits of his nature, magnanimity, benevolence, and fortitude. It is good for his country to be safe, and it is fiill more so for him to be an instrument in obtaining that safety. If it be the lot of the vine to bear a fruit for its owner, fertility and abundance of clusters is the prosperity and beauty of the plant that comes so loaded to the vintage.

The people confidered as the vital blood of a nation, if they are fitted by their characer to supply that part, have a value proportioned to their numbers; or if the numbers be given, we are to estimate their value, from the measure of life and of ftretgth, which they bcftow on their country.





S E C T I O N Il.

Of the Mll.sZanners, or Tolitical Charac7er of the People., \VE are not under this title, to repeat tle general descriptions 
PART I.
of virtue and vice. These we observed, may operate in any si- 



tuation, or on any materials: They may operate in public or in . r .^
private life, in prosperity or adversity, refpeding matters of property or eJtiration, matters of private or public concern.

To distinguish the political from the moral charadRer, we must recolleCd, that although a man may be virtuous or vicious in any situation, and conversant in any materials, yet there are, in relation to circumstances and manner of life, certain habits which enable those who are poffefTed of them to give to their virtues the proper effect in their particular cafe, or in the treatment of matters, in which they arc particularlyconcerned. A scholar or a merchant, may be each in his way a person of great sense and integrity; but tlh one is not therefore qualified for a counting room, nor the other for' place at college. VWhere habits proper to the political fnte are ob--
3 taeincd, 
 tained, they constitute the value of a political charaAer ; or where 
.
SECT. II. the people are by contrary habits disqualified to maintain the kwr\^ political form of the community, or to pursue the objecs of state; their numbers may be great, but they are not of proportional value to the nations they constitute.

I m ay be observed, that mankind in the result of the politi-.

cal arts to which they are led by the exigencies of society, arrive at different eftabliflments, whether simple or mixt. They are led by their situation also to pursue a variety of objecAs, in which the pacific or military arts may prevail, and the estimable character of the people in the political point of view is their fitness to reap, to preserve, and to improve the advantages of their own intlitutions; and to fuppprt their country in pursuit of its refpective objects. Under establishments, therefore, in which the people are differently governed, or have formed themselves into a governing power; and in nations differently occupied, whether in commerce, or war; and engaged in the practice of specific arts, whether lucrative or liberal, suitable habits, though various in different inflances, give to the people a political value proportioned to their numbers.

In states of a democratical form, and small extent, where the people may be destined to govern and to defend themselves, the habits of the statesman and the warrior are required as ordinary accomplihmnents of the citizen; and the individual is entitled to cftimation, only in proportion as he pofieffes these habits. Authority and power are entrusted in the hands of particular persons, but every citizen equally retains his claim to ftch occasional trust. There is a fjirit of equality therefore, an attention and i ze l!

zeal for public concerns, which make an essential part in the ha- 

bits of such a people. CeI .4P V

>CT V

If the citizen under a demo'cratical government submit to resign his pretensions, he betrays the right of every other peribn in the state, while he surrenders his own. If he aim at any afcendant, or Superiority of fortune, different from the effe&t offuperior ability and virtue, his pretensions become inconsistent with public order and safety.

In proportion, therefore, as we suppose individuals in such instances not qualified to preserve their station, not disposed in their turns to obey without meanness, and to command without infolence; the community, instead of increasing its strength by multiplying its numbers, actually tends to its ruin. Want of numbers might expose such a state to be overwhelmed by an external power; but the want of a fit character, in public spirit, ability, and vigour, prepares the Rate from within for immediate fubversion, as a fabric is prepared to tumble or fall into ruin by the weakness or decay of the parts that compote it.

The manners of men may vary without inconvenience in republics of adifferent description. In ariftocraticalormixed government, for instance, certain cafualor hereditary diftinetions of fortune beingadmitted, the inferior may yield and the superior assume a comparative advantage in perfect consistence with the order eftabliflled. Nay, in proportion to the inequalities acknowledged, there is a habit of the person fitted to the rank, and in every condition a suitable character or manner. The habits of Ration are necefary to qualify the citizen to sustain the part which is afligned to himSclf. Elevation and dignity arc suited to the rank in persons of one PA rTr IT. one condition, deference and refpecl are suited to the rank in those 
CHAP.VI. of another; and without suitable diftincRions of character diffe./YX. 'rent orders of men would be difqlualified for their situations, and a community fb made up of discordant parts would be unfit to .tmaintain the cftablilhment in which the public order consists.
The utmost to be expeced among citizens in this state of difparity is that the fhperior fiould, by his noble qualities, merit the respect which is paid to him ; or earn the returns of affeAion and -gratitude by the good he performs.

Under monarchies, w!r .her absolute or mixed, the scale of subordination may be farther extended ; or the extremes of high and low much farther removed fi-om each other than they are in republics of any fort; while the interval between these extremes is filled up w-ith many flow and insensible gradations. Under such institutions, accordingly, equality may be altogether unknown; the habit of individuals may be in every instance either to yield or to assume a superiority. And these habits of subordination, of precedence, or deference, are necefsTary to give the people their value in the different ranks they are defined to hold.

Under all or any of there varieties, a people disqualified to preserve the political form of their country, nobles without beneficence, elevation or dignity, inferiors without refpea or fubmifsion; instead of giving national strength proportioned to their numbers, would prove the immediate source of weakncfs, or lead to revolutions of uncertain or dangerous issue.

But while we thus contend for propriety of manners adapted to the conllittioo n of slate, it mufl be obfcrvcd, that, if there b1>

be any political eflabliflment raised upon a plan of injurious 
 usurpation on the part of those who govern, and proceeding upon 
a debased and abject spirit of submission on the part of those who D-O
are governed, it were absurd to ascribe any merit, under the notion of a political value, to the habits which might be required to preserve such a system. The form itself we must confider as an abuse or a calamity, and for the fake of mankind must contend, that manners suited to preserve it are evil. That manners, on the contrary, which dispose the people to revolt, and overthrow such governments at the expence of any temporary hardfllips, are necefiary to obtain or restore the bleflings of national peace dilturbed by the continual, though unresisted wrongs to which the fabjea is exposed.

This description is perhaps too nearly verified, where the relation of sovereign and fubjecct is conceived on the models of mafler and slave, where the one is conceived to be a property and holds his poffeflions and his life, not upon conditions that may be supposed merely unequal; but without the observance of any condition at all, and at the will .f the other, by whom the difcretion is frequently abused. The value of the people, in such inflances, is to be estimated from their qualifications to repel such pretensions, and from the energy with which they recur to a form more confiflent with juflice and the good of mankind.

Amidst the varieties of political characler, nations differ also in refpec to the objects on which they are chiefly intent: One nation is intent upon commerce, or huficd with the arts of fubfiflencc and accommodation : another has its existence to contend for at the edglfe of the frvordl is there fore intent upon the arts of war, and the advant;ages to be gained or Joli in the contell with its neighVoL .
II. 0 o bours 
PART IT. bours. In either cafe, the fitness of men to promote the pro
SECT. 1ll1 fperity, or to watch over the safety of their country, is an es;_ - ential circunflance in eflimating the political value of their numbers.

Commercial nations have not any interest in the increase of population, except in so far the people are indufirious, or pofleffed of folne profitable art. The idle, -the profligate and the prodigal become, in proportion to their numbers, a source of pu.
blic distress and calamity.

Warlike hordes, on the contrary, would multiply warriors, not traders or pacific inhabitants. The Romans, in the first slate of their principality or republic, hastened their population by the indiscriminate admiflion of firangers to a participation of all their political rights. They had no occasion to make any feledion of those, they were to admit on the rolls of their people; for all the hordes in their neighbourhood from which their numbers could be supplied were warriors like themselves, and every acceflion to their number from the nations around them, was an addition to their military lifts.

W'hile flates are thus intent upon any particular objed, they appear to estimate the character of their people upon a partial model; and so far, no doubt, it is partial as they limit their notions of virtue to the tranfaicions in which they themselves are engaged, or to the forms according to which they themselves are accuflomr ed to proceed: But to such partialities we muf ftiubmit in eflimating the comparative merit of nations, and in judging of the lustre which individuals may have cast around them in their refpective tive ages. Human nature no where exists in the abftraa, and PARr IL
human virtue is attached, in every particular instance, to the use 

of particular materials, or to the application of given materials SEw.
to particu

Of the Wealth of the People.

 W E may confider national wealth in refpe to the purpose it 
 serves, while in the polfeffion of the people; or in respeCt to SECIV. that which it serves, in the form of a revenue to the state employed to defray public and national expences of government, defence, or chargeable inffitutions of any fort.

Wealth, as it may be referred to the firfl of there purposes, and is in the possession of the people, is the subjed of this section; as it may be referred to the second purpose of revenue to to the fiate, will be the subjea of that which follows.

The first and most eifential purpose of wealth is the subsistcnce and accommodation of uiful men; and its value is to be estimated from the numbers it will fcrve to subsist and accomnmodate ;-furnifling at the fame time, the means of lucrativc cnterprifi for the accumulation of more wealth, or the reprolducion duacion of that which is necefTari.ly consumed. These are pur- 

poses which it serves best, not in the coffers of the tate, or at the 

disposal of those who are supposed to a& for the community, but v in the management of the frugal and industrious proprietor; or laid out on the principle of private interest, and with a view to private gain.

In refped to national wealth, frates may rate their prosperity, not so much by the fums they are enabled to levy in the form of revenue, as by that wealth which, in consistence with public service, they are enabled to leave in the hands of the induftrious citizen. In his hands it is employed to its best uses, the rearing of a family, the establishment of manufa&cure, the purchase of materials and other articles, in the outlay of a lucrative and prosperous trade.

The constituents of wealth are more or less quickly consumed in the rife. The fullest granary and the amplest store of commodities are, within a limited period, exhausted in-the consumption of a people; and their wealth is to be estimated, not from the state of their magazines or stores at any particular time, but from the sources of reproduction and continual supply, by which the abundance they enjoy is increased or perpetuated.

The source of supply which nature has provided for man, in any given situation of climate or foil, is labour. Without this, in refpeEc to him, the land is every where barren, and materials of cvery fort are too rude for his use. The wealth of the citizen is measurable by the quantity of labour he can employ. If he can command the labour of others, he may difpcnfc with his own; but, to enable one pcrlbn to obtain the labour of another, ii: [: 
 neceufary that the one flouldc e able to pay the hire of that la
 bour; and that the other should be in need to receive that hire.

If all men were equally rich, every one might be willing to pay the hire of labour, while no one would be willing to labour for hire: But, as labour is neceflary to supply the consumptions of life; on the supposition of equal riches, every one would be reduced to labour for himself; and thus a supposed equality would reduce the fortune of every person to the fruit merely of his own labour, and, in fact, would be to render every person alike and equally poor.

The antient republics, amongfL whom it was propofed,in some inflances, to equalize the fortune of citizens, had recourse to the labour of slaves, and the objec, without this provision, would have been altogether chimerical and wild.

Nature seems to have ordered, that, in proportion as men Ihall depart from their original poverty, they llall depart also firom that original slate of equality, in which itwas necessary for every individual to labour for himself.

The unequal capacities and various dispositions of men; covctoufnefs and frugality, in one; neglet and diilipalion, in others; unequal ability, application, and success in the pralcce oi the lucrative arts, have ever, in the progreis of wealth, been accompaialcd with a distinction in the fortunes of men ; so that, while i.mnc are in a condition to command the labour of many, ochcrs remain without any other poilcIlion than the immediate fiuits of their ~~~~~O\'Vll~. ~Fro F1rom From a difference of fortune there rcfults a difference of eftima- 
PART IL

tion and rank; and to those who would emerge from the lower 
Rtation, there is a motive of ambition joined to that of neceflity, in promoting the pra&ice of arts: So that nations who are forward in the accumulation of wealth, proceed in it with a double ardour from the effeC of advances they have already made; and thus owe, in a great measure, to the inequalities of fortune, what sprang originally from necessity, the application of that labour by which articles of confunuption are reproduced, and the sources of wealth are enlarged.

In this state of unequal fortune, one man has the means of projecting and executing a lucrative enterprise; numbers of others feel the neceflity of committing their labour to his direclion; and what he gains, even while it remains in his own polffetion, goes into the mass of national wealth.

Skill, experience, and a sleight in the application of labour, contribute greatly to the success of it, or to the accumulation of its fiuits. To promote these advantages, the division and the fibdivision oftafils are highly conducive: A person who has to work but in one single material, will soon come to understand his department better, than if he had to do with a number of different lhbjeCts that would tend to diffract his attention, and embarrass his thoughts. Whoever operates but to one single effect, and obtains that effeCt by repeating without variation one single movement of the hand or the foot, will become mailer of his talk in a shorter time, and will practifi it with less interruption, than if he had to pass through a variety of operations; were obliged fircquently to change his tools; and at every fhccellive part of his work were required to praclife a different fpccics of Ikill.

Among: PA ,. l. Among the circumstances, therefore, which were formerly tSc r. IV. nmentioned, as attending the progress of commercial arts, none is '- of nlore confequencc to their advancement, than the reparation of callings, and the subdivision of each into a convenient number of dilferent branches. This lessens the difficulty of every appren.
ticelhip, and greatly increases the produce of any given number of hands. A fit aflortment of persons, of whom each performs but a part in the manufacture of a pin, may produce much more in a given time, than perhaps double the number, of which each was to pioduce the whole, or to perform every part in the confiruction of that diminutive article. But to this separation of tafls, as well as to circumstances in the original lot of man, it was observed, that commerce, or the exchange of commodities, was necessary. A person who performs but one species of labour, and obtains what is not the whole or perhaps is not any part of his own consumption, must have a facility in exchanging what he has produced for the other commodities which his occasions require, but which he is not equally in a condition to fabricate for himself.

With the benefit of commerce, or a ready exchange of commodities, every individual is enabled to avail himself, to the utmost, of the peculiar advantage of his place; to work on the peculiar materials with which nature has furnilhed him; to humour his genius or disposition, and betake himfclf to the task in which he is peculiarly qualified to succecd. The inhabitant of the mlountain may betake himself to the culture of his woods, and rhlc manufacture of his timber ; the owner of paflurc lands may betakel himself to the care of his herds; tiec ownerl of the cl;iyIit to the manufacturc of his pottery; and the lhufbandlln;i to tlhi'

the culture of his fields, or tle rearing of his cattle: And any 

one commodity, however it may form but a fmiall part in the 
whole accommodations of human life, may, under the facility of ,-y commerce, find a market in which it may be exchanged for what will procure any other part, or the whole : So that the owner of the clay pit, or the induflrious potter, without producing any one article immediately fit to supply his own necessities, may obtain the pofllflon of all that he wants. And commerce, in which it appears that commodities are merely exchanged, and nothing pro.duced, is nevertheless in its cffeccs very produciive; because it miniiters a facility and an encouragement to every artifl, in multiplying the productions of his own art; thus adding greatly to the mass of wealth in the world, in being the occasion that much is produced.

In trade, the profit of one is not, as sometimes supposed, necefiary lois to another; or rather, commerce being the exchange of what may be spared for what is wanted, and this a mutual convenience to all the parties concerned, is equally gain and profit to all.

The principle of trade is private interest, the fartheflt pofllbl removed fiomi public spirit, or any concern for a common cause; yet, so far as wealth, in the pofieflion of the people is a benefit to the Rlate, private interefi in trade operates with the least erring direcion for the public benefit, and is secure of its purpose, where public councils would miitake or miss of their aim.

The trader, no doubt, may err in the pursuit of his gain; but the principle from wh\lich he altcs is so exquisitely fenlible to lit experience of prolit or lols, that the Ilcfl os of that Cxle ioice Vol.. II. 1 h h I Jc'ldo 
 seldom need to be repeated: The first loss is sufficient to correct 
CHAP.VI. the error of the trader, and he runs with irresistible avidity k'"vY.' wherever it appears that profit is to be made. The slate may do much to protet, or even to aid him, but not in the way of exciting his ardour, or in directing its application.

It is a primary object of government, on this and many other accounts, to secure the property of its subje&s, to protect the induftrious in reaping the fruits of his labour, in recovering the debts which are julfly due to him, and in providing for the fair decision of questions that may arise in the intercourse of trade.

For the encouragement of commerce, in particular, it is wife to facilitate communications by commodious high ways, inland and sea navigations, and every other conveniency that tends to lessen the difficulty of removing commodities from the place in which they are produced to that in which they are wanted. This is the principal aid which commerce requires. Ministers of Rtate have had their predilections; some for manufacture, others for agriculture; some for foreign, others for domestic trade, and it is not uncommon to imagine, that either is profitable only in proportion as the commodity of the merchant brings money, or filver and gold in return.

In speculation we wish to simplify our objects, and would propose to set the whole machine of human life in motion, by touching some key, or by pulling a particular firing. Some would encourage manufacuures, in order to furnish the husbandman with a ready market for the produce of his farm ; and take this way to encourage the culture of land. Others are inclined to adopt 1 th:11

the converse of this expedient; or increase the produce of land, 

in order to feed the manufaCurers at a cheaper rate: At the fame 
CHAP.P Vl time, it is evident, that, if the itate can procure any special aid v-p or inftrueion to either, that this aid ought to be direcly applied where it is supposed to be of use, and not left to wait the recoil of encouragement or inftruaion from a different quarter.

Errors of administration are frill more pernicious, as a late ingenious author has fully demonstrated -*, where, apart from any consideration of public fafety,they tend to check one article of trade in favour of another, or ad upon a principle of predilecion for exportation or importation, in preference of one to the other.

With refpe& to the comparative importance of the home and foreign trade, it is evident, that a person having a redundancy of any commodity, and not able to find what he wants in exchange for it, in the dwelling of his nearest neighbour, muff go farther, and even if necessary to the territory of a separate sovereign.

A market that is not to be found in the neighbouring village may be found in some city or difrria at a distance; and a commodity which can neither be produced nor vended in one latitude, may be produced or find its market in a different one. If in the search of this market, the trader is led to the dominions of a sovereign different from his own, he is said to go into foreign trade. If all the parties live in the territories of the fame fovereign, the commerce between them, however remote from each other, is fiill domestic or internal. But this circumstance, it fioulcl seem, does not assed the preference to be given to one branch of I-I h h 2 trade * Smith on the Wealth of Nations.

. trade over another, farther than as a preference is clue to the neal.
' clt and re.dicetfi market, as being attended with the leani expcnce '~'-rx., of libour or carriage, and the leait delay of returns.

It is evident that, where a redundant commodity cannot be diifofi.cd of at home, the producer is intererfed to have it carried abroad, or presented wherever he can find a market; that, where the commodity he wants cannot be obtained at home, he is intcrefled to have it fiom abroad, or firom whatever quarter it can be procured. But the necessity of foreign commerce, in either way, may diminifl as the territory of the state extends ; ifbthat finall iatces may be in continual need of commerce with foreigners, while great empires, like the globe of the earth itself, have a fufi-cienc range for every species of trade within themselves.

VWhere silver and gold, or money, is more wanted than other commodities, commerce willnaturally take its direction to the quarter in which these are to be had in return ; but, where other commodities are more wanted than gold or silver, there will be itnt for a supply of the more pressing neceflity; and there would be no profit in retaining them if other commodities are more ufCful than they are.

One article of policy connected with commerce, and in which the authority of state is supposed to be neceflary, is the eflay and coinage of money, to serve as a flandard of valuation and medium of exchange. Commerce may originate in what is termed barter, in which the parties mutually give and take the articles which they have to fiarc, in exchange for thole they want. The hufsiandiman may have given his nieafrl-c of corn in exchange 5ir the yard of the manufalcurcr's cloth, without any ianclrd o.t of valuation betides what is afixed by the want or exigency of the PaTr II.
several parties. Even where the parties in trade recur to a patri- 



cular commodity as a common flancard of valuation in their va- S~.-.[V
rious tranfiltions, they may themftlves estimate the quantity and quality of the tfandard, as well as that of the comlmolditics they are to appreciate by a reference to its value; but rlany inconveniences are avoided by flec(ing the precious metals as the flandard of valuation, and fill farther inconvenience is avoided by the just interpofiion of government to ascertain, by a mark of public authority, the fincnefs and quantity of the species v;hich is to pass in circulation. This is the objct of coinage, and a principal article in the policy of nations, relating to commerce or the operations of trade.

It is well known that even the precious metals, however fitted to represent a great value in finall bulk, nevertheless may become too unwieldy for quick circulation, and for repeated transfers of property, when the tranGfactions of commerce come to be widely extended, and great remittance of money required in payments.
That, in this cafe, where public or private credit is sufficiently established, promifibry notes, or obligations to pay, may pass through many tranfiCtions, and for a time fuperfecte the ne-ccflity of aaual payment, while the money lies ready to, anf\ver the demand, at the place froml which the promifilry note was illiecl.

In this matter, it is a sacred objecR of policy to keep faith with the creditor; and, where the credit of slate is interposed, and to give ready protection to the citizen where any abuse in the circulation of paper or promillbry notes can bc dreaded.

3a l-ere 
Here then, or in refpea to the accumulation of wealth, we 

SCT. IV.' may venture to reft the estimate of national felicity: First, on /-vx. the labour of the people, or the degree in which that labour is productive; next, on the species of commodity produced, and its fitness to fubfifl and accommodate the greatest number of valuable citizens and useful hands; and, last of all, on the freedom of trade, and the equal protection given to the people in every bianch of commerce unrestrained and unforced, with this single exception, that where in the course of trade advantages may arise, or inconveniences be incurred, refpeeting the safety or defence of the commonwealth, in every such cafe, fafety-is to be preferred to profit; and the public defence being a primary objec of public attention, and an object for which states must be prepared to incur indefinite expence, it is an object for which also they must be willing on occasion to forgo their profits, and to embrace the less profitable branch of trade in which men are formed for the public service, in preference to the more profitable branch in which this advantage is not to be obtained. Hence the wisdom of encouraging seamanship in maritime nations, and the wisdom of guarding, in every state, the manners of a brave and ingenuous people, in preference to their numbers or wealth.





S E C T I O N V.

of the Statewealth of the people, according to the observations of last 
ting 

quantity, continually perishing, and continually reproduced. Its 
sources are the labour employed in agriculture and manufature.
Its issues are the consumption made by the people, and the expences incurred by the state. Its increase or diminution depends on the proportion which the supply bears to the waste or consumption.

The first and principal use of wealth is the fubfiflence and accommodation of the people: But there is another, if not included in this, at least necessary to obtain its end; the support of government in the discharge of its necessary fundions, as in difpensing the law, in preserving the peace at home, in guarding againft danger from abroad, or in any other objea of adminiftration calculated for the general benefit of the community.

In PA.XRT. I- In what manner a public revenue is to be conifituted for these Ci-iaP. VI.
Si1c'r. V. purposes is matter of very important concern. It is under\i'ood to come into the management of those who are intrusted with government, and is that on which the spirit of liberty has most cause to be jealous; in which the supposed interests of the governing and the governed are foonefc at variance; and in which the tyrant has most immediate occasion to abuse his power.

In rude and barbarous lhordes, numbers of men appear to be united merely as making up the train of a leader. \hatever be their purfaits or refburces, the leader is supposed to preside in the one, and to enjoy a principal fliare of the other.

In the first wars of the Romans, every citizen kept the field at his own expence, or served the public from the fame flock with which he supported himfclfand his family. If the leader, in condudting the public service, incurred a greater expence than any of his followers, he was enabled to discharge that expence by means of the fame advantages which procured him the afcIenlant he enjoyed. And in his cafe, to-employ the spoils of one enemy, in waging war with another, was at once to have a public revenue, and to be cntrufecd with its application.

In the firPi difribution of property, individuals are likely to lhare in proportion to their power. The leader or iobvcr'irl of the coimmunity, together with his power, has a claim to wvht lmay enable him to Ipport his rank, and to cdi 'e its funtii;; andm the demelne appropriated to him is u!l(ndrflOOd, at the b.!::'.
time, to be his private cflae, and the revenue of the commo:1-1wcalth.

as well as principalities, have had part of theipublic revenue constituted in fubjeCs reserved for the communi- ty, or set apart from the property of any individual, for this pur- SA
pose. Such were the mines which were wrought for the ifate of Athens; the pasture lands of Campania, and other fubjeds which were let for the republic of Rome.

The kings in ET.rope have 'their forests or demesne lands, which are so many remains of the funds from which the state of a feudal sovereign was maintained, as that of his vassals was supported from their refpeaive fiefs.

In the progress of nations, however, -the demesne of the fovereign has been found till less and less adequate to the public expence. While other fubjeds of property in private hands are improved or rendered producive; the royal forest in their neighbourhood continues to be waste; and government, taught to rely on other and more copious resources, has long confidered the demesne of the sovereign as a mere article of state and pleasure to the prince, or as the means of liberality towards those in his favour.

As private interest is the great principle of lucrative arts or accumulation of wealth, it is material to the prosperity of nations, in this article, that every subjed susceptible of improvement {hould be appropriated or pass into private hands, who may turn it to the highest account: Insomuch that the idea of a public demesne, as men advance in flill and industry, is justly exploded, or exchanged for a contribution, or taxes to be levied from the labour or eitates of the people.

VOL. I. LI i T.

 It is just, and in every community matter of tacit, if not of ex

SECT. V press agreement, that every one who partakes in the benefit of a ---' public establishment should bear a part in the expence it incurs, On this principle is founded the obligation of the subjea to contribute his flare to the revenue of the state; and, on this principle, a revenue wifely conflituted may, in the progress of national.
wealth, without any public oppression, be made to keep pace with the growing exigencies, the growing numbers, riches, and frugality of the people.

Taxes, for this purpose, may be laid in different ways, and follow the rates of property in different fubjeAs and effects.

They may be laid in the form of affeffinent on the rents of land, or other sources of private returns.: They may be laid on goods as they pass in commerce; or they may be laid on articles of consumption in the actual use.

In judging of the absolute or comparative expedience of taxes diverfifled in any of these ways, the following maxims may be asfumed.

First, That the real exigencies of the state are to be provided for at any hazard or expence to the fubje. The interests of the state and of the people, when well underitood, are the fiame. The first interest of the people is that every one fllould be protected; and the first interest of the tate is, that it Ifiould be in condition to afford protection. Whatever may have been in faA the origin of government, upon this principle alone, the solicitude with wh.lch which it is adliniftered, and the refped that is paid to it by the PrAlT Ir.
people are founded. C P. V1.

Secondly, it may be assumed, That the private estate of the subjed is in no cafe to be unnecessarily taxed, under pretence of a public concern. The establishments of a great people may contain a variety of departments, and lead to applications of revenue useful and proper, in a variety of different ways; but beyond these limits, it is evident, that, to tax the people were to rob them of their property, to take from industrious hands what may go into the hands of the prodigal; or, instead of a source of farther wealth to the community, prove an occasion of abuse or a walte, for which the commonwealth is to receive no compenfa.tion or supply.

In the third place, it may be assumed, That, as it is a principal object of government to secure the property of the subjec against every invader, care should be taken, in the form of taxation, to fix the limits of public exaction, so as no way to impair the security of the subjed, in the possession of what he has left; that, while he is required to contribute a part of his labour to the public expence, the extent of this demand Ihould be well ascertained, and no admifion be given to arbitrary impositions, which might render the fortune of the subjec in any degree precarious. It is in the confidence of a security of property that the labourer toils to obtain it, and chearfully contributes a part of his gains to ensure the remainder.

It is difficult to obtain security on this point wherever the ibvcrcign, conceiving his own intereit as diftinii froin that of the 1 i i 2 people, 
 people, is at the fame time empowered to impose taxes by his SCHA. VI. own prerogative, and without their consent.

A prerogative of this extent, wherever it be lodged, whether in the hands of a monarch, a senate, or democratical assembly, except so far as bodies of the two last descriptions are supposed to to tax themselves, is not confifent with the liberty of those over whom it is exercised. In a monarch, it leads to the defpotifin of one; in a senate, to the despotism of a few; and, even in a democratical assembly, when exercised over fubjec-provinces, is the despotism of many; and, for this very reason, is the more oppreffive and the less restrained, than it is in either of the two former instances. Thus the Athenians oppressed their allies, or maller states in dependance upon them, under pretence of exacting the quota of each in support of the common cause; and the Romans, while they exempted themselves from taxes, suffered their provinces to be oppressed with every mode of vexation.

In the fourth place, it is evident, that no tax fllould be laid on in such a manner as to drain the source from which it is derived.
The labourer ought not to be interrupted or disabled in the performance of his labour. The trader ought not to be robbecL
of his tfock; nor the landholder difpoffeffed of his land. Eachl may be required to contribute a part of his returns; but this lhould be clone in perfect consistence with the safety of that subjed from which his returns are derived.

In the fifth place, it may be afiumed, That not only every real grievance, but every apparent one also, and whatever is likely to be felt as such in the imposition of taxes, is to be avoided.

Thc The public and its members ought to be confidered as parties 

in the fame common cause, and flarers in the fame common ad- 




venture. It is the interest of the state, that it should be chearful- Srv ly served and supported; that nothing flould take place in the exaAions of revenue or of public service which has a tendency to alienate the minds of the people; that, in the choice of taxes, those ought to be preferred which are least likely to be felt as a grievance. For this reason, probably, the most prosperous flates have indefinitely varied the forms of taxation, so that by raising some part, though not the whole, from any particular quarter, they have avoided laying a burden to be felt as a grievance, upon any particular class or order of the people.

Customs fall ultimately upon the consumer of the goods for which they are paid. Perhaps all taxes fall ultimately upon those who may themselves -be made to pay, but who have not the means of recovering any part of what they have paid, by imposing any terms for that purpose upon others. Whoever lives on his rent, and buys every article of consumption, without having ought to fell, comes under this description. It is contended, therefore, in speculations on public oeconomy, that taxes of every kind, however immediately constituted, fall ultimately on the produce of land. This is probably a mistake; for every other person that lives on a taxable income, and by the consumption of taxable goods, without having any to fell, must bear a proportional part of the burden, as well as the person whose rent is from land. But, even if the revcrfe were admitted, it would be far from expedient to apply to the landholder diretly for the supply of a whole revenue to the slate. Were this measure to be taken, the whole -urdcnl would apparcntly, as well as really, lie upon one cla's of tlr~c t~A1T 11. the people; and even if the load should continue to be support:ET.HAP. ed by this class, it would nevertheless, from its immediate pressure .-H-- and apparent partiality, be confidered as an insufferable grievance, and become a continued source of complaint.

It is material, therefore, in conformity to the maxim now fiated, that taxes, wherever they may ultimately fall, should be diverfisied in refpea to the fubjeds taxed, and the tax gatherer have immediate recourse for payment to all orders of the people, that the whole may, at least in appearance, if not in reality, bear a proportional fihare of the burden.

In this manner, and through a succession of ages, a revenue of the greateit extent may be raised gradually and almost infenfibly, so as scarcely to occasion any complaint of a grievance but from those who induflrioufly speculate on the whole amount, and indulge apprehensions of what may be the ultimate result of its progress.

The policy to which this maxim refers has been adopted by sovereigns of almost every description, whether they meant to charge their people with heavy burdens in the most artful manner, or to provide for the real exigencies of slate in the manner that would be leafl felt as a grievance. This consideration, while it may influence the choice of a tax, ought to influence also a choice of the manner in which taxes are to be levied, or made esfectual, with the lcaft cause of complaint on the part of the subject.

Taxes, we fippofe, may be levied, either by officers in the pay of the public, or by persons who farm the revenuc at a dctcrmiIna tc nate rate. In general it has been observed, that taxes let to farm 

are more oppressive than those which are levied by public corn- 
mission or revenue officers. 
It is not difficult to perceive whence it should arise, that a revenue let to farm is more oppressive than one that is collected by officers in behalf of the public. A farm of revenue is commonly let to the highest bidder. The sovereign stipulates for a certain fum to be paid into the public coffers, without any risK from the negligence or failure of those who are employed in the colletion, or from the infolvence of those from whom it is due. The farmer rents the subjec but for a limited period; and ats in that period under the impulse of a temporary interest, and at the hazard of exhausting the source of future revenue, while he reaps the present. He naturally proceeds with the illiberal severitics of a private concern, having in his view to obtain tome adequate return for his risk and trouble, as well as to make up the fum he is bound to pay to-the Rate. His concern in the matter is temporary, and he labours to make immediate gain for himself, however it may asseA the permanent interests of the public. He calls upon the sovereign to support his exaAions, under pain of sussering him to fail in performing his engagements; and,l under this pretence, the public authority is of course employed to enforce the vexations of private rapacity.

\Where, on the contrary, officers are employed with fixt salaries.

to colled the duties which are required by the public, thece oiTlcers being restrained from exacting more than the public has inposed, and though called to a firic account of what they have received, answerable only for the diligent and ftithful dicthar.,ce of 3 their 
their own duty, they are not interefied to urge the public exac

SECT. V. tions to any cruel or oppressive extent.

Taxes are of different denominations, taken either from the subjed on which they are imposed, or from the manner in which they arelevied. They may be reduced to five titles, capitation, as/fefment, monopoly, cu/lo7.s, and exc/e. The two first are exaded from the person or the estate of the fubjeel; the other three are exac2ed from commodities in sale or consumption.

Capitation is a tax on the person, and when not modified by any diftintion of poor or rich, is supposed to fall equally on both.
This may be the first rude device of an arbitrary master, who, not being willing to embarrass himself with diftindions, would arrive at the end of his government in the shortest way %. It were absurd to exact no more from the rich than the poor can pay.
And it would be cruel to extort from the poor as much as the rich may without inconvenience afford. Capitation were in either way unjust and impolitic, either unproductive or cruel. It has indeed seldom or ever been exemplified in this extreme. The most arbitrary and inconsiderate master is aware of its defects, and aims at some diftindion, by which he would make the wealthy contribute in some proportion to their means. In a plan of capitation, for instance, projeded for a neighbouring kingdom, it was * The Turkifli governor in the island of Cyprus levies a poll tax from every inhabi.

tant, without diftincqion of persons; and, by way of additional revenue, fi)n.
times repeats the exaction from persons of a particular name, whether George, J7ames, or *Thomias. And, we may believe, when such is his humlour, may adn a name or two nlorc. 'Thl labour of thinlinig feeis to be the principal diflrefs from which these otliers flu-ink.

3farili's lTavels into C.)prui and Sa'rin.

was proposed to range the people into fix classes, and to fix a pro- 

portional rate for each. Such an arrangement, however, would 


S eT. V.

serve only to diminish the evil, not to remove it entirely. Within each of the classes considerable varieties of fortune must have been admitted, and great injustice would still take place in the exaction of equal rates from persons of unequal wealth, though of the fame clafy.

Were we to suppose a capitation or poll-tax to be freed of all its defects, by a perfect adjustment of the exaction to the means of those on whom it is laid, this in fad would be to change it into that form of taxation which we would express under the name of afleffinent.

Under this title we may include every species of tax, in which a due proportion to the means or estate of the subje&t is aimed at.
Such, in particular, is the nature of the land tax in Great Britain.

The rent of land is of all others the most palpable fulbjed of assessment; but this form of taxation may with great justice be made to comprehend the rent of houses or tenements of any fort, which yield an ordinary return to the owner.

Property in money or flock is leTs easily ascertained. The very attempt, in the cafe of a merchant, might be attended with much inconvenience, or improperly disclose the secrets of trade. His flock is fluctuating. It is riflced upon uncertain events; and, at particular times, it may be doubtful whether his fortune is not greatly reduced, or whether he is not upon the eve of recovering his risk with great profit. Free and trading nations, therefore, may wifely forego the application even of VOL.II. K k k aireffiment, 
 aflTffinents, where the indiscriminate extension of such a tax SHCAP. V. might check the efforts of trade, on which the increase or preferva-rv tion of national wealth so much depends.

Monopoly is the exclusive privilege of buying or felling a commodity, from which it is proposed to levy a tax.

Whoever has the sole privilege of buying may buy at his own price, and will give no more than what enables the feller to bring his goods to market. If he also have have the sole privilege of vending, he will exacs as much as the confuner can be made to pay, without discouraging him entirely from the use of the commodity. With these advantages, the dealer may make indefinite profit in the result of his trade. When the sovereign takes such a monopoly to himself, or lets it to farm, as has been done in many states, refpeaing salt, tobacco, and other commodities, he obtains by such means a considerable revenue, limited only by his regard to what the people may susser from an immoderate exacion upon a commodity of general use, or by the danger of suppressing that use altogether, if the profit attempted to be made amounts to a prohibition. The Roman state, at a very early period of its history, took or let to farm the monopoly of salt The fame measure has been repeated in different nations of Europe and Asia, and is extended to a variety of other fubjedCs.

Among the objections to this mode of taxation may be reckoned the necessity with which sovereigns of almost every cenomination must feel themselves, being obliged to farm their monopolies, and thereby expose their people to all the vexations which accompany this mode of levying a tax, joined to the peculiar vexation of of being prohibited from filpplying themselves with an ufcful or 

neceTfary article, at the easiest rate. SCHP. VI

SE cr. V.

The effect of monopoly, otherwise, may be the fame either with that of a capitation tax, or of a fair affeffinent. A monopoly of the mere necefTaries of life, or of any commodity which the poor must consume, at least, equally with the rich, has all the cruel effecAs of indiscriminate capitation or poll tax; whereas the monopoly of any commodity of which men proportion the use to their means of procuring it, such as are matters of luxury or fuperfluous accommodation, has the effect of assessment so as to fall chiefly on the rich; or, if it fall upon persons of unequal condition, it may do so in just proportion to their fortune, or to their consumption of the article taxed.

But, in general it may be observed, that, if commodities are to be taxed, the form of customs or excise is preferable to that of monopoly.

The revenue of cufloms consists in certain rates exacted for goods as they are passing in commerce. They are exacted at toll-bars, at the entry to markets, at the gates of cities, or at sea ports.

The exaction of customs, no doubt, is an interruption to commerce, and as such is avoided by nations whose principal trade consists in the carriage of goods.

Customs are commonly advanced by the merchant, but confidered by him as a part in the cost of his goods, and to be recovered with profit in the sale of his commodity ; so that taxes of K k k 2 this 
 this fort acAually fall upon the consumer. By either merchant 
CHAP.V. or consumer, however, they are less felt as a grievance than any SEvCT. ' other form of taxation. The merchant submits to pay custom, because he hopes to recover that and every other part of his advance with profit. The consumer is almost insensible of it, be.
cause it is paid as a part of the price of the commodity, which he fieely buys, and from the use of which he is free to refrain whenever he becomes unwilling to pay the price.

As goods in commerce pass through a number of hands, and are paid for, successively by different traders, it is evident that the earlier any custom is paid to the revenue, in the tranimiffion of articles from the hands of the producer to those of the consumer, the heavier will that duty fall on the latter, as he will be made to refund with profit the advance which every intermediate trader has made; and the more will what he is made to pay, in consequence of a duty so early advanced, exceed what actually pasfes into the coffers of the Rate. To obviate this and some other inconveniences, supposed peculiar to the revenue of customs, the duties of excise have in ofme cafes been preferred.

The excise, when flated in contradiftindion to cutfoms, is a duty exacted from commodities in the adual use, and paid, not by the merchant, in any Rfage of the trade, but by the confumer.

In this form of a duty, all interruptions to commerce are propofed to be avoided, and the duty Limply exacted from the consumer, without any accumulation of impositions on the cost of the article. In nations, however, where the fubjecct is fond of his imnmunity, nity or exemption from the controul and inflpeaion of govern- 

ment, it is difficult to inflitute a revenue of excite, in the perfect CA P. 'V
form of its definition, as a tax levied fromn the confiimer. The citizen exposed to such exacion would be aggrieved, in having his dwelling always laid open to the intrusion of the revenue ofsicer, and his manner of life fubjeted to infpetion. To avoid these inconveniences, the excise in Great Britain is no more than an approximation to the model proposed under this title. It is a duty exadred not from the consumer, but from the producer or last vender of the commodity; who, on account of the profits to be made by his trade, may submit to the inconvenience of having it infpeded.

Another occasion of dislike, which, in this island, is taken to the revenues of excite, is more accidental. The first duties of this kind, that were fettled on the crown, were given in lieu of certain feudal rights which the king was entitled to exercise at difcretion; and it was thought reasonable that their equivalent should be administered in the fame manner with that part of the former revenue for which it was substituted. It is accordingly administered by a revenue board; and questions that arise with refpeC to it, are decided by commiflioners, without admitting the subjed to a trial at common law. The excise laws, accordingly, being supposed lets favourable to the people than those by which their rights are adminiflered, in other instances, are confidered with peculiar dislike.

But apart from there considerations which are peculiar to the free spirit of this constitution, the merit of excite, like that of any other tax im-posed on commodities, whether levied by monopoly or customs, is mcafurable by the nature of the comnodity on which PARr. II. which the duty is paid. It may be a tax either on the poor or on the rich separately, or on all the different ranks and conditions _yv of men, according to the degree in which they consume the commodity taxed.

No revenue can be considerable, that is derived only from a few, or from a particular class of the people. In the choice of articles to be taxed, therefore, fubjeAs of very general consumption, if made to pay what even the poor can afford at the rate of their own consumption, and which in the greater or increasing confunption of the rich may amount to a payment proportioned to their fortunes, is no doubt the preferable objea of taxation, whether in this form of excise or any other.





S E C T I O N VI.

The fame Jubjec7 continued.
a public revenue be constituted, whethein all or any of the ways now mentioned, a question still re- mains, In what manner the public resources are to be applied to ,-'"Y
the occasional exigencies of the state ?

An ordinary expence is to be provided for, from Come ordinary fund; but sudden or extraordinary occasions require some immediate or extraordinary supply; and it is an important queftion in the administration of public revenue, In what manner this supply is to be obtained, whether by calling upon the subje&, at every particular emergency, to contribute proportionally to the occasion; by having a treasure reserved from the savings of an ordinary income; or, last of all, by anticipating a future revenue in money borrowed, and chargeable with interest on some public fund?

There IA'RT II. There is no doubt that contributions proportioned to the oc'SrFc. VIl cafion, if these could be always obtained, would be the mos provv-~.-a per and safest manner of accommodating revenue to the variable exigencies of the state. In this manner, persons entrusted with government might be retrained from engaging in projects of expence beyond their means or resources. Perpetual taxes would not be imposed for temporary or precarious advantages; nor would the errors of a passing age leave, for a monument of its misconduct or misfortune, an unneceflary burden to be borne by posterity. But it may not be pracicable, on every emergency, and on those even the most pressing, to find a supply fully adequate to the occasion; and a nation thus trulRing its safety to the supply of the moment, would be exposed to much difadvantage, and even danger.

The occasions on which a people are likely to be called upon to contribute most largely, are the very times in which their means are the moit likely to be impaired, or they themselves precluded from the command of them. Such might be the cafe in time of invasion by a foreign enemy; when lands are laid wafie; when the stock of the husbandman and manufacturer is carried off or deflroyed; or even in cafe of war at a distance, or when the channels of trade are obftruted or turned away from their usual course, and the returns of profit are interupted or rendered precarious. In all fich cafes, no revenue fuddcenlj constituted can be equal to the occasion.

The provident rfatefman, therefore, we may fuppofc, would be prepared for for such an emergence in one or other of the ways rwe have mentioned; that is, he would manage his ordinary in2 COllIC

come in such a manner as to have some savings reserved in his 

coffers to meet such extraordinary occasions ; or he would bor- CHTIA. VI

SE cl:. VI.

row upon credit from the few who are in condition to lend what the public may not then be in condition to advance; but which it may be in condition to repay in a more favourable time.

The firit of these pratdices, in amafing a treasure hath been adopted by sovereigns in many Ilates both ancient and modern. It is peculiarly adapted to the charader of a prince, who is able in ordinary times to stretch the resources of his people to their utmost, or who is entitled at discretion to call upon them to contribute what he has not any immediate occasion to expend.

If indeed the ordinary revenue is such as the people can eafily supply, and the saving proceeds rather from the moderation and wife oeconomy of the sovereign, than from his rapacity in extorting from the people more than is consistent with their profperity to give; in such a cafe, the formation of a treasure by public saving is unquestionably a wife measure, and sovereigns are entitled to refped in proportion as they pur!iue it steadily and successfully.

In pursuit of this meafurc, however, it is aflunmed, that more niay at all times be exacted fiomn the people than there is any inmmediate or present occasion to expend ; that a capital or 'fock, equal to the publicfavings may be withdrawn fiomu the lucrative nradc of the fi!bjcEt, and lie unlc nployed in the coflC'r.s of thc flatc.
.ut to wt tiidraw any part of thel public lock, in tllis ni. an.nr, fl'o m ,ublilic use, is no doubt anl incolnvfcni1nce ; and it vSwill lie tiic more ;tfi1l) ly felt, in proportion as th!c p ol I
::;. indullfriu -, ::11l tt iV oi..11. , ]1 I ;i;;; 
PART. V. lified to improve the flock in their hands, by employing itin the C n _~ p. ; "!.

c ,-. ir hire of ufectul labour.

The objecions thus flated to either of the two former ways of adminiflcring a revenue, whether by making demands, on every emergency, proportioned to the occalion; or, by hoarding at one time lwhat may be wanted at another, may be removed by adopting the method which has been mentioned in the third place, viz. that of borrowing a capital for any sudden or extraordinary caf ; and, by creating a fund, or impoling a tax no more than lui'icient to pay the intcreil of the debt so contracted.

In this praclice, the len: er is tempted by the equitable or lucrative terms which are offered to him ; the public is tempted by the convenience of obtaining great fuins, adequate to the occasion, upon the credit of a fmrall or inconsiderable tax, government, at the fame time, reserving the option of paying up the capital at a convenient time, or leaving the fund allotted to pay the intcreft in a transferable form, all parties are fully accommodated.

The creditor, although the public debt flould not be paid, may recover his capital at pleasure by the sale of his flock: But the continuance of this practice requires that the good faith of thle public flould be known, and a perfect confidence established in the security it has given. The practice is therefore most likely to ficcecd, where the people, by themselves or their reprefentatives, have a lhare in the government, and are confilted particularly in what relates to the revenue of their country. As their consent is required t tohe levying of taxes, they are likely to preser a finall tax, though with the burden of a perpetual annuity, to heavy taxes for the prlcint, without any such burden. ! 1
-, d!er der such constitutions of government, while the public at large 

become debtor, some part of that public also becomes the creditor, CIAP. Vy.

S F c T. V1.

and in this capacity is deeply interetled in having the public faith ftriEly ob served.

* y this expedient, nations are qualified, on great occasions, to make exertions proportioned to their credit, .and may fometiines overwhelm an enemy of superior strength, whose coffers are drained, and who has not an equal access to this resource.

For this reason nations who have ample credit will ever be tempted to employ it, and proceed in accumulating debt bo long as the increase of their wealth enables them to provide for the supply of funds on which the public credit may be securely eftablilhed.

This policy, however is supposed liable to peculiar objection, and is indeed threatened with evils of a very serious nature. It opens a new species of trade in the transfer of public funds attended with profit and loss to individuals, but unlike the employment of flock in manufacture or commerce, which tends to the increase of national wealth, itrefembles rather the viciflitudes of a gaming table, turning the industry and skill of those concerned into instruments of mutual deftrudion, by which they would prey upon one another ; so that, whoever gains, the public is fiure to lose to the amount of a labour which is so mifilpplied. The more that the public funds increafdl, the more scope is given to thi s ruinous branch of traffic; and the ftrcets of a capital, inltcad of the concourse of a busy people, who are labouring to increase the wealth of their country, exhibit crouds of adventurcrs who arc lhafcning to partake of its fjoil-. They lcnd, not: L 1 1 tC

 to accommodate their country, but'to make profit on every occa
 sion of public expcnce or calamity.
Sxc'r. VI.

The ftatefinan, in the mean time, is tempted by the facility of borrowing to be lavili of the public credit. The monied min encourage him, that they themselves may have lucrative bargai ns; and they from wxhom a tax is to be levied prefer a light burden in which their posterity is to bear a part, to one more heavy, of w hich they themselves muff have borne the intire load.

A national debt may be increased almost insensibly, while the means and the strength of the people continue to grow; but no progress in human affairs is infinite, and whatever may be the strength of a people, a load that is continually growing muff overwhelhn them at last; or, to speak without a figure, the interest of a debt that is continually accumulating must come in the end to equal, or even to exceed, all the funds which can be found for payment of its interest.

Upon this account, it is a wife policy to eftablifli some form, in which a debt that is gradually increasing, by recourse to the public credit on every accidental occasion, may also be gradually diminifiling, in times of respite from every iuch occasion.

It may happen fortunately for nations in which the measure of borrowing is adopted, that the interest of money, by the accumulation of unemployed capital, may be considerably reduced; and in this cafe the public, by borrowing at a reduced interefl to pay off the original debt, may considerably diminifli the annuity vlhich they were originally bound to pay. In tlis nmanner, whlil the clapital of the debt in Great Britain was increaring, lthe anunity, nuity, by a mere reduction of interest, was kept from increaflng, 

in the fame proportion. An original interest, in some inflances, CHIAP. VI'
of eight per cent. being reduced to three, it may happen that, Sc-. V
while the capital of a debt is doubled, the annuity receives no increase, or may even be reduced.

So far, however, it appears from the whole of there obfervations, that states, in adopting any specific form in the adminiftration of revenue, are exposed to peculiar inconveniencies or difficulties; and it is probable, that no two Rates can with equal advantage have recourse to the fame expedients. One slate may not be exposed to any such great or sudden emergency as may not provide for by an effort made on the occasion; and, in such cafe, it is undoubtedly expedient to accommodate the supply to the service for which it is wanted.

As every Rfate may to a certain extent proceed in this manner, and on many occasions find a supply proportioned to the exigence of the cafe, it is undoubtedly wife, so far as is practicable, to accompany every emergence with a suitable provision, while, at the fame time, care may be taken to have some treasure relerved in the coffers of the state, for occasions which cannot thus be provided for by occasional supplies. Thus, the Romans who had repeatedly suffered under sudden invasions from the warlike nations of Gaulic extraction, residing within the Alps, had a facredc treasure reserved, which it was deemed profane to touch, but in cafi of iome such alarm from that quarter as threatened the public with immcdiate deftrucAion.

Nootwithflanding thcfE maxims, it mufi also be admitted that, where itatcs are fortunately circuLtlanced with rcfjict to ctr.'it, I ntlC, PA;.x I. and, by means of this advantage, are able to maintain their ifate 
aglaintf nations otlherwife more powerful than themselves, it were S:c'r. VI.

no doubt impolitic in them, to forgo their advantage, or to susser themlflvcs to be overwhelmed, rather than employ a fpccific means of defence which they in a particular manner have in their power.

But, without dwelling any longer on the comparison of diff.
rent forms for the adminifiration of revenue, we may ojferve, that the wifdomi of any public expence is to be estimated by the occasion on which it is made; and public profit or loss from any adventure is to be measured by the return which it brings, whether adequate or unequal to the cofl.

An expence, in whatever manner it be provided for, whether by savings made of the past, or by anticipations of a future revevenue; or, in whatever manner it be disbursed, if it either were unnecessary, or did not bring a proper return, is to be confidered as an article of public loss.

On the contrary, an expence which is necelTary to public safetv, or which brings an overbalance of gain, in whatever manner the supply be obtained, may be confidered as part in the course of a prosperous nation. Not only positive acquisitions, but losfcs avoided, and the maintenance of a people in their progreflive courle of improvement, may be stated in account againil the debt which is incur'cd, and be fuiflcient to create a balance in favour of the nation by whom it is contractecl. Mere debt, therefore, is -not to bc confi(lcred as an article of loGs, or even inconvcnience l'which thc national gtin may not amlply coinpenfttc. Nor arc 'Vi; we rahilly to conclude, that a nation is the poorer for every arti- 

cle of debt it has contracted, until we have confidered to what 




cffect the money so procured has been expended, and whether the E,-r public advantages-gained by means of it are.fully adequate to the riflk and the cost.

At the fame time, admitting this rule to be followed in the estimate of profit and lots, whether from money spent or borrowed, the peculiar effec of a national debt contracted is merely to trani.fer exifling property or revenue, from the person who formerly consumed it, to a person who now receives it in the form.
of interest for his money. In this form, the property is at once ofufe and transferable with more ease than in any other form whatever. To the flockholder it joins the convenience of a bank with the profit of a mortgage, and is of great benefit to the trader at every little interval at which his money is unemployed. We cannot doubt, therefore, apart from the advantage of credit in the public operations of a people, that it is a public benefit also to have part of the national property in this transferable form: How much, it may be difficult to determine. It may, no doubt, with advantage, be increased to a certain degree; but not indefinitely.
And it is wife, as the public occasions may tend to accumulate debt, that there should be a public regulation also, tending to diminifl it *. In this manner, the balance of universal order is beautifully preserved throughout the system of nature T.

W5here -X As in the comminiion for managing a finking fund.

I- TUle influx of rivers is balanced by cvaporation from tlhe f:a ; nndl he proj[ ile i ltmlfc of pl;lllt is ciliLcunfcribicd withiin certain bounds by cc r rcs.

PART IT. Where the money wanted cannot be raised within the year, it may nevertheless be raised within a limited period, if the fund v X- - ,provided should be sufficient not only to pay the interest, but also to extinguifli the debt within a specified time.

S IE C T I ( N



S E C T I O N VII.

Of Civil or Political Liberty.

T HERE is a meaning annexed to liberty which is highly inte- 
PART ILr refting to every ingenuous mind. Its votaries are supposed to 




have a common cause with their fellow creatures, and ever oc- -Sv.
cupy a distinguished rank in the lift of the heroes. It is thus that Pelopidas and Thrafybulus, Dion, Cato, and Brutus, rife above the level even of eminent men. It inspires magnanimity and noblenefs of mind; at the fame time, like every other objec that greatly concerns mankind, certain misapprehensions of it, or false pretensions to it, give occasion to great abuse. The zealot for liberty has run into the wildest disorders; and adventurers, under pretence of promoting it, have found their way to the most violent and pernicious usurpations *.

Mmm On * To this we ascribe the Tribunitian disorders at Rome, and the usurpations of Cacefr and Cromwell, &c.

 On a subjeA so interetling, we are deeply concerned to have SEC.VII. just information; and, as the substitution of a false idol for this GoV _ objec& of ardent devotion has led to such fatal extremes, we are no less concerned to reprobate the idol with horror, than we are with fond devotion to reverence the genuine object of worship; and may very properly, in our way to the formation of a just notion of liberty, begin our researches by observing what it is not.

Far fetched knowledge is not the most useful, either in the formation of theories, or in the conduCt of life; and it is in the common course of things we must look for the rule to direct us in either. It is also in the most common or vulgar errors we have to dread the greatest danger to the peace and welfare of mankind.
H-owever persons of reflecRion, therefore, may think it idle to wafle time in correcing such errors, we must attend to the common notions of men, refpecing a matter in which the plurality of voices may often prevail over reason and good sense.
TJpon this account we may be allowed to observe, in the outset, that liberty or freedom is not, as the origin of the name may seem to imply, an exemption from all restraint, but rather the most effectual application of every just reteraint to all the members of a free slate, whether they be magistrates or fubjeAs.

It is under a just restraint only that every person is safe, and cannot be invaded, either in the fieedom of his person, his property, or innocent acion. If any one were unrestrained, and might do what he pleaSed, to the fame extent also every one else must be expoled to susser whatever the free man of this defcription were inclined to inflid; and the very ufuipation of the most outrageous outrageous tyrant is no more than a freedom thus assumed to PArT 1I.

hn! ~~~~ifS'^~~ elf ~



Under this rniftake, the.vulgar conceive a zeal for liberty to consist in opposition to government; take part with every refractory subjeA; and seem to think that whatever impairs the power of the magiltrate must enlarge the freedom of the people. It is material, then, to remember that every person whatever, no leTs than the magistrate, if not properly restrained, may trespass on the liberty of his fellow creature ; and that the establishment of a just and effetual government for the repression of crimes, is of all circumstances in civil society, the mofi essential to freedom: That every one is justly said to be free in proportion as the government under which he resides is sufficiently powerful to protect him, at the fame time that it is sufficiently restrained and limited to prevent the abuse of its power. This is the roof under which the free citizen takes flelter from the storm of injustice and wrong; and he is no less concerned to know that the roof is tight and sufficient to repel the storm, than he is to know that it is well supported and secured from falling on his head.

We are safe, then, to define liberty, the operation of just government, and the exemption from injury of any fort, rather than merely an exemption firom restraint; for it adtually implies every just restraint. It must be admitted, at the fame time, that to a being whose acdive exertions are a principal source of his enjoyments, restraint, if capricious or unjust, may be confidered among the first of his grievances; and there is no infringerment of liberty more sensibly felt than a teazing imposition of frivolous obfcrM m m 2 vances, PA RT. TI. vances; or an arbitrary restraint imposed on the harnilefs purfuuii SECT. VI. of an ordinary life.: It is highly grateful to the human mind to pursue its innocent eourfe undireced and uncontroulled. It is even flattered with the imagination of romantic scenes, in which nature is free; nor bound to any task; not responsible to any authority; not hampered by any forms; and left to purfute the object of the moment in the way that the present moment suggests. This we conceive to be the Itate of the savage in his forest, conneced only with the objects of his affecion or choice; and, even in his engagements with those he loves, released from any sense of awe, controul, or restraint, whatever.

From this state of supposed perfect freedom, we apprehend that every flep which is made towards a political establishment must be to the individual a surrender of some original right; but we are disposed to apologise for the conceflion a free citizen has made, by stating the sacrifice of a part as necessary to secure the remainder.

Liberty, therefore, if most perfed in the condition of the savage, it fliourd eem from this account of the matter, is at least insecure; and this circumstance overthrows the very idea of that freedom which consists in the secure enjoyment of rights. The savage may, if he will, retire from the haunts of his fellow creatures, and avoid them as he himself is avoided by those animals of which he is disposed to make a prey. But, while he lives within reach of other men, he himself if weak may be a prey to the strong; or,. if individually strong, he may still be a prey to numbers, if perchance they should combine against him. His fieedom, then, is precisely no more than a privilege to deny himself all the corn2, forts, forts of a marn,in order to avoid the inconveniencies of a-dangerous 

neighbourhood: Or,iffecurity be necessary toliberty,in what man- CH"P Vi ner, we may ask, can he at once possess and secure his comforts ? V
Only by the concert of many, mutually to defend one another, and for this purpose to ad under a common direction. This, in other words, is to form a political establishment; and so far mankind universally proceed to adopt some species of polity upon the suggestion of nature, or theearly lessons of experience in ages otherwife rude.

Now, it may be asked, what has the individual surrendered in coming under such an establishment ? the freedom of retiring from his kind, flall we fay, and of relinquishing all the comforts of society ? But this he has in faa no where surrendered. This fort of freedom is still entire to the citizen of London and Paris, as much, as to the original inhabitant of Canada or Labrador.
But the subj-ea of any regular government will scarcely think it a privilege that he may, if it so please him,, relinquiih all the comforts and securities of life under the notion of recovering the original freedom of his kind. Security, in faa, is the essence of freedom; and, if security is to be obtained under political eftablifhment alone, there alone also is freedom obtained: and, in repairing to this shelter, when properly instituted, the savage surrenders nothing, or rather in the acquisition of fecurity.acquires every thing.

Freedom or liberty, then, we may conceive to be the genuirn fruit of political effablifhment: But, where the fruit is wanting, the tree is jufily accursed for its barrenness, or torn up by the roots for its yielding a poifoninfteadofa wholesome food. When liberty is confidered as the cause of the innocent against the guilty, or of the weak against the strong, and awakens the heart again f 
 against insult and wrong, we may easily account for the ardent CHCAP.VI and enthufiatic affe&ion with which it is embraced by every 
yverb) ingenuous mind. Mere reitraint, however injurious, is but one species of wrong, and would form but a partial account of the evils which render the tyrant so much an object of indignation to mankind.

But to the negative proposition thus stated, that liberty does not consist in mere exemption from refRraint, we may fubjoin.another, That it does not consist in the equality of fation or fortune.
In this sense, liberty were a mere chimera or vision, never realized in the slate of mankind. The nations who contended most for the equality of citizens, in admitting the institution of slavery, trespassed most egregiously on the equality of mankind.

Nay,but we shall be told,that all men were originallyequal. This, in regard to property, can mean only, that, when no one had any thing, all men were equally rich: But even this is no more than fancied equality in a single point. In refpec to sex and age, tfrength of body and mind, individuals are destined to inequality from their birth; and, almost in the firft-feps of society, bear the diftincions which industry and courage give in the different attainments of men, and lead in the sequel to all the varieties of profession and fortune.

The only refped in which all men continue forever to be equal, is that of the equal right which every man has to defend himself; but this involves a source of much inequality in refped to the things which any one may have a right to defend. As every one originally had a right to preferve'himfelf in the just use of his limbs, organs, and faculties, he has also a right to what there may may jutly procure for him; he has a right to engage himself in 

any bargain or compact, and to stipulate for himself any fair con- 


SFcT.VII.

dition; he has a right to acquire by his labour any unappropriated fubjecd, or any subjet appropriated with consent of the former proprietor. In the exercise of there rights, the conditions of men, whether in refpeA to pofeflions, or in refpea to their mutual conceffions.pr claims offervice, may become unequal to any fair amount; and it is not possible to prevent the inequality of condition in the fortunes of men, without violating the first and common principles of right in the most flagrant manner.

Whilit we admit, therefore, that all men have an equal right to defend themselves, we must not mistake this for an assumption that all men must have equal things to defend, or that liberty flould consist in firipping the industrious and the skilful, who may have acquired much, to enrich the lazy and profligate, who may have acquired nothing, or who may have wafted allthey could reach. It is inpoffible to restrain the influence of superior ability, of property, of education, or the habits of station. It is impoffible to prevent these from becoming in some degree hereditary; and of consequence it is impossible, without violating the principles of human nature, to prevent some permanent diftinAion of ranks: And, if this were poflible, it is far from expedient in the circumstances of human life. In these inequalites we find the first germe of subordination and government so necessary to the safety of individuals and the peace of mankind; and in these also we find the continued incentive to labour and the pratice of lucrative arts.

As liberty consists in the communication of safety to all,nothing could be more repugnant to it than the violation of right in any part, in order to level the whole. It is true that great inequalities X of 
 of fortune are adverse to some species of political institution; that C'HAP. VI.
SCT. VII. great diiindtions of rank, founded in birth alone, to the exclurY_ sion of merit, or to the suppression of all the efforts of distinguished ability in public service, is a corruption fatal to mankind; that unrestrained possession of arbitrary power of any fort, is for the fake of liberty and justice, to be carefully watched and flopped short of the extreme to which it may tend: But, as every one has a right to the condition in which, by the ordinary course of human nature, he is fairly placed, in which he is no way injurious to his fellow creatures, it must follow that liberty, in every particular infiance, must consist in securing the fairly acquired conditions of men, however unequal.

Diftindions of fortune may give rife to a reparation of ariftocratic and popular faclions, or a supposed opposition of interests, in the different orders of a people; and we will have occasion to observe that neither is safe without such a ihare in the government as may enable them to defend themselves, or put a negative on any measures which might be prejudicial to their refpedive interests. Both the high and the low, however, frequently aspire to. the government of their country. The one is said to contend for authority, subordination, and power; the other for liberty, immunity, or privilege: But liberty is far from being sa'fe in the exclusive prevalence of either. This will not be disputed relating to the unrefirained prevalence ofariftocratic authority. But it is no less true, that liberty does not consist in the prevalence of democratic power. 'I he violence of popular afTemblies and their tumults need to be restrained, no less than the pafilons and uulrpations of any other power whatever; and there is indeed no species of tyrrany under which individuals are lels lase than under that of a majority or prevailing ficUion of a corrupted people.

From IFrom these observations, upon the whole, it appears, that liber- 
PART I.

ty consists -in the security of the citizen against every enemy, whe- S V

C I. VI.

ther foreign or .domestic, public or private, from- whom; without <vo any provision being made for his defence, he-might-be.expofed to wrong or. oppression of any fort: And the first requisite, it should leem, towards obtaining this security, is the existence :of an esfetive government to wield the flrength of the community against foreign enemies, and to repress the commission of wrongs at home. Under this protetion, indeed, there may be danger from the very power which is established to afford it; but, without some fuich provision, there cannot be any degree of safety whatever. .

In pursuing this idea of liberty, therefore, through the several circumstances that may be neceflary to give it reality and effect, we have to confider, in the first place, what may be necessary to give an eflabliihment efficacy in restraining the disorder of the subjea: Next, what precautions may be neceirary in the inftitution of power,, to prevent the abuses that may be apprehended in the discharge of its functions.

There functions, we may conceive under three separate titles, legiflatioit, jurij2iiciozn, and the execution of the law, or concluc7Z
oj the national Jorce. And, corresponding to there functions, in every political eftabliihment, three diftint powers may be confidered; namely, the legf/lative, the judicative, and the executive. With respect to each of there, liberty requires that the powers Ihould be effectual to the eftablilhmncnt and preservation of order on the part of the lubjedt, and that it fllould be so exerVOL. IL. N n n cifed 
cifed on the part of the magistrate, as not to offer any injustice or Sc-T.VI. wrong to the people.

In farther treating of liberty, therefore, we are to confider the inflitutions of government required for the discharge of the principal funtions now enumerated, and providing at the 'fame time for the efficacy of power, and the safety of those who might be exposed to susser from its abuse.






Of Liberty as it mnay be afneed by the Exercie of the eegflative Tawer.

LAW is the sovereign will to which every part of the commu- 

nity must conform itself. That power, therefore, whether single 

or combined of many parts, which gives law to the community, 
mnuft be supreme; and, when its will is declared, cannot admit of any controu], without a diflolution of the political frame.

Upon this ground, liberty seems to require that every member of the commonwealth should have access, before the law is enated, to guard himself against any wrongs to which he may be exposed from the admission of any partial regulation; or. in other words, that the people of every separate order or rank, however diftinguifled by fortune, flould each have an acive fllare in the legislature of their country.

At 
 At the fame time, if this be admitted, it should seem to follow SECTHAPVI that liberty must be confined to a few democratical flates, in !- .-- which alone it is possible to comply with this condition. And so indeed, among antient nations, liberty was supposed peculiar to republics, and to those especially in which the sovereignty was exercised by the collective body of the people. Upon this ground, the republics of Greece and Italy were, with a few exceptions, diftinguifled from the reft of the world.

But the practice of representation, so happily introduced in some modern nations, though not of so great extent as to admit of their people being collecively aflembled, has removed this difficulty, and enabled every order of the state, if not collectively, at least by deputation, to take a part in the legislature of their country, and to have a vigilant eye on the proceedings of the whole.

What renders this expedient, of trufling the interests of many to a few, a sufficient security to the people who rely on it, is that their representative, by being a person of the fame mind and interest with themselves, and himself included in every ac of legiflation, is likely to'proceed as his constituents would do in his place. In whatever manner the representative be singled out, if he bear there qualifications, human nature does not seem, in flares of considerable extent, to admit of any greater security to liberty than this.

It may be thought that elecion is the most likely, if not the only way offecuring tlefe qualifications in the person who is to represent the people; but, if the roll of the citizens be sufficiently purged of all persons unfit or unworthy to partake in the legislaturc lature of their country, the representative might no doubt with- 
PARTIL.
out any danger be drawn by lot. 




But here we may be told, " That more is required to com" plete the advantage of a form in which citizens aa by repre" fentation: That it is not enough the representative partake in " the interest of those he represents: That he ought to feel him" self in the exercise of a trust committed to him by the confi" dence and good will of his fellow-citizens, and be led to act " from affecion in return for their esteem." This, indeed, however little it may be necessary to secure his regard for an interest in which he himself partakes, is the true slate of a man and a citizen acting for the welfare of his country.

With this, also, it may farther be urged, " That every flatute 6 being a treaty or act of convention between the parties concerned, and, like any other compat, is binding only upon "those who in person, or by their- commiflioners, have given ' their assent; the representative muff have an express commiflion " or deputation, entitling him to bind his confrituents before he s can fubjeet them to any condition in the form of law; and that ' in ats of legislation, every individual has a right to name his " representative, or, if this right be withheld from him, that he is " not bound by any deed which may follow."

Upon this plea of absolute right in every individual to be bound only by his own assent, itfhould be allowed that, prior to convention, a people cannot be bound to any aA in which they are not unanimous. WVh:re any individual diflents, he does more than withhold his agreement. he declares a repugnance: But when a plca thus amounts to iomething that has never been realized in -he 3 shi fory 1'ARtI iI. history of mankind, flill more, if its object be such as cannot be >:l:t.. VI. realized, there is reason not only to doubt its validity, but actually ,./T'--, to confider it as altogether nugatory and abfird.

Laws are every where acknowledged to be binding on persons who are never called upon to give their assent, either by themselves or their representatives. And where it is proposed to have a general assent, still the assemblies which are held for this purpose are partial, and far fiom admitting every subjed, without exception, for whom the law is to be made. One of the sexes, though by nature vefied with every right; and a great part of the other sex, upon an arbitrary diftindion of nonage f, are excluded altogether; many are kept away by disability of health or decline of age; yet, it never was supposed, in any cafe whatever, that these are to have a dispensation from the law. Even of the few who attend deliberative or eleEtive assemblies, it seldom happens that the whole is unanimous. And if the majority in faa overule the minority, this prior to convention is a mere effeCt of power, not matter of right. The majority is no more than a government defac7o, until the people at large, finding their account in the observance of tome such rule, and every individual, in his turn, availing himself of his advantage in being of the majority, by his acquiescence, gives it a right of convention in the fame manner as any other acual government receives the anCtion of compaCt, and becomes binding on those who avail themselves of the benefit it beflows.

3 Prior The period of nonage has been varied from i8 to 21 and 25 years, and is in r nlity arbitrary. One person may have more fcnlf under 20 than another at 40 or 6c, or any other time of his life ; but, as children are iincapable of public trull, it is neccf'nry that there fliould be a rule in this matter to which all nmuif conform, Prior to convention, every one has a right to govern himself; 

but not to govern any one else. The government of others, then, 


prior to convention, is not matter of right to any one; although l -~j to have government, and this purged of every person incapable or unworthy of the trust, is matter of expedience to every one. And under every wife political establishment it becomes a queflion, who may be safely entrusted with legislative power ? for surely the indiscriminate right of every one, whether capable and worthy, or incapable and unworthy, cannot by any means be admitted.

While we suppose the people, therefore, to partake in the legiC
lature of their country, whether collectively or by representation, a variety of questions are still open to discussion: ift, Who are to be admitted on the rolls of the people, and to have a deliberative or elective voice ?

2d, In the cafe of a people too numerous to meet in any one body, in what divisions are they to aa ?

These questions, even under establishments the most favourable to public liberty, have been decided as chance would have it. In all the ancient republics, the class of free citizens was but a small part of the whole number that was fubjeat to the law. At Athens, the moll democratical of all the ancient republics, not a third; and at Rome, flill in a smaller proportion. Even the citizens, so reduced in their proportion to the whole number of men in the community, were never in faa collectively alTembled. At Athens, of about two hundred and eighty four thoufind fouls, including siee citizens, aliens, and slaves, no more than five tiloulian commonly met in the Ecclesia or national afembly ; a proportion rather iPR.r lr. rather to be confidered as a representation than a collective body.
 At Rome, the people dispersed over the country towns and the __- provinces were, in the fame manner also, casually represented in the comtia by such as fi-equented the ftieets of the capital. In the cafe of Athens, io far as concerned the free citizens, being about 84,000, the representation may have been adequate and safe: Five thousand citizens, inhabitants of the city,cafually taken from the whole,and making laws for themselves and the community,were no way likely to-invade the rights of the multitude; although, fromn their democratical spirit, they too often invaded the rights of particular citizens, diftinguifled by their fortunes, or even by their merit. The casual representation which took place at Rome was much less adequate or safe. The disorderly inhabitants of the town gave law to their fellow citizens as well as to their fubjets and allies of the provinces.

In modern Europe, we are every where happily rid of that diftindtion of free man and slave, which in antient times excluded so many of the human species at once from any means of defending themfelves,in forming'the laws towhichthey werefubjed. Buteven here, and where the spirit of political eftabliflhmentis moit favourable to public liberty, there are still considerable exclusions from the political meetings of the people, whether for police or elecRion.
Not to mention again the exclusion of women and children, there is in every country a diftiniion of denizen and alien, by which many inhabitants are excluded from any flarc in the government to which they are fubjeet. In thelittle canton of Schweitz, the master and his firvant unyoke their team, and go to the national assembly together: But still the alien inhabitant must abide by refolutions in which he has no part. In the firfl attempts of the irench Revolution to equalize the rights of men, a certain though a very small cenius was required, to entitle the citizen to a vote at PARr IT.
elections. In a subsequent appointment this census was dropped 

but frill those who are to be governed by the law exercise their dif- r cretion, and menial servants are excluded. In Great Britain, a certain census * is required, together with some circumstances of freehold and burgers qualification. And even, notwithstanding these qualifications, certain officers of the executive power, as being dependant on a part of the community diflinA from the commons, are, by recent laws, excluded from a vote at the election of commoners to serve in parliament. But, notwithstanding these exclusions, the liberty of the subjea is more secure perhaps than it ever has been under any other human eftablifliment. And if any one plead that, being excluded from a vote at eledions, he is not bound by the laws to which the people aftent by representation, his plea may be admitted, and he is at liberty to withdraw from the influence of these laws: But, while he remains within the precints to which they extend, and continues to take the benefit of them, he is not at liberty to counteracd- or to disturb the order of things eftablifhed. The public, to avoid a special discussion of the franchises of every individual; and the return of fich difcuffions,on every particular occafion,have fettledgeneral rules for the better government of the country': And, if there rules carry an exclusion to any individual,he neverthelefbowestothatlawthe fame obedience that he owes VoL.11. Ooo to * DiftinCqions of rank, for the molt part, are taken from birth or property; and we may censure the rule, but cannot reverse it. It is even fortunate for mankind that a foundation of subordination is laid, too obvious to le overlooked by the dullelt of men, or by those who fland nmoit in need of being governed. But, though property sometimes overpower both ability and every other merit, yet there are occasions in which it must give way to cither. At eledions and country metillgs, men of fortune predominate; but arlices arc conmanldeid and flates are governed by men of ability.

PA RTI II. to every other law of which he enjoys the effeAd and protec

SECT.V \! tion.

But, in refpe& to there exclusions, and in refpec to other particulars, in matters of particular form, there is a confideriable latitude, within which varieties are found that do not eflentially affect the liberties of mankind. As to the separate divisions, in particular, in which a numerous people may assemble for any purpose of itate, they have for the most part been casual; as were the tribes or Curia at Rome; the tythings, hundreds, parishes, counties, and borroughs, in Great Britain.
Such divisions may be unequal; and yet, .in perfet confluence with freedom, have equal voice in the deliberative or elecive proceedings of their country. The liberties of mankind do not totter upon a single point of support: They make for themselves a large and capacious base, under a variety of forms, in which men itill find themselves in condition to defend their rights. All that can be said in the matter is, that, if any people were to make up anew the rolls of their citizens, or to set off the divisions in which they were to aa, the rolls ought to be made up with the feweft exclusions, and the divisions set off with the greatest equality, confitent with reason and public safety. Where people indeed ac by representation, their liberty depends more upon the character of the representative, than upon the form of proceeding, or the number of persons who are admited to vote at elections; and when this matter is fettled upon any footing that is safe, Stability is of more consequence than any advantage to Ilunmanum efl crrarc.

to be gained by change. Too much fluauation, or frequent 
PART I.
transition from one set of rules to another, is, of all circum- 

stances, the least consistent with that sense of security in which l the poffefiion and enjoyment of liberty consists.

Of the Yudicative Tower.

 I
CHAP VI. iT is congenial to the nature of intelligent being, that the scene SECT. IX in which he is to act flould be governed by fixed and determinate laws, either obvious, or scrutable by the faculties with which he is furniihed. Such, accordingly, is the scene prepared for man in the system of nature.

It is also essential to the liberties of a people, that their rights should be defined in well known and permanent regulations, from which the citizen may know his condition, without consulting the caprice or uncertain will of any person whatever. As for this purpose there is required a legislature the most likely to form impartial laws, so also is required a judicature the imot likely to give these laws their proper eficA.

*1

In whatever manner the powers of state be distributed, that 


 which gives law to the whole, we have observed, must be fu- 
preme; and though, by this circumstance, the legislative power cannot admit of controul, either in the application or interpretation of its own enatments, yet it is perhaps by this very circumstance, in ordinary cafes, disqualified to exercise, in consistence with the safety of the people, either the judicative or executive powers.

It were dangerous to allow of any latitude or any exercise of discretion, in the application of law. This is the tenure by which every citizen holds his right; and it were nugatory to fay, that the tenure of law were secure, if it might be interpreted and applied at discretion. But it is impoflible to separate the idea of discretionary power from that of the sovereign or supreme legislature. Persons invested with sovereignty, and inured to conmand, will not easily submit to be restrained by rules which, thoughjuft in the principle, may, in particular cafes, appear inexpedient. The discretion that was exercised in framing the law will incline even those by whom it was framed, under the influence of sentiments or passions that may arise on particular occafions, to dispense with the rule which they themselves had-enaAed. And if the law be departed from, in any cafe whatever, the citizen is ob far aggrieved, or becomes insecure of his tenure.

If the legislature be cornpofed of members collected fiom the different orders of the community, as the safety of these difTcrcut orders seem to require, there is indeed, even from such aflnmblage of powers concentrated in the fame assembly, les abuse to be apprehended in the application as well as cnacmlcnlt of n2~~~~ d1:l~~i~the 
PART. TI. the law. But such numerous afTemblies- are peculiarly apt to 

SCAT. IVX. enter into the passions and interefis of a particular cafe, to com\ ',r municate paffon by contagion, and to become eager in the pursuit of any object, by mere sympathy or participation of zeal; so that one or other of the parties, to whom a law should apply, in a particular cafe, may be liable to susser by the heat or passion of a moment, a tenure which of all others is the least secure by which any right can be held.

A person may be qualified to hold a place in the Iegiflature of his country, by merely partaking in the interest or concern of the order or claPs of men he represents, or of which he makes a part; and he may provide for the safety of his constituents, by refuting his assent to whatever is inconsistent with his own : But to exercife the office of judge, more may be necessary; an equal concern for the rights of all parties, and an adequate knowledge of the laws in which those rights are defined.

Where the laws, therefore, are greatly multiplied, as is generally the cafe under institutions of freedom, the study of law becomes the object of a separate profession; every one, whose right in a particular cafe is brought to the test of law, has recourse to the assistance of learned counsel; and, as in the contest of parties each may have recourse to partial counsel, it is necessary that the public also should have counsel retained for law and justice.

Such we may conceive to be the charalcer in which official judges are appointed, under every well regulated government.

As judgement, in any one instance, may be subje6t to error, O'

or incline to abuse, it is proper that there fllould be courts of- 

appeal, and means of review; or, in cafe of apprehended cor- 
ruption, it is proper that the official judge flould be responsible vr-.
to some tranfcendant jurifdidion which may take cognizance of his conduct, and restrain a crime which would involve the whole community at once in its consequences. Here the legifla.
ture itself must interpose; and, if for no other reason than this, ought not, in the previous Rteps of a suit, to charge itself with the functions of judicative power.

In legislation, citizens assemble with a professed intention to promote or to guard their own interests, or those of their refpecdive orders; and, even in the exercise ofjudicative power, it may not be possible to exclude the consideration of peculiar interests, even from those who fit in judgement on the rights of fellow citizens: But, if any interest is to be admitted in the tribunals of justice, it flould certainly be no other than the general interest of the people at large; an interest which is equivalent to justice itself; which requires that no right flould be violated, or that no violation of right ihould escape punishment.

This, in fad, is an interest which the impartial citizen has in every question of law. If crimes may be committed, and a wrong may be done to any one, it may be done to himself. If an innocent person may susser under pretence of a criminal charge, such a charge, in the next instance, may be brought against himself.
If crimes are not restrained, or if criminals are suffered to escape, the innocent citizen may confider every criminal so discharged as an enemy let loose against himself and his family.

It 
 It appears, then, that a person so affeled is equally qualified 

SECT. X. for the judicative as for the legislative trust:. He has every ilv'r-j ducement to judge fairly, to the utmost of his ability, in every question of civil or penal jurifdiAion. He may need the aliftance of learned counsel, or of the official judge, in directing the forms of procedure, in bringing questions to iflue, or in pronouncing the sentence of law; but, where evidence is brought before him, and the circumstances of a cafe are fairly stated, he is fully competent, as in the ordinary affairs of human life, to perceive the reality of a fad, or to pronounce of a deed that has been done, whether it be guilt or innocence.

Such, indeed, is the description and funAtion of juries in the tribunals of some modern nations, who have fortunately in this instance refined on the pracice of feudal establishments, by which questions of right or criminal charge, in particular instances, were referred to the judgement of a few felea men from the vicinage. The occasional tribunal so composed is termed a Jury, because its members are sworn to determine truly in the questions which come to be tried before them. The oath of the juror may no doubt be held in part a security for the truth of his verdiCt; and a like security might be had, by administering a similar oath to the official judge: But the specific security which is had in this cafe arises, not from the fandion of an oath, but from the characer and condition of the juror equally interested in civil questions, to support every right, and to restrain every wrong, and, in penal questions, to protea the innocent, however accufed, and to punifli the guilty, however supported.

That That this character, indeed, may be realized in every instance, 

it is proper that a lift, colleced indiscriminately fron the vicinage 


SEcl. IX.

in which any question has arisen, should be purged of all partial i w counsel, by challenge of the magistrate or of the parties conccrned, until they who are inclosed for trial ihall be free from any exception, whether ofreafon or nameless distrust, that may lie against them.

Men taken, for the occasion, from the mere ordinary walks of life, may be ill qualified to unravel the intricacies of of a judicial cafe; but, in this, it is the funtion of the official judge to afftif them. Law is devised for the people; and as, in the accumulation of its forms, there may be introduced a number of technical .rmills, with which lawyers alone are familiar, it is right that in every particular trial they should be brought back, if possible, to the use of a language which all men underhand. This is the tenure by which every citizen holds his right; and it is proper that it fiould not be wrapped up in obscurities. The official judge partakes in the magistracy, and may be infeced with its specific prepoffereions against the subjet. If his condud occasion any sus'picion of this fort, the power of a jury is on this account also wifely interposed to prevent its effects. And upon the whole we may venture to assume, that a tribunal so constituted gives to the citizen, in the possession and exercise of his rights, all the security which it is possible to obtain through the medium of any human eftabliflment.

After all, it is possible that, in thus attempting to fix canons of estimation in matters of political inflitution, we may be partial to those of our own country, and miflake the forms to IP p p which P ART II. which we ourselves are accustomed for the models of reason and 
 wisdom. It is, however, fortunate for a country to have in
ftitutions which can be so mi-flaken by those who experience their cffects.



Of the Executiv.' Power.

WVIHEN a people is orderly, and affairs proceed with little in- 
PART I.
terpofition of government, we may be apt to imagine that they 

might do without it: But the happiest effea of government is Y
to prevent disorders, not to redress them. And when we confider the mixture of ill disposition, folly, or mistake, that is ever inherent to human nature, the more probable inference from the cafe of a people at reft, is, not that government is needless, but that they are well or happily governed. The citizen must not imagine that law is unnecessary to him, because he has not had any occasion to recur to its protecion. This want of occasion is itself the greatcftproof of its energy. Were this energy witheld for a moment, the finalleft leaven of depravity, in any part of the focicty, would oon dcflroy the peace of the whole; and, by a licence to crimes on the one hand, and to private refcntment on the other, would toon make a fcenc of confusion and riot. Lven where the inclination Ppp2 to PA.RT II. to evil is leafs frequent, if it atually exist in any part, the whole CITA. VI. must be on their guard.


Among the advantages to be reaped from society, therefore, one, and a principle one, is, That numbers of innocent men, by uniting their forces, may be secure of their rights to a degree that could not be obtained by any single person asding alone for himself. Under such .combination properly direCed, ;the community is secure ag:,intt any foreign enemy, and the individual is secure against any wrongs to which he is exposed from the commiilion of crimes.

To wield the national force for these purposes is the office of executive power; and the citizen knows not of any consideration more essential to his liberty, than that there hould be such a power fully adequate to the purpose for which it is established.
It is like the roof, by which those who take shelter under it are protected from the lorm: It is the molt essential part of their dwelling, and for the support of which the walls and other parts of the building are chiefly contrived.

It were a great error, therefore, in the zealot for liberty, to set himself against the formation of an executive government, ftfficient to combine the firength of the people, and to enforce the obP:rvance ofjuflice in every part of the community.

At the fame timie, if we suppose that a power which is eflabliilhed for these purposes were employed to violate the rights it ought to protect, there is no cafe more fatal to the liberties of the people : For, on this fiuppofition, the arm which ought to defend is Itidf the force that invades. The remedy is become the difbafc; land(

and the roof, under which flelter is taken from a form, threatens 

a ruin more dreadful than the itorm it was intended to repel. 




In refpec2 to the executive power, therefore, in whatever form it be etablifled, itis equally the interest of the citizen that it should be irresistible in every aca of justice, and that it should be refrained in every commission of wrong. And in this consists the great problem of political wisdom for securing the liberties of the people, which are equally exposed in the licence of the subjet against the magistrate, as in the licence of the magistrate against the subjeA.

Of the funcions of executive power, Come are in continual exertion; others, whether casual or periodical, are only occasional.
Some require great secrecy and dispatch; others admit of being publicly known, and may be the better direced for having been publicly discussed.

Funtions of so different a nature may be discharged with advantage, by powers differently conftrudled, and under different forms of proceedure.

Matters of an ordinary and public concern, such as the adminiftration of revenue, or the internal policy and government of a country, may be treated of in numerous councils, and taken up at regular periods, or at any convenient times.

Affairs that may come by surprise, and that require dispatch, may be committed to single men, as they are, in republics of finall extent, commonly entrusted to magiitrates elected at (Ieterminate periods: And, in iLch cafis, the albufcs of power may be guard2 cCd PARr IT. ed against by limiting its administration, as at Venice, or by 
 florteening its duration, as in other frnall republics of Italy.

It being the intereit of the citizen, that the executive government employed in the defence of his rights should, in that exercise of it, be altogether irresistible; it is required, of course, that no other person within the state, no faCtion or partial combination whatever, should be able to withstand the power of the magistrate when fairly exerted.

In republics uncorrupted, the eleclive magistrate is, by the respect which every citizen bears to the majesty of the commonwealth, sufficiently supported to enable him to suppress every diforder to which any private faction or party may be inclined.

But, in republics greatly corrupted, facion and party often become too powerful for the legal authority, and the private citizen is sometimes exposed to injuries which the usual forms of the state cannot restrain. To remedy the defects of government, in such cafes, the people have had recourse to the temporary eftablifliment of extraordinary powers, as that of the decemvirs, or of diStators, at Rome. But, in times of great corruption, the remedy has proved worse than the disease. The decemvirs abused and attempted to prolong their discretionary power, and the dictatorihip ended in the usurpation of perpetual defpotifiln:-An emergence, indeed, which among many others in a corrupted slate may appear at the instant to be the least of its evil; as at Rome, the usurpation of Cafar may have appeared a less evil than the dangerous tumults which were employed in the contests of Clodius and Milo.

o^~~~~ s Wrl~~~In In Rates of the greatest extent, the citizen, either by himself 
PARTII.
or his representative, may have such a share in the legislature as 



may secure him from any encroachment on his rights in the w form of law; but, without a sufficient executive power, he may not be secure of the right which law confers upon him; or he may susser from the crimes which become frequent under the licence which attends a weak government.

In great empires, there is a danger of disunion and difmemberment of provinces, as well as disorder and licence of individuals; and, to preserve the peace and give effec to the laws, in every corner of such a dominion, it is perhaps necessary to veff the executive power with all the prerogatives and influence of monarchy, and to take in aid of its authority whatever is fit even to impose upon the imaginations of men, the lustre of birth, the splendour of a court, as well as extensive patronage, and the command of a military force. So armed, the sovereign may be able to repress every disorder, and to overcome the resistance of any party, or combination that may be formed to disturb the public peace. And with these advantages, no doubt, he may be in condition to preserve the rights of the citizen; but he may also, if not properly restrained, be in condition to invade those rights; and hence the difficulty of arming the executive power with adequate force, and at the fame time of reserving a fuflicient security .gaiinft the abuse of that force, or to eitablifli such a relation bet:ween the executive and legislative powers, as that neither shall, without proceeding to violence, encroach upon the functions or rights of the other ; or that, in cafe of violence, the nmolt daring luutrpation fllould feel itself wcak in proportion as it ventures to ihock the general fcnfe of the people.


PAicr. II. For the first of these purposes, it is necessary that every branch 
of the legislature fllould have all the power that is necessary to pre/'yx'_o serve its own privileges; should be perfectly free and unawed in its deliberations; and, though not in condition to obtain every article of law that may be proposed for its own advantage, that it ihould have a negative upon every article from which it apprehends a diminution of its rights. So far also it is proper that the executive power should have a voice in the legislature; or, in other words, that to prevent encroachments upon its just prerogative, or any diimnution of that energy which ought to be exerted for the safety of the people, it ought to have a negative upon every ad that may tend to such consequence.

It is essential to liberty, that, in matters to which the foresight of legislature can reach, the operations of power ihould be nothing more than the execution of law.

In refpea to this objedc, wherever the people of every denonomination, by themselves or their representatives, have a deliberative and negative voice in the legislature, they seem to have all the security that human nature can give: In the firic place, a security that there ihall be laws, according to which the executive power is to govern and that these laws shall be equitable or just refpeding the subject. And so far we have already, in what is observed on the  pointed out the most effectual iecurities against the abuses of executive government also.
Still farther, if the people in their legislative capacity retain the privilege of constituting and granting the public revenue, while while they are careful to 

they may charge it with conditions sufficient to prevent its mif- 
application, or even withold it entirely, when they apprehend an .
abuse.

In refpet to judicature, when the very persons who are most interested that no right flall be infringed, that no innocent man {hall susser, and no guilty person escape, are themselves the persons called upon to interpret and apply the law, the security of the citizen, whether in civil or criminal cafes, appears to be complete; so that, in what has been observed on the institutions of judicature as well as legislature, the most effectual securities against abuses of the executive power have been already pointed out.

But there is nothing perfect in human affairs; and all the fundtions to which we have referred under the titles of legislation, jurifdiaion, and execution, though necessary to' the safety of the people, are all of them subjeC to abuse, if not by their reparations rendered a mutual counterpoise, or a restraint from the errors to which they may be severally subjea. If any person or elafs of persons, having a partial interest, were entruiled at once with the legislative and judicative power, that interest might be expeced to prevail in the spirit and tendency of every law, or warp every judgement in the application of it.
And if the executive power, which is necessarily partial, lliould have the whole legislature and judicature, no civil liberty could poflibly exist. Partial laws, in this cafe, according to Montesquieu, would be enaled in order to be partially applied and executed; and errors coimmitted in one form could not receive correcion in any fubfequcat form of proceeding in the state.

Q. Q-(q But PA1wr. II. For the first of these purposes, it is necessary that every branch S ECHA. . of the legislature should have all the power that is neceflary to pre-vvYw serve its own privileges; Ihould be perfectly free and unawed in its deliberations; and, though not in condition to obtain every article of law that may be proposed for its own advantage, that it lhould have a negative upon every article from which it apprehends a diminution of its rights. So far also it is proper that the executive power should have a voice in the legislature; or, in other words, that to prevent encroachments upon its just prerogative, or any diimnution of that energy which ought to be exerted for the safety of the people, it ought to have a negative upon every aA
that may tend to such consequence.

It is essential to liberty, that, in matters to which the foresight of legislature can reach, the operations of power should be nothing more than the execution of law.

In refpeE to this objea, wherever the people of every denonomination, by themselves or their representatives, have a deliberative and negative voice in the legislature, they teem to have all the security that human nature can give: In the first place, a security that there shall be laws, according to which the executive power is to govern and that there laws shall be equitable or just refpeting the subje&t. And so far we have already, in what is observed on the filbjed of legislature and judicature, pointed out the most effectual securities againtf the abuses of executive government also.

Still farther, if the people in their legislative capacity retain the privilege of confitiuting and granting the public revelle, while while they are careful to make it sufficient for purposes of slate PARr 11.
they may charge it with conditions sufficient to prevent its mif- 

application, or even withold it entirely, when they apprehend an /
abuse.

In respect to judicature, when the very persons who are most interested that no right fllall be infringed, that no innocent man {hall susser, and no guilty person escape, are themselves the perfbns called upon to interpret and apply the law, the security of the citizen, whether in civil or criminal cafes, appears to be complete; so that, in what has been observed on the institutions of judicature as well as legislature, the most effectual securities against abuses of the executive power have been already pointed out.

But there is nothing perfect in human affairs; and all the functions to which we have referred under the titles of legislation, jurifdition, and execution, though necessary to' the safety of the people, are all of them subjed to abuse, if not by their reparations rendered a mutual counterpoise, or a restraint from the errors to which they may be severally subjea. If any person or class of persons, having a partial interest, were entruiled at once with the legislative and judicative power, that interest might be expeced to prevail in the spirit and tendency of every law, or warp every judgement in the application of it.
And if the executive power, which is necessarily partial, should have the whole legislature and judicature, no civil liberty could possibly exist. Partial laws, in this cafe, according to Montesquieu, would be enaaed in order to be partially applied and executed; and errors commnitted in one form could not receive correction in any fubfequcnt form of proceeding in the state.


SHAP. Vi But, although such dangerous accumulations of power be aCrc'r. X.
C!jv{ voided, and the great principles of order, resulting from the just authority of government and the privileges of the people, be admitted in form, they are not in effec secure otherwise than as the forces of the state are properly adjusted to give them esec'. Law without force, is no more than a dead letter; and force, if improperly lodged, will frustrate all the precautions of a legal eftablifilinent. It is not less dangerous in the hands of a profligate rabble who would level the conditions of men, than it is in the hands of an usurper who would render them fubjeca to his will. In order to obviate the danger from either of these quarters, the fame guard that is or ought to be set over the sources of the legislative power, namely, that every refpeaable order in the state may have a proper share in it, and every improper person be excluded from the trust, ought also to be set over the distribution of arms or of force in the community. Where the law originates, there also is the proper depositary of the national force; and whoever has not the proper interest in the laws of his country is but ill entrusted with its defence.

In ordinary times, military service, like the profefflons of law, divinity, or medicine, may be entrusted to persons who make it an honourable calling. But, it does not by any means follow, that they who have a real stake in the preservation of an order established ihould forego the use of arms, and profess their inability to defend themselves or their state upon any emergence whatever.
Or, if this flhould be thought necessary, at any period of national progress, we cannot any longer be at a lots to account for the viciflitudes ciflitudes of human affairs, or the fatal reverses in which the 

eflabliflled order of ranks is sometimes overturned *. 


The magistrate, in republican governments, is called to account at the expiration of his office; and even the monarch, whose office does not expire but with his life, may be called to account in the person of his ministers: But the ultimate and essential fecurity to liberty, or guard against the disorders which are equally fatal to the state of the magistrate as to the privilege of the people, is the character to be retained by those who have any considerable itake in the welfare of their country, a characer by which they are qualified, in the last resort, to defend as well as to fulfil the ties of their flation. Public benefits enjoyed by one order of the community, and the defence of them entrusted to another, is indeed an abuse, against which mankind have not perhaps yet any where found'a permanent guard.

Such, however, are part of the reflections into which we are led in search of means for the preservation ofjuft government, as well as precautions, which render executive power in the most exten.five dominions, confiitent with the freedom of the people.

Upon the faith of such expedients as we have now mentioned, we may venture to deny that defpotifin is necessary to the prefervaQ q 2 tion ' The present order of things in Europe originated in the afccndance of persons having arms in their hands. What was originally a cavalier or military horseman, is now a gcntleman ; and, in the conRitution of our own country, members returnable from the counties to parliament, as appears from the remaining form of the writ addrcflcd to fleriffs for this purpose, were to be military l.; none being thought worthy f pl:lce in the councils of slate, but such as were armed for its defence.

*1- lfii's glalio cilan::;.

 tion of order in the most extensive dominions. It is indeed more EHAP. X. difficult to preserve liberty in great empires, than in states of a i*tYv moderate extent; because they who are entrufled with the necessary powers, in such inflances, ever itruggle against the precautions of freedom as inconsistent with the energy of government.

For this reason, it is a principal interest of the citizen that the extent of his country should remain within reafbnable bounds, accessible tojuftice in all its parts, without the exercise of a force dangerously constituted even for the authority that employs it, and too often understood to be turned at discretion against those it is destined to protect.

The security ofjuftice is, in every slate, the great interest of all parties, whether the governing or the governed; and whoever wishes to have it in his power to do wrong, whether the subjea who would be exempt from the restraints of government, or the magistrate who would be exempt from the restraints of law, however little either propose to use his exemption, may, from the very desire to possess it, be confidered as an enemy to mankind.







Of National Felicity.

IN this attempt to solve the political problem, refpecing what 

the citizen ought to wifli for his country, we have not entered 




into any discussion of the comparative advantage of different L/
forms of government, as they are commonly enumerated, under the titles of democracy, arifocracy, or monarchy. In the first, the sovereignty is exercised by a majority of the people in their collective aflemblies ; in the second, by a part or superior class of the people, hereditary or eleQive; and, in the third, by a monarch or single person, conducting his adminitfration by proper officers, and agreeably to general rules or fixed laws which he himfilf may have laid down.

To these legal forms susceptible of juflice and wisdom, other three have been sometimes added; namely, Ochlocracy, in which the people govern by tumults rather than regular assemblics. O)li,;rchy, in which a few, without any genuine title of eflimation or election, usurp the government. And Tyr2 ranFt}

 r1am, in which a tingle person governsaccording to his occasional 

SEcr. XI. will, without any fixed rule or general laws. These, indeed, arc ~-'~Y\ rather the abuses nearefl to each of the regular forms, than conflitutions hlaving any pretence to the choice or approbation of ~mannkilnd in any cafe whatever.

It appears to be the will of providence, that wherever there is society there ioould be government alo ; and, whatever be the governmIent , it is the nature of man to accommodate himielf to its brlms, not always indeed with perfect contentment, nor always the revcirfi; but lie is affectcd in this, as in other parts of his lot, according to the humour he is in, not according to any precise iLate of his fortune.

Monarchy lias its admirers, as well as democracy; and it were vain, in most inflances, to propose to the subject of either a fudden change fiom the one to the other. Each is best fitted byhis inclina.tions and his habits to the situation in which he is educated.
It nma therefore be a!ked, to what purpose perplex ourfelvcs with quefiuuns on a subjeCt in which our state is already determined? We come with our schemes of what is best for mankind, like an architec't with llis pIan after the house is built, and the lodger fitted to lis mind. To dislodge him for the fake of eventual improvements, wvould be at leait to incur immediate calamity anddiflrefs, without any ailurance of future advantage.

To the question, that may be aflkcd in any particular cafe, To what govcrnn elt we should have rccourfie, or under ,swhat roof we should lodge ? The first ailfwecr, no doubt is. the frejc:It.' Nnay, but the prefint government may have its (tcfcths, ;:: tl.c aill O)r roof of the building in which we lodge lmay be itiliutsiiciut, inufficient, or threaten to fall on our heads. Then, fct about 

the necessary repairs. In refpea to your dwelling, the walls may 


SEc'r. XL.

be renewed or rebuilt in parts successively; and, in reFrect to the v administration of government, grievances may be rcdreffed. But, in refpet to the one, it is a wife maxim; Beware you take not away lb much of your /upports at once as t thathe rooj may fall in: Or, in refpedt to the other, Beware you do not overthrow so much of your government at, once as that the innocent have no protection against those who may be disposed to the commission of crimes, This caution, indeed, it may be difficult to apply in every cafe.

In some inflances, it may be laid of our dwelling, that the roof is actually falling, and the whole must be taken down: In refpecd to our political situation, that the oppression of a despotic power, whether in the person of one or many, is incorrigible, and must be cut short at once; for, while any measure of such power remains, no reform can be obtained.

It is indeed the nature of extreme evil to be surrounded with calamities on every fide; insomuch that, in guarding against mifchief of one kind, some other must be incurred. And, although it may happen that the last remedy of a political evil, like a chirurgical operation, may be attended with mere pain than was infliaed by the disease in any equal portion of time, ftil! the operation nevertheless is to be preferred to a perpetuity of the complaint.

As to the choice of a political eftablifliient, could we suppose na-p tions aaing wifely in pursuit of public order and freedom,as defined in the foregoing fiections, it is probable they would proceed to iomewhat different fronm either of the simple forms we have mentioned.

2 ' h 
 The members of any community have never been found in such 
a.ftate of equality as not to have a diftinfion of ranks, to the 
k./v--. safety of which it is required that they should have each a diftinctive share in the legislature of their country. Nor is it safe for the subjet, of any denomination or class, to commit the enactment, as well as the execution of the law to any single power.
Hence we may assume, that, in pursuit of the political advantage in queflion, a fortunate people will adopt some mixed rather than any of the fimnple forms.

The character of government is frequently taken from the executive power; and this, in consistence with all the advantages we have mentioned, may be either a feleA council, or magistrate; a single person or monarch, hereditary or elective: And nations governed by any such powers have not occasion to change them, if at the fame time they are fortunate in the conatitution of the collateral, legislative, and judicative forms.

Where this is the cafe, there is greater danger from change than from any trivial inconvenience attending the actual order of things. And it may be safely afumned as a maxim under every establishment whatever, That the present order, if tolerable, is to be preferred to innovation, of which, even in very small matters, it may be difficult, and is often above the reach of human wisdom, to foresee all the consequences or effects.

Grievances. nevertheless, under the fairest government, may take place, and muff be redressed; and whoever has a grievance to plead mufl be heard; whilit he who, without any complaint of grievance, has gone forth in search of speculative melioration, or improvement, not al)olurtcly required to the safety of his country, try, is to be dreaded as a mot 'dangerous enemy to the peace of PAR I1.
mankind. He would, without neceflity, unsettle the minds of 
men on a point on which it is highly expedient they should never be unsettled, to wit, the reality of an acual authority to which they are bound to submit in all cafes that concern, the peace and good order of their country.

Here, however, it mufl be admitted that, where men are leat disposed to innovation, changes imperceptibly arise, whether in the ordinary course of things, as in the progress of arts, or in the fucceflon of events, And, as men are tle actors in this political scene, whether seemingly itationary or transient, it behoves them to know the good of which they are susceptible, and the evil to which they are exposed. The sceptic may contest any serious diftin.ion in this matter; and, as men are so variously accommodated, insist that every' age or nation fmould be left to please itself. The slave, we are told, is often more chearfu! and gay than his master, and the filbjee of absolute monarchy more undisturbed, than the citizen of a fair republic: And if we reason froim the taftes of men, we mufl leave every one to chufe for himself. This is pleaded in martters of private as well as public felicity; but, so long as humain nature has its visible destination, in the perfection or excellence of which it is fiufeptible, wemuft be allowed to fcrutinize the taftes as well as the attainments of men.

When, under one fpecics of eftabliflhment, we obfervc the persons and poflffions of men to be secure, and their genius to profper,; under another, prevalent disorder, infhlt, and wrong, with a continual degradation or fuppreflon of all the talents of men, we cannot be at a loss on which to bellow t the preference.

VOrCL. II, r r Fr 
For forms of government let fools contef : 
 The bel t? adniinif/er'd is always belt.
SEcr. XI.

Thus sings the poet: But, in order to juffify the charge of folly he has brought in this couplet, he ought to have sung also, that one form of government is as likely to be well administered as another; or that men are no way the safer for having it in their power to check the infringements which may be attempted on their rights.

If it be required to continue this argument beyond what has been already offered on the subjea of population, national refources and liberty; a few observations may be indulged on the subjects of wealth, public peace, and good order, on which men are commonly inclined to estimate the felicity of nations.

Of these, indeed, some may be confidered as the symptoms, others as the invariable constituents of national happiness.

Wealth is at least the symptom of national felicity, so far as it argues the presence of industry, frugality, and skill, with the fecurity of property, and a regular administration of juJtice. These are the appurtenances of public virtue, and, as such, the conftituents of good to mankind.

But, if we suppose wealth to come from any other source than there; or, to come as it does to conquering nations, by rapine, and to thecourts and capitals of great empires, by the oppression of provinces; it is not, in refpet to its source, or in refped to the effects it is likely to produce, either symptomatic, or productive of any national good whatever.

As As riches give scope to evil paflions, and, where obtained by 
PART II



injustice, argue the pretence of such passions, they are a symptom Sc'r. XV
of misery rather than of happiness: They are produAcive of pro- x digality, licentiousness, and brutal sensuality. Such was the misery, not the felicity of Rome, become the capital of a great empire, a centre to which the wealth] of nations was colleced, and at which it was consumed in gross sensuality, or in cruel and idle ostentation of power.

It were folly, therefore, to felicitate a nation on the measure of its opulence, the extent of its territory, the multiplicity of its conquests, or the profusion of wealth that may run to waste in its capital, without regard to the origin or use of these advantages.

The tendency of human affairs in the result of prosperity, indeed, is to enlargement of empire; and it is difficult to restrain this tendency without a rifle of misfortune on the opposite extreme. In the contest of nations, it happens sometimes that, of contending parties, either must conquer or be conquered; but it is evident that although, in the struggle of two or more nations for security or independence, the event may give to either a dangerous ascendant; yet they ought not to indulge a wish beyond that of safety to themselves. And, in the midst of such dangers, the best doctrine that can be inculcated on the minds of men, is a decided opinion that conquest is no advantage to those who make it, any more than to those over whom it is made.

War is justly avoided, and peace among mankind is admitted to be a supreme object of consideration and desire: But we must not therefore enjoin it as an article of wifldom for nations to dif2 continue P'ARr It. continue their military policy, and to neglect preparations for their .SEAP. XI. own defence. These are often the surest preservatives of peace, and, Ls joined to a Scrupulous attention to abstain from wrongs or unneceffary provocations,are all that the most pacific nation can do to avoid.
the mischiefs of war. Peace is recommended as an article of wisdom; and the wife do not recur to war as the means ofacquifition, but as the means of preservation or safety. But war may be necefary, although it be not desirable on its own account; and it were folly, in reasoning of mankind, to confider the time of necelTry war among nations as a period of misery, or the time of peace as of course a season of happiness. In either conjuditre, the vices and follies of men may predominate ; but, in either conjuncAure, also, men have occasion to exercise their best affections and faculties: and, by this alone, the prevalence of good or illt of public happiness or misery, can safely be determined. It is the will of providence, that men have occasion sometimes to maintain the cause of their country against its enemies; and, in so doing, the virtues of human nature are its happiness, no less than they are so in reaping the fruits of peace.

\Vith respeCt to internal tranquillity, it is surely a bleffmg for citizens to be exempt from injury, be the quarter from which it come what it may; and this alone is .o enjoy peace. But, to be exposed to wrongs, without any power of defence or refitance, is not peace, but war that broods on the mind with animofities of the most rancorous kind. Such a war in the dominions of defpotical empire is termed peace and tranquillity; but the wrong that is done in such inflanccs to the passive sufferer, like every other evil, is just so much the worse that nothing is cone to counteract or redrcfs it.

The The war that fubfilts in defpotical governments, between the op- 




pressor and the oppressed, consists of injury, indeed, all of one fide; SGT. XL.
but, in having wrongs endured without remedy is so far from approaching to peace, that the necessity of tame and helpless fubmifsion imposed by the party oppressing on the party oppressed, is either felt as an accumulation of injuries, of which the first aggreffion is but a part; or, in being tamely endured, and received with sentiments of fear rather than resentment, it compleats the debasement of those by whom it is suffered.

It is not so much the physical evil which a tyrant may inflict either in respect to the person or property of his subject, that aggrieves the liberal mind, as the idea held forth under the defpotical government, that, whilst one has a right to inflict such evils, the other is bound to' susser at discretion. The disciplined foldier or sailor is exposed to fuffcr much more from an enemy than from the mort revere or capricious will of an officer who is disposed to abuse his command; yet he contends against an enemy with an alacrity and even gaiety of spirit and of courage, while he finks, under the caprice of the other with dejecion and sorrow.

The pretension of a right in any one to absolute dominion, or to a property in his fellow creature, was the evil fiom which Cato withdrew atUtica, and from which the worthiest citizens of Rome, under the fuccefrors of CEfar, continued to withdraw, aster repeated endeavours to reconcile themselves to the fiation in which they were placed. " It does not become me to defer any " longer," said Aruntius, who, being threatened with a profecution from the agents of Tiberius, was importuned by his fiiends to await the end to which the declining age of the tyrant was fait approachilgr, 
 approaching, "I have already delayed too long in the midst of SHAP. VI. ' dangers, insults, and the mockery of justice. If I should furY ^ " vive the old age of one tyrant, what better profpet awaits me ' in the youth of his successor *."

It was the idle assumption of discretionary power, originally, perhaps, in matters of finall moment, not any flagrant ads of oppreflion or cruelty, that routed the spirit of our ancestors to a revolt, which, after afucceffion of mutual provocations, and the interference at last ofdefperate adventurers, ended in the murder of one of the most innocent of our kings.

The claim of a right to govern at discretion, until it have produced some effeC, may be no more than a form of words: If it operate only in ads of beneficence, such discretion is beloved, and is indeed vested in every person alike; but, so soon as it appears in mischief, the pretence of a right to do wrong is absurd; and any tfch assumption, with the profped of indefinite abuse, is itfelfan ad ofhoftility against which the spirits of men revolt more than againft any physical harm that may proceed from violence or occafional passion.

Next to the intire absence of hotfility, or a perfed exemption from injuries, we may reckon among the constituents of peace the just powers of redress, or even resistance, which the constitution of just government employs in behalf of the injured.

The passions of men may produce assault and provocation, under any system of human policy; but, in mere assault, there is but one injury, of which the cffed is greatly abated in being resistible, as well as in the means of reparation which are provided.
Y Tacit. Annal. lib. vi. c. 48.

vided. And we are not to estimate the evils incident to society 

Ib much from the personal sufferings that may be occasionally in- 




curred even under the freest government, as from the suppression o of every claim to redress which compleats thetyrrany that is exercifed by a defpot,or by the disorderly tumults of a corrupted people.

Men are deflined to play in human life for manifold Rtakes of unequal importance. The merchant plays for profit, and is exposed to loss. The warrior plays for vicory or conquest, and exposes his life. Every one who would better his situation in point of fortune, preferment, or honour, hangs in fufpence between the opposite events of success or disappointment. What was tfaked among the ancients, in their national quarrels, was of greater importance than is riflced at war by the officer or soldier in any modern nation of Europe. When captives or prisoners of war were retained in servitude, or sent to the market for slaves, the soldier exposed not only his life but his personal freedom also. This violation of natural law was enforced by the Romans in all their wars, and by the Greeks put in practice in their contests not only with barbarous nations, but even with one another.
" During the Peloponefian war," fays an eminent writer, " and " for many years after its conclusion, all the different repub" lics of Greece were, at home, almost always diftraded by the " most furious factions, and abroad involved in the most fangui'nary wars, in which each fought not merely superiority of do" minion,but either compleatly to extirpate all its enemies,or what was not lets cruel,to reduce them into the vilest of all states, that " of domestic slavery; andto fell them, man, woman,and child,like " so many herds of cattle to the highest bidder in the market."

If ' Vid. Theory of MIoral Sentimcnts, by A, SMIT-r,.

P^ART T. If, from this account of the Greekst it be proposed to infer Si-. X tlhat they were a wretched people, there is reason to queflion the <-~-,r- truth of any such inference, The fortunes of men do not always decide of their feelings. Cervantes, we are told, wrote his adc ventures of Don Qlixote in a prison ; and, from so vigorous ar exercise of all his faculties in that situation, we have reason to conclude that a person may be in jail without being wretched, The human mind gave firilar proofs of felicity no where more conspicuous than in Greece. And if humnan life be compared to a game, it was played among ancient nations, and among ihe Greeks in particular, upon a stake no less indeed than is stated ia the above pafiTge, of freedom as well as life. But their example ihould lead us to think that the spirits of men are not greatly damped by the rif les which they are made to run in the service of their country. The first citizens in every Grecian fRate, with thi profpet- of eventual slavery before them, took their poll with ala*
crity in the armties that were formed for the defence or advancernent of their country: And in no quarter of the world was the muilitary character held in higher efteern. Tho(e nations, at the finme time, in other refpets, carried marks of felicity fiperior towhat has cver been displayed in any other quarter of the world or age of mian kind. In tlheir very language, there is evidence of genius, or intel1
icChial ability,fuperior to that of other nations. The order andform of their expretffon kept pace with the order and difcrinination of fiubicjs to be exprcled, with all the pofllble varieties of relatiol, and with all the fubtilitics of thoughlt and fentimnent, beyond what is exemplified in any other klnown iniftance. hey led tlh way also in all tle forms of literary comn!)ptfition or lifi:oulrf, i1

er lwhich the humanr ei's in difil:vycd.. TI'ihir poet:s, litlo-, Sln., ora.tors, and! moril's, , prce(:dcd thl(i oflother natio.1, ad rcniU

remain unequalled by those that came after them. Their fculp- 
PARTr Ii tors, painters, andarchitects, excelled those of every other nation; :
and the fame genius which rose towards every object, in which ',/
excellence or beauty could be required or exhibited, gave also the moit masterly examples of civil, political, or military virtues; and, in the whole, gave the most irrefragable evidence of minds no way funk by the sense ofoppreffilon, or the gloomy profped of hazards impending from the loTs of liberty, or the fear of slavery to which they were exposed. The ease and alacrity with which they moved on the highet steps of the political, the moral ,and intellectual scale, abundantly shewed how much they enjoyed that life and freedom, of which theywere so worthy, and which they so freely risked in the service of their country. And if the hazard of blessings which they flaked in every public contest had at all any effel on their minds, their example may serve to prove,that men are not unhappy in proportion to the flake for which they contend; or, perhaps, what is verified in the cafe of other players as well as in theirs, that persons who are used to a high stake cannot condescend to play for a lower; or that he who is accustomed to contend for his freedom or his life can scarcely find scope for his genius in matters of a lower concern.

A warden of the Fnglifh marches, upon a visit to the court of Scotland, before the acceflion of James to the throne of England, said he could not but wonder how any man could submit to so dull a life as that of a citizen or courtier: That, for his own part, no clay ever part in which he did not pursue tome one for his life, or in which he himself was not pursued for his own. It is the degradation of fear, the guilt of injuflice or malice, to which the mind of man never can be reconciled; not the rifls to which the liberal may be exposed in defending his country, or in withstanding iniquity.

Vol. II. S s s We 
 We are, for the most part, ill qualified to decide what is happy S EC. XI. or miserable in the condition of other men at a distance. The in,-~- conveniences, which we fee, may be compensated in a way which we do not perceive. And there is in reality nothing but vileness and malice that cannot be compensated in some other way. Even those we call slaves are amused in the performance of their task, and, when it is over, are observed to be playfome and chearful beyond other men. They are relieved of any anxiety for the future, and devolve every care on their master.

We estimate the felicity of ages and nations by the seeming tranquillity and peace they enjoy; or believe them to be wretched under the agitations and troubles which sometimes attend the poffeflion of liberty itself. Under this apprehension the forms of legislature we have proposed implying numerous aNfemblies, whether colleEtive or representative, may be censured as exposing men to all the inconveniencies of faction or party division; but, if these inconveniencies are to be dreaded, they neverthelefs may be fairly hazarded, for the fake of the end to be obtained in free governments, the safety of the people, and the fcope.which is given to all the refpedable faculties of the human mind.

If we have not miflaken the interests of human'nature,they consift more in the exercises of freedom, and in the pursuits of a liberal and beneficent foul, than in the pofeffion of mere tranquillity, or what is termed exemption from trouble. The trials of ability, which men mutually afford to one another in the collisions of free society, are the leflons of a school which Providence has opened for mankind, and are well known to forward, inftcad of impeding their their progress in any valuable art, whether commercial, elegant, 

or political. 




Under the last of these titles, more especially, we had occasion to observe, that the most important objects of human concern, and the most improving exercises of ability, are furnished to the members of a free state *: And we may now also assume that forms of government may be estimated, not only by the actual wisdom or goodness of their administration, but likewise by the numbers who are made to participate in the service or government of their country, and by the diffusion of political deliberation and function to the greatest extent that is confitent with the wisdom of its administration.

WVhile those who would engross every power to themselves may gravely tell us, that the public good consists in having matters ordered in the manner they conceive to be right, we may venture to tell them in return, that it consists frill more in having proper numbers admitted to a share in the councils of their nation: That, although the proverb in a particular instance fiould fail, and the multitude of councilfor once be inferior in wisdom, yet the multitude of council is really in itself a greater public advantage, than the talents of any single person, however great, can otherwife procure for his country. Single men may chute a measure or conduct a particular service, better than might be obtained in any concourse of numbers: But numbers do more in a fucceflion of ages, than any single man could obtain; and man nature is more interested in having nations formed to the charaCter of manhood and public virtue, than it is in any particular measure of conduct, or the most successful attainment of any particular obj e&.

Ss s 2 We x See Vol. I. Scaion, Of the Political Arts.

'TVe are sometimes checked in the commendation of free confti

SJCT. Xr tutions of government, by an obfcrvation that party divisions are Ax. ni-moft flagrant in such instances, and the turbulence of free flates is contrasted with the seeming tranquillity of defpotical government, as an evidence that it it happier for mankind to be governed at discretion, than to be indulged with freedom, or be admitted to any filare in the government of the community of which they are members. But we have already confidered what is to be thought of a peace or tranquillity, which consists of injury all of one fide, and which is followed by the denial of redress or impoflibility of reliftance. *

.Wherever men are free to think and to ace, errors will be incurred, and wrongs will be committed: But the error that results from the freedom of one person is best correced by the wisdom that results from the concurring freedom of many. And the crimes of a few lose their effect in the resistance they meet with, or in the means of redress that is provided for them: But for the errors or crimes of a despotic matter, or the violence of a disorderly populace; there is neither correction nor redress: It is sedition, or herefy,_or madness, to dispute their opinions, or to resist their power.

In free states, even where men do not ad from any culpable defect of understanding or criminal lifpofition, they are seldom all of one mind, on any fubiject whatever. The conversation of good men very often takes the form of debate or controverfy; and it is indeed in this form they are molt likely to receive from one another mutual inftrudion and improvement of thougilt.

thought. The freedom of conversation, therefore, whether re- 


CHtAp, VI
lating to matters of public deliberation or private concern, is at S'eAr. XLT
once a symptom of jus as well as of-vigorous government: And _ron this fihbjec we may venture to observe, by the way, that the zealots for liberty fonmetimes mistake their aim in supposing that they cannot exceed in weakening the powers of the magiftrate, or in taking measures to restrain him, by which they would icarcely leave him enough for the suppression of crimes. So reduced, he is jealous of the most innocent freedoms, and dreads a too familiar infpeaion of his measures as want of refpea to his person or his state. Hence the citizen is obliged to be more guarded in his talk at Berne or at Venice, than he was at Paris, even when the Bastile remained yet undemoliflhed. In vigorous governments, whether pure or mixed, and under the adiminifiration ofmagiftrates who have nothing to fear from the discussion of private companies, or even the impertinence of mistaken censure, there is frequently great freedom of speech as well as thought.

It has been observed, in a former part of this work, that it is wifely ordered.in this school of intelligence, which is opened for man in the scene of nature, that there fliould be obstructions and difficulties to be met with, adequate to the power with which he is furnished, and fitted to give these powers their full exertion, whether in producing mere physical effects, in carrying his fellow creatures along with him, or in surmounting the impediments which they mutually furnifhl in the course of their oppositions.
And in closing our view ofthe-fubljeA we may now observe, that the congregation of men is not, in any instance, to be confidered as an aggregate of flill or quicfcent materials, but is a convocation of living and aCtive natures: That the order of which ~~~~~~~~3 ~~they C they are susceptible is not merely, like flones'in a wall or an arch, ScT. X. that of relative position and place, but of aAivity, and of co-opera'--V'" tion in different fundtions, or of balance, counterpoise, and mutual correcion, where the operation of any single power might be partial and wrong, but the general result is salutary and jutl.

Such is the living order of nature throughout; and the amount of this argument, relating to the felicity of nations, may be fummed up in there comprehensive though vague expreflions, That the felicity of nations is proportioned to the degree in which every citizen is safe; and is most perfect where every ingenuous or innocent effort of the human mind is encouraged; where government devolves on the wife; and where the innoffenfive though weak is secure.

In societies that approach the nearest or recede the farthest from this description, the individual may, in his own part, be either wretched or happy. Clodius was a wretch in the abuse of a freedom which he took up in the midst of disorder and faction ; and Helvidius or Thrafea was happy, though under a tyrrany by which their country was oppressed. Every one indeed is ananswerable only for himself; and, in preserving the integrity of one citizen, does what is required of him for the happiness of the whole.

s M.EVMh BR.ITAN
T HE EN D.
V. AN EXCURSION IN THE HIGHLANDS : DISCOURSE ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS 

of Oedipus than he des of any family in Atholl afterwards repeated this acc as a trait of the manners in the highlands, I know your author. Walking, he pretends to be a wag and laughs at your Lowlander for their Ignorance & want of Speech, and seeing where My Visitors indeed were delighted with the Aspect of the Country its Rivers Hills & Woods your Question pointed would not baulk your Credulity your Lowlanders he has often said to me will believe any thing. To prove are mankind to interpret a difference of any kind against foreigners and in their own favour. I am not sure but the most ured are the most apt  Spy Barbarity in every thing different from themselves. And something like the Chineze Map of the world is to be found in every European head. My Friends however were not insensible to the Natural Beauties of the Country.
Its Woods Waters Lofty Hills & Precipices and my heart overflowed with pleasure in a Company to which I was so much attached from & in whom I had taken my first Draughts of Moral Science.
Having already Rode or Walked through every Road or by Path among the Woods & the Banks of the River, We agreed one Evening that next day we should Ascend the mountains & enjoy a Pleasure which I had often talked of to them of sauntering amidst. The Solemnity of Lone & Empty Vales among the mountains with nothing to be seen but heath towering hills & Majestic Rock & not a Sound but that of the Whittering Plower or Moor Cock when he spring the Heath.
But that we might appear to have some method in our Walks & not pass for madmen in the Countr I undertook to Arm them all with some sort of Guns & procure a Dog to give us the Appearance of Sportsmen. The Scheme being formed overnight all of  were dressed for the Mountain about four oClock in the morning at a Signal which I was appointed to give by firing off my piece under the Window  the Place where they Slept. And we accordingly Sett off with a Gilly whitfoot with a bag of Provisions to Stay hunger which never fails to make itself very intensely felt through the day in Such excursion.
We had scarcely turned the Brow of the first Hill & lost sight of the Strath we had left and all its Vestige of human habitation when we fell in with one of those Sportsmen who are called Stalkers & live by the most fatiguing & tiresome of all pursuits that of the Deer whose Vigilance & Wary & shyness can baffle the hunters skill for Weeks to get within Shot of them. This person was my acquaintance & he undertook to Conduct us where we might me with Sport. My Low Country friends thought it became them as persons  come from a wild Country to complain of those rugged Assents & Barbarous Regions & but for shame some of them 
would have thrown their Guns being little used to Such implements of Sport. Our friend the Stalker indeed was very much puzled what to make of us for tho he put two or three Coveys in different places. The Birds were allowed to go unmolested. His own Gun was loaded with Ball & he did not deign to fire at a Bird, and my Friends continued the dissputes which they got into while the game Sprung from their feet. I was myself no shot & tho I fired once or twice killed nothing. I led the way however to a Spring & Rivulet with which I was well acquainted & where I proposed we should take some Rest and Refreshment. The doubting that our bag might no be very plenty Stalker took a different way towards a Shealing from which he said he would meet us round hill with some Supply of Milk & what else the Shealing could Supply. We had accordingly scarce got sight of our Rivulet when our Friend appeared accompanyed with a herdsman & two young women carrying Pitchers of Milk Cream & Why with Barley Cakes of the most delicious , as every one of the Company owned at this time,
tho at any other perhaps they would scarcely have tasted such fare. My Friend Adam while he devourd the Cakes & the Milk held up his hands & exclaimed that whoever could not fend on such fare should be taken out and Shot. And here is luxury said Cleghorn stretching himself on the green bank of this Rivulet which no Sopha even surpassed.
I was in haste this morning to know what sort of pleasure Sportsmen could have in killing poor birds. But I might have lay still in my bed for all I have learned. So you might for I dont think you so much as looked at the Dog or cocked your Gun once Wilkie & you could have settled your disputes just as well at the Breakfast Table as among these Hills. And he would not have lost his Powder Horn as I am told he has done.
What is more says Wilkie I should not have worn out a good pair of Shoes which cost me a Boll of Pease at Christmas.
Nay, says R. Adam if they have lasted from Christmas till now at Midsummer there is not much to be said against the pleasure of shooting.
Shooting I said is like many of our other pleasures consists in the excercise it gives to our Skill & our faculties as well as our limbs. My wonder is says Cleghorn that so lazy an Animal as man should take it in his head to have his bones broken for diversion. A Country Squire will risk his neck at any time rather than be quiet in his bed. Hunting in this Country is laborious and hazardous: but what was when the Game was a Boar or Lyon. These are publick enemies says Home And every lover of Arms must be keen to encounter them. Yes when he could not avoid them I said: but to put himself in their Way on purpose does not appear to be very reasonable. If we did nothing but what reason prescribes we should pass but a dull life in my Opinion. There is reason for you says he turning to Cleghorn who seemed to be falling asleep. I heard what you say, said Cleghorn But I had rather be left alone with the pratling of this little Brook. 
Are you now to learn that mans life must pass in Action whether with or without reason And his very best enjoyment are in the Nature of passing Scenes not fixed Acquisitions or possessions. He had Scarcely Spoke these words when our Stalker in a hasty & menacing kind of whisper called Close. Then pointing to Windward with his face almost touching the Ground. We Spyed a Stag coming at Speed over a height beyond us. We have the Wind of him said the Stalker and if I but get a shot you will not want Venison here this eight days. z For your Life says Cleghorn dont shoot him I would not forgo the pleasure of seeing him pass for all the Venison in your Dukes Forrest. The Animal was soon near enough to spy his Danger and making a Spring to avoid us, raised a kind of involuntary Shout from all the Company: but the Stalker was Silent & without saying a Word to any of us took his departure. Are you surprised says Cleghorn that Animals should be fond of their own Movements, With what Majesty & Grace he went off tho alarmed for his Life on seeing a Gang of Thieves and Murderers. It was very fine says R. Adam: but I doubt whether he was Conscious of it or meant to show Away. That may be doubted says Cleghorn But who can doubt  that in Nature there is a meaning which Couples the Grace of Action with the Instinctive dissposition to show it. I believe the great difference between Man & the other animals is that they are made to perform their functions Gracefully. Man is all to perceive why he should so perform them:
but left to choose for himself at the hazard of missing the Aim in which Other Animals are for the most part correct. I believe that all Animals says Wilkie do what is agreeable to them & Man among the rest. And if pleasure is so placed as to Misslead them. The Arrangement of Nature is defective not the Animal that conform himself to the Law of his Nature.
Certainly so says Cleghorn with Respect to Animals who have no power of discernment beyond the present impression: But in respect to Man who not only like the other animals is occasionally sollicited by different Pleasures: but who at all times, whatever the present impression may be can recollect & State the whole sum of considerations on which he is to Act. If he neglect to do or make a wrong choice in the face of better information The defect is in him not in the scene whi nature has opened for his Choice & exertions. It is expected of him that he shall chuse that which upon the whole is constituent of most pleasure & least pain taking in the whole of time the past the Present & the Future. What a Mighty Vista you would open says Adam for so short sighted a Creature. It is so no doubt said Cleghorn And neither the very sudden occasion on which he is Often to make his Choice nor the extent of his views enable  to Act upon this principle alone. But there is another Principle neither requiring so much deliberation nor such extensive views on which he may Act with Tolerable Safety & is probably that to which Nature has trusted his Conduct. And I need not say that this is the distinguishing principle of right & Wrong Innocent & Guilt Honour & disshonour or by whatever name the Estimable & Praiseworthy disstinguished from the blameable & Vile.
I am affraid says Wilkie that we are not always correct in the Application of this Principle any more than the Former. Absolute Correction says Cleghorn is no where our lot. But in the Application of this Principle I believe we are safer than in that of any other. And less Evil is incurred by those who do what they believe to be their duty than by those who study nothing but pleasure or Interest however well pondered & calculated. In our deliberations indeed upon every Principle we must decline present Enjoyment for future Considerations but I believe we are more effectually Supported in acting thus through Sentiments of Integrity & honour than any mere consideration of future Interest or Safety. I even doubt whether it be correct to Say that the Man of Integrity upon any occasion forgos a Pleasure to persevere in his duty for to him I believe this very perseverance is the Supreme pleasure on every Occasion. And if Nature have taught him and all Other Animals to pursue his their pleasure She has not neglected to Mark the proper Object of his Choice.
Other Pleasures have their Separate & Absolute value whatever it may.
This of doing right derives me a possible Pleasure from the comparable neglect of every other one.
Virtue it should seem by this account to be the greatest Pleasure And the Systems of Epicurus & Zeno were the same. Just so he said all to the mere order of Words & the possible mistakes a traveller may commit in setting out from one end of the Road he is to Travel or The Other.
Epicurus says that Pleasure is the Chief Good.
Zeno says that Virtue his Chief Good is Supremely pleasant.
Here the only difference seems to be that the Adjective & Substantive are differently placed. Strange that so slight a difference should have occasioned so much Controversy or that in the effect there should be any difference.
What difference can it make in the Effect says R. Adam. It may make some Answerd Cleghorn. The Epicurean says Pleasure is the chief Good & leaves his Pupils to chuse their pleasure, many of them Im affraid will take the first that Comes Altho he owns that Virtue is the highest yet many who set out in the pursuit of Pleasure may never Arrive at Virtue.
According to Zeno The Choice is at once directed to Virtue and all inferiour pleasure are sett aside in the Effort to arrive at this.
If according to Epicurus himself there be a choice of Pleasures the very meaning of a Formula in Stating the Chief Good is the Specification of that which is the preferable pleasure. And if retitude & Integrity of mind be that pleasure Common sense requires that it should be Specifyed be its Name Virtue Moral Excellence or any Other.
I am affraid says Wilkie that if the World is to be governed by the Choice of Names we have little to expect from Philosophy at least.
C I am not very Sanguine in my expectations. But of the Principles of Action in human Nature allowing that pleasure of one kind or other is the gratification of all. It is of consequence at least in speculation to know.
That the Principle of Estimation in the human mind is at least one of the strongest and its gratifications of the greatest value.
W What a Mysterious and Indefineable Principle you open upon us. And Plato himself I believe with his One in Many or his many in one could hardly make Sense of it. What is it? Vanity Ambition or Pride.
The fashionable point of humour Dress or Beauty Politeness Education Science Fortune or birth or any thing else which mankind affect to set themselves off.
C It is indeed none of these exclusively: but all of them springing from one Source of which the Waters in its very first ishue into different Channels is instantly sweet or bitter, Clear or foul poisonous or Salutary.
R. Adam. What a wonderful Spring. One must take care where he tastes it or rather a tasting at one channel can give no notion of what it is at another.
W. C Just so a person who has tasted only of Integrity & just Elevation of mind will not know what the Proud or Vainglorious Enjoy or Suffer.
R. A Yet all this you say comes from One Spring. I wish you would show it us.
W. C Ferguson there will show it. He has often told me it is the point at which all that is forcible in the human Mind is Collected. The Honest Mans Integrity The Gentlemans honour which neither will forgo to preserve his Life The Soldiers Glory for which life is exposed a thousand times and often Sacrificed. It is the Martyrs Crown which renders Suffering indifferent or a matter of Joy and Triumph. Whoever can direct the Channel in which it is to Run may command Mankind to any Purpose or to any extent.
R. A This is still no better than leaving us to grope for the Point over an amazing extent of Surface. For in what point do the Plain honest Man & Integrity Military Glory or Religious Enthusiasm agree.
Fer. There are Forms or Characters for differing human Nature from mere integrity & honour such as Emulation, Pride & Vanity and yet I believe they are derived from one common source whose water in flowing in any of its Streams are bitter Altho the source from which they are derived is Swe
A What for a source is that?
Fer To drop the Metaphor It is a certain disposition to Esteem the Excellent or Perfect in contradisstinction to Imperfection or defect. In what relates to our own attainments I would call it Ambition. A term in common use for the most limited to the desire of Power. But according to the definition which is given of it in our Dictionary Viz. The desire of something higher & better than the present We may venture to call the desire of Excellence Ambition As we call the Love of Animal Pleasure Sensuality.
Ambition then in this sense is that Polarity of the Human Soul which gives it a direction horizontal or rather Elevated to what is Esteemable As sensuality like what befalls the dipping needle tends to ascension or depression.
Johnson defines it not the desire of Power: but the desire of something higher & better than the present. This implys at least a distinction of high & low to which in our mind Correspond sentiments of Esteem & Contempt & what may be termed a Species of Polaty in human Nature ever pointing to the Esteemed or the Estimable And away from the Contemned or Contemptible with as many different Appearances as their are things in which the distinction of Excellence And defect can in imagination be applyed.
The F. If I have ever ventured to say anything to you on this Subject it could be little more than a repetition of what I had learned from yourself and Water is better from the Fountain than from any Vessel in which it has  kept any time.
W. If you toss the subject in compliments from one to the Other we had better be after the Deer that might have  shot for our Dinner when we might have more Patience to listen to Speculations. Here are three or four of us something to do with the Arts that contribute to Pleasure as well as Profit. And if each will Specify what he Aims at. For Beauty in his Way we may possibly find some Point in which to agree.
H. Whether you agree or not we may at least part good Friends. I do not wish to end the dispute at once. But my faith is pinned on Bob Adam. I shall desire no other account of Beauty than what he will gi
A. In our Profession we have less to do with Beauty than People imagine. We must humour our employers. They have each Crotchets and think only how they may be lodged at the least Expence.
D. H. Now this to me is the very summit of Beauty Utility in which every one is entitled to judge for himself. Will any one lay out his money on what he does not want or is of no use to him.
R. A. I am not so unreasonable as to think he should: But Still Beauty is a proper Object for the Rich: but if any one with money in his Pocket should Prefer a Lump of Mere Mason to the Pantheon or Collonade of a Grecian Building he might be well enough lodged within But the outside of his Mansion would Argue little Taste or Spirit.
D. H What would you have our monied People do in this Respect.
R. A The Remains of Antiquity Even Pieces of Cornices & Broken Columns will show them what they ought to do.
D. H Even in the Stile of Antient Building I believe it is acknowledged that the ornaments or the Beauty of Parts is derived from apparent utility and the ornaments are but apparent Supports or strength of the Building and hence the great Superiority of the Grecian to the Gothic Architecture.
A. F This I believe is true and in this point of View. An Edifice is Beautiful in the same Sense in which any other work well Contrived in the means for a beneficent End is admired as a Beauty.
D. H. A Beneficent End and Apt means are only so many more words to Express utility.
A. F. Such a Work no doubt is Useful but if Utility be the sole Recommendation of what is Called Beautiful. It should follow that utility whever found shall have the same Effect And a Dunghill be more Admired than the Pantheon of Agrippa or the Dome of St Peters.
D. H. I grant you that Utility without art or Design especially if it offend our other Senses is not admitted for Beauty.
A. F It is not mere utility then but utility Obtained by design that Constitutes Beauty. And if a Beneficent Design or Beneficent Ends & wise means even when they are not of any Actual use to any one as in the Pantheon of Agrippa are admired as Beautiful and if Actual Utility is sometimes Observed with disgust it follows that the order of Salutary Ends & Wise Means is the Genuine Constituent of Beauty And while we bestow encomiums on the work it is only the workmen we admire.
W. W. We have let the Deer Escape and I suspect we must let the Game you are in pursuit of Escape also. It is too nimble I doubt for our Speculations. In trying to catch it we lay hold of some block or heap of baggage that ly in the Way. What connection can Beauty the mistress of Fancy and lively conceit have with Utility the dullest of all considerations or with great schemes of Contrivance however beneficent. This is mere plodding and puzle not the gay aspect of Beauty. Beauty has always appeared to me a Matter of Surface & Delight not of internal Solidity or Depth of thought. A Pair of tools bespatterd with Dirt should be beautyful because of the Use they were of in keeping a traveller clean And a Steam Engine should be beautiful because of its purpose and exquisite Contrivance but no Gentleman would like to have such a Beauty seen from his Windows wherever it may be placed for use he endeavours to Lose it from the sight. So much for Useful & well contrived things which have no Beauty. Show me then a Beauty which has these qualities of Utility or Design. What is the Use or Design of a Tulip or a Rose perhaps among the first Specimens of Beauty which ought to have occurred to your Inquiry if you had not been misled by the Sprightly bouncing of a Stag who mistook you for hunters of Venison of which notwithstanding his appearance he may be at this season but an indifferent specimen. Beauty is mere outside and too often but covers defects.
W. C. In that W you are surely right. Beauty is often an Apparent Recommendation & often detected not to be real. Yet it may be apparent Utility or Apparent ingenuity. For no one contends that it must always be the Reality of Either.
W. W. I repeat my question respecting the apparent as well as the Real Utility or Contrivance. What is the Apparent use or Contrivance of a Rose or a Tulip. Do not we say that Tint or this Note of Music is beautiful.
No one ever denyed that Hogarths line is more beautiful than the Zig Zag of a Sawe. That a Circle is more beautiful than any angular Figure yet here is no appearance of Use or Design.
A. F. It is possible we may be disputing about Words. They are seldom so well fixed to a precise meaning as not to occasion an apparent difference of opinion even where there is none. We apply the term beauty frequently to whatever delights or pleases us & it is certain that the sources of Pleasure are to us so various that they ought not to be confounded under the same . Mere sensation is pleasant without any regard to its external cause. We have other pleasures constituted in a sentiment of Esteem or admiration in regard to the merit or excellence of an object. I taste or smell the flavour or fragrance of a Fruit or Flower but I admire an amiable Character. Here too is delight or Pleasure but there is merit in the object as well as satisfaction to me. I would confine the appellation of Beauty to cases of Esteem or Admiration and withhold it from all cases of mere pleasant Sensation.
There is yet another source of Ambiguity in the Terms we employ on this. There are some things in their own Nature agreeable or Admirable:
Others are so only by association with something else. A Fine Morning or Evening is pleasant in itself. The Rise of the Curtain at the Playhouse is pleasant on account of the Entertainment expected to follow. Many Instances now mentioned of very Simple or indifferent things to which the Epithet of Beauty is applied owed to some Association casual or founded in some Slight Analogy Certain pleasing affections of the mind Are associated with notes of Music or tints of Colour and the very terms in which we express our Sense of Beauty in such Instances point out its Source. A Note or Tint is Gay or Sorrowful that is to say it is associated in our Fancy with Joy or sorrow and because the Beautiful is pleasant we say that such Sensations are beautiful.
I would however limit the Appellation of Beauty to such Cases as bear the association not to mere pleasure but to somewhat in its Nature Estimable or admirable And I doubt that in all merely Corporeal Subjects to which the Epithet of Beautiful is applied the title is founded in some such association. What is the Beauty of Certain Expressions of the Countenance but the Characters of Innocence Good Sense and Candour which they bear to the observer. Nay what is the Countenance And the Person himself but the Work of a Divine artist. For since I place Beauty among the Subjects not of mere Sensation but of Esteem admiration & even Extasy I do not fear to ascend too high penetrate too far in Search of its origin.
W. C. You are going now where I have long Wished to go with Plato to the Idea of first Fair & first Perfect derived from the Majesty of God himself and by him impressed on the minds of Intelligent beings.
W. W. We have heard much of Words & their Ambiguity on this occasion. I wish some one would tell us the meaning of these.
W. C. I can tell you only the Sense in which I take them myself And it is no more than this.
That the Almighty in superadding Intelligence to the Animal & Sensitive nature of Man gave him the Power of discriminating Excellence & Defect and Under the Disstinction of becoming acquainted with that Perfection which is Eternal & without Limit that is without Defect for whatever is short of Infinity is Defective so much that in finite or Created Being The least Defect is the greatest Attainable Perfection.
D. H. Do you think that no Power but that of Intelligence alone is required for this Purpose.
W. C. I know not any other.
W. W. What not know of the Moral Sense The Sense of Beauty; the Sense of Ridicule and so forth. Understanding or Intelligence is employed in discovering Truth or refuting Error. But in judging of Merit or Demerit there is Sensation as well as Reasoning.
W. C. It may be so: but if any one should tell me he understood that the Sun was placed nearly in the Center of the Planetary System but that he was not qualified to Judge whether it was wisely so placed. I confess I should question his understanding or Intellectual Faculty: but this after all is but a dispute about Words.
The Moral Sense or the Sense of Right and Wrong is a term like many other metaphorical Expressions familiar in common it is nevertheless a mere metaphor and as Metaphors frequently do tends to misslead our Conception. We are not indeed told of any Internal organs like those of the Eye or the Ear. But as Sensation whether of Colour or Sound is very different from its Cause We are apt to imagine that the Approbation of Virtue has the same arbitrary connection with Virtue that Sound has with the Tremour of a String or Bell. This with me is an objection to the use of such Metaphorical Language. It is the tremour of a Chord that produces the sensation of Sound. But it is the Thing itself that produces the Approbation of Benevolence.
W. W. Benevolence Im affraid is an affection as little known to some people as the Tension and Vibration of Chords required to a musical note is known to others.
W. C. People are no doubt unequally disposed to it but there are few if any who do not in some or on some occasions experience it.
W. W. The Question at present however is not concerning the Reality of Moral Distinctions: but that of mere Beauty and Deformity or Uglyness. This Sentiment may be produced by something abroad in its own Nature indifferent. It is found in Stocks and Stones no less than in living Creatures: But on this question if this were a proper time and place I should wish to proceed more regularly than we have yet done. The Question may be divided into two.
1st What is in the Nae or Form of Things that thus affects the Observer of Beauty.
2d By what faculty in the Observer this Perception or Sentiment is Obtained.
To the first Question some Answerers have said That Beauty consists in Uniformity amidst Variety. Others that it consists in mere form in gently flowing Lines & Surfaces.
The first appears to place Beauty in mere Contradiction. Uniformity contradicts Variety & Variety contradicts Uniformity. The Error however may be in the terms not in the Substance. If in Stead of Uniformity we Substitute Analogy The terms will be consistent. Analogy is Consistent with Variety And this of course with analogy and such indeed is the Scene of Nature exhibiting variety almost indefinite through which however there is still analogy that seems to Argue The Identity of Genius in the Great Inventor of all Living Natures whether Vegetable Animal or Intellectual having their origin in a seminal Germ have their progress to Maturity and Period of Life in the Individual But in the Race are continued by successive & renewed Generation. And the scene is undoubtedly Beautiful: but whether is so from its Mere Variety and Analogy may be doubted. These circumstances may be conceived to take place in scenes of which the effect will be quite the reverse.
Suppose for Instance of Torture but Analogous in the manner of their Application by Machinery or by Fire. The Hell produced with all variety & Analogy would be a Scene of Horror and Detestation not of Delight or Admiration. It is therefore not the mere Analogy of Various Classes and orders of things that Constitutes their Beauty, But the Beneficent Intention that appears throughout and still appears in all the Variation of unexhaustible Invention.
The Gently flowing & bending line or Surface of the Ingenious Artist Hogarth has something childish that would tempt us to believe he never looked for Beauty beyond the Folliage which decorates the Frame of a Picture. In Architure the Streight line and plane Surface are as Necessary to Beauty as foliage is to the Festoon, or a Serpentine Walk to the Pleasure.
Give Hogarths line of Beauty to the Column & his Waving Surface to his pavement in the Portico. I imagine his Beauty will disgust or offend the Taste it is meant to Gratify. These and every other Instance it is Propriety the Child of ingenious and beneficent Desire we admire not any capricious variety or unmeaning combination of Parts.
W. W. I am affraid if we allow you to go on you will bring us to combination and means: the Serious we beg you to damp or sadden or damp a Speculation on which Boys & Girls might be employed with delight.
A. F. The Consequence does not deter me for I am without the that there is no Excellence real or supposed and would limit the use to Subjects of Esteem and admiration.
W. W. We shall not quarrel with you about Words provided you help us to understand their meaning. But I doubt Excellence or Perfection as you sometimes call it will puzle us as much as Beauty itself.
A. F. It is that for which in our Esteem is preferred to another.
W. W. I know what is in our Esteem But it does not follow that in Nature there is any Such Thing.
A. F. Do you think there is no Gradation in the scale of Nature.
W. W. As we conceive there is but as things are I cannot conceive what it should be Things are in unequal Demand in our Market but our Demand & our Esteem are all Creations of our own Heads. There is neither Esteem Demand or Market in the System of Nature. In Nature every thing is in Demand Otherwise it would not have been there And Soil in greater demand than Diamond or Gold otherwise it would not have been more plentiful. Our Demand is so much the Reverse of Nature that ours increases as that of Nature diminishes. And so we erect a Scale the Reverse of that which Nature has adopted.
A. F. If the Demand of Nature is to be measurd by the quantity she has produced so is ours & by that Rule The Soil on which we trade is more in demand that is occupied by Thousands where Diamond is never thought of. But nothing is more in demand than Happiness and you will own that in the Nature of Things it is preferable to Misery And if so you will own that in Scale of Being Happiness is a most real and important distinction.
A. F. That distion most assuredly is real but like the Others its in the mind of the Observer.
Is the mind of the Observer no part in the System of Nature. I imagine that great as the System of Nature is Mind is predominant and Being without mind altogether indifferent or not Susceptible of any Distinction whatever.
W. W. That there may be Gradation of Happiness I do not deny:
but how will this Assist you in Establishing a Gradation of Perfection or Excellence.
A. F. The Gradation of Excellence is Established If Happiness & Perfection be the same.
W. W. Did you never know an Excellent Person Suffering under Misfortune or Disease.
A. F. Man is a kind of Mixt or Amphibious Nature, we cannot begin the Scale of Gradation from him he partakes so much both of what is above him & below him that we must had both under our View before we can denounce him truly.
W. W. Begin then where you please. I shall not interrupt you.
A. F. In describing a Scale we may begin at Bottom & Ascend or at Top & descend. Which order is best I shall not say but either is better than beginning at the midle which in fact will be best understood at last after both extreams are contrasted to one Another. To give Existence any Value Power must be Supposed and even Power can scarcely be Conceived to Exist with Exertion and both are indifferent untill it be known to what End-All these bring. Supposed Gradation will Ensue from the Measure of Power And Energy & from the Value of that End proved and Obtained.
Let the Top & Bottom of our Scale then be considered upon this Principle of Estimation. At the Bottom of our Scale we have mere Corporeall Substance or Still Matter. Here however there is Power The Power to resist or withstand any changes. The Vis Inertiae. If this were the Sole Power in Being it must have remaind forever without Exertion. But there is in Fact a Power to change & the Resistance of matter Appears. A Power to coagulate termed Gravitation or Cohesion. The Exertions of this Power would soon terminate in Mass Universal & Still immensity the same as for Existence or Death. There is however a Saving Power by which Coagulation is sufferd to proceed a Certain length and Spheres of different Dimensions are Formed. They do not Rest but Gravitating towards each other are so urged by a Lateral Power of Motion as to revolve in Orbits instead of Running into Mass. And among a Number  Globes the Heavyest of all or nearest the Center is found to have a Salutary Influence on all around it.
Here then or in other analogous Instances The Observer begins to Observe a Purpose transcending the best of his own. The Same Order of things as far as we can discern or Conjecture prevails throughout the immensity of Space & we but exhaust our feeble Powers in the attempt to conceive it. Design Wisdom Goodness Magnificence all crowd upon the feeble Conception. And our thoughts are hurried at once from the Bottom of the Scale we are in Search of to a boundless tract of Existence beyond its Summit. We are placed where Being seemingly begins and Ends And look back from Effect to Cause And to Cause preceeding Cause. But feel in the End that if there were not a first there could not be a Succession & to be first is the same thing as to have been forever & because it was Necessary & Could not have been Otherwise. Where all is order The First Cause or Principle of Existence must have been the Principle of order its Power directed by Goodness & Wisdom. These then it seems are in Being, Consequently boundless in Measure or Extent: If Power be necessary it must be omnipotence. If Wisdom & Goodness they must be perfect.
W. W. But what are we who thus presume to reason every Depart of Nature however remote or exalted above our Reach.
A. F. We are not the lowest & probably much less nearest the Summit in this Scale of Being we are considering but we too are a constituted Power not the least Eminent and indeed that which alone gives value to Existence The Power to be happy.
W. W. And to be miserable.
A. F. Happiness is the Object of all Intelligent Being and the Power of Intelligence is bent to suffer is passive & imbecil the Reverse or defect of Power not a Modification of it. In our Way to Happiness Facts & the Estimate of things are highly interesting & we are not in any Instance precluded from the use of Reason in guarding against mistake or Errors And our Faculties improve by Exercise And the very Form of our Existence is progressive. I am not affraid to Offer a Conjecture that the Frame of Nature is presented to our Observation As the Aliment of Intelligence As the Fields on this Globe are Covered with Verdure for the Aliment of Pasturing animals. I am ready to contend that still matter in any form has no Value but in its Relation to living Nature and on this Earth chiefly to the Living and Intelligent Nature of Man. The Huntsman finds his game even on these Barren & Towering mountains and if the Stag were ten times more cautious & swift than his pursuers would find out ways to overtake & seize . The game for Contemplation & Thought is spread overall from the Earth on which we tread to the Gallaxy and the sparkling suns that do but now reach us with their Ray. We may err in the order in which we employ our Thoughts and our opinions be no better than matter for Correction: but we are not out of our way so long as even the mistakes we saw made have still an approach to our End. To the Progress of Intelligence this is peculiar that the experience of Mistake & its consequences lead to the discovery of Truth. We are not therefore to be deterred from the Use of Reason for it is in using it that we render ourselves fit to enter on the higher Scenes of Being to which our progression may lead. This indeed is a Form of Being implying in itself a Scale of Gradation from the Germ in which it originates to the Maturity or indefinite height of its possible attainments. And in this Comparison of Man with man and of manhood with Infancy you will own there is palpable ground of distinction enough.
W. W. The progress of Indls in every species from small beginnings to higher attain in his kind cannot be disputed. But still how far one species in the System of Nature of an Order Superior to others may be questioned or at least the grounds of any such superiority may be considered.
A. F. I have already hinted at what I consider as the first in the Estimate of Physical Rank. It is Power which gives reality to Existence. It is however hardly conceived to Exist untill it is exerted and even then remains to be estimated from its object. Happiness to be obtained or bestowed is the Object which fixes its Value and this value being once admired the Rank so constituted will consist in the measure of Power. Omnipotence is that to which there is no Resemblance or Approach in any Contingent Being. Even Contingent Intelligence however is of a prominent Rank in the Order of Created Being. Here is Will directed to Happiness and in proportion as this is approached There is Will to bestow it. The Will to be good to be wise Intrepid orderly is happiness And is also the Will to Bestow it. You quoted the sufferings of an iii Animal incident to man as a Proof that happi is not always proportioned to the Excellence of Mind. But the Happiness of Man is not the peculiar State of his Enjoyment at any Particular time but the Summit to which his Progress is directed & which in the Result of his Being he is finally destined. The Wants the Defects and the Sufferings of an animal are in part Constituents of the School in which this mighty Lesson of Goodness & Wisdom is to be obtained.
When the send on Earth Virtue his darling Child designed.
The present Felicity of Man consists in the possession of his Powers of Progression and the fitness of the Scene in which he is engaged by Excercise Experience and Information to conduct him in his Approaches to Happiness The measure of which at future Periods cannot now be Ascertained. But when we consider what his Intelligence may be capable of it is scarcely possible to suppose its being to determine with the organization of his animal Frame.
If Happiness be a ground sufficiently solid on which to rest in Estimating the Value of Existence. The Power to obtain and communicate Happiness as it may be modifyed in degree or Extent cannot be rejected as a distinction on which to found a Scale of Gradation in the orders to which this Distinction may apply. On this Principle mere Still matter can of itself admit of no Distinction of Value however varyed in its descript of Great or Small of Fixed or Fluid Hard or Soft &c. &c. If the Immensity of Space were filled with Diamond & Gold or with Corn & Money It would be of no more value than Vacuity or none Entity itself. This Being then if it may  called so Never could have been Created on its own Account. In Relation to living & Intelligent Being it may be a supply of some Want. It may form the scene of their operations the means of their communications the Material of their Arts and of their Beneficence. Such the Material Earth in the Variety of its parts actually is to Man &c &c. And Magnificent as the Material World is with its Countless Suns and Planets of which the nearest and the least tho of a dimension easily expressed in Numbers of any standard measure yet exceeds Imagination itself when Stated as the object of one Single or comprehensive view. The Globe of Earth itself on which Millions of Men are yearly Born does not in its Dimension does not exceed a Millioneth Part of The Sun And to these mighty orbs we are led by Analogy to Suppose that every Star in the Heavens is a Counter part and like this our Planetary System also a mere Scennery for the Reception and accommodation of Intelligent Being which without either Magnitude or Figure Constitute that Power in Existence in Subservience to which all Magnitude & Figure is created imagined for and all that we know of them after all is the sensation Perception or imagination they suggest.
On the present occasion however we  not so much concerned to fill up the Scale of Gradation in Nature as to mark what is undoubtedly to be placed in a direction to the Summit I mean Intelligence the Power of conscious Enjoyment & Felicity. We inquire what is the Actual Subject of Esteem or Admiration in the Nature of Things & by what faculty we are enabled to distinguish it. If such a Subject at all exist it must be the highest quality of the highest form of Existence or in other Words Goodness & Wisdom. The Perfection And Happiness of Intelligent Being as to the Faculty which enables us to discern I know not how Wisdom & Goodness should or can be discerned but by the Intelligence of which these are the Properties & Conscious possessions. Even he by whom they are obtained in the same measure the Sense of Defect is shunned And its opposite however mistaken is matter  continual desire. Beauty too a less Respected Name than Wisdom and Goodness still points at Perfection & Excellence and cannot long delight where these are found to be wanting. The commendation of Beauty tho meant of Excellence is given on the first Appearance of it While that excellence is reserved as matter of deliberate Judgement.
If the grounds of Esteem and admiration have been rightly assigned Mere still matter cannot bear in itself any distinction of Excellence than as it is Subservient to the Purpose of mind nor be pronounced beautiful otherwise than as it is associated with some mental affection or caries in its appearance the Design & Execution of Ingenuity & Goodness so much that it may with Confidence be said That mind alone is truly happy Excellent and Fair And if we are right in this Conclusion we are come very near to a Satisfactory Decision on the much agitated Question relating to the Principle of moral Approbation And the serious distinction of Right & Wrong. If the highest order of Being in the Gradations of Nature admits also in itself of Comparative Excellence & Defect There can be no doubt that there is in Nature a fixed Subject of Esteem which when Wanting or reversed must incur Disapprobation or contempt. The exhibition of this difference in the detail of human life will account for the distinction of Right & wrong so familiar in the Appretiation of human Actions.
This distinction and the sources of Moral Law have by Dr Clerk and the President Montesquieu have been derived from the fixed relations and Fitness of Things are of course as fixed and unalterable as things themselves and their Relations.
This if our Conclusion be true we cannot be disposed to question: but the Enunciation is too general. We must Ask what Things & Relations.
Undoubtedly The Things & Relations to which moral Laws refer That is human Mind And the Relations of Man to Man And to his Maker. By Another This Distinction is said to be founded in Truth that is in Truth relating to God & Man for there are certainly Truths to which it has no reference As in Mathematics &c &c others derive from the Utility of some Actions & the pernicious Nature of others: but in Science Morality may be Considered under two different aspects. That of the mind possessed of moral Excellence and That of The external Action which a mind so disposed is in the habit to perform. The mind may be in itself be commendable & Happy That is to say Wise & Good or in that very Condion which renders specially Estimable in an order of Being which is in itself in the highest Order of Being. Such Minds indeed having a conduct to adopt respecting fellow & fellow Creatures will Naturally choose to perform such Actions as are Usefull And as the action is preferred for being useful and it may be admitted that Virtue considered in respect to external actions is distinguished by it utility but it is Esteemed & loved not merely in proportion to its Actual Utility but in proportion to the Estimable affection or disposition which serves to Evince.
A Shower in Season may be more useful than any human Action but commands no moral Esteem Benevolence provided by misfortune of any external Effect As when a person may perish with his Child or his Friend in Attempting to save him tho without Utility is nevertheless highly Esteem and Loved.
Benevolence is in itself highly Estimable but to call it useful is a mere abuse of Words. Aristotle in the Outset of his Treatise on Ethics observes that some things are sought as Ends and others as means to some Ends.
And it happens frequently that what in one Instance is sought for as an End in another is sought as means to some Farther End and so indefinitely. The End of one pursuit is the means of another: but this cannot be infinite.
There must be some where an End Valuable in itself other no means could be of any Value. The Value of means is measured by their Utility: but the Value of the Ultimates by the Good it constitutes and ought not to be referred under the name of Utility to any Other purpose whatever. Hence The Question concerning the Chief Good is in Latin termed a Question de Finibus or of that which  valuable and to be sought on its own Account. This we cannot doubt is the proper distinction of a Mind intrepid Benevolent & Wise.
There is a Moral Sense as other tell us by which we perceive this Truth but they ought to tell us that it is true whether we perceive it or no.
Others in treating of this Subject confound two questions together as different as Wisdom is from folly and Candour from Partiality.
From what Principle may we Safely & truly decide of Action and Character.
On what Principle do men actually decide or entertain Sentiments of Praise or Blame.
To us who think the distinction of merit and demerit in Character is as real as Happiness or Misery it is idle to tell us of the false or ill founded Judgements of men with any Other View than that of warning us against them. The Sole Question at Issue is how may we Securely decide whether in General or in any Particular Case.
To the first Question we have now endeavoured to Answer That Wisdom & Goodness the Excellence of Intelligent Being is the Test of Moral Rectitude & Felicity and that well Informed Intelligence is competent to judge of Such Merits.
To the second Question we may admit that Men frequently consult their own Interest in judging of merit in Others.
To Others we may admit that what they are pleased to call sympathy or coincidence of Sentiment or reverse is the ordinary or frequent ground of Estimation of praise or Censure. But we Cannot admit that either is a safe ground of Estimation much less the only Ground which Nature had laid for the disstinction of Right & Wrong. And every attempt to Instruct us on the Subject without distinguishing the Question is not only Nugatory and Perplexing to the unwary but actually tending to explain away distinctions of the utmost importance to mankind turning Zeal for morality into a mere selfish Interest or into a mere coincidence of sentiment which may take place among Knaves and Fools as well as honest Men.
In the judgements of Men respecting others there is much Variance and sometimes difficulties arising from multiplicity of Particulars to be taken into the Account. But in the breast of the Individual Respecting himself there is seldom difficulty or Risk of That function of Wisdom or Intelligence which is termed Conscience undecided or erroneous in its Judgements. It is a Watch that Seldom Slumbers or sleeps or mistakes whatever the Party concerned may plead or pretend to others.


XXV. OF THE PRINCIPLE OF MORAL ESTIMATION. A DISCOURSE BETWEEN DAVID HUME , ROBERT CLERK AND ADAM SMITH 

When Mr Hume was at London about to publish some volume of The History of England, General Clerk called in a morning & soon after Mr Smith came in also.
Mr Clerk & Mr Hume had been talking of The History And Mr Clerk after some compliments on Mr Humes Stile & Politeness in writing said he was glad he had taken to History in which he could not avoid being Instructive And Agreeable too.
H I certainly shall not endeavour to avoid either of these Effects But I hope you dont think I have endeavoured to avoid them in any of my other Writings.
C. If you endeavoured you have not succeeded you are very much in fashion & I do not mean for your Doctrines. For I think you rather try to pull down other peoples Doctrines than Establish any of your own. 
H Pardon me, did I not sett out with a complete Theory of Human Nature which was so ill received that I determined to refrain from System making.
C That was rash. The worlds a System & the best we Can do is to Assist one Another in perceiving And Communicating its parts & their connections.
H I dont know what a Man of Letters is to get by that. To be writing what every body knows or may hear from every Coffee House Acquaintance.
C That would be very idle: but I do not think Mr Hume is in danger of that even if he should discard all paradox and take to the investigation of useful truths.
H I own I am inclind to Scepticism & would avoid the Pedantry of Dogmatism But have not declared opinions on Commerce Politics & Morals. 
C I like some of your Thoughts on the Subject of Commer But for Morals and Politics you seem to play with them than to be serious.
H You surely think I am Serious in my Essays on Morality. 
C I do not doubt it. But it sounds oddly to say that morality is founded on Utility And that Virtue is only a Cow that gives milk of a Particular Sort. Alms to the Poor and every Mans Due to himself.
C It is very true that these Actions are Useful. The good man performs them because they are Usefull and neighbours applaud them for the same reason: but is there anything more Useful than a good Cornfield. People say there is a plentiful Crop but no one says there is a Virtuous Field. 
H No, for a Good Reason: Moral Virtue is peculiar to Mind and is the utility or usefulness that proceeds from mind. That is from a Benevolent or good Intention.
C Do we not Esteem a Good Intention although from any Circumstance it be prevented of External Effect, And do we not withhold moral Approbation from mere utility that comes without Intention. In short Mind is Approved without external Effect & External Effect is not approved without Mind. And it is the mind we Approve not the Utility.
H Pardon me it is both when they come together. A Mans pretensions to Virtue are very doubtful if it have no effect in his Manners or behaviour.
C Very doubtfull indeed. The Elasticity of a Bow is very doubtful or rather incredible if an Arrow drawn to The Point is not made to fly from the String. Where benevolence is real it will be beneficent. But we are not talking of the Evidence required to evince the reality of Benevolence. We Are supposing Benevolence to be real & know how Agreeable it is apart from its external Effects.
H That I own: But to me Virtue is a course of Life directed if you will by Good Intention But realised in all the Effects of Innocence Beneficiens Sobriety and Candour.
C I understand, & because you conceive a Virtuous  & its external Effects together you Chuse to Ascribe the Approbation of it to the external Effect alone. For my part I am inclined to consider rather in respect to its Value in the Mind that possesses it, than in its Effects towards those who are within reach of its External Influence. To every man his own happiness is first & most import Concern. And Nature cannot require of a Man what is not of any Value to himself.
H Yet Virtue for the most part is admired as a Principle of Self denial.
C That proceeds from the Stupid Notion that Man is to Estimate himself as he Estimates a dead Ox from His Belly & Four Quarters so that whatever he does without a View to that Self is said to be Self denial and in this point of View but Happiness itself may be a System of Self denial. We sett out with Supposing we know What Virtue is without considering whether it be happy or Miserable. For my part I choose to refrain all terms of Praise till I know what it is to be Happy & this to every Intelligent being is the first & highest Praise. If a Person be a Wretch Praise him who will. He had better to be a Clod or a block of Wood than a Man without the requisites of a happy Mind. In this consists the excellence of Mind that he may be happy and if it fail of this Excellence is an Evil.
H Happiness is surely very different from Merit: for every Man thinks himself happy in being Gratifyed some with a dinner some with money And all with Respect & a Good Name.
C When I talk of happiness I do not go to the Rabble in the Street for an account of it. If there be in Nature affections & habits agreeable Others dissagreeable as Benevolence is Agreeable Malice the Reverse Courage Agreeable Cowardice in all its forms the Reverse I call that Man happy who is habitually Courageous & Benevolent whose Occupations & Thoughts are pleasant whose very Existence is the Tranquillity of a mind undisturbed with the Consequences of Error & Mistake or sense of meanness degradation or Wrong. If Virtue is a term of Peace And felicity. Here I fix it on Goodness & Wisdom on Fortitude Temperance And the occupations of a Strenuous Mi
It is well known that there is distinction of Good & Evil in human Life & till we have Ascertaind that distinction & made our Choice all our Inquiries & Pretensions to Philosophy are nugatory & absurd.
Here the Conversation was about to terminate when the Servant Announced Mr Adam Smith Who at the same time entered the Room with a smile on his Countenance and Muttering Somewhat to himself.
After the first Salutations Mr Hume said Smith. The General & I have been upon a Subject in which you are well versed & should have been glad of your assistance.
Sm. What was it?
H No less than the Theory of Moral Sentiment.
Sm My Book. I am sorry to have been away. I should willingly profit by your remarks. General he said then observing him for the first time I have long wished to know your opinion. I think I have removed all the difficulties & made  Theory Comple
To this The General made no Answer tho Mr Smith made some pause as expecting to hear what he would say.
And But continued People thought I should never be able to get over the difficulty of Supposing a Man to Sympathise with himself or if he did not chance to take that trouble what means he had of being admonished of his Faults. I have removed both these difficulties & should be glad to know your opinion.
C I dont much like to trouble Authors with my opinion of their Works.
S Ah do you will Oblige me!
C If you insist upon it. I must be plain & leave no doubt.
S Surely Surely.
C Your Book is to me a Heap of absolute Nonsense.
Smith seemed to be stunnd And Clerk went on. You endeavour to explain away the disstinction of Right and Wrong by telling us that all the difference is the Sympathy or Want of Sympathy that is the Assent or Dissent of some two or more persons of whom some one Acts & some Other Observes the Action and Agrees or does not Agree in the same feeling with the Actor.
If the Observer Agree, Sympathise, go along with him or feel that he would have done the same himself.
he cannot but approve of the Action. If on the Contrary he does not Sympathise or agree with the Actor he dissents & cannot but dissapprove of him. And you seem to mean that where there is neither Assent nor dissent there is neither Right nor Wrong. And no one would ever Suppose any such thing. Or if you dont deny the reality of the Disstinction you at least furnish but a very inadequate means of discovering it. How can I be sure that a Person is in the right because I Sympathise with him. May not I myself be in the wrong. Does the presence of any Sympathy ascertain a good action: or the Want of it a bad one.
Sm. No! I have cleard up that point. Parties concerned in any transaction may be willing each to flatter himself or both Mutually to flatter one Another But to the Monitor may not fail to present himself. The well informed And impartial Observer will bring to view what the Ignorant or prejudiced would overlook.
C That is convenient to be able to bring Virtue itself to your Aid when actual Sympathy fails. You began with call Sympathy to explain Moral Sentiment. You now call up Moral Sentiment to explain itself: What is a well informed & impartial Observer: but a Virtuous Person whose Sympathy may be relied on as a Test of Virtue.
If he be well informd of what is he informd not of Astronomy or Geography for these would be of little use to him in distinguishing the Characters of men. For this purpose he must be informed of the disstinction of Right how constituted And Applyed in particular instances. And to be impartial must aim at a fair Application without Byas  any Side. Such a Person is not likely to Misslead those who confide in him and such a Person every one is concerned to become in himself instead of Acquiescing in Sympathy as the Test of Virtue appeals to Virtue as the test of Just Sympathy.
Here then ends your System. After beating round a Circle of Objections & Answers you return to the point from which you set The Phaenomena of moral disstinctions & moral sentiments to be explained.
And let us try once more how far Sympathy is adequate to this Purpose. You do not fail to tell us that Moral Sentiments are real & we trust familiar to all men you inform us that they constitute Satisfaction in some cases and distress in Others. This  of great importance & the Consequence is that we should be careful to Obtain the Satisfaction and avoid the distress.
I do not see how we can be aided in this by merely resolving these Sentiments into some other affection of the mind especially into any affection differing from themselves.
What is this Sympathy which you talk of. The word is not new: but the meaning probably is so. It is commonly Synonimous with Pity or a fellow feelin for the disstress of others. But who ever heard of Sympathizing with a Person who Pays his Debts or if this were Said it would be supposed that we pityed him for being Obliged to part with his mony: but you tell us of Sympathizing with a Hero on having gained a Battle although he escaped unhurt.
The word Sympathy in this Sense is generally unknown and to explain Moral Sentiment by Sympathy is to explain the known by the unknown The very reverse of what is required in Theory.
But if Sympathy in all the Affections or Passions were as well known as it is in Commiseration or Pity to the distressed I do not see how it could explain moral Sentiment. For where it is best known it does  produce any moral sentiment either of approbation or blame. When we pity a beggar we do not admire him for begging nor think that a person has any merit in the Toothache even if the thoughts of it should sett our Teeth on Edge or draw tears from our Eyes. If Sympathy means the participation of any Passion without disstinction I do not see how a Passion participated should be any other than Some Shade or degree of the Passion participated.
If I participate in a Persons Anger I am Angry too if in his Joy I too am Glad: but neither one nor the Other is Moral Approbation.
Sm You do not say it is but; that a man who participates in the Passion of another cannot but approve of it.
Every Passion or strong motive urging a Person to act justifies itself And if Others go along with or Sympathise; they too approve: if they do not go along with it they dissaprove or Condemn his Conduct And so he does himself if when the occasion is past he cannot go along with the passion which actuated him.
C The whole amount then is that what others term Conscience you Term Sympathie or the want of Sympathy. Every body knows, that under the operation of any strong Passion men are incapable of cool reflection.
This you call Justifying their Passion: but when it is over & they come to reflect, a Crime if committed Stares them in the face & they become a prey to remorse or Self condemnation. I do not see that your account of the Matter is any way more Intelligible than this: or that we are any way nearer the ultimate in the one Account than in the Other. Most men repose on the Fact that men are by Nature endued with a Principle of Conscience. But you say The Fact commonly called Conscience is Sympathy or the want of Sympathy. And The supposed Theory is a mere change of Words or at best an Attempt to confound two distinct principles of Nature.
This practice is too common & when substituted for Theory is insufferable. One great Object of Study certainly is to distinguish what is different as well as to bring things of a kind together. In morals Especially The judgement is badly confounded by Substituting one Thing for another.
A fashionable Philosopher has told us of late that Judgements are but Sensations. That Integrity or Elevation of mind is no more than Pride he owns indeed that it is enlightend Pride Orgueil Eclair. Others have told us that Benevolence is mere self Love or tends alike to personal Gratification whether in his own wellfare or that of his Neighbour.
And in both these hopeful Theories. We are cautiond not to be imposed upon by the specious appearances of magnanimity or Benevolence, for the one is mere Pride The Other mere Selfishness. This to bespeak our Animosity to A Friend by Announcing him under the name of our Enemy.
At the same time The Gentleman undertakes great merit to himself for his penetration and Knowledge of Persons.
I confess I was affraid that your Sympathy might have some such Effects as this or that the differene of right & Wrong might vanish into an assent or dissent of two or more Persons who may agree in the wrong as well as the Right: but you relieve us at last by telling us you do not mean any assent or dissent at Random but that of a well informed & impartial Observer, who we would say in common language is a Virtuous Man or Competent Judge. And the preference due to such a Person is what no one doubts, tho it is the Phaenomenon which you sett out with a Purpose to explain in your Theory, And so leave it at last as others do as a Self Evident Truth which needs no Explanation.
I do not find that moralists of Old ever went into this Question. They Observed that human Life was happy or miserable & they were curious to know how one or the other was brought about. Or in Other words what was the Good on which men might rely for Happiness or Avoid as misery. This was certainly the first or most importan Question to be settled in human Life And it was certainly wise to go into it even if they should mistake the Solution. Let the Solution however be what it may if a Chief Good was acknowledged there could no longer be any doubt of the Choice to be made or if it were found that Conscience concurred with Experience in recommending the same thing, could there be any Question of the Grounds on which Conscience proceeded. I have sometimes been puzled to Guess how this Question came to be Started in modern times. Or how it came to hold such a place in Modern Philosophy.
H You may believe I do not doubt its importance as I have treated it myself yet I believe the introduction of it was in a great Measure Accidental. A performance which made some noise.
The Fable of the Bees calling Virtue the Ofspring of Flattery begot upon Pride and pretending that Private Vices were publick Benefits gave a General Allarm to the friends of Morality. And some of them sett about refuting this Sophism.
One contented that the disstinction of Virtue & Vice was founded in the Nature & fitness of Things. Another that it was founded in Truth. Another that it was founded in the natural principle of Benevolence. Another in a Specifick Sense inspird  Nature, & Which to distinguish it from mere Corporeal Sensation was called the Moral Sense.
They were all perhaps in the right And the Author of the Fable of the Bees betrayd himself when he maintaind that Private Vice was publick benefit: for as Virtue consist in publick Utility or Good how can that which is a publick Good be a Vice. Moral Sense is a mere figurative expression taken from the Analogy of our Corporeal organs in distinguishing their respective Objects but it appears trifling to me to be inquiring for reasons to Approve what is so useful as all the Virtues of Men are in Society or human Life And I hoped to Silence the Question for ever by pointing out this very real & important ground of Approbation or Preference in behalf of Virtue.
C Well done but while you considered what Virtue was in its Communications & external Effects, which are the Objects of Law and in part the recommendation of Good Manners. You forgot or overlooked what is the real recommendation of it to the Person who is to embrace it in his own mind & without whose Will it is not to exist. If it be happiness to him as Wisdom Goodness Fortitude and Temperance certainly are It is certainly a Thing good in itself not a thing recommended merely by its utility in procuring something else. We are apt to Laugh now at the Old Distinctions, Divisions And Definitions of the Schools: but it were well sometimes to mind them. Some things are Coveted as means to an End Others as Ends valuable in themselves. And if these were not somewhere such an End, the whole Fabrick of successive means would fall to the Ground: Hence the important & Genuine Question of Moral Philosophy de finibus, or what is the End And I believe that The utilitys which you point out are not ends but means concurring to the preservation of Society and this as means to furnish the Wise and with the proper Scene & Object of his Enjoyment in the Condition of his happy mind whom no false allurements can mislead nor dangers deter.I wrote last from Groninguen & told you of Mr Gordons Intention of passing the Winter at this place. The impressions he had got of Groninguen upon the Road woud have made him constantly Dissatisfied at that place, for people sometimes think meanly of themselves at an University of litle repute, as in a Coat that is out of Fashion, otherwise I am not well qualified to Judge of the Superiority of this University.

There are a great Variety of Professors, & all who have got the Degree of Mr of Arts here may advertise a College upon any Branch they please, they have scarcely any Vacations. The publick lectures are in German & Strangers are Obliged to have private lessons in Latin for themselves which make the fees very high. Mr Gordon attends three in Company with Mr Abercrombie. The Civil Law, The Law of Nature & Nations, & Modern History, which are rather too many at once, at least they woud be so to one who coud give application to books & pursue a Point steadily, but that habit is seldom acquired by People in Mr Gordons Way; he likes very well to hear about matters of Study but what is called Poring, is not much to his mind. I have no trouble in advising him against Irregularitys, & the whole remittances are very safely  entrusted to his own management so that you may call me a very happy Governour, provided you will always keep in mind how far the happiness of a Governour mounts. This is not a place of Conversation to me, there may be agreeable people but I have not yet been able to find them out or relish much through the Medium of bad Latin & bad French, I am already of opinion that Learning is very frequent here, but have not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions: but you must consider me as a Stranger  who may know more hereafter.

A Gentleman passed some days ago in his way from Paris to Berlin, & told some Storys of Mr Fontenelle, one that he was in Company with a Lady who happend to drop her Fan, he put himself immediatly in motion to take it up, but she prevented him, for he is a hundred year old, upon which he said, Plut a Dieu que je n'avois que quatre Vingt Ans. Another Lady who it seems had removed lately to his neighbourhood made him a Visit & told him; she expected to see him often for that reason; he replyed that wont be my reason, that will be only my Pretence. I wish you may relish these Bons mots, that come so far as Germany, if not you may make reflections upon the length of time it may take to turn a Frenchman Sour. I saw lately some Smart letters in Manuscript that Passed between Voltaire, & a Church Man of Dignitee in France on account of his Infidelity, They say he is Constantly Complaining of his Health & threatning to Die.  

A Lady here tells me she saw him in his way from Berlin, & that he caressed one of her Children & said he woud be fond of him even if he had been begotten by Maupertuis. We Lodge here with a Frenchman, who is a litle Foolish, for the sake of learning his Language; he has taught French in this Place for Some years, he has translated some of Mr Hume's Works into French & has the the Title of Secretary to the King of Poland, all which is very fine in a Landlord. The King when he has a mind to Flatter a Man cannot give A Title of Nobility but makes many Secretarys & Members of the Privy Council. The Nobility waste away here to Nothing; for all the Sons share alike in the Estate & Title; all ranks almost have Voluminous Titles, if you was a Professor at Leipzig instead of Glasgow I shoud have directed my Letter. To His Excellency The most learned & Celebrated &c. I shoud be sorry to have written all this Idleness to a Man who is not well & I hope to hear you don't Complain this Winter.

Make my Complts to Mrs Smith Miss Douglas & Other Friends at Glasgow. If Mr Bagwell & Mr Reid be at Glasgow my Complts to Both. I woud write to them if I was quite Sure of their being there. Mr Gordon Joins me in Good Wishes. 

Two or three days before I got your letter I happened to be applyed to by Mr Alexander Merchant here, to recommend a young man if I knew any fit to be tutor to his Son. I immediately carried your letter to him and he is perfectly Satisfyed with the recommendation and I am well Satisfyed that as far as relates to Mr Alexander himself and his family your friend will have every reason to applaud his good fortune in meeting with him. He has very right Ideas with respect to his Children and very noble ones with respect to the person whom he trusts with the charge of them. He told me when he first mentioned this Subject that it would be a pleasure to him to meet with such a Young Man as he coud forward through life and that he would not scruple to risk of his fortune in doing it if his Subject was promising. The only difficulty with Mr Alexander with respect to your Friend is that his view to Physic may carry him away from him sooner than he woud wish. And it may be a difficulty with your friend that the two boys of whom the charge is proposed to him are so young the one being eight and the other six but they are equally advanced being to begin the Latin together. He proposes that they shall attend the Public School while they have the advantage of a Tutor at home. He leaves the terms to you or me and will be inclined to increase them as the boys advance especially if that will induce a person to his mind to continue with him the full time. Remember me affectionately to J. Black and all friends with you. Youll please let me know your friends resolution when he had determined himself. I am  

I am told that Dr Beaty, or his party, give out that he has not only refuted but killed D. Hume. I should be very glad of the first, but sorry for the other; and I have the pleasure to inform you that he is in perfect good health; if he had been otherwise I should have certainly mentioned it in some of my letters. He had a cough, and lost flesh, soon after you went from home, which we did not know what to think of, but it turned out a mere cold, and it went off without leaving any ill effects; he has still some less flesh than usual, which nobody regrets, but in point of health and spirits I never saw him better. You seemed to doubt whether I should not write to Lord Stanhope. I had inclination enough, but was not so decided as to send my letter to himself without putting it in your power to withhold it if proper, and therefore I stayed for a frank; what is disagreeable is, laying him under the obligation to make a ceremonious answer, and, if he be gone, subjecting him to Continental postage, so you will judge. I have not seen J. Ferguson, but he must acquiesce. 

It has given me great pleasure that you have avoided doing anything that might tend to urge Lord Stanhope farther than he has already gone in the proposal respecting Lord Chesterfield. If I had known the part he took in that business, I should certainly at first have either frankly accepted of the offer made me, or declined it in a way that could not imply an intention to raise the terms. This is certainly the only alternative that is now left me. I have recolved the subject all night and this morning, and the possibility of my becoming a burden on Lord Stanhope's family weighs much, but the odds on Lord Chesterfield's life is so great as very much to reduce that consideration. My place here, a few years ago, was worth about 300 a-year, but this and the preceding year it has fallen considerably short; and while the present alarm of the scarcity of money, and the expense of education at Edinburgh, continues, it may not rise again to its former value. To this I must add, that in case of debility or old age, I shall probably be reduced to my salary, which is no more than 100 a-year. For these reasons I think that I can fully justify myself to my family in accepting of 200 a year certain, with the privilege of choosing my place and my occupations; and if my Lord Chesterfield's guardians should be of opinion that he ought, when he comes of age, not only to relieve my Lord Stanhope of his engagement, but likewise, in case I shall have acquitted myself faithfully and properly, to make some such addition to my annuity as I mentioned, I shall then likewise think that I can justify my conduct to the world who rate men commonly as they do horses, by the price that is put upon them. But of this I would not have the least hint to my Lord Chesterfield at present. I have so far proceeded without consulting anybody, and have formed an opinion subject to correction. I mean to read your letters, and this I am writing to one or two of my friends. If they approve, it shall go to you; and if you agree with me, be so good as intimate my resolution to the guardians of my Lord Chesterfield; or, if you have any objections of moment, delay it till I shall have heard from you. My own present feeling is, that I should be to blame if I omitted putting myself and family under the protection of persons so worthy and so respectable, when I have an opportunity of doing it without any real hazard to my interest. But I shall not enter on this subject, my heart, indeed, being too full, especially with respect to Lord Stanhope. I am, &c.,

I don't know whether You may not allude to a letter that I have not received, but it is likely that none have miscarried. And I thought my last decisive as to my resolutions and intended Motions. I have laboured hard to finish at the College and have put an end to one Species of Philosophy today and shall to another tomorrow. I have fixed to set out for London with J. Ferguson on Tuesday the Fifteenth of this Month, but as my Companion is indulgent to himself and Lazy may not be in London before Sunday or Monday thereafter. I write this merely because you say you are uneasy at not hearing from me. Am perfectly Satisfied with the whole manner and State of the Transactions and defer particularly till we meet. I have been dining with D. Hume who says you have never yet made any attempt to cure him on his Pet altho it be a great and a growing distemper. 

You see I have taken full benefit of the time you allowed me to form my opinion of this situation, and have the pleasure to inform you it is in most material circumstances very agreeable. I was received with great politeness, and continue to be treated with sufficient marks of regard. I have found not only vivacity and parts as I was made to expect, but likewise good dispositions and attachments, servants all of an old standing, and become friends without any improper influence or disorder that I have yet observed. I was made to expect great jealousy of control, and set out with a resolution to employ no other than what a sense of my great regard might give me. It is likely that a person of different character was expected, and the disappointment, I believe, has had a good effect. My journey hither furnished no adventures worth relating. My Lord Stanhope's being at Paris gave me access, for the few days I stayed, to some very respectable and agreeable company, in which I was questioned concerning you, particularly by the Duchess D'Enville, who complained of your French, as she did of mine, but said that before you left Paris she had the happiness to learn your language. I likewise met with your friend, Count Sarsfield, to whom I had great obligations, and if I write I beg that you will thank him &c &c

I have been for some time so busy reading you, and recommending and quoting you, to my students, that I have not had leisure to trouble you with letters. I suppose, however, that of all the opinions on which you have any curiosity, mine is among the least doubtful. You may believe, that on further acquaintance with your work my esteem is not a little increased. You are surely to reign alone on these subjects, to form the opinions, and I hope to govern at least the coming generations. I see no addition your work can receive except such little matters as may occur to yourself in subsequent editions. You are not to expect the run of a novel, nor even of a true history; but you may venture to assure your booksellers of a steady and continual sale, as long as people wish for information on these subjects. You have provoked, it is true, the church, the universities, and the merchants, against all of whom I am willing to take your part; but you have likewise provoked the militia, and there I must be against you. The gentlemen and peasants of this country do not need the authority of philosophers to make them supine and negligent of every resource they might have in themselves, in the case of certain extremities, of which the pressure, God knows, may be at no great distance. But of this more at Philippi. You have heard from Black of our worthy friend D. Hume. If anything in such a case could be agreeable, the easy and pleasant state of his mind and spirits would be really so. I believe he will be prevailed on at last to get in motion, and to try the effect of Bath, or anything else Sir Jno. Pringle may recommend. I have said more on this subject to Mr Gibbon, who, if you be found at London, will communicate to you. If not, I hope we shall soon meet here. And am, &c

I heard from Mr Chalmer of your being again intangled in my disagreeable Affairs And have Since received your own letter inclosing one from My Lord Stanhope to you. I have been greatly at a loss on this occasion for want of my usual Counsellor Mr Davidson. After mature consideration it appears to my friends here as well as to myself that a requisition to produce the original of Earl Stanhopes letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 may be a matter of Course in Bussiness But that it may proceed likewise from some degree of Suspicion that my Copies of this Letter particularly that transcribed in my own hand writeing and sent to the Earl of Chesterfield in January last is not exact. That if the original letter were by any Accident lost the Suspicion might produce Insinuations of which I shoud in that case have no direct refutation. And that in this View of the matter I ought not to expose this letter to any Avoidable Accident whatever. If My Lord Chesterfield declare his Intention in case my Copy is verifyed by the original, to fullfill the condition which will Relieve My Lord Stanhope of his Obligation, I will if he give me leave without loss of time to go to London and wait upon his Lordship with the original Letter. In the meantime I send by this post Copys of this and two Other letters from My Lord Stanhope to me Collated and Attested by a Notary Public and by The Lord Provost of Edinburgh in hopes that this may be Sufficient. These Copys go in a Packet to Mr Chalmer who will communicate them to you and otherwise employ them for any purpose they can Serve. I return you with this Lord Stanhopes letter to yourself and send to His Lordship the Copy he desires in my own hand writeing very sorry any difficulty shoud hinder me from sending the Original.


I wrote last from Groninguen and told you of Mr. Gordons Intention of passing the Winter at this place. The impressions he had got of Groninguen upon the Road woud have made him constantly Dissatisfied at that place, for people sometimes think meanly of themselves at an University of little repute, as in a Coat that is out of Fashion; otherwise I am not well qualified to Judge of the Superiority of this University. There are a great Variety of Professors, and all who have got the Degree of Master of Arts here may advertise a College upon any Branch they please, they have scarcely any Vacations. The publick lectures are in German and Strangers are Obliged to have private lessons in Latin for themselves which make the fees very high. Mr. Gordon attends three in Company with Mr. Abercrombie. The Civil Law, The Law of Nature and Nations, and Modern History, which are rather too many at once, at least they would be so to one who could give application to books and pursue a Point steadily, but that habit is seldom acquired by People in Mr. Gordons Way; he likes very well to hear about matters of Study but what is called Poring, is not much to his mind. I have no trouble in advising him against Irregularitys, and the whole remittances are very safely entrusted to his own management so that you may call me a very happy Governour, provided you will always keep in mind how far the happiness of a Governour mounts. This is not a place of Conversation to me, there may be agreeable people but I have not yet been able to find them out or relish much through the Medium of bad Latin and bad French. I am already of opinion that Learning is very frequent here, but have not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions: but you must consider me as a stranger who may know more hereafter.

A Gentleman passed some days ago in his way from Paris to Berlin, and told some Storys of Mr. Fontenelle: one that he was in Company with a Lady who happend to drop her Fan, he put himself immediatly in motion to take it up, but she prevented him, for he is a hundred years old, upon which he said; Plut a Dieu que Je n'avois que quatre Vingt Ans. Another Lady who it seems had removed lately to his neighbourhood made him a Visit and told him; she expected to see him often for that reason; he replyed that wont be my reason, that will only be my Pretence. I wish you may relish these Bons mots, that come so far as Germany, if not you may make reflections upon the length of time it may take to turn a Frenchman Sour. I saw lately some Smart letters in Manuscript that Passed between Voltaire, and a Church Man of Dignitee in France on account of his Infidelity. They say he is Constantly Complaining of his Health and threatning to Die. A Lady here tells me she saw him in his way from Berlin, and that he caressed one of her Children and said he woud be fond of him even if he had been begotten by Maupertuis. We Lodge here with a Frenchman, who is a little Foolish, for the sake of learning his Language; he has taught French in this Place for some years, he has translated some of Mr. Humes Works into French and has the Title of secretary to the King of Poland, all which is very fine in a Landlord. The King when he has a mind to Flatter a Man cannot give A Title of Nobility but makes many Secretarys and members of the Privy Council. The Nobility waste away here to Nothing; for all the Sons share alike in the Estate and Title; all ranks almost have Voluminous Titles, if you was a Professor at Leipzig instead of Glasgow I should have directed my Letter, To his Excellency The most learned & Celebrated &c. I should be sorry to have written all this Idleness to a Man who is not well and I hope to hear you don't Complain this Winter. Make my Compliments to Mrs. Smith Miss Douglass and other Friends at Glasgow. If Mr. Bagwell and Mr. Reid be at Glasgow my Compliments to Both. I woud write to them if I was quite sure of their being there. Mr. Gordon Joins me in Good Wishes. I am  

Two or three days before I got your letter I happened to be applyed to by Mr Alexander Merchant here, to recommend a young man if I knew any fit to be tutor to his Son. I immediately carryed your letter to him and he is perfectly Satisfyed with the recommendation and I am well Satisfyed that as far as relates to Mr Alexander himself and his family your friend will have every reason to applaud his good fortune in meeting with him. He has very right Ideas with respect to his Children and very noble ones with respect to the person whom he trusts with the charge of them. He told me when he first mentioned this Subject that it would be a pleasure to him to meet with such a Young Man as he coud forward through life and that he woud not scruple to risk of his fortune in doing it if his Subject was promising. The only difficulty with Mr Alexander with respect to your Friend is that his view to Physic may carry him away from him sooner than he woud wish. And it may be a difficulty with your friend that the two boys of whom the charge is proposed to him are so young the one being eight and the other six but they are equally advanced being to begin the Latin together. He proposes that they shall attend the Public School while they have the advantage of a Tutor at home. He leaves the terms to you or me and will be inclined to increase them as the boys advance especially if that will induce a person to his mind to continue with him the full time. Remember me affectionately to J. Black and all friends with you. Youll please let me know your friends resolution when he had determined himself. I am  


I am told that Dr Beaty, or his party, give out that he has not only refuted but killed D. Hume. I should be very glad of the first, but sorry for the other; and I have the pleasure to inform you that he is in perfect good health; if he had been otherwise I should have certainly mentioned it in some of my letters. He had a cough, and lost flesh, soon after you went from home, which we did not know what to think of, but it turned out a mere cold, and it went off without leaving any ill effects; he has still some less flesh than usual, which nobody regrets, but in point of health and spirits I never saw him better. You seemed to doubt whether I should not write to Lord Stanhope. I had inclination enough, but was not so decided as to send my letter to himself without putting it in your power to withhold it if proper, and therefore I stayed for a frank; what is disagreeable is, laying him under the obligation to make a ceremonious answer, and, if he be gone, subjecting him to Continental postage, so you will judge. I have not seen J. Ferguson, but he must acquiesce.

It has given me great pleasure that you have avoided doing anything that might tend to urge Lord Stanhope farther than he has already gone in the proposal respecting Lord Chesterfield. If I had known the part he took in that business, I should certainly at first have either frankly accepted of the offer made me, or declined it in a way that could not imply an intention to raise the terms. This is certainly the only alternative that is now left me. I have revolved the subject all night and this morning, and the possibility of my becoming a burden on Lord Stanhope's family weighs much, but the odds on Lord Chesterfield's life is so great as very much to reduce that consideration. My place here, a few years ago, was worth about 300 a-year, but this and the preceding year it has fallen considerably short; and while the present alarm of the scarcity of money, and the expense of education at Edinburgh, continues, it may not rise again to its former value. To this I must add, that in case of debility or old age, I shall probably be reduced to my salary, which is no more than 100 a-year. For these reasons I think that I can fully justify myself to my family in accepting of 200 a-year certain, with the privilege of choosing my place and my occupations; and if my Lord Chesterfield's guardians should be of opinion that he ought, when he comes of age, not only to relieve my Lord Stanhope of his engagement, but likewise, in case I shall have acquitted myself faithfully and properly, to make some such addition to my annuity as I mentioned, I shall then likewise think that I can justify my conduct to the world, who rate men commonly as they do horses, by the price that is put upon them. But of this I would not have the least hint to my Lord Chesterfield at present. I have so far proceeded without consulting anybody, and have formed an opinion subject to correction. I mean to read your letters, and this I am writing to one or two of my friends. If they approve, it shall go to you; and if you agree with me, be so good as intimate my resolution to the guardians of my Lord Chesterfield; or, if you have any objections of moment, delay it till I shall have heard from you. My own present feeling is, that I should be to blame if I omitted putting myself and family under the protection of persons so worthy and so respectable, when I have an opportunity of doing it without any real hazard to my interest. But I shall not enter on this subject, my heart, indeed, being too full, especially with respect to Lord Stanhope. I am etc.

I don't know whether you may not allude to a letter that I have not received, but it is likely that none have miscarried. And I thought my last decisive as to my resolutions and intended Motions. I have laboured hard to finish at the College and have put an end to one Species of Philosophy today and shall to another tomorrow. I have fixed to set out for London with J. Ferguson on Tuesday the Fifteenth of this Month, but as my Companion is indulgent to himself and Lazy may not be in London before Sunday or Monday thereafter. I write this merely because you say you are uneasy at not hearing from me. Am perfectly Satisfied with the whole manner and State of the Transactions and defer particularly till we meet. I have been dining with D. Hume who says you have never yet made any attempt to cure him of his Pet altho it be a great and a growing distemper.

You see I have taken full benefit of the time you allowed me to form my opinion of this situation, and have the pleasure to inform you it is in most material circumstances very agreeable. I was received with great politeness, and continue to be treated with sufficient marks of regard. I have found not only vivacity and parts as I was made to expect, but likewise good dispositions and attachments, servants all of an old standing, and become friends without any improper influence or disorder that I have yet observed. I was made to expect great jealousy of control, and set out with a resolution to employ no other than what a sense of my great regard might give me. It is likely that a person of a different character was expected, and the disappointment, I believe, has had a good effect. My journey hither furnished no adventures worth relating. My Lord Stanhope's being at Paris gave me access, for the few days I stayed, to some very respectable and agreeable company, in which I was questioned concerning you, particularly by the Duchess D'Enville who complained of your French, as she did of mine, but said that before you left Paris she had the happiness to learn your language. I likewise met with your friend, Count Sarsfield, to whom I had great obligations, and if you write I beg that you will thank him, etc. etc.

I have been for some time so busy reading you, and recommending and quoting you, to my students, that I have not had leisure to trouble you with letters. I suppose, however, that of all the opinions on which you have any curiosity, mine is among the least doubtful. You may believe, that on further acquaintance with your work my esteem is not a little increased. You are surely to reign alone on these subjects, to form the opinions, and I hope to govern at least the coming generations. I see no addition your work can receive except such little matters as may occur to yourself in subsequent editions. You are not to expect the run of a novel, nor even of a true history; but you may venture to assure your booksellers of a steady and continual sale, as long as people wish for information on these subjects. You have provoked, it is true, the church, the universities, and the merchants, against all of whom I am willing to take your part; but you have likewise provoked the militia, and there I must be against you. The gentlemen and peasants of this country do not need the authority of philosophers to make them supine and negligent of every resource they might have in themselves, in the case of certain extremities, of which the pressure, God knows, may be at no great distance. But of this more at Philippi. You have heard from Black of our worthy friend D. Hume. If anything in such a case could be agreeable, the easy and pleasant state of his mind and spirits would be really so. I believe he will be prevailed on at least to get in motion, and to try the effect of Bath, or anything else Sir John Pringle may recommend. I have said more on this subject to Mr Gibbon who, if you be found at London, will communicate to you. If not, I hope we shall soon meet here. And am, etc.

...David, I am afraid, loses ground. He is cheerful, and in good spirits as usual; but I confess that my hopes from the effects of the turn of the season towards spring have very much abated....

I heard from Mr Chalmer of your being again intangled in my disagreeable affairs and have since received your own letter inclosing one from My Lord Stanhope to you. I have been greatly at a loss on this occasion for want of my usual Counsellor Mr Davidson. After mature consideration it appears to my friends here as well as to myself that a requisition to produce the original of Earl Stanhopes letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 may be a matter of Course in Business But that it may proceed likewise from some degree of suspicion that my Copie of this Letter particularly that transcribed in my own hand writeing and sent to the Earl of Chesterfield in January last is not exact. That if the original letter were by any Accident lost the suspicion might produce Insinuations of which I shoud in that case have no direct refutation. And that in this View of the matter I ought not to expose this letter to any Avoidable Accident whatever. If My Lord Chesterfield declare his Intention in case my Copy is verifyed by the original, to fullfill the condition which will Relieve My Lord Stanhope of his Obligation, I will if he give me leave without loss of time go to London and wait upon his Lordship with the original Letter. In the meantime I send by this post Copys of this and two other letters from My Lord Stanhope to me Collated and Attested by a Notary Public and By The Lord Provost of Edinburgh In hopes that this may be sufficient. These Copys go in a Packet to Mr Chalmer who will communicate them to you and otherwise employ them for any purpose they can Serve. I return you with this Lord Stanhopes letter to yourself and send to His Lordship the Copy he desires in my own hand writeing very sorry any difficulty shoud hinder me from sending the Originall.

your letter has been read to me, and I would have sooner attempted something in the way of answer, but for want of Strength, and even now, what I do will be of as little Satisfaction to you as to myself. In your case I do not see what the Prince himself could do, If you were convicted of a crime his Prerogative could Pardon, but in nomination for Employment in which his Ministers alone are accountable they cannot forgive interference, and if they do not forgive, are powerful to resent. Still further be it from me at Ninety two, to make my first approach to His Royal Highness's Notice, is an act of mere Presumption, and in this  trust however Bold you yourself may be in action, will indulge my caution.

I Prize your Victory in obtaining the kind affection of Walter Scot, and others I could name, more than some Battles however loudly talked of, but knowing how the Admiralty stand affected, my decided wish is that you wait the Chapter of accidents, and discontinue all further applications for the present. For Money it appears to me you have enough if carefully conducted.

Here too in open arms extended to receive you; and you may perform the part of Chief in my impending obsequies, an office which will there become you and leave no stain behind to blot your future life.

Believe me to be with more concern than I can express 

I must insist on not seeing the inclosed any more & that may matters may proceed for this year in the ordinary way. I wish that I were a great Prince with a great Revenue & fewer outlets for money that I might deal more nearly in proportion to what I think of Peoples merits. In the mean time I am your most

 I had attended Dr Ferguson's the first year he taught the Natural Philosophy Class, 1759 60, gratis.... two years after, when in Watson's hospital, I offered him a fee, but he would not accept it. When his son Adam came to my class in the H S I requested he would allow me to return his favour; but next year when I sent back his first quarter, I received this letter.

I am very glad to find that you take up the Bussiness of procuring publick benefits in our part of the Countrey. It is now your turn & I hope that you will not drop it soon. My private interest in the Lime Road was much greater some years ago than it is now: but if you make a very good Road you may tempt me to use it a little still. At any Rate I am willing to Contribute & considering the comparative value of my Concern I am affraid I may be thought to have done so extravagantly. You will find my Subscription of three Guineas at the end of the paper you  are pleased to Address to me. I heartly wish you success in whatever you Undertake either for the Benefit of your own Estate or the Conveyance of the Publick, and Am

As Lord Carlisle and Mr Eden are preparing to return to Great Britain, His Majesty's Commissioners have directed me to desire that you will fortwith inform yourself from the Merchants, whether previous to their Excellencies Departure there are any farther measures respecting Trade which are wished to be taken into consideration and I shall be glad to know the result as soon as convenient. I am with ver sincere Respect, Sir, your most obedient and 

I am to request of You for the Information of His Majesty's Commissioners the best Account you can furnish of the Variation during the last twelve Months between the Prices of the Principal Articles of Stores and Provisions which are imported into this Place from distant Ports by Licenses and otherwise for necessary Consumption.

We arrived here yesterday morning without having met with any interruption or uneasiness on the Road, but we are likely to meet with some hinderance here, the Wind has been contrary all day yesterday & continues so to day, if it comes more favourable a Packet will sail this afternoon, but there is at present litle appearance of it, as the Wind seems to be set in, and blows hard. If we are detained here to another Post day, I will write your Lordship again from this place.

The expence to Harwich amounts to About Nineteen Guineas. I have not yet delivered your Lordships letter to Mr Fletcher, & I believe it will come more properly when the hurry and dissipation of his Journey is over.

Mr Fletcher and I arrived safe here a few days ago, & have introduced him to some of my acquaintances , & engaged a lodging for him at which he slept last night, in the house of a Person who has passed some time in England, & is now setled here as a teacher of the English and French languages. This House was recommended by Mr. Swartz the Professor of Law, & I thought it lucky for Mr Fletcher at first to find a Landlord he coud speak to.

We have not yet fixed upon an Ordinary for him, but hope in a few days to setle that point likewise. I have been inquiring into the particulars of his expence here, & will be able to inform your Lordship fully in my next or on my return to Scotland. We have drawn upon Mr Crawfurd for five and Twenty Pounds, as Mr Fletchers Allowance for the first quarter. This money as far as I have hitherto been informed, may probably be sufficient for him at this place.

One of the Persons I have made him acquainted with here is Professor of Anatomy & has very good reputation as a Physician. If Mr Fletcher's health shoud require his Attendance, I have great confidence in his Skill & Attention. We have a Countreyman setled here, Mr Falkner a Brother of Lord  Hackertons. Mr Fletcher brought him a letter from Mr Crawfurd to procure him Credit & give his assistance in any thing thing else he might stand in need of. Mr Falkner has been very Civil & I hope, will be extremely usefull to Mr Fletcher while he stays here. Our expence in all to this place amounts to about three & thirty Guineas, we stayed for a Wind at Harwick some Days after I wrote your Lordship & had a very tedious passage, which detained us in all about ten days. I have delivered your Lordships letter to Mr Fletcher, he was much affected with it, & tells me he will send the Copy of it by me. As I hope He will be fully setled here in a litle time, I can scarcely expect to hear from your Lordship at this place. The way from here to Amsterdam is almost impassable when the Winter weather begins, which will make it necessary for me to set out the sooner.

We made no stay at any place in Holland & gave litle attention to the Publick news. The People I have talked with seem to think this Countrey in the Utmost danger from all Quarters. They are threatned by every formidable Power in Europe, & required to declare themselves, which they are so far from Venturing to do that they dare not make the least augmentation of their Troops for fear of giving Umbrage to their Neighbours. The People at Present seem to be stromgly affected to the King of Prussia, they consider the War in Germany as a Religious one, & think the Protestant Interest at Stake, so much for news which I remember your Lordship was pleased to desire .

I shall be able in my next to inform your Lordship of every thing relating to Mr Fletchers setlement at this place.

In my last I told your Lordship how far I had gone in setling Mr Fletcher here; & did not then think it necessary to wait for a return from your Lordship, Mr Fletcher was indeed then very melancholy but I was in hopes that might go off in a few days, it has however increased to such a degree that I cannot think of leaving him so soon as I proposed, without even a Servant who in case of further Changes, might at least procure him the offices of Humanity. I am very well aware what your Lordship must feel from these appearances for my own disstress is beyond expression. I cannot forsee what I may be obliged to do before I can hear from your Lordship, perhaps to return to Brittain, where a properer place might be found for Mr Fletcher till his melancholy goes off, than any here, he is at present disqualified by it for doing any thing. I am hurryed in writing this as the Post is just going away & I was not able to determine myself what to propose  to your Lordship sooner. I feel great uneasiness in a Situation Subject to blame without advice or Authority from those who shoud direct me. Your Lordship will please to direct for me (Au Parlament d'Angleterre a Groningue) or to the Care of Mr Crawfurd at Rotterdam.


Mr Fletcher has appeared so much better for some days past, that I am preparing to set out on my return, I am still not without uneasiness on his account but inclined to believe that this Situation is as favourable for him as any that coud be found. His Landlord has promised me a particular Attention to all his Affairs, & to call for the accounts regularly every week of such people as furnish him any thing here. He has hitherto since we set out given no signs of dissorder, & has been cautious with respect to drinking although I did not appear to restrain him in that Particular. The degree of Melancholy which possessed him perplexed me very much as I am hurried to leave this place both by the winter season coming on & my apprehensions of an Ague which used to trouble me in this Country.

As his Spirits seem to have taken a turn to the Better  I hope it may Please God to restore him fully to his former applications & Temper of Mind, he seems to be out of the way here of what formerly  might have missled & disstracted his mind. I thought it necessary however to take what precautions I could in case of the Worst. Mr Falconer whom I formerly mentioned to your Lordship, & to whom he is recommended by Mr Crawfurd, promised me to take particular care of him, & as I have informed him in confidence of the former state of his health he will be able to suit his care to that circumstance. I likewise explained his case to Dr Vandoeveren Professor of Anatomy, in whom I have much confidence as a Physician and as an Obliging Worthy Man, both agreed in thinking that his Present Landlord is a very proper person for him to lodge with, his name is Le Moine, & as I gave him your Lordships Adress, he will not fail to write if any thing remarkable occurs. If your Lordship has any commands for him Please direct (A Monsr Monsr Le Moine Maitre de Langues a Groninguen by Holland).

Mr Fletcher has given me a Copy of your Lordships last letter to him, and at his earnest desire I have  left the Latin Newtestament with him. I have computed his Stated expence for one half year.

Which in British money amounts to twenty four Pounds seven Shillings and eight pence. There are other Particulars besides Cloaths which I coud not compute such as Candles Tea Sugar &c. We have lately had a Storm in this Countrey which has cast many Wrecks on the Coast & greatly the Damaged the Shipping which plys in this Country. I intended to take the favourable weather which now offers to get over the Lakes and Marshes of Friesland.

I wrote your Lordship a litle before I set out from Groninguen, of the resolution I had taken & did not find any reason to Alter it. Mr Fletcher continued to recover his Spirits, & since I set out I have the Satisfaction of a letter from his Landlord; which came to hand at this place, telling me he was very well, & begun to talk & employ himself more than when I was at Groninguen.

I have come here in order to meet with some company or find out some convenient way of travelling to Scotland & don't intend to make any Stay. I sent your Lordship in my last some computation of Mr Fletchers Stated articles of expence where he now is. I am sorry that this Journey shoud have been so expensive to your Lordship, & earnestly wish  the Satisfaction may be answerable, which I hope it will. The whole according to the best account I have been able to keep of the Particulars amounts to 53:2:5. The delays in waiting for Passages has increased the expence a good deal. I hope to be in Scotland soon & defer further Particulars till then. I am My Lord

I Understand Mr Home has been proposing Schemes for my Advantage in Scotland, & he has informed me of the manner in which your Lordship was pleased to receive them. I am very much affected with such proofs of your Lordships remembrance & Friendship, & whatever be the consequence can never forget the Respect & Gratitude which my treatment has at all times inspired me with. I have written to Mr Home on the Subject of his proposals, I am sorry the Affair is of a Nature to give trouble to my friends, & know he is Sanguine about every thing where friendship is concerned. You will be able to Judge how far Mr Abercrombie can be brought to reasonable terms, & I Shall have a particular Satisfaction in following any determination your Lordship is pleased to take the trouble of making for me.

I have not heard of Mr Kinloch since he went to Bath, he was then looking well, but his Spirits a little depressed with the apprehension of his remaining complaint. I have some thoughts of getting in to the Stage Coach & going down for some days to see how he does. I wish your Lordship Joy of the Victory on the Rhine but need not trouble you with the Accounts talked of here as you will be better informed.

Mr Kinloch I believe informed your Lordship, by the last post, of my intention to attend him on his journey Abroad, & I was extremely willing to be of any use to him; & went in to his proposal with little hesitation, till upon recollection I saw the difficulties which might attend by my being out of the Way at this time. He bore with the thoughts of allowing me to return when Necessary: but when I thought of the difficultys which might Attend my Return in time of War, & the inconveniency to him of being left in a Strange Countrey I determined it was better to lay aside thoughts of it Altogether.

I think Myself extremely Obliged to your Lordship for the trouble I understand you are pleased to take in what concerns me. Mr Home writes in very Sanguine terms on the prospect of Success in Making an Agreement with Mr Abercrombie: but his friendship as it may have led him to give your Lordship  trouble on my Account may likewise have made him think Other Circumstances equally easy. The Purchase is greatly beyond my Stock; but I am made to believe that the income of the place, with diligence in the Profession might enable me in a few years to clear the debt it woud bring upon me. And if it takes place I am determined to quiet my own Mind against any loss to my friends, by Ensurance. This affair however filled me with a good deal of Anxiety & made me a very improper Companion for Mr Kinloch; who I am affraid has taken my hesitations amiss. I took the Liberty to Recommend his continuing Mr Congalton; but he is not determined & Stays here a few days longer, he was told today that the Sailing of the Packet is interrupted by two French Cruizers which ply in the Passage, & that none will sail till a Man of War which is ordered Round comes to protect them. It made me uneasy that he imputed part of his delay to me: but many things have occurred to me that make it impracticable for me to go along with him as I at first intended. Among others I have been informed that the Gentleman in whose hands the greater part of my little Stock is lodged, has a prospect of Going to America. It is necessary for me to settle my affairs with him before he goes & to have my little funds in readyness if there is any prospect of making a Bargain with Mr Abercrombie. I am sorry to give your Lordship the trouble of so long a letter but it is owing to my Concern, for the Offence which Mr Kinloch seems to have taken, & to explain the Reasons of my not being able to accompany him as he wrote I intended.

Whatever be the Event of projects formed for me in Scotland I shall rest Satisfied in the Proofs I have received of your Lordships Goodness &

I had notice from Mr Home by last Post that I was chosen Professor in the College of Edinburgh. Nothing coud happen more agreeable to me & it gives me great pleasure to think that I shall soon have an opportunity of thanking your Lordship in Person, to whose friendship alone I own that piece of good fortune. I shall be very happy if your Lordship continues to have satisfaction from that kind protection you have given me on this & former occasions.

I was to wait on Mr Fletcher this morning:but missed him, I shall go to receive his commands before I set out for Scotland which will be as soon as I can settle my little affairs here. The people here are not much alarmed with the French  Invasion even People who allow it practicable have no impression of its consequence. I am told that one Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland says; The French Minister at the Hague advised her not to go to England in a time of such confusion, or if she must go, offered her letters of recommendation to The Officers of the French Army. This piece of news your Lordship may not have heard from any other hand, Altho you will certainly hear that a Battle is expected in Westphalia. Prince Ferdinand is unwilling to pass the Weser, & has given it as his opinion that Hanover woud suffer more from the two Armys before an Action than it will lose by Contributions in case his Army is defeat.

I have written this line, in case I should miss your Lordship; I dont know whither it is proper to trouble you about Stamp Masters. But I have a sister who is married to a man of the name of Wilkie at Coupar in Angus who some years ago was appointed Joint Stamp Master with one Menzies who being unable for the Bussiness on account of his Age only retained the Sellary and so much of the bussiness as was to be done in the Town itself, Whilst it was understood that my Brother in Law was to do the Rest & I think to succeed in the office: I have a letter from My sister telling me that they are very much alarmed by some steps which they hear have been taken to change the destination of the office in a favour of a person who it seems has married Menzies daughter. My Sisters Situation forces me, perhaps to tresspass on your Lordships Goodness. If it should   come before the Trustees for the Linnen Manufacture your Lordships Protection here woud add most sensibly to the Obligations I ly under. & am

I have met with Interruptions which hindered My writing the inclosed till this day at one O Clock, & made it impossible for me to go to Brunstane to Dinner. As your Lordship said you was to be in Town tomorrow forenoon I will wait upon you sometime between twelve & two wherever I find you are. If I have mistaken your Lordships meaning, I can have your farther directions then. I hope you will excuse my keeping the French Treaty tomorrow as I have not yet had time to read it.

Principal Goldie died this morning. I am going to attend My Class Otherwise would have carryed this Message Myself. I will call to Receive your Lordships Commands after twelve O Clock. I am with the greatest respect 

Mr Ferguson Presents his Complts to Lord Milton, he has been confined to his bed since about the midle of the Day yesterday with a feverish Dissorder which is now abated but which does not yet permit him to Rise. He will however be sure to wait upon his Lordship the moment he is allowed to Stir abroad.

The Inclosed letters were sent to me that I might carry them to your Lordship: but being obliged to delay my setting out for some days it is proper that I forward them by the Post. Captain Fletcher was advised by Dr Pringle to go to the South of France for his health & The Duke of Bedfords going furnishing him with so good an opportunity of going without a Passport that he had no time to consult your Lordship upon it before he set out. He is still the youngest Captain in the Regiment & has only Lieutennants Pay there being a Captain from that Regiment allowed to retire upon his full pay. But this probably will not long be the Case as the Regiment is now before the Havanna. I will refer farther Particulars  and all Political news from this place till I have the pleasure of Seeing your Lordship.

Mr Oswald in a cover under which he sent me the Inclosed desires that I woud Join my Testimony to his Recommendation of Mr Drysdale. Which I do most willingly as Mr Drysdale has been my Intimate Friend for many years and I know him to be a very deserving Man who upon farther knowledge or tryal woud give your Lordship great Satisfaction.

I expect to be at Edinburgh in about a fortnight when I long to entertain you with what I have been able to understand of the temper of this place and am with the Most Sincere Respect and Affection your Lordships

I have drawn out & enclosed the Scroll of such a Paragraph as your Lordship perhaps will think proper to insert in your letter to the Ld P:S: relating to Coll. Fletchers Affair. It may proceed or follow what relations are to be sent of the Perthshire election.

I have likewise inclosed inclosed a short memorandum of the Proposal I mentioned relating to the College & am with the greatest Respect.

I have enclosed the letters your Lordship gave me and a Short proposal which may serve as a Supplement to Dr Wisharts report. I have been much hurried but hope these papers do not come too late. I am with the greatest Respect

I received your most acceptable present by Dr Blacks conveyance & tho very little of a Genealogist or Antiquary have been highly gratifyed. Mere names of Father & Son with dates & Successions always vanish from my recollection And I need some adventure or trait of Character to give them Substance and to make an impression. You have supplied these requisites, And I am now convinced that your Family is the most Illustrious of any in Europe descending from remote Antiquity thro nobles Crowned Heads Great Warriours & Heroes noted abroad as well as at home and if the Popedome were not extinguished in a fair way to have the Keys of St. Peter & the triple Crown.

Their generations serve to Arrange and to illustrate the History & Antiquities of their own Country & in some measure of forreign Nations also. In reading Guicciardini formerly I was unable to guess who that Obin Scotzese could be. And I am ashamed to say  that hitherto the History of Scotland has interested me less than almost any Other that is Commonly read.  This I should be sorry to account for  without owning the defect to be in myself.

I have many times attended Buchanan: but notwithstanding his Latin never could get through. I am well pleased with the knock you have given him. His fine genius and wonderful possession of a dead Language never can attone for malice or indifference to truth. His retention in a family who honoured him with an important trust might have excused some bias to hide defects or to heighten their lustre: but the Contrary disposition was at least extremely perverse. Your discoveries in the Vatican have met the progeny of Robert the Second beyond the possibility of misrepresentation or doubt. I have now only one difficulty left how you come at this moment not to take the Title of Sr A. Stuart of Castlemilk. As to the execution of your work: If you make a Gil Blas of me I can give every Sort of encouragement about the Homilies. There is the same compleat information the same fair Statement & fullness if not redundancy of Evidence as in former productions & perfection or Sublimity of Stile; because it is precisely what it ought to be. And I rejoice to think that checks  to Animal life do not always touch the Intellectual faculties. Along with the Genealogy I had your letter to Dr Black sent to me & have since received your letter to myself. I am not discouraged by the slowness of progress in recovering your strength. My own was so slow that except in the effects of Bath & my excursion to Italy I never could fix the time of any Sensible advance, Altho I am now certainly as well as could be expected at my time of life, & better probably than I should have been if the check I received about the age of 60 had not put me upon a safer course of life than formerly.

It is an old saying that at a certain Age every man is either a fool or a Physician of the two no doubt one had best be a Physician. Altho I suspect that the Skill of such Physycians is mostly limited to their own Case, Yet the causes of health are so much the same to every body that except in the case of opposite disseases what is good for one will be so likewise for Another. We are too apt to suppose that our peculiar Constitutions require what we have brought upon ourselves by habit &c. There may be for ought I know a very material difference betwixt your constitution and mine. One inclined to repletion or fullness of Blood, the other not so much. I know not what upon this account the Doctors may have recommended  to you: but to me the meagre diet and Water has been in a high degree Salutary & pleasant. Your own experience of what is attended with least inequality of sensation whether of want or repletion is certainly the best guide. I have seen a name in the bath list which I suppose to be yours. And hope that you may still reap some benefit from the Queens Bath. Your catching cold formerly makes me suspect that you used the private or covered baths. The difference is probably greater than people commonly imagine. Observe the appearance of boiling immediately over the hot Spring in the Kings Bath, it proceeds from a discharge of a Air together with the Water, And that Air is what Dr Black who first observed it in other instances, called fixed Air & Other Chymist have since called Acid gas or Carbonic gas, the same with that which fills the bottom of the Grotto del Cane near Naples and which upon immersion extinguishes flame or kills an Animal as effectually & immediately as Water or drowning itself. This Air respired in too great a propor may give that check to animal life which we call a Cold. And if so it is certainly material when you approach a Spring of such Air that the Space should be uncovered for the free access of better respiration.

Your coming to this country will be a great  Pleasure to many. Mrs Stuart has a Sister within a few miles of us here & I hope to be early informed of your Arrival. And tho very much attached to my own Apparatus for sleeping &c will either go without them or transport them wherever I can have the Satisfaction of passing any time with you. Here is a pleasant enough Shealing with plenty of Chickens & Garden Stuff if you allow a Philosopher to think of his belly. I direct this Letter to London & trust it will find you wherever you Are. I am  with

The inclosed are Answers to some Queries I put to a Relation of My Wife now at Aberdeen who lived long at Batavia in quality of English Consul. The Dutch have reputation for good Government & I wished to have some notion of their Establishment in India. These queries were put carelessly in a Postscript & with little recollection. The Answers however are disstinct and Satisfactory. I have them here for your perusal that if any thing occur to you I may question him farther. I shall write him sometime next week after I have again considered this Paper & got your Animadversions. Please consider whether this Dutch Book may


you will accept of my thanks for your Ingenious and valuable Performance on the Subject of Taste.

My defect of sight which renders me dependent on others for what I hear read, has so long deferred my acknowledgements.

I have indeed suspected that the distinction of Beauty & Deformity any more than those of Merit and Demerit Happiness & Misery, were not applicable to any mere Corporeal Essence or Form.

In this you have confirmed me by your ample and satisfactory Induction of Facts throughout the departments  of Matter in which we commonly fancy distinctions so expressed.

I was personally acquainted with the Late Capability Brown and if I could have put your work in his hands should have endeavoured to divert him and his Employers from the search of Capability and Beauty in subjects were it is merely Fanciful to those in which it is real. But this I may be told is Moralizing and adverse to the Taste of the Age. Be this as it may. I am happy to leave the Culture of Taste in such hands as yours.

I am sorry to be Obliged to give you trouble a second time about my Affairs in the College: In treating about the Instruments which belonged to the Late Doctor Stuart I have been referred to Doctor Cuming who has engaged to bring that Affair to some conclusion by tomorrow. As there are likewise some Instruments which belong to the public, I am obliged to give you the trouble of making an application to My Lord Provost & Town Council, to have those instruments delivered to me by their Authority, together with Such an Inventory as may Ascertain the particulars committed to my care, & for which I or my heirs are hereafter to be accountable to the public.

I have had notice from my Son of the Copper plates being come & have desired him to put them into your hands with my request to have some proof impressions as soon as convenient. That we may consider what is necessary or may be done for their improvement & this I am perswaded you will think right. We are proceeding as you probably know at the press. And I am much allarmed at the probable size or  of our Volumes if condensed into four. A lumpy Octavo is of all forms the most inconvenient to me & I break down some of my books into separate vol's. I should earnestly wish if it can be done without great inconvenience that our book could be divided into six Vol. s. The  Stitched should be nearly the same & if more when bound I shoud hope the  buyer would be reconciled on account of the more convenient & portable form. I make these remarks to have them considered before the first separation of a Vol. And you will determine what should be done. 

I am glad to see the plates so little dammaged as they appear to be. The first execution had little elegance or merit of any sort; And nothing material at present occurs to me for their improvement: but when reduced I shall be glad to have a proof of each separately when perhaps some little addition of names &c may occur.

I should think that the two plates Ns 3 & 5 would not need to be reduced as they may somehow be folded into the Octavo Vol. but of this you can judge better. If you should imagine it of any consequence to have a representation of the author there is in this family a Miniature well done which may be copyed for the title page in form of a medallion but such things if not well executed are best omitted. I expect to be in Edinburgh soon when I shall call upon you And Am,


I am about my departure for the Country. I wish to make some presents here but now recollect only Sir Ralph Abercrombie Lord Dalkeith Lord Ancram & Mr Kerr of the Post Office to whom we are so much Obliged. When the Vols are Stitched be so good as send Copies to these three Four Persons, Directed to each from the Author. You will learn at what Shop Lord Dalkeiths & Lord Ancrams parcels are taken in & they have Messengers every day in Town. I imagine I shall not trouble you for many more here but if any should occur to yourself or me I may trouble you hereafter. I am 
 

I have received the two Quarto Vols you sent accompanyed with a Letter from Cadel and Davis concluding with their opinion on the subject of an Octavo Edition. The same they told me a year or two ago; but is not an Answer to the Question I wished you to put. This was to sound them on the Subject of transferring the Property, which as the Sale is so dull I should think they may not be unwilling to do. If so I should wish to know upon what terms that I might determine what is proper for me to do either now or by such improvements as occur to me left to my Heirs. In all this I wish you to proceed as from yourselves without any mention of me.

N.B. you will please to Observe that if Cadel & Davis were to print a new Edition there would be two hundred pounds due to me. I am Gentlemen

I want for a particular purpose a Sett of my little works. That is to say. The Essay on the History of Civil Society, one vol. 8vo. The History of the progress and Termination of Roman Republick 5 Vols 8vo the last Edition. The Principles of Moral & Political Science 2 Vols 4to. Let them be decently bound: The Edges stained of a deep Red or Claret Colour with thick Boards Letter & numbered on the back. I wish to have them soon & when ready please to have them well packed up & sent to me here by the Peebles Carrier.

I have received your letter acquainting me that Trustees whom you do not name are now deliberating on the publication of my worthy Friends and your late Uncle's Manuscripts. Of this you must be sensible that I cannot give any opinion. The small part I saw or with my impaired sight could decipher did not appear to me intended for publication: but rather the amusement of leisure in the exercise of a talent in which our friend excelled, the easy satisfactory detail of familiar occurrences affording a pleasure which his correspondents experienced in every letter he wrote to them. I was so pleased in reading the part you showed me or I could attempt to read but  it related to things and persons, most of us so obscure as not to be entitled to publick notice, that I should not be willing to exceed what I believed to be the Authors original intention by publication. And I thought myself the more at liberty to give this opinion, that I found my own name repeated with that partial favour which I always experienced from my friend. It was our lot thro' great part of our time to be neighbours so near as to be frequently together and the opportunities I believe were never willingly omitted by either. We were Socii Criminis in the countenance we gave to the first representation of our friend J. Home's Tragedy of Douglas, a charge for which I was never called to Account But Dr Carlyle was more known & had more enemies who by prosecuting him for this offence declared him innocent of any thing more likely to serve their spite. We were also accessory to the formation of a Poker Club, & survived most of its members, & thus had occasion of regret which are but ill refrained in the solitary comforts of sequestered Old Age. You cannot doubt my desire to promote  the respect which is due to the memory of Dr Carlysle's memory; But how I know not beyond the testimony if it were called for that I never knew a more steady friend or more agreable companion, and in this I should have so many concurring witnesses as to make my words of little Account. I shall be anxious to know how you proceed, and I beg I may hear from you.

I have the honour of your Lordships letter with the Copys inclosed & am extremely sorry for the occasion to which they relate. I am even surprised to find that Lord Chesterfield should suppose my Claim to the Annuity in question precluded by expressions in a letter which was neither addressed nor communicated to me or shoud Suppose me fettered now by a condition which was never proposed to me. It is true that in deliberating on the terms that were offered me by The Earl of Chesterfields Guardians I considered both the risk I ran of  loseing my Professorship & the chance I had of being able to retain it but never once imagined that my Annuity, the sole lucrative consideration on which I agreed to the proposal, was to depend on either Event.

Your Lordship I observe had mentioned to Lord Chesterfield that I did lose my Professorship & that I enjoy it now through the favour of those who reelected me before I parted with his Lordship. If there were any doubt of the hazard I ran of loseing my Professorship that fact must certainly remove it. The Town Council of Edinburgh who are the Patrons of this University did by one act deprive me of my office: but on hearing my Plea against some irregularitys in their proceeding & my application for favour, they by a subsequent Resolution erased the former from their Records. And were even willing to indulge me with leave of Absence for another term, which woud have enabled me to remain with Lord Chesterfield untill he attained the Age of twenty one years: But the Act of His  Lordships last Guardians, made it unnecessary for me to avail myself of their Indulgence. This fact however has not been stated by me as any part in the foundation of my Claim to an Annuity from His Lordship nor has it before now been ever mentioned by me in the course of this bussiness: so that His Lordships expressions in chargeing me with meanness on that account are at least unguarded if not unjurious. It is sufficiently dissagreeable to have any disspute whatever with His Lordship without the addition of ungracious terms: And if I were writeing to His Lordship I shoud endeavour to make him sensible of this truth by some such conjunction of Epithets as he has made to me. That it is mean, for instance, in The Earl of Chesterfield to impute to me a part which I never acted, or to excuse himself from the performance of a bargain by alledgeing a condition which never was Stipulated.

Lord Chesterfield I perceive intends me no more than Justice, & it is indeed all I ever proposed to ask of His Lordship. I am only sorry that he makes it necessary to apply any where else for a determination of what that Justice is, but must Suppose that he has as little inclination as power to withhold it from me.

I have a very disstinct remembrance of the passage in Mr Lovel Stanhopes Conversation to which your Lordship alludes. Having mentioned with other things my Claim to this Annuity Mr Stanhope was pleased to say that although he believed it woud fall on Lord Chesterfield at last: yet he coud do nothing relating to it at present. And this I mentioned in the letters I then wrote to My Lord Stanhope to Sr George Savile & to Mr Hewett.

The Idea of a Lawsuit with persons to whom I owed every Duty & with whom I expected to Remain on terms of confidence and friendship, is extremely painful to me: but from the Papers which I have the honour to receive from your Lordship now appears unavoidable. My Suit I imagine must stand against The Earls of Chesterfield & Stanhope jointly: but I shall wait for My Lord Stanhopes commands, which may be sent to Mr Chalmer my Agent in St. Albans Street or to myself here before my Counsel or Solicitor proceeds. Mr Smith Arrived here yesterday & joins me in Respects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I have the honour of Your Lordships letter with the Copys inclosed and am extremely sorry for the occasion to which they relate. I am even surprised to find that Lord Chesterfield should suppose my Claim to the Annuity in question precluded by expressions in a letter which was neither addressed nor communicated to me or should Suppose me fettered now by a condition which was never proposed to me. It is true that in deliberating on the terms that were offered me by The Earl of Chesterfields Guardians I considered both the risk I ran of of loseing my Professorship and the chance I had of being able to retain it but never once imagined that my Annuity, the sole lucrative consideration on which I agreed to the proposal, was to depend on either Event.

Your Lordship I observe had mentioned to Lord Chesterfield that I did lose my Professorship and that I enjoy it now through the favour of those who reelected me before I parted with his Lordship. If there were any doubt of the hazard I ran of loseing my Professorship that fact must certainly remove it. The Town Council of Edinburgh who are the Patrons of this University did by one act deprive me of my office: but on hearing my Plea against some irregularitys in their proceeding and my application for favour, they by a subsequent Resolution erased the former from their Records. And were even willing to indulge me with leave of Absence for another term, which would have enabled me to remain with Lord Chesterfield untill he attained the Age of twenty one Years: But the Act of His Lordships last Guardians, made it unnecessary for me to avail myself of their Indulgence. This fact however has not been stated by me as any part in the foundation of my Claim to an Annuity from His Lordship nor has it before now been ever mentioned by me in the course of this bussiness: so that His Lordships expressions in chargeing me with meanness on that account are at least unguardd if not injurious. It is sufficiently dissagreeable to have any disspute whatever with His Lordship without the addition of ungracious terms: And if I were writeing to His Lordship I shoud endeavour to make him sensible of this truth by some such conjunction of Epithets as he has made to me. That it is mean, for instance, in The Earl of Chesterfield to impute to me a part which I never acted, or to excuse himself from the performance of a bargain by alledgeing a condition which never was stipulated.

Lord Chesterfield I perceive intends me no more than Justice, and it is indeed all I ever proposed to ask of His Lordship. I am only sorry that he makes it necessary to apply any where else for a determination of what that Justice is, but must suppose that he has as little inclination as power to with-hold it from me.

I have a very distinct remembrance of the passage in Mr Lovel Stanhopes Conversation to which Your Lordship alludes. Having mentioned with other things my Claim to this Annuity Mr Stanhope was pleased to say that although he believed it woud fall on Lord Chesterfield at last: yet he coud do nothing relating to it at present. And this I mentioned in the letters I then wrote to My Lord Stanhope to Sir George Savile and to Mr Hewett.

The Idea of a Lawsuit with persons to whom I owed every Duty and with whom I expected to Remain on terms of confidence and friendship, is extremely painful to me: but from the Papers which I have the honour to receive from your Lordship now appears unavoidable. My Suit I imagine must stand against The Earls of Chesterfield and Stanhope jointly: but I shall wait for My Lord Stanhopes commands, which may be sent to Mr Chalmer my Agent in St Albans Sreet or to myself here before my Counsel or Solicitor proceeds. Mr Smith Arrived here yesterday and joins me in Respects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect My Lord

you have done me a great deal of honour, in making me the conveyance of a proposal from the Committee of Association in the County of York,for a reformation of Parliament, & for the extension and better regulation of the right of Election to Parliament throughout the Kingdom. I took the first opportunity my Health would allow to communicate the contents of your Packet to Mr Ilay Campbell a Gentleman of the first Character in this Country, who, I understood was employed in preparing the Draft of a Bill relating to the right of Election in Scotland. And am desired to return his thanks to you and the Other Gentlemen of the Yorkshire Committee. This matter is under consideration here, chiefly with a view to reform a Supposed abuse  which has recently crept into the manner of constituting qualifications to vote at County Elections. Persons having extensive Superiorities in this part of the Kingdom, parcel them out to their retainers & Friends in such manner as to multiply Votes without increasing the number of Voters. The person who confers these qualifications being understood to dispose of the Votes as he pleases. Of those concerned in this reform, many no doubt are willing to reduce the qualifications of voters so as to increase their number: but this like many other reformations, I am told, must be the work of time & some caution. My own earnest wish has long been, that we had the same Law of Parliament with you as far as relates to County Elections: but I confess that I do not hope ever to obtain it.

I am very happy that my writings make me be considered as a Sincere friend  of the Constitution: being so little able to serve it in practice the least I can do is to pay it all due respect in my Speculations. One of its beauties is that it can withstand many evils without being overthrown. I know nothing so likely to be fatal to it as the weakness & Cowardice of those on whom its preservation depends. And I sincerely believe that to preserve the rights of the people the Vigour of the Crown is not less necessary than their own. To make us as happy, as our Constitution woud admit of, requires indeed many other conditions, which I hope we shall long improve or retain.


I have not yet had access to the Rooms in the College, which are alloted to the use of the Natural Philosophy Class; because some Effects belonging to the executors of the Late Professor are still lodged there, & the Person to whose care they are committed is absent from Town. But being informed that those Rooms need reparation, I am Obliged to beg the favour you will apply to My Lord Provost &  The Town Council in order to have them visited, & the necessary repairs considered, in such time as that they may be compleated if possible before the meeting of College. Mr Cumming with whom I am to treat of what relates to the late incumbent & myself, is expected in Town this week, and that no time may be lost after his Arrival, I beg that you will be pleased to lay this request before the first meeting of Council & am Sir

I was just about writing to you when I had the pleasure of your letter. I knew you woud not forgive me if I did not tell you what Josey was doing. He went to Mathisons School immediatly on coming to Town, but has not begun the Greek. We have not been able to find a teacher who has any number of Scholars with whom to class him, it not being the fashion here to begin Greek in this manner & I begin to doubt whether we should gain any considerable advantage by attempting it.

Hunter at the College has two Class's, at the first of which he begins the very Rudiments of the greek grammar at the other he continues to read Greek Authors. Josey will be young enough to mix with his Scholars even at the first class two years hence & it is a question whether we coud prepare him sufficiently for the second. To send him to the first with a smattering learned elsewhere is only enabling him to be idle while the Other Boys are bussy, & perhaps giving him a habit of neglecting the Thing altogether, which literally happened to myself in a like Situation.

Meantime Mathison after some weeks tryal with many  commendations of Josey tells me that he is defective in some of the Principles of the Latin Tongue, particularly in Prosody, & has not a facility in writing sufficient for his School exercises. Part of this complaint may arise from a mere difference in the particulars chiefly attended to in this School & from the manner of teaching. I think Josey reads Virgil very well for his Age but I perhaps woud not be a good Scholar at Mathisons Class. At any rate it will be an advantage to him to be on a footing with his companions in the Mechanical parts & to have fair play to his Emulation. I have for this reason desired Mathison to find me a Person who by Attending him an hour at home in the Evening may bring him forward in the Particulars he wants & to give his Man directions necessary for that purpose & to choose one who is fit to proceed to the Greek with him in case you continue to desire it. He will however read the Latin Grammar with him &c till we hear from you or till he has the same facility of quoting Rules of Prosody that the Other boys at Mathisons Class have acquired by being used to his Way. At Present his Journal as he tells me begins with getting up at eight taking his breakfast & going to School where he remains to Eleven. Then to the High School yard to play at English Man & Scots Man or the Hare  and the dogs, of which I take the merit as I saved him from the writing School at that hour. He returns to School at twelve & continues till two, goes to writing between three & four & spends his Evening as he tells me in getting his School tasks or in reading amusing books such as his Uncles History. In short he is a very amiable boy with quick parts in my opinion as well as yours, and there is no doubt but he will do well. Write your opinion about the Greek: meantime a month will not be misspent in the way I proposed. After that he may go on to the Greek or the French or some thing else as you shall think proper.

I am very glad of every thing that gives you pleasure even of some things that give you pain. From all accounts both before & since you went to Paris it might have be foreseen that your reception even from Sincere as well as affected admirers woud amount to a degree of teasing. But all for the best as my fellow Philosopher Pangloss says. I dont care if you are chass de France  Coups de Complimens & accabl en Angleterre a coups de richesse so as not to find any rest to the Soles of your feet out of Scotland. I woud fain consider every accession to your Fortune as so many dishes added to the future dinners in James's Court & your Eclat in France as  the forerunner of much Variety of chosen & excellent Wines from every quarter of that great Kingdom. Mean time tho I like to lounge at firesides in practice I have not in speculation that opinion you mention. I know nothing that is necessary to happiness but Cordiallity & the talent of finding diversion in all places. I remember somewhere a Mans being told that he was too Nice because he coud not dine on a Ragout and must have cold mutton. But I shoud not perhaps contradict you so flatly nor rub so hard considering how tender your Sensibility will be grown after so many lenient applications.

I have seen Lord Marischall sometimes since he has been here, he is indeed very engaging & I shall certainly follow your directions relating to him. Ahmet Ulla now a Christian has followed him to this place. It is a pity she changed before she came here she woud have been the first Lady who ever entertained at Edinburgh the hopes of Rogering to all Eternity. I need not tell you to put Gen'l Clerk in mind of me. I only wait to hear of his coming to London or some place of Residence in order to write to Him.

I am just now interrupted by one Lister chosen by Mathison who is to attend Josey as above at the rate of two Guineas or if that is too much a Guinea & half a Quarter.

I promised to make all my applications to the Ministry by your means & I hope that before all the affairs of this church & State are settled you will think me a man of my word. I beg that if you are not disgraced and on your way to Scotland before this comes to hand, which I hope you will be very soon, that you will favour the Prayer of the inclosed Petition from My Colleagues. I am not concerned but their Petition is reasonable it is gone I believe to The treasury by some Proper conveyance & I woud fain hope it may receive some Support from you likewise as being of the Northern Department.

I am glad to hear from Jno Home that the last representation we made in his affair may be Satisfactory. God grant your continuance in Power till this affair is dispatched. I am  much obliged to you for the Review and to the Author of it for his favour & partiality to me. I have just now sent me by Lord Kames who is at Blair Drummond a Letter of Mrs Montagu to His Lordship. If I knew the ground on which she trod in this countrey I woud kiss it for the Notice she is pleased to take of me. I am very sorry for the complaints of her health & for her thinking that mankind in any state shoud be as perfect as her conceptions, in order to give Satisfaction. I dont believe that there is in the whole list of created beings one that acts his part or fulfills his destiny better than man, & I am perfectly satisfied with him & with no circumstance better than I am with his fancying a perfection superiour to his own Nature which is the foundation of many of his complaints. I write all this in hopes that when you see Mrs Montagu you will mix some of my Philosophy with your own. I am nevertheless somewhat Angry  with her for conjuring up the Spartan black broth against me. I thought to have laid this Devil under the Genteeler appellation of Pottage which you know is here a dish in great request. I know that you are an admirer of the Athenians as well as Mrs Montagu & if I were to plead the cause of Sparta against her I must appeal somewhere else. Meantime I believe in my conscience that very few even of the Spartans coud receive her commendations without Vanity, and I am in this Article but a mere Scots Man.

John Home sets out for London next week. I expect to dine at the Poker with Edgar, to day he goes there for the first time. All is well here & what your malice wanted to represent as mischief done by me has turned out no mischief at all.

I wrote you a short line from London as Other people do when they draw Money. Matters here were then & still continue in some dissorder but I hope that from this time forward I shall be able to draw my appointments pretty Regularly & shall in a little time endeavour to replace what you so kindly favoured me with. My Journey to this place has furnished no adventures worthy of being told. It has been extremely pleasant & tho we have lately spent a month in making the Tour of Swisserland I am not yet tired of Wandering. That Country is Curious by Nature by Art & by Politics. In the Aristocratical Cantons all Councils are Secret & the people are well Governed nobody knows how. As for the Democratical I could be mad enough to put on great breeches and let my Beard grow if the people would admit me to be one of them. In the meantime I think myself very happy in the Prospect of returning to Scotland after I have passed a year or  two in this way of Life I hope not unprofitably.

I think I am very fortunate in the Character of My young Friend as well as in the whole of the Connections I have formed. He has Vivacity Parts & good Disspositions, a little spoilt perhaps by certain Circumstances but if every thing were already Perfect there would be nothing further to be done.

I am now writing on the Very Spot where Calvin reformed the reformed Churches this being the place of his house & Garden where we Live & I feel the warmth of my Zeal sufficiently against all reprobates altho I shall not indulge it in this letter. I am likewise in sight of Voltairs Castle another worthy tho of a different description. I have seen him but it is probable can tell you nothing new of him. He is worn to a shadow but has all his Vivacity & his Genius Intire. The last proof he has given of it is a Satire in Dialogue between Pegasus & himself which I think is perfectly equal to what he used to write. He writes frolicking Cards to Lord Chesterfield & calls him, mon droit honor  honorable Seigneur & Signs himself Le Pauvre Diable de Ferney. A Geneva Lady had a dispute with him lately about the Trinity, When she had finished a Speech he Answered

He entertained us with a Philippic against France and its Bigottry. Lord Chesterfield said he should go to england, Ah si je n'avez que Soixante & dix Ans Said.

So much for Voltair. I hope you favour me with a line & that I shall Peggy is not fallen off in her Cookery in your Eating, when I have finished Education, I hope to be better Judge of matters. Please to direct for me at the Ed....

I received about eight days ago, after I had been reading your History, the copy which you have been So good as to send me, and for which I now trouble you with my thanks. But even if I had not been thus called upon to offer you my respects; I coud not have refrained from congratulating you on the merit, & undoubted success of this valuable performance. The Persons of this place, whose Judgement you will value most, agree in opinion, that you have made a great addition to the Classical Literature of england, and  given us, what Thucydides purposed leaving with his own Countreymen, A Possession in Perpetuity. Men of a certain Modesty and Merit always exceed the expectation of their Friends; and it is with very great pleasure I tell you: that altho you must have observed in me every mark of Consideration and regard; that this is nevertheless the case I receive your Instructions, and Study your model, with great deference, and join with every one else in applauding the extent of your Plan in hands so well able to execute it. Some of your readers I find were impatient to get at the fifteenth Chapter, and began at that place. I have not heard much of their Criticism but am told that many doubt of your Orthodoxy. I wish to be always of the Charitable side while I own you have proved that the Clearest stream may become foul when it comes to run over the muddy bottom of human Nature. I have not stayed to make any  particular remarks: If any should occur on a Second reading I shall not fail to lay in my claim to a more needed & more useful admonition from you in case I ever produce any thing that merits your Attention.

I shoud make some apology for not writeing you sooner in Answer to your Obligeing letter: but if you shoud honour me frequently with such requests you will find, that with very good intentions I am a very dilatory, irregular correspondent. I am sorry to tell you that our Respectable Friend is still declining in his health, he is greatly emaciated & loses strength. He talks familiarly of his near prospect of dying. His Mother it seems died under the same symptoms. And it appears so little necessary or proper  to flatter him that no one attempts it. I never Observed his Understanding more clear or his humour more pleasant & Lively. He has a great Aversion to leave the tranquillity of his own house to go in search of health among Inns and Hostlers. And his Friends here gave way to him for some time: but now think it necessary that he shoud make an Effort to try what change of Place & Air or any thing else Sir John Pringle may advise can do for him. I left him this morning in the mind to comply in this Article & I hope that he will be prevailed on to Set out in a few days. He is just now Sixty-five.

I am very glad that the Pleasure you give us recoils a little on yourself through our Feeble Testimony. I have as you suppose been employed at any intervals of Leisure or rest I have had for some years, in taking  notes or collecting Materials for a History of the Disstractions that broke down the Roman Republic & ended in the Establishments of Augustus & his immediate Successors. The Compliment you are pleased to pay I cannot accept of even to my Subject. Your Subject now appears with advantages which it was not supposed to have had. And I suspect that the Magnificence of the Mouldering Ruin will appear more Striking, than the same building when the view is perplexed with Scaffolding Workmen & dissorderly lodgers And the Ear is Stunned with the noise of destruction & repairs & the Alarms of Fire. The Night which you begin to describe is Solemn & there are Gleams of Light Superior to what is to be found in any Other time. I comfort myself that as my trade is the Study of human Nature I coud not fix on a more interesting Corner of it than  the end of the Roman Republic. Whether my Compilations shoud ever deserve the attention of any one besides myself must remain to be determined after they are farther Advanced. I take the Liberty to trouble you with the inclosed for Mr Smith, whose uncertain stay at London makes me at a loss how to direct for him. You have both such reason to be pleased with the World just now that I hope you are pleased with each other.

I can without hesitation or reserve answer the Question which you put to me having read Mr Alisons Book soon after it was published. This volume is given but for a part of the intended Work. It is written in my opinion with perspicuity ease and Elegance. His Arguments on the different points he undertakes to Prove, full & to me convincing. So that I think it must do him great credit with the Publick & satisfy his friends that they may venture to recommend him with great Confidence.

I should have been to wait on your Lordship with the inclosed Papers if I were not confined by the Remains of a Smart Fit of a Feaver I had in the End of last week. The Person to whom they relate & who means to present them to Your Lordship has I believe stated the Facts very fairly & will probably obtain your Lordships Pardon for this Trouble. He flattered himself that His Memorial was  to have been presented to Lord North by Mr Mc Donald to whom he has long been known but is dissappointed by Mr McDonalds being gone as he informs me to the Countrey for Some weeks.

He tells me he had the Honour of being presented to Your Lordship in America & has pressed me very earnestly to Sollicit your Protection in his application for some relief to his present difficulties. Your Name in any way Accompanying these Papers to the Minister may procure him some Attention & he will probably leave them for your Consideration. The Patronage of Disstressed Americans is not at present a Station of Pleasure: but times may change.

The few Letters I have received from  New York by the last Packet confirm the former favourable Accounts & are summd up by saying that The Congress are Allarmd and dissunited.

you do me great pleasure by calling upon me for any thing that can be of use to you. My late worthy Brothers Esteem and Obligations have made you more than a Relation.

I certainly could interpret some of the names in the list you have sent me: but think I do better in referring you by the inclosed to My Friend Mr Bisset Minister of the Parish who by this daily use of the language and view of the places can much better connect the name and description together. I know it is a received Notion with Antiquaries here that most names of places in the Country are of gallic original and actually descriptive of the Situation. Much of this no doubt is true  & not a little imaginary as you will easily admit when you consider by what accident names are affixed to places without any meaning.

The district of Scotland in which the gallic etimologist is most Successful in this Way is the Counties of Air & Galway, where no Gallic has been Spoken time out of mind. And yet the inference is fair that it must have been the vulgar tongue formerly. As to the fact I have just heard it asserted & no more that a very Old man in the memory of People in the last Age used to say he remembered when the Common people spoke Gallic about him. And yet the total change of one Language for another totally & radically different is Scarcely to be accounted for without the Absolute extirpation of one Race & Substitution of Another. We perceive how the Latin has been changed into Italian Spanish & even French by time & a mixture of Races. But I  dont believe that the Saxon has come to be Substituted for Welsh or Gallic and a total change made without the removeal of those who Spoke the one to make way for those who Spoke the Other. And our imperfect account of these removeals & Supplantations has made me very Sceptical respecting the Authority of our History in many parts.

But this is perhaps little to your purpose. Altho' one impression your Dictionary will make on the mind of your readers is: That the Scoto Saxon as well as Anglo Saxons are now in possession of a Country originally Gallic. I return the list of names as it may save you the trouble of recurring again to the Map and together with my letter to Mr Bisset send you one also to Mr McLaggan Minister at Blair in Athol who is highly reputed as a Gaelic Scholar and Antiquary. If he have proper Maps within his  reach I trust he will extend his Observations & interpretation of names beyond his own Parish or immediate Neighbourhood.

Being informed of an Intention to appoint me Professor of Moral Philosophy in the place of Mr Balfour who has resigned in order to make way for Mr Russell to succeed me in the Professorship of Natural Philosophy: I hereby give my full consent to the part of this Arrangement which depends on me, & intend this letter to your Lordship as a resignation of my present office of Professor of Natural Philosophy in the College of Edinburgh in order that the other parts of this Arrangement may be put in execution. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect to your Lord Lordship & the Town Council

A Gentleman in whose ingenuity, the writer of this memorandum has much Confidence, says, that he knows of a method of attack against which Gibraltar is not provided, & by which of course it might be taken by the Enemy. The Defence, if known might defer the event or oblige the besiegers to repeat their attack with disadvantage; but could not in the end prevent the effect of it.

He farther professes to know of means that may be employed to keep vessels afloat, when in danger of sinking at Sea, And which would be effectual to raise the Royal George now sunk at Spithead.

I beg leave to present to your Lordship my most Respectful acknowledgements for the terms in  you are pleased to make known to the King's Commissioners His Majesty's most gracious approbation of their choice in nominating me to act as Secretary to the Commission & for having laid before His Majesty an Instrument for His Royal Signature confirming me in that office. I hope I shall ever retain a proper sense of My Duty  to His Majesty and of my Obligation on this occasion to your Lordship.

Being to Deliver to your Lordship the Letter of His Majestys Commissioners containing their Thanks for His Majestys gracious Acceptance of their Services, I meant at the same time to have begged Leave to present my own to your Lordship for the Obliging Protection I have experienced both in My Nomination as Secretary & in the Discharge of My humble Duties. It will ever be a happiness to me to have any opportunity of exerting my Affection & Loyalty to His Majesty & of Evincing the Sense I retain of My Obligation to your Lordship.

Having received a Call to attend a young Nobleman abroad & in circumstances that require my Speedy compliance, I take this way of making my request to your Lordship & the Town Council that I may be allowed to Substitute proper persons in what remains of my bussiness in the College for this winter. Ever since I have had the honour of being a Professor I have endeavoured faithfully to discharge my duty to the Public, & if I may judge from the countenance occasionally given to me by the Patrons of the University, not without their approbation. This encourages me to hope that in a matter which is of so much importance to my family I may have  every reasonable Indulgence. And I now beg that your Lordship woud communicate my earnest Intreaty to the Council that they woud either be pleased to point out to me Persons Proper for this Substitution, Or allow me to Apply to Dr Lind to teach what remains to be taught this Session of the Natural Philosophy And to the Rev. d Mr Grieve at Dalkeith to teach what remains to be taught of the Moral Philosophy. My knowledge of the Learning & Abilitys of these Gentlemen is such; that if they undertake the several tasks I have mentioned for them; I am confident that they will perform them to the advantage of the Students & the Satisfaction of the Public. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

I have notice of your kindness in the nomination of my relation Robert Stuart to an Indian Cadetship. As I believe you would not suppose me insensible I hesitated whether to give you the trouble of opening a letter on the Subject: But as this is done: I have no more but to Pray that God may bless and Prosper you for the preservation of us all. your most Obliged

I have not lost sight of the subject on which you permitted me to write. And have been kept back more by want of Strength than of good will to the work. You may consider what follows as a last effort of impending Fourscore & treat it accordingly.

You know that I glory in the Volunteer Corps of Great Britain and Ireland not as adepts in the mysteries of War & Military Tactics but as a Specimen of what the Country may expect in time of need And an Evidence that no varieties of Condition or occupation can Silence the great Behest of Nature to defend what they possess. With this in my head  I attacked you on the subject of those Corps That the Peace might not be allowed to extinguish that Fire of which the War had struck out such Sparks.

The Publick is well apprised of your merit in Arming so great a Body of the People in defence of their Country, And will look up to you for Support in case any question arise relating to that measure. It was no doubt Idle in me to think of prompting you in a matter so well understood; And this Specimen might have warned you of what was to be expected: but you are now in some measure pledged to bear with what may Come. It is a gratification to me; And if real Respect and the utmost deference to your Judgement of what may or may not be entertained or Attempted can attone for seeming presumption I may hope to be forgiven.

Before the preliminaries of Peace were known to be Signed I had my doubts whether The present government of France was ripe for such a conclusion: but when this  appeared to be the Case & there is so much bussiness to be done for themselves at home, Unless the Republican faction force a War, we may look for a peace of some Continuance & take our measures accordingly.

It is nevertheless wise to consider the longest Peace but as a long Truce and a time of preparation for War. Such are human Affairs And no single Party can mend them, without, what never can be obtained, A consent of the whole.

It requires no foresight to Arm when an Ennemy is at the Door; any more than to Cloak when it rains: But the Proverb enjoins to Cloack when it is fair, leaving the Traveller to do what he pleases when it is foul. You may not need this lesson: but you will not prevail on your People to Arm in time of Peace with the same Alacrity as in time of War. Then the Threats of an Ennemy to give us Law on the Thames: The Insolent attempts that were made to seduce our People from their Allegiance Suggested the Idea of Volunteer Corps; And the pressure of generous Nature into what appeared a post of danger & of honour soon filled the Ranks. But now it is peace and the danger has  vanished; let us not think the occasion is over for such Institutions; nor neglect any measure we can take to preserve them.

It is here if ever that speculation itself may be of use and Stumble upon things that do not occur in practice. My Fancy however I doubt is barren, And terminates in little more than one general prescription To make that appear honourable to which you wish the Honourable and the Worthy to repair. In this I need not say that the gracious Regard of the King & the Example of those about him will have a Powerfull Charm. His Majesty is not a Soldier by Profession I see no reason why he may not be a volunteer: This language may be too free: but it is only to you.

In well ordered Communities the Military Function however highly respected is Still Subordinate to the Civil. Or in other words the sword tho powerful should be directed by Justice. For this I know not any security so effectual as that of placing the Sword, When Education, the Sense of high Rank, And a mighty Station  in the preservation of order, have already placed the virtues of Candour Magnamity and Justice.

This, in general so wise a measure of Policy, is happily favourable to what we have So earnestly to wish, on the Present occasion. These Islands have their Barrier fortifyed by Nature but to be Safe must have a guarison formed in the bosom of their People And the very organs of Civil & Political order turned into Sinews of Strength.

Nations for the most part would have it in their Power to force the Service they require: And would command rather than accept of Voluntary exertions. This indeed it is fit they should have in Their Power. But the less that the Iron hand of necessity is felt, the Better. If it be Supposed that persons retained to serve the publick as Soldiers can do nothing else; The Power of Defence must be restricted within very narrow limits, unless the People at large & otherwise employed be allowed in consistence with their employments to choose the portion of time they will employ in preparing themselves  for those pressing occasions on which defence may become an Act of necessity equally devolved upon all.

In this the expedience of a Voluntary Militia is sufficiently manifest: but I ought to beg your pardon for couching that point. The means of cultivating the happy disposition of our People to join the use of Arms even during Peace to their other occupations is what I meant to consider.

Here it is Evident that in admitting Recruits we are rather to Select than to solicit; For besides that it is no recommendation to any Institution, that it is open to every one; here is a Trust that must not be prostituted. The Magistrate is to be Supported in the discharge of his Duty & his Supporters must be taken from among those who are likely to respect his Person & the Laws he is Appointed to execute. Those who had volunteered during the War may not be questioned: but for Entrants in future, a Patrimonial or pecuniary qualifications may be required, And a Character without reproach Certainly: For this Purpose a proper form of Attestation may be entrusted with a Magistrate, The Parish Minister &c bearing that the Subject is without reproach, And in his  Condition of Life Orderly Independent and frugal. If our Institution should become fashionable as I hope it may, may we not hope that these Qualifications may become fashionable also.

As Fashions however for the most part descend from the High to the Low; it is surely not too much presumption to hope that there are many well informed liberal & high minded in the upper Ranks who will be pleased to set an Example of so much advantage to their Country.

If I had my wish; every member in either house of Parliament under fifty years of Age, should enroll his name in some Volunteer Corps and give due attention to its forms. There is no question of Precedence on this Parade, a place in the Ranks is as honourable as the first Station of Command. The Object of this Wish is perhaps already more than fulfilled: but it is no more than a Wish and must rest with those concerned. If I durst talk of Enactment: looking forward to a future period, Suppose twenty one years after the present date; might it not be enacted, That after the year 1823 no one should be qualified for a seat in either House of Parliament untill after sixteen years of Age his name had stood enrolled five years in a Volunteer Corps and his Attendance on its duties been  regular.

This it is true would not bring a great Force into the Field; not even if all the members of both Houses should Serve for life. It is not their numbers we trust to; but their Estimation and example. Nor is our Strength to be calculated by numbering the Arms at any one time in hand over the Country: The Object is to exhibit the practice of Arms in such a form of distinction & honour as will excite the Ambition of every ingenuous youth & become a necessary Article in the course of every Liberal Education.

The young and the Active may be allured in this matter, by many little circumstances of Celebrity & publick Notice attending the Military array joined with Other County Solemnities. The Ball The Race the Hunt &c &c And honorary prizes for competition in Facts of Agility & Strength.

We are perhaps too apt to slight such facts as unworthy at least of Gentlemen: but in this we differ from the wisest nations of Antiquity, who sought for vigour of mind And the Emulation  of Glory in the excercises and display of a Vigorous body. If what is called Learning were the sole or principal Objects of education for all ranks and Conditions of men: few nations could boast of advantages in that respect superiour to ours. Many Foundations for publick Instruction were laid before it was known in what men ought to be instructed; but successive Ages have arrived at last at real Science and Elegant Literature which in one degree or Another are supposed the general Objects of Education for all.

There is an Account from Mecklenburg no less pleasant than new. Of no less than an Institution of a School for Schoolmasters. It is wonderfull that this never occurred before; And that we who who have Boards for Agriculture & Trade &c &c should never have a Board for Education to Observe and Supply the wants of succeeding Ages in this Important Article. I would willingly emulate the wisdom of Mecklenburgh: but begin with the Establishment of a Board the Highest and most Dignifyed the State can Compose with the  King himself at their Head And next to His Majesty all who serve or served any of the higher Offices of State Primates Chancellors Secretaries of State &c &c &c. From such a Board all the Instruction might Issue relating to what might be taught & how. It is not likely that they would find any thing to Suppress in our present Universities:b ut the recent institution of a Military College & Practical Institute for The Application of Theory to Art show that somethings may be added. And why not annex Military & Practical schools to every University That beneficial Endowments may not be separated That letters might accompany Practice & the Literary student be kept in mind of his Manhood & the common cause of His King and his Country which may at some interesting time require his exertions. While every Individual is opening a Separate Career for himself it is surely a supreme Object of State, that none should be lost to the Community  in any of its essential Departments whether of Order Resource or defence.

I need not trouble you with my reasons for so much Anxiety about our internal Strength. Please take for an Emblem The great Gyant Briareus. He had 100 Arms & hands, 50 heads & breathed fire at 100 Nostrils. With all this he had but one little Heart on which the whole depended. While the Heart was safe, Briareus could deal his blows and make himself respected at any distance: but if this failed him he was a mere carrion for Vulturs and beasts of Prey.

I once thought before I had done to be upon you with an Idea, which has long pressed on my mind, no less than a Project of giving the Privates whether of the Army or Navy a Scale of Estimation & small advance of Day on which every entrant might hope to better himself by good behaviour: What Happy effect if it could render the Application or even the fear of Punishment less necessary. Besides the Policy of this measure it might appear a proper expression of Gratitude for the honours they have procured  to the national Character.

One word more and I have done. Away with the absurd Fable, Sovereign at the Sea, which we sometimes so idly repeat. We and every Party on Earth to the extent of our force, have a right to impede Search & detain everything from going to an Ennemy, by which he might be enabled to annoy us. But the Sea is not a Subject of Properly Idle Prentensions to homage on: that Element will sett the world against us, more than real usurpations at Land might do: for the first is galling to Thousands: the other only to a few Statesmen.

The weather has reduced me to be mostly in bed where I have repeatedly taken up and laid down this paper & now endeavour to make out my treatise. The labour has not been painful. You have been ever present to my mind. Farewell. My Blessing forever attend you.

your bearing with these impertinence without taking any offence is what I expected: And I fear to tresspass on your good Nature: but cannot refrain my Assent my Assent to the Idea of Universal Training for publick Defence. I agree with The Persians of old who are said to have taught all their Children to shoot the Bow as well as to Speak Truth. In these indeed there was no matter for Separate Professions, any more than, in our Case, there is reason to withhold the Powers of Defence from any one who has a Country to defend. The only question is How the powers of Defence may be most effectually extended to all who have a Share in the Stake.

One way is by Compulsory Statute as  in other instances of publick Arrangement. In this way no doubt every Subject may be forced to handle a Firelock: but this is soon Obtained and is of little value if the Heart does not go along with it. There is danger that whatever is forced may leave an impression of Servitude and consequently some degree of repugnance to the Bussiness. It was not the use of Arms but the National Spirit that has of late decided the Fortune of Europe. Another Way is one on which we are already entered. That of fostering Volunteer Corps with attainable marks of Disstinction and Honour. On this Point, what I said, I am affraid a little too flippantly. That The King himself might be a Volunteer, could mean little more, than that His Majesty on certain occasions might wear The Volunteer Uniform as he bears the Collar of an Order, that of the Garter or Thistle on its Day.

In the Volunteers there can be no repugnance; for they consist of the Willing, and as such are likely to be a Selection of the most Worthy. The honours they bear will be alluring  to Numbers, & take like a fashion; infect the mass of the People & to make free with a familiar Allusion: like jest propagate a kind of Military Ferment or Verve through the Whole.

At Rome for Some Ages the Lower Class of the People were not received into the Legions. Every Roman nevertheless was a Soldier in his Heart: both he who was enrolled, and he who Aspired to be so.

You will infer from this that I am partial to the Volunteer Corps; & the more so that we have them Actually in Use. There is a French Proverb, with Cautions, when we have already what is good in our hands, against Aspiring to what is better, but may not be attainable: Le plus grand Ennemi du bien c'est le mieux.

As you gave me leave to write what I thought of your Volunteer Corps, I trust you will take in good part also what occurs to me on the Subject of Buonapartes Legion of honour. I am the more inclined to trouble you with my impressions, upon seeing that Institution slightly treated in some news-paper Articles on both sides  the water. This I can believe the Government of France is not averse to, because this Legion is certainly not meant to allarm us: but to strengthen their own hands without being noticed. Such Institutions operate as Alternatives are said to do in Medicine without any instantaneous effect, but requiring time are not to be counteracted by any similar contrivance once the Consequence begins to Appear.

The French Soldiers Enthousiasm for equal claim to preferment is likely  abate when the object is secured or no longer contested,  and the State may be obliged to rely on a discipline in which it was is not to have any Advantage over its neighbours. For this reason it might be hoped that France should be less formidable in the nineteenth Century than it had been at the close of the Eighteenth. But the Genius of a Statesman & Warrior who in a few years & by a general consent   competitors of great renown & Ability has mounted step by step from a very Obscure to the highest Situation is it seems not to suffer the streams of Revolution to spread on the Plain and lose their force. This Policy is likely to be as formidable in Peace as in War. He has actually said or rather enacted, That every French man is to consider himself as the Defender of his Country. That Armies are to be formed by conscription 1st of the young & unmarried, next of an Age more advanced & so on untill the Force that may be employed is that of the whole.

While The Law holds this Language to every Frenchman Such allurements are presented as may engage sufficient numbers to covet the distinction of a soldier, & fill the ranks with Men not pressed but with adventurers who press to be foremost in the Career of Honour. To this purpose we may refer the frequent Military shows, in which  new standards are erected under oaths of Devotion to the Military Duty, with the Ostentatious distribution of honours by which Military Service is signalized and Rewarded. But more especially the Institution of a Legion of which every Rank from the highest to the lowest is to be a place of honour to which those of every Rank may Aspire.

It is surely not necessary to devise any higher Reward than that with which meritorious Commanders of Armies & Fleets are vested in this Country: but the immediat Effect of such rewards, except in mere votes of Thanks and Praise does not descend below the Commander in chief, So far it is good, but partial, while a place in the Legion of Honour is a Spur to Emulation in every Rank. May we not hope that after witnessing the Effects of National Spirit in our Forces abroad & our Volunteers at home, while mere discipline every where else gave way to the fury of a revolutionary madness, that much may be done to show our sense of this Spirit & contribute to foster & Preserve it. I am not partial to former times, or disposed to ascribe the Virtues of men to Ignorance & Poverty: but rather believe that Ranks well employed are favourable to Virtue and Elevation of mind. No Nation Surely ever exhibited  a better Spirit than Britain has done in the height of its affluence: but there is no reason why that Spirit should be neglected or  because they are a great Resource  adopted as the only standard of Estimation & ho nour. The Manufacturer I trust will not be less qualifyed to ply his Loom because he is conscious that no Enemy will dare to invade his family or his Property. I am far from being disposed to undervalue the Virtue that has been taken of Military merit: but I wish if Possible to have something devised in the way of that Institution I have mentioned to Penetrate the Souls of men with Sentiments of Elevation & Honour. That Institution never can be slighted because The Sovereign honour is of it And never can lose the Regard payed to it in every rank unless we suppose its appointments prostituted to Subjects unworthy which cannot be frequent in a Country where the Sense of the Army is every thing.

I am aware of the Impropriety of intruding on your Lordship in these times: but my Tenure in the course of Nature cannot be long, And Anxious concern for a Son of mine, who has been now for years an unemployed Writer to The Signet at Edinburgh, has become irresistible. I flatter myself that he is not to blame; And I could account for his want of Success, from the train into which the Bussiness of that Profession has got, of which I was not apprised untill it was too late. But a long letter would not be excuseable.

I have not at present any particular  Request to make; if I had I should probably only interfere with some previous Arrangement. My wish is merely to place the Circumstance of my Son in your Lordship View; And leave it to the Operation of that kind intention towards My Family of which I have So Sensibly felt the effects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

The Within is a List of Publications now in my possession. Dr Hill had left this place on his Way to Duneira but I trust this may come to hand before he comes away. I am particularly fond of Troop Ships or floating Barracks While the Continent is as one Party against us & we are surrounded by the sea our Army should be afloat.

The Inclosed has come to me without a Name. On being read to me I think it worth your Lordships notice. The measure to which it relates seems to call for all that kind of Benevolence & Wisdom which have distinguished so many of your Lordships acts, that I shall hold myself Excused for this Intrusion.

With an earnest desire to stop the further Effusion of Blood and the Calamities of War, We communicate to you with the least possible delay after our Arrival in this City, a copy of the Commission with which His Majesty is pleased to honor Us, as also the Acts of Parliament on which it is founded, and, at the same time that We assure you of our most earnest desire to reestablish on the Basis of equal freedom and mutual safety the Tranquillity of this once happy Empire; you will observe that we are vested with Powers equal to the Purpose and such as are even unprecedented in the Annals of our History.

In the present State of our Affairs, though fraught with subject of mutual Regret, all parties may draw some degree of Consolation and even Auspicious Hope from the recollection that cordial Reconciliation and Affection have in our own and other Empires succeeded to Contentious and Temporary Divisions not less violent than those We now experience.

We wish not to recall Subjects which are now no longer in Controversy, and will reserve to a proper time of discussion, both the hopes of mutual Benefit and the Consideration of Evils that may naturally contribute to determine your Resolutions as well as our own on this important occasion.

The Acts of Parliament which we transmit to you having passed with singular Unanimity, will sufficiently evince, the disposition of Great Britain, and shew that the Terms of Agreement in Contemplation with His Majesty and with Parliament are such as come up to every wish that North-America either in the hour of temperate Deliberation or of the utmost Apprehension of danger to Liberty has ever expressed.

More effectually to demonstrate Our good Intentions we think proper to declare even in this Our first Communication that We are disposed to Concur in every satisfactory and just arrangement towards the following among other Purposes.

To consent to a Cessation of Hostilities both by Sea and Land.

To Restore free Intercourse, to revive mutual affection, and renew the common Benefits of Naturalization through several parts of this Empire.

To extend every Freedom to Trade that our Respective Interests can require.

To agree that no military Forces shall be kept up in the different States of North America without the consent of the General Congress or particular Assemblys.

To concur in measures calculated to discharge the Debts of America, and to raise the Credit and Value of the Paper Circulation.

To perpetuate Our Union by a Reciprocal Deputation of an Agent or Agents from the different States who shall have the Priviledge of a Seat and Voice in the Parliament of Great Britain or if sent from Britain in that case to have a Seat and Voice in the Assembly's of the different States to which they may be deputed in order to Attend in the several interests of those by whom they are deputed.

In short to establish the Power of the Respective Legislatures in each particular State, to settle its Revenue, its Civil and Military Establishments, and to Exercise a perfect freedom of Legislation and Internal Government, so that the British States throughout North-America acting with us in Peace and War under one Common Sovereign may have the irrevocable enjoyment of every Priviledge that is short of a total Separation of Interests, or consistent with that Union of Force on which the Safety of our common Religion and Liberty depends.

In our Anxiety for preserving those Sacred and essential Interests, We cannot help taking notice of the Insidious Interposition of a Power, which has from the first Settlement of the Colonies been actuated with Enmity to us both. And notwithstanding the pretended date or present form of the French Offers to North-America yet it is notorious that these were made in Consequence of the Plans of Accommodation previously concerted in Great Britain, and with a View to prevent our Reconciliation and to prolong this Destructive War.

But we trust that the Inhabitants of North-America connected with us by the nearest Ties of Consanguinity, speaking the same language, interested in the preservation of similar Institutions, remembering the former happy Intercourse of good Offices and forgetting recent animosities will shrink from the thought of becoming an Accession of force to our late mutual Enemies; and will prefer a firm & free and perpetual Coalition with the Parent State to an insincere and unnatural Foreign Alliance.

This Dispatch will be delivered to you by Doctor Ferguson the Secretary to His Majesty's Commission and for fuller explanation and discussion of every Subject of difference, We desire to meet with you either Collectively or by Deputation, at New York, Philadelphia, York Town or such other place as you may propose. We think it right however to Apprise you, that His Majesty's Instructions as well as our own desire to remove from the immediate Seat of War in the Active Operations of which we cannot take any part, may induce us speedily to remove to New York; but the Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Land Forces (who is joined with Us in the Commission) will if it should become necessary either Concur with us in a Suspension of Hostilities or will furnish all necessary Passports and safe Conduct to Facilitate our meeting and we shall of course expect the same of you: If after the time that may be necessary to consider this Communication and transmit your answer the Horrors and Devastations of War should continue we call God and the World to Witness that the Evils which must follow are not to be imputed to Great Britain. And we cannot without the most real Sorrow anticipate the Prospect of Calamities which we feel the most Ardent desire to prevent. We are with perfect respect

It being reported that the Hotham Tender Lieutenant Hale, sent from hence with a Flag of Truce to carry Packets directed, according to the inclosed List and containing the Original and Copies of a Manifesto and Proclamation lately issued by His Majesty's Commissioners, has been wrecked and the Papers lost. I have the Commands of their Excellencies to transmit the inclosed Copies that the Congress may be informed of the Contents, and in Case the Reports respecting the Wreck of the Vessel above mentioned should prove true, communicate them to the Assemblies of Pennsylvania and the Delaware Counties, to whom as well as to the Congress, the Instruments executed in due Form shall be sent as soon as any Desire is by them signified to that effect.

I have, within these few days, been honoured with a circular letter from the Committee of the Highland Society, with Queries relating to the poems of Ossian.

In answer to the first query, the committee will please to know, that about the year 1740, I heard John Fleming, a taylor, who in the manner of the country, worked with his journeymen at my father's house, repeat, in a kind of chiming measure, heroic strains relating to an arrival or landing of an host and a subsequent battle, with a single combat of two chiefs. This I took down in writing, and kept for some time; but was not in possession of when Mr MacPherson's publication appeared. I had no doubt, however, in recognizing the same passage in the arrival of Swaran, and the single combat with Cuchullin, in MacPherson's translation of Fingal.

The few words I can recall, are, 1st, in relation to the hosts engaged:

And in relation to the chiefs who grappled, and in whose struggle

The Committee will be so good as excuse my spelling, and guess at the words as they best can. As John Fleming was then an oldish man, he is probably long since dead.

As to the second query-the Committee will please to know that I have, at different times, heard other scraps or fragments repeated; but the principal use I made of them was, to tell my friend and companion at College, Mr John Home, that there were such relicks of ancient poetry in the Highlands, and which led him to the inquiries which produced Mr MacPherson's communications.

The fragments I afterwards saw in Mr MacPherson's hands, by no means appeared of recent writing: the paper was much stained with smoke, and daubed with Scots snuff.

To the third and fourth queries, I can say nothing, as I am not now in the neighbourhood to which they refer.

To the fifth, please to know that I have, very early in my life, and of course very long, heard of Fingal and his race of heroes, and of poetry on their subject, to be found some where in the Highlands. But as to my qualification to give evidence in this matter, the Committee will please to know, that the place of my nativity in Athole, is barely within the limits at which Gaelic begins to be vulgar tongue, and where the mythology and tradition of the highland were likely to be more faint than in the interior parts. I am sensible that mere opinion must go for little in the midst of such evidence as the Committee are in search of. I cannot, however, entire ly suppress my own, in addressing the committee of a society of which I have the honour to be a member, though prevented by my infirmities from taking any active part in the meritorious pursuits in which they are engaged. In the communications which Mr MacPherson at any time made to me, I was far from apprehending any imposture; but when the poems of Fingal and Temora appeared, I was inclined to think some pains must have been bestowed, and even liberties taken, in piecing together what was found in separate or broken fragments, with defects attending all such traditionary strains. What the collector had to do, or actually did, of this sort, it is impossible to know, if he himself has kept silence on the matter. May we not, without attempting to compare the subjects together, recollect a similar tradition relating to the scattered rhapsodies of Homer himself? and as the collector left no intimation of the pains or liberties he took, we embrace Homer, as we may now do Ossian, as the sole author of strains which bear his name. When I consider the late fashion of the times, respecting the contents of a language which is now thought so interesting, I am not surprised that the gleanings of Mr MacPherson has left so little vestige behind. It was a language spoken in the cottage, but not in the parlour, or at the table of any gentleman. Its greatest elegancies were to be learned from herdsmen or deer-stealers. It was connected with disaffection, and proscribed by government. Schools were erected to supplant it, by teaching a different language. There were no books in it, but the manuals of religion, and these in so awkward and clumsy a spelling that few could read them. The fashionable world in the neighbourhood, as usual, derided the tone and accent of Highlanders, believing their own to be models of elegance and harmony. It was more genteel to be ignorant than knowing of what such a language contained; and it required all the genius, learning, and courage of James MacPherson, to perceive and affirm that the ancient strains of Gaelic poetry might compare with those of other nations more celebrated. If it should still remain a question with many, whether he collected or composed these strains, I shall not be surprised; for I believe, that what he got in writing was unknown to those who gave it, and the merit of what was repeated scarcely felt. And, in short, that he himself at times was not averse to be thought the author of what became so much celebrated and admired throughout Europe.

In writing so much, and so little to the purpose of the Committee's letter, I trust to your usual favour and good nature in helping me to the proper excuses; and am, with the most sincere and perfect regard,

I am sorry to feel that I can do but little to supply the defects of your materials, in framing the intended Memoir relating to the life of my very particular friend John Home. My intimacy with him began at College, about the year 1743, or 44. I left Scotland in the summer 1745, did not return till the year 1751, and had no fixed residence in Scotland till near 1760, and my recollection of transactions, or rather of dates, within this whole period, is very imperfect, and even perplexed.

As to Mr. Homes early visits to London, I heard of one in company with some of Mr. Adam's family, and believe it was then he met with his repulse from Garrick, and made his address to Shakespeare's monument. I know not whether he was then presented to Lord Bute, but have heard of his interviews with Mr. Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham. His openness, ardour, and warmth of  heart, recommended him equally to Mr. Pitt and Lord Bute; but the political difference which arose and increased betwixt these personages, lost him the one in the same degree as he acquired the other.

It was, I think, in his first visit to London, he fell in with Collins the poet, perhaps introduced by Mr. Barrow, who, as you suppose, was his fellow adventurer in the castle of Doune, and continued through life his warm and affectionate friend, as I too experienced by Home's recommendation. Home's access to Lord Bute procured Barrow the office of paymaster to the army, during the American war, where scores of millions passed through his hands, and left him returning to England, I believe, nearly as poor as he went.

I lived, as you suppose, with Mr. Home, at Braid, a farmhouse two miles south of Edinburgh; but as to the date, I can say nothing, but suppose it may have been after the first representation of Douglas at Edinburgh, and after he was far gone in the favour of Lord Bute.

I remember he was then much engaged in versifying, but cannot say what. I think, but may be mistaken, it was in some changes or amendments wished by Lord Bute, in the tragedy of Agis; and even in concert with Garrick, who was beginning to regard the influence of Lord Bute more than he had formerly regarded the applications of Home. I  am by no means qualifyed to mention what different subjects, or works, Mr. Home attempted or executed, as I myself, during the busiest time of his life, was much engaged abroad, sometimes in the Low Countries, in Germany, Switzerland, and even in America. As to any attempt of his in comedy, I never heard of any such thing; and, if the public are not much interested to know the failures as well as successes of literary men, I should be willing to have the attempt in comedy you mention entirely suppressed, as one of the mistakes we commit in moments of dulness or error.

As to what you call the party at Moffat, I cannot pretend to recollect the date to which it may be referred. I believe it was not any concerted party. John Home was there by himself  lived at the Ordinary  and met with James M'Pherson at the Bowling Green. M'Pherson was there with his pupil, young Graham of Balgoun (now Lord Lynedoch), living with his mother, Lady Christian Graham, at her Brother, Lord Hopetoun's house, in that village. What passed between John Home and James M'Pherson, I soon after heard of; and had no doubt it was a continuation of what had passed frequently betwixt Home and myself, on the subject of reported traditionary poetry in the Highlands. There was another highlander there, who, as well as Mr. Home, I understood, obtruded on M'Pherson  with inquiries on that subject. M'Pherson confirmed the report; and being asked whether he could exhibit any specimens, said he was possessed of several; and on Home's wishing to have some translation, M'Pherson agreed, and furnished him with some of those fragments which were afterwards printed in a pamphlet, and drew that public attention which gave rise to the further proceeding on the subject.

David Hume was not at Moffat when these interviews with M'Pherson took place; he was, you know, a professed sceptic, and cannot properly be said to have ever formally affirmed or denied the authenticity or imposture of the poetry in question. He began, and continued to call for evidence-perhaps for more evidence than the circumstances of the case could admit; but this, you know, is the essence of scepticism; to most men, day- light is sufficient evidence that the sun is rising or risen; but the sceptic would always have more, even if the rays are vertical.

As to the project and subscription which afterwards took place, to dispatch M'Pherson to collect more poetry in the Highlands, I was not then in Scotland, nor heard of it till some time afterwards.

Mr. Home certainly never entertained any doubt that the original of Mr. M'Pherson's translations was traditionary in the Highlands.

As to the society he mostly frequented at London, you seem to be sufficiently informed. Lord Bute generally treated him with an uncommon degree of affection; their minds were much at unison in all the sentiments of admiration or contempt. The sphere of attentions paid to Mr. Home at London, no doubt extended after the representation of Douglas; but I have ever since been too little in London to be apprised of particulars for your information; and as to the defects of what you might expect from me on the subject of this letter in general, I trust you will forgive it, being now for many years declining, while you and many other younger men are advancing in knowledge and power.

I am visited sometimes by Dempster, who is possibly too old for your acquaintance, but I call him a younker, being myself about to enter on my ninetieth year.

Give me leave to introduce to your acquaintance and good offices my Friends Mr Johnstone and Mr Gardener and at the same time to renew my respects to you. It is extreamly agreeable to recall the memory of my having been at Geneva though attended with a very sincere regret for the shortness of my stay. Many changes must have happened since the year 1774: but I shall forbear alluding to particulars untill I am better informed. One thing I am happy to Know that you are in the train of pursuing your former studies, and excursions to the mountains, and have at last accomplished the Herculean labour of getting to the top of Mont Blanc, a difficulty, indeed, which I thought must have remained for ever unsurmounted. Your toils are not lost to the observers even of this country.

The former vols. you published are in their hands and Mr Hutton in particular is highly pleased and instructed. He has long worshipped the same Divinitys with you and embraced every specimen of stone or earth with a most pious attention. His Ideas are magnificent and what is more precious and more difficult in science formed with a scrupulous regard to reality. You have some account of them in the paper he has furnished me, to be sent by these gentlemen to you. He had directed a copy for you to the secretary of the Academy of Agriculture at Paris of which he is a member: but as the copy I now send may arrive before the other he is willing to indulge my request of having this duplicate for the purpose. He has likewise joined a copy of his theory of Rain. It would be a great pleasure to him and to me to pay our respects at Geneva and visit your mountains. There is a company here in which it has often been mentioned, but we should draw different ways some to contemplate the Earth, others the Country ancient and Modern and I am particular to follow the Tract of my Friends the Romans: but a scheme that has already given so much amusement in Nords is not likely to be executed. I trust I shall have from Mr Gardener from time to time some account of my Friends of Geneva. In the meantime I beg to be remembered most respectfully to Madame De Saussure and conclude with again recommending these gentlemen to your good offices. 


I have just seen in the hands of Dr Black the letter which you have received from Dr Percy, and am exceedingly vexed to have a difference on a matter of fact with a person whose character I so much respect; I did not imagine that Dr Percy, any more than you, could have been affected by the late declaration relating to a passage in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's Poems, farther than the repetition of your names, which were already made free with. If I had thought Dr Percy any way committed, I should certainly have troubled him with a copy of my declaration, and waited his commands before it was published. But it did not occur to me that he, any more than you, could be cited in support of any allegation which it concerned me to deny.

The most respectful thing I can now do to Dr Percy is to remind him, as far as my memory serves me, of the fact in the only conversation which I had the honour to have with him. Among other subjects that of Earse poetry was mentioned, and I remember to have shewn him, in my own hand-writing, some scraps which I had received from Mr James Macpherson, or from Mr Maclaggan, Chaplain of the 42d regiment. I remember a line, or expression, in which the Poet, describing the time and the scene, said, the sun of day was scorching the mountain, and that Dr Percy was pleased to say it was a Pleonasm, but a beautiful one. I remember to have left the paper with Dr Percy, and have since lost every other copy of it.

The difference between Dr Percy and me is perhaps not very material; no more, as he states it, than that he remembers what I have forgot. If, nevertheless, what he pleased to publish shall seem to corroborate the charge which I have already thought myself called upon to deny, I must recur to the intire sense and consciousness of my innocence, and renew my declaration, that I was not present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a young Student from the Highlands; and I give my denial in these positive terms, because I not only do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse, by a Student from the Highlands, by a Student upon that occasion, but because I do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse on any other occasion; and because, though intimate with some students from the Highlands, I do not remember that any of them ever repeated verses in my presence beyond a song or a catch; and this circumstance remains with me with respect to some of them, as a circumstance I noted; so that I am entirely persuaded Dr Percy, in recollecting the passages of his few days stay at Edinburgh, must have jumbled together circumstances that, in point of time, were actually separate; the repetition of verses by a young Student, with the communication of verses in writing by me. If this supposition does not compose the difference, I must despair of being able to remove it, and must leave the matter to the candour of those who are pleased to bestow any thought on me or my affairs.

If I should be under the necessity of publishing any more on this subject, I shall, with your leave, send a copy of this letter to the press. In the mean time, as I have not the honour of a personal correspondence with Dr Percy, must beg the favour that you will transmit it to him.


To the contents of this letter, I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own hand-writing, I likewise procured a Student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the Student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.


I return Dr Percy's letter of the 10th inst., on this disagreeable subject, of the recital of Erse poetry. I am sorry he has had so much trouble; but cannot blame myself, as I am satisfied the trouble did not originate with me. I have in what is past, and shall continue in what may follow, to confine myself strictly to what is necessary in my own defence. I found it alledged in print, that Dr Percy had a cheat put upon him when at Edinburgh, to which I was accessory. In such cases it is often argued that until such or such assertions be contradicted they must be supposed true; and I did not choose that my character should rest upon that footing. I was free to deny any concurrence in the cheat, and even free to deny my having ever been present at any such scene as that in which the cheat was said to be practised. With respect to the last point, indeed, it may be thought that I could speak only negatively, and deny my having any memory of the transaction; and so it is no doubt of all past transactions. But there are circumstances which entitle a person to be more or less positive. In this case the cheat that is said to have been put upon Dr Percy could not be practised in my presence without my concurrence; and this every feeling of my mind warrants me in denying in the most positive terms. As I never questioned the fidelity of Mr James M'Pherson in his publications, I was none of those who busied themselves in finding evidence of it. It has happened to me, indeed, to mention a very few particulars of Erse poetry that were known to myself; and from my knowledge of which I had taken a very early impression of what mere genius, without the aid of literature or foreign models, may do where the human mind is free and the passions have scope in recital as well as in action. I imagined that evidence of its power might have been found in every country if collected before language and manners had so far changed as to obliterate or efface its productions. There being any remnants of it in the Highlands of Scotland, I imputed to the manners and language having changed less than they have done elsewhere in equal periods of time. Whether or no this be honourable for the people I will not at present try to determine. It appeared to me matter of some curiosity in the history of mankind, but very little as matter of vanity to one corner of this island, much less of jealousy to any other corner of it. The scraps I showed to Dr Percy had a reference to this idea, not the fidelity of Mr M'Pherson's publications. And I was surprised to find myself, contrary to the general tenor of my feelings, stated as a fabricator of evidence on that subject. I thought myself free to deny in very positive terms my having ever been present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a student from the Highlands; because I never knew a student who pretended to repeat any part or specimen of Ossian's heroic poetry. And the mention of Mr John M'Pherson's name does not at all alter the state of my recollection, for my memory of him is, among other particulars in which he is well known to me, that he never appeared to be in possession of any part of Ossian's poetry. I well remember that he was in some degree a singer, though I do not recollect any particular song but one, which, with a very few words of any meaning, consisted chiefly of a chorus or burden, not more significant than lullabolaro or derry down. If he repeated this or any other song that Dr Percy might hear the sound of the language, it is no wonder that I should forget that circumstance, especially as I have totally forgot Dr Percy's visit with you at my house. But I hope that Dr Percy, now he has seen his minutes, will be sensible that a person may mistake what he thinks he remembers, as well as another may forget what has really passed. What he wrote from his memory in a former letter was, that I had sent for a student to your house. What he writes now is, that he came to the student at my house. Some other very easy mistake in the circumstances, if recollected, might acquit me entirely of any share in the imposition that was put upon Dr Percy. I confess that I was astonished at the ease with which this charge was stated against me in the pamphlet which has given rise to this correspondence. If I had the honour of being sufficiently known to Dr Percy, I should certainly request that he would compare probabilities, and consider which is most likely, that I should be accessory to a cheat, or that he should mistake some material circumstance of a story sixteen years old. Although I may not be entitled to employ this plea with Dr Percy, I certainly must be allowed to submit it, in case I am under a necessity of more publications, to persons to whom I am better known. There is certainly hitherto no reason to apprehend from me, as Dr Percy mentions, any improper desire of committing my name in print. I appeared, from necessity, to prevent inferences which might be drawn from my silence against me. I do not pretend to set up my affirmation against that of any other person; but as often as occasion is given to the same inference, I must appear again to the same purpose. Dr Percy is pleased to say in the letter which I return to you, that if I persist in denying publicly the existence of a recital, &c., he must then be compelled, much against his will, to produce at large necessary proofs in support of his own affirmation. Dr Percy will be pleased to observe, that I do not pretend to know what recitals he may have had made to him. I only deny that I ever was present at any imposition put upon Dr Percy by any pretended recital of Erse, and that I ever was present at any such recital. I am persuaded that there are no proofs to the contrary, of which Dr Percy will not perceive the weakness the more he considers them. At any rate, he must be sensible that if any such proofs are supposed, I cannot possibly consent to have them secreted. When they appear, I hope that I too shall proceed with temper and decency, although I have a little more at stake than Dr Percy, and have my integrity to defend against a most unexpected attack, which it seems is to be carried on against me in support of his accuracy in conversation.

I have been in the country all day, have barely time to write what I wish you to know by this post, in answer to a letter with which you have made me so happy. I will think no more of doubts or difficulties of any kind. Kate is mine. You have a numerous family of children. I hope that she is among those that will need your assistance the least. I am averse to all solemnity, I would not even have you think of going to the expense of new cloths for her on this occasion. I make no change in my house till she comes, and then she may change it as she pleases. I spoke something about Interest in my last; my meaning was that you should consider of a paper in which I may secure all I die possessed of to Kate and her children in case she survives me. I am in too great a hurry to explain this at present, but will send you a memorandum of it by next post, and you may have the writing ready to be signed when I get to Aberdeen. Doctor Black is ready to attend me whenever I call for him. My situation requires the decency of some forms, such as being called in church, and married by a minister of the Established Church. If Doctor Campbell is at hand to perform this office, it will be very agreeable. I hope that the ceremony of proclamation can be got over at Aberdeen in less than three Sundays. I can at a day's warning get a certificate of my being proclaimed here, and I hope you can get through that affair so as to satisfy Dr Campbell in much the same manner. If this can be done, I think you may get this letter and write an answer naming a particular day, so as that Dr Black and I may be at Aberdeen by the end of the first week in October. My time will only allow me to get to Aberdeen the day before and leave it the day after our ceremony. Your own family is company enough for me on the occasion. If Mr A. Gordon from Hallhead could without inconvenience be there, it would be pleasant, or anybody else that Kate chooses. This letter is the longer for being written in a hurry; but I hope it is to be understood and that it will procure from you, by the first post, the nomination of a day in the first week of October, or at furthest in the second. Dr Black and I will be there the day before. I am, your most obliged and affectionate servant

In looking over Lord Chesterfields deed of settlement I find that 100 for the last half year was due on the 29th of September last. If you have not made application for Payment of it, I beg that you will without Delay. Running more into Arrears may be inconvenient to his Lordship as well as to me & make him feel the inconvenience of this Bussiness more as it may expose me to the loss of the Whole. I waited some time to pick up a Frank but it is not material as all these Expences must necessarily fall upon me. I am 
At my return from Bath on Saturday evening I found it necessary that I should stay a week or two about London before I go to Scotland & chuse to pass as much of that time at this place for the sake benefit of the Air, as I can. As this is about the time that Lord Chesterfields people of Bussiness may be expected to make their half yearly Payment you will please to let me know what passes. Direct for me at Mrs Atkinss near the Hare & Billet on Blackheath. The penny post I am told is the best conveyance hither.

you may possibly think that I am forgetting you like your Other Correspondents of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; but Michaelmas must remind me. I knew exactly the State of your bussiness on receiving your Letter: but our Society very unlike a trading Company that has Stopt Payment has never yet begun to pay & when they do I hope will never Stop.

They have had only one meeting for the first Forms & they have established a Fund for their expence but how productive it has yet become I know not.

The Person for you to correspond with  I believe is Mr Keith younger of Ravelstone at Edr who has accepted the Office of Treasurer. The Society is to meet for Bussiness on the first Monday of Novr. It will be proper that your Account be then presented & you will either transmit it to Mr Keith in time for that purpose, or if you have formerly sent it to any person here cause them produce it, tho I think it should bear interest & therefore a fresh Copy will be best.


As there was little chance of my being in London & I forsaw the necessity of a transaction relating to my Book; I sent you the Copies annexed to my last although I did not clearly see what part you should take in the matter immediately. Even in Answer to your Letter I must proceed on Suppositions, which at this distance I cannot verify, & of which even on the Spot I should probably not be a Competent judge. If my Book has had its utmost sale, it would be very improper for me to grasp at a profit to the hurt of my Booksellers: But if the most profitable part of the Sale is yet to come either from the lasting demand for it or from their exertion when it becomes their absolute property, I ought not, in justice to my family, to forgo any part of the advantage, that is justly due to me. Messrs Strahan & Cadell have the reputation of fair &  liberal dealers, & I must continue to think they deserve it untill I have reason to think otherwise. Please to let them know that I wish to come to a definitive Bargain, & try on what terms they are willing to conclude the transaction. I am willing to accommodate them in deferring the term of payment hereafter as may be fit and reasonable. In other respects our Agreement of Febry 28. 1782 I think ought to be the basis.

As to the Evidence of their having performed the conditions of that egreement I must for the present suppose so, altho if the agreement were to be strictly fulfilled they would probably offer such Evidence as the case would admit of; what that evidence is I know not & must Submit to you & to them. I cannot entertain any doubt of their having taken the proper Steps to secure the copy right to whomsoever it shall be assigned: but as this is probably matter of record, you can  easily know it.

I ought probably to have mentioned in my last, that I mean my letters on this Subject to be confidential & Secret.

I write merely to remind you that I am alive & wish you to apply as usual for the half years Annuity due to me at this term, from Lord Chesterfields Trustees. I wish also that in making any remittance to me you will take Credit for the Charges of our late vexatious transaction &c. I am Dear Sir your most Obedt &


I write to remind you of our Michaelmas application to Lord Chesterfields Trustees for the Last half years Annuity. And beg at the same time you will inquire for His Lordship & where he now is, As by the news paper accounts he has been some time in England.


I wrote to you yesterday, that I am required by a Circular Letter from the Auditors Office & signed by Sir John Dick & Others to exhibit my Account of money received and Disbursed in my office of Secretary to his Majesties Commissioners &c &c in America. The Account is to be attested on Oath before a Baron of his Majesties Court of Exchequer & exhibited at the Auditors office on or before Wednesday the 13th Decr at two OClock. Finding from this experience that such requisitions may be repeated I am very unwilling to risk any material Paper, which I cannot restore in case it should be lost, by any uncertain Conveyance. And therefore hope that the Inclosed Copy of My Account and of the Commissioners Certificate attested on Oath before a Baron of Exchequer here may for the present at least be Sufficient. If not. Please refer to the Attested Copy taken at the War office when it was there presented by you. For the same reason that I am unwilling to risk by any uncertain Conveyance the original Account and Docket signed by the Commissioners I am unwilling also to risk the vouchers of Particular Articles exhibited to the Commissioners when they passed my Account at New York. All these Papers however if necessary shall be sent to you when required. Most of the disbursements  were made upon mere verbal instructions from the Commissioners and as some of them were naturally to be made without any exaction of Receit or Voucher whatever:  it was the more necessary for me to present the Account to the Commissioners for their Approbation while the occasions were recent in their memory. Thus having given this Approbation I hope will be thought to exhonerate me so far as I was bound to Obey their commands. In case however Particular Articles should be questioned I must trouble you with the following comment.


such explanations should be called for please to make use of them Otherwise the names of persons in Question need not be mentioned. As to the Receipts and Vouchers in my hands I will take the first safe opportunity of sending them to you if they should be necessary.

I have deferred concluding my Letter untill  I should have taken the Oath required to the truth of the within Acct & Docket. But I have now little to add: further than that I wish very much the Auditors would Satisfy themselves now of the Truth & give me Such a Clearance as may save me from farther trouble. I shall be glad to hear from you as soon as convenient what passes on your Exhibiting the Inclosed or what farther may be required from & me. The time limited for my Appearance is on or before Wednesday the 13th of this December which I make no Doubt you will attend. 

I had notice some time ago from the Messrs Drummond at Charing Cross that the following Sums were lodged with them by the Messrs Thomas Payne & Son, to my Acc't 32 in Cash.

13/100 John Stockdales note due 23 Septr you will remember enough of the transaction relating to the Roman History to recollect that whatever came from Messrs Payne on that Acc't should be lodged with Mr Pulteneys Banker & to his Acc't untill his advance was discharged, My desire therefore is that you will take the trouble  to inquire whether Stockdales note be paid and if so, to have the 100 transferred to MR Pulteneys Credit as above. If any formal order be necessary from me to that effect be so good as let me know what it should be & on what Stamp &c. I must at the same time remind you to make at a proper time the usual application for the half years Annuity due from Lord Chesterfields Trustees at Michaelmas. I am 

Above you have a Certificate which I hope will entitle you to receive my half years appointment from Lord Chesterfields Banker. You will recollect the Bussiness on which I have lately been at London. It was so far advanced at my Departure that I left my Son Joseph Ferguson possessed of an Appointment of Cadet in the Corps of Artillery on the Bengale Establishment and  of an Order to Captain Dempster of the  to give him his Passage to India. I left him in the hands of Captain Dempster & of some Friends in the City for this purpose paying all Costs for Passage & Necessarys on the Voyage or on his arrival. But in case any trifle should remain from oversights, delay or Other Accident I left with him a letter to you requesting that you would be so good as Supply him to  my Account, & I now renew the same request. I am 

Finding myself here at Munich past the Michaelmas Term a known to Mr Walpole the King's Minister, I have thought it a good opportunity to Obtain the within Attestation which I hope will entitle you to receive my last half years Annuity from Lord Chesterfield's Banker. If so you will please give notice to My Son Adam Ferguson Writer in South Castle Street New Town Edinburgh, who has a Factory a full powers of Attorney from me so that his draft will be to you a discharge or receit equal to mine. I have found travelling in this country sometimes tedious and with ill acommodation but so healthy as to be fit to restore invalids. The Elector mentioned yesterday at his Levee that the King of Prussia has declared his intention to Winter at Berlin. And there is a Report that the Emperor is about to set out from Vienna to Brussels. What all this portends you will guess. 

My last at Michaelmas was from Munich in Bavaria, being now at Florence on my return from the Southern parts of Italy. I have Obtained on the Other leaf of this paper Mr Wyndhams Attestation to entitle you to draw the half years Annuity now due from Lord Chesterfield Banker. When you receive it be so good as pay it to My Account to Messrs Couts in the Strand to help out a little my Credit with them. I am now on my way North & expect to be clear of Italy soon. 

Bill comes to hand, I shall probably place with Messrs Mansfield & Co and believe that when both are paid I shall find it expedient to place the amount of some Other of my little Effects have gone through the Hands of Mr Couts & Mr Ramsay into some of the publick Funds.

The Accounts of the Regiment will probably have been made up & sent home also by Coll McKenzie & I must desire that you will inquire at the Agents N. Donaldson Esqr White Hall, for the State of my Late Son Captn Josephs Ferguson of the 78 Regiment Account; Obtain an Abstract of it, & let me know how it stands & in case of any ballance Instruckt me in the needful to have it Settled. 

The Documents on the Other leaf of this Paper will speak for themselves. Being apprised some time ago of a payment made by Mr Donaldson Agent to the 78 Regt in part Price of a Company Sold in that Regiment. And my son expressing your desire & his own to know how it should be disposed of: As I trust every thing in my Name will like this be the joint & equal Property of all my Children, my notion was that it should be vested in my Name, And I mentioned the 5  1797, when I understand it is so vested, with exception of My Son Adams own Share who having an Active Cash Account at Edr thinks it more for his advantage to  it placed to his Credit there, Upon the whole of Bussiness I am desirous to have the Stock Receipt in my Possession that I may enter a declaration on the back of it whose Property it is. In this according you will do the needful And Oblige your

The last favour I had of yours was of the 17th Octr last with draft of Mr Thomson for 31:18;10 which was duly honoured.

The purpose of My Now troubling you, is to beg of you with Conveniency, to apply to Mr Donaldson of Whitehall relative to the balance of 950 which remains to Come from the 78th regt part of the proceeds of My late brother Josephs Commission in the Same.

I find myself indebted to My Brother in Law Mr Samuel Burnett  32:10:11 and you will please to reserve a round Sum to Answer it when he sends his discharge to you as he will be told to do. 

Nevertheless you will please 
direct for me at Hallyards 
made on the stock Books relating to the Long Annuity Part of My Brother Roberts Estate of which the Life Rent is bequeathed in Trust to me: But the Reversion to another & hope that matter is in proper train. Meantime pressing circumstances have occurred here that make it necessary for me to sell out the 120 four pr Cts which was soon after Michaels last vested in my name. I therefore earnestly request you to dispose of that little Stock & to let me know when I may draw on you for the Produce & wish it may be as soon as Convenient. I am Dear Sir your most

My Friend Fordyce who is not limited as Members of Parliament are to a certain weight will frank it for me.

But for this there is no haste. Whatever charge has been already incurred in the matter be so good as discharge to my account.


you will learn on the Other leaf of this Paper that I have changed Quarters Since my Last. Grown too feeble for Country affairs I supposed a Town would fit me better And having out Lived all my Friends at Edinburgh I endeavour to mix here with a Society that is very much to my mind And shall be glad to hear of you on every Occasion.

you have the usual attestations on the other leaf of this paper.

I endeavoured to hasten the Miss Burnetts in denomination of their Agent supposeing their Annuity to be payable at this Term but have learned that it is not payable till Christmas so that they may proceed at leisure. I sent them a Copy of your last Letter and we must wait their pleasure.

Nydpath Castle to Pendreech health peace & Salubrity. Retired from the Children of men to live among the lambs of Sheep & their Shepherds, I am anxious to know what is passing among the Dogs & the Wolves. And if the Wolves come across the flock, rejoice that they are dogfully opposed. There is malice in your old friend. The Don's cession of St Domingo to the French, with whom both he & we were at War; but with how little hearty Cooperation! The Don will never forgive Gibraltar & who can blame him. I have sometimes asked Jn Bull how he would like to have Spain lay hold of the Lands End, and pretend to give law in the British & Irish Channels. But Jn thinks that Other Nations should give way to him. He is insulated and at one time thinks he should care for nobody, at another time that every body should be governed by him & never at all knows how to behave himself to Other Nations. But according to the Italian Proverb: Bisogna ben coprirsi il viso innanzi di  stuzzicar il vespaio.

I am glad the Armament is great and may the Blessed Maker of Seas & Winds and Climate favour its unwieldy Bulk. It is not long since I thought R. Abercrombie the first of the young men in point of of Good Sense Gentleness and Candour. How proced to See him with the Thunder on his Arm. So the Lord of Thunder & of Storms preserve and Prosper him. That is right by all means bring home the Cavalry they will enable Such politicians as I am to Sleep the Sounder. I knew the Strain would be tedious: for I had such a one myself: but time will restore the Muscle & may it be really, as well as nominally, that of Achilles, till peace is restored which is the never ceasing Object of My Prayers &c &c &c

your Express was Received . In Consequence of it, I have been with the Duke of Atholl. Told him I was to do what Coll. C: was to have done himself in case he could have got back from Ireland by his Time. & that I had in charge to make this Intimation if my Friend was detained in that Countrey beyond the time at which he meant to make it himself. That he was expected every Hour in this Countrey & would then certainly pay his Respects with such Recommendations as might encourage him to hope for Countenance & Support. That he had some time last Spring Consulted  his Friends in Government on a different Object & had this Recommended to him that his Friends in that Quarter therefore would probably think themselves the more Indispensibly called upon to support him that this attempt was their own Suggestion  The Answer was that He had not fully considered what Part he should take in the Elections of that District, or if any Part. That his Family however had an Interest there & he must Attend to the means of Supporting it. That he must deferr Coming to any final Resolution till the Arrival of Col M. who was Expected from London in a few Days.

I told him that no Other or more Decisive Answer could be immediatly Expected. The Day & the Evening passed in much Hospitality & Politeness on the Part of his G: I  set out Early next morning for this Place.

Pray send us the Remainder of our Letters to Ld Kinoul &c Lord Gray. And now I think one may with propriety be written to the Duke of Athol.

The Others are Delivered. I met Ld Privy Seal at Perth, he on his Way to Bute, & I to Dunkeld, he is over & above his Respect to the Recommendation friendly to Ld Miltons Family.

General Skene I have seen he is a Man of Influence in one Burrough & puts his hand to the work Cordially & Willingly. The Circumstance we Anxiously wish for is the Arrival of the Principal. For in such Matters the great & needful operations can be performed only by the Principal. You may believe that all your Letters have been understood Tua not excepted.
Our Friend Cl having made part of his Tour will inform you by this Express of the Particulars. I wrote you by successive Posts last week what occurred here. You will judge how far the matter can be carryed with any Credit of Adn or Advantage to the private Party.

At C. General Skenes Friends have acquitted themselves in a Manner that Deserves the Protection of G.. At St. A. no encouragement.

At D   the Whole decided against us And in this the adherents of D: & of the D of A are probably Agreed.

At P:  Leading men by our accounts not Engaged: but Letters to Neighbouring Gentlemen  will not be Sufficient, & you will consider in what manner & through what Channel the Patronage of G. & the Respect that is due to it can be employed.

As to the L  A who is supposed to speak the language of Administration is Silent this Bussiness becomes Proportionally Difficult. Is there any considerable thing in Dependence that can be given through the Proper Channel.

If P   with C   could be Secured then CC could afford to Strugle hard for a 3d & do as much as he ever meant to do for the whole Object. But without this the affair seems Desperate and a handsome Retreat is all that can be Effected, for the Credit of A   as well as his own.

D   is exceedingly Popular. Every man of us disposed to wish him  personnally well. It is painful to be against him upon any Other Idea than that his Seat must be disposed ofa to some body else if not to us.

Pray Answer by express and with as little loss of Time as circumstances will Allow.
Edr 1st September 1780

The Express to CC arrived & has been delivered to him this Morning. You should have heard from me very full a Post or two ago if I had not supposed you Sufficiently informed by Letters which I knew were written by Our Friends CC & J: M: relating to the Declaration of P: against us; a very important Emergence in the Progress of our Affairs.

We had then almost lost Heart:but the Partizans employed elsewhere made favourable Reports particularly from St. A. which Revived our Hopes & Induced CC to hasten a second time to F  . His Antagonist being there, & certain Persons  being engaged in his Company, prevented any Decisive Conversation, at That Time, tho Overtures were made, Supposed Sufficient, to prevent any Actual Engagements against us, untill the Bussiness could be farther Adjusted. Letters however from thence, received this Morning, represent the Vote of that Town as engaged against us.

A Declaration of the Council Signed by the Provost & the two Bailies to that Purpose is actually given in Writing: But as it has been said of this Place that the People there are open to Conviction to the Last: a Tryal will be made, more, to Satisfy, that the utmost has been done; than from any real hopes of Success. It appears now that the Encouragement conveyed to you as from the principal B  s was altogether without Foundation. The Report of it may have Piqued them to declare themselves  Otherwise. St. A:: has been gained not by the Influence of Coll. Nairne who has till very lately avoided CC & his Friends but by a very Active Friend and some Expence which had produced the Effect before the Letter to Nairne Arrived. That to Ld Kinnoul was Instantly sent as was that likewise to Mr Fothuringham of Purie but, as I now believe, all too late, as well those which are received & forwarded this Morning. Whatever farther CC may do here for the Credit of Ad-n or his own The time is come when his Hopes of being Elected must come intirely from your Quarter of the World. And I most Earnestly Exhort you to fix without Delay the Alternative on which he proceeded as necessary to justify his Expence; save his Credit upon a dissappointment here, & enable him to Patronize the Friends of Govt. & his own in these B  s. I am well perswaded that Governt will find in him a very Respectable Friend & able Support. Yours most Affectionately

I am glad you are decided on the form in which Ossian is to be recorded. You may expect to hear different opinions on the subject; but if any one thinks he can do better in a more portable form, or in Roman character, this he can easily accomplish from your standard copy; and I shall cease to reason on the subject. Being but a bastard Gaelic man, my ear is a very uncertain rule for pronunciation or orthography. I will, however, mention what occurs under correction of your better judgment. Will it not be proper to prefix an alphabet, with notice of the power of each letter? If so, I think the two sigmas should be distinguished, the one s the other sh. I think the alpha is sufficiently full and broad in the sound without any additional vowel, as (u), for instance; and I think the upsilon should have the power of the English (v), uniformly given to it. The modern Greeks always pronounce it so. The (), falsely numbered with the diphthongs, should always stand for the Italian (u), or English double (oo), as in moon or boon, &c. To illustrate these remarks, I have ventured to mark the changes they would make in the specimen. Aous I see, you spell with a kappa, to my ear it is rather a (), gamma; however you know much better. Query, also whether the nasal sound, when the article precedes a word beginning with gamma or kappa, may not be marked with the double gamma, as in the tale of Pharaoh's daughter ( ); so much for remarks which you will not make any use of, as you see cause. I have conformed to your former injunction exactly in consulting no more persons. There are few persons of any education in the Highlands, whether clergy or laity, that do not know the Greek alphabet; and perhaps will have easier access to your Ossian in that alphabet than they would in the barbarous orthography which few, and I among the rest, never learned to read. I know that this would make many a learned man stare. For there is no persuading people south of Tay, that all the works of the bards are not to be found in booksellers' shops in Lochaber or Morven the capital of the country at least. I tryed your experiment on J. Home, and he made it much more intelligible from the Greek orthography than from the Roman. I showed him in confidence your flagellation of the Edinburgh critics, and he is much diverted. I admire the fair hand and current writing of Greek in your amanuensis. 

I had no opportunity of seeing any Charter Schools untill the Regiment came to this Town, which is the reason your Lordship has not heard from me sooner. There is one at Loch-Rea about Sixteen Miles from this Place, which I went to see, & inclose a State of the Masters acc'ts with the Society according to the information I had. As your Lordship was desirous to know their manner of Building for this purpose: I have attempted to make a Plan, at which I am not expert, but it will perhaps be more satisfying than a Description. I had only room on the Paper for the Ground floor. Above Stairs the Body of the house is divided in the midle by a Partition which forms apartments for the Master and Mistress, & the wings of each Side are in intire Rooms where the Beds are for the Children. They have Garrets over head for Store & Lumber.

This School is build upon an Acre of Ground which was given to the Society by My Lord Clanrickard, And they have a Lease of forty Acres at Six pounds per An. 

The Complement is twenty Boys and twenty Girls of which only two are now wanting. They complain much of the difficulty of finding Children, because the Papists are averse to the Design. In looking over the Register, I found all the Children at this School to a very few are Natives of Dublin, & I believe they pick them up more easily there than in the Country.

They teach them to read English & repeat the Catechism with some Arguments against Popery: but most of their time is employed in Work. The Oldest of the Boys are employed in what they can do without Doors; the younger Boys knit Stockings & the Girls Spin. When their time is out they are put apprentice to Protestant Tradesmen or to Service Under Indentures.

I hear pretty Good accounts of their success in General. Many Gentlemen get Servants from these schools; & I was told in Particular of one Paterson in the Country of Antrim who carrys on the Linnen Manufacture to a great extent, & employs about a hundred from these Schools.

PS. I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship that I begin to Despair of finding a Wolf Dog, for the Breed is become very Scarce in the Country.
Blackheath Aprile 21st 

I have heard with much Surprise and concern of a Resolution of the Town Council to Vacate my office in the College at the end of a session, in which my place had been, with their own permission & with the approbation of the Publick, Supplyed by one of my Colleagues. After having Served fifteen years, & I flattered myself without any discredit to the University I trusted that I had no reason to apprehend the Patrons of it woud attempt to deprive me of my Professorship uncalled & unheard. The Interest which I have at stake made me wish to be indulged with leave of Absence for one  Session longer. Such an Indulgence had been granted to one of my predecessors & is now granted by the first University in Britain to one of its members. If it had been refused to me I might have felt the Severity of being commanded to forego an Emolument which a few months longer woud have Secured to my Family: but certainly shoud have acquiesced in the most respectfull manner. I shoud not however have troubled your Lordship at present on this Subject; if I had not heard that I am accused of having neglected to give the Town Council proper Intimation of the circumstances that were likely to detain me Abroad. I left Edinburgh without knowing precisely how long I might be Absent. When my Prospects became less uncertain I was at a great Disstance, foresaw a change of Magistracy & was therefore desirous to commit the Official Communication of my Affairs to a friend who was present & who coud judge of the  properest method of Conducting them. Nor had I any Surmise till within these two days that any circumstance in this matter had exposed me to blame or censure.

I am still Ignorant of Particulars, & whatever misstakes may have been committed by my friends or Myself I hope that your Lordship and every Gentleman in the Magistracy will upon recollection think me incapable of any intended neglect, And that you will believe me to be with the greatest Respect

Were you now in your old place and I at my old Corner of the table, I coud tell you a great many Storys and adventures, as how I dined with Yappie Findornard at the Briel, and how I slept at Rotterdam, no matter whether true or false so I might be allow'd to assume the airs of a traveler and a great fellow, in which Character whether you allow of it or not, I intend to write this Letter. I promised to write you from London but we are often under Obligations to do what is not so easily performed. I was so bewildered and lost in that great place, and my Brain so jumbled that I could not think of doing any thing orderly. During the short time I was there I got into great variety of mixed Company, which afforded a deal of entertainment to which before I had been pretty much a Stranger; every fellow reads the publick papers and talks his mind concerning them with all the vehemence immaginable. What does the King do abroad quoth one. Bring home the Army quoth another if they woud make Lord George Graham Admiral of the Fleet we are a match for all Europe Still. You see, these vast oddities of Character, as might naturally be expected, in a place where a great many of the Inhabitants come from different corners of the World, and bring their own peculiaritys along with them, and where the Characters of others are Shaped amidst a Multitude, as Chance or their different applications will have it.

But how come I, say you who was but two short Weeks in London to see all this. You or I may go to an Eating House a Beer or any house, set at what Board join what company you will, and talk familiarly with people who neither know you nor one another, and whom perhaps you never will have another sight of. As for the Whores Villains and Robbers that throng the Streets at Night John Blair can give you a very good account of them. I saw John Spencer Esq.r who is like a footman in his Dress and a Yorkshire Jockie in his Air and manner. The Famous Lord Chesterfield is as short as my friend Drysdale and has as great a head as my Brother Robertson, I saw him lookie, with great patience reading a beggars paper in the entry to the Cockpit as he was going in to settle the affairs of Brittain and Europe. And not to forget you Sir, I have seen St Paul's which in my shallow judgements is a grand Building. I heard a preaching there concerning Modesty and Bashfulness, which was  somewhat Speculative like the Sermons of Davie Dickson according to Andrew Grey. But not to forget myself concerning whom you are no doubt anxious to know somewhat, I went to our Agent, who told me that my 60 at Least was mounted to upwards of 90, and I am since made to understand that the Duke of Cumberland has orderd that pay to all in my way whilst the Army is Abroad. The Agent gave me thirty Guineas and so I bade him farewell and marched away in the Stage Coach to Harwich. In a few hours after I came there, the packet sailed, and with the Assistance of a little bit of a hurricane we were dashed from England to Holland in about fourteen hours. I can tell you little about the Dutch but that they are grave odd like fellows, and speak a language I don't understand. They are the greediest for Money of any people I ever saw; profit is their life and joy nor will they allow you one doit of advantage though your life were at stake. There appeared amongst many one remarkable Instance of this at Rotterdam, there were other two Gentlemen in Company, after we had taken three places in a kind of Posting Coach that goes from Rotterdam to Antwerp and had all payd our pistoles each, one of the Company went aside to the Petit Maison, ad exonerandum alveum, the people immagining some body had not payd, went first to one, then to another, at length they came to the Gentleman in his retirement from which place he was dragged by a Man and a Woman in all the Dishabile common on such occasions without being able to Satisfy them till he came to an interpreter, so little delicacy have they in money matters and so impatient are they till their demands are Satisfied. We set out from Rotterdam in the Morning and drove it away to Antwerp that Night. The appearance of the Country was very strange to me who was mostly conversant with the highlands of Scotland, such dead extended plains, such a Cold invary'd prospect, where a paltry Bush will terminate the view to as good purpose as a Mountain were wonder enough to a Highlander. And indeed in so far as I could observe it the Temper of the People seemed to be pretty much what the objects they were conversant with woud inspire. Tho Sunday there especially in the afternoon be a mere play day, I cannot say, but the people keep it with as much Gravity as they do in Scotland, no Gamboling no Quips or Quidities, every fellow sets on a form before his Door with perhaps Six Pair of Breeches on, and a tobaco pipe,  smoaking with as much Gravity and wisdom as the Minister of Gladsmuir himself, you'll perhaps too see a houshold thing or two with shining Morning face and Green Purse on Side creeping like Snail about her own affairs.

In the Country the People are mostly Bours, that is each holds as his own Property a piece of Ground equall to a good farm with you, for which he pays some tax to the Republick only. To this it is owing that in all the way through Hollandd I coud not see a house beyond that of a Ministers manse at Gladsmuir. No Gentilhomes or Highland Dune wassels. Mr Allen McLean of Brolas in the Isle of Mull a Gentleman of as good Blood as any in all that country, observed that the Dl ha him if he believed there was any thing of a tolerably good Gentleman in all Holland, which Observation I leave John Hume to make his remarks on, as he can trace their blood from the Siege of Leyden even until this day, and prove that they have had their five senses in as good condition as if they had been descended of the best family in Scotland. When you come near Antwerp and in that City itself the face and apearance of things are pretty different. The City is large but thinly peopled, the Low people are very poor and ragged and The great extravagantly fantastick in their dress and equipage. It is their dayly custom to ride round the whole Streets every afternoon, bowing and saluting one another as they pass, and I am told many of them can alight from a most princely Coach and come home to dine on a little Sallad and Greens because they cannot afford a better dinner, the Coach horses and Laqueys eating up all their Revenues.

There is in that place I am told about 100 Churches and 6000 priests. I myself was in more Churches than I coud well number and in many of them Saw very admirable Pictures, but the Grandest piece they have is one of Rubens in Notre Dame Church, it is our Saviour taking down from the Cross, I never coud conceive such perfection in that Art before, the whole and each figure being so masterly designed and finished. You may possibly have heard of the Grand spire of Antwerp, I wish I could give you a Draught  of it, I never saw such a piece of Gothick Architecture in my life. It shoots to a vast heght and is just a pyramid of minute ornaments crusted and baked together to the very top, on the top of it your view is boundless it being higher than any ground within a hundred Miles of it. Nor must you be surprisd Ladies that I write about Steeples, for by that means I Instruct your Brother let you know that I was at Antwerp whether you will or not. After I had spent upwards of ten days in this place I went forward to the Camp, where I became acquainted with my officers all at once, we here form a body whose interests are all Connected together, and it is the easiest matter to fall into acquaintance. I'm extremely happy in my Colonel nor would I change him or his Regiment for any in the Service, I preached to them yesterday over a Couple of Drums, and tho it was my first I had no more fear or concern than if it had been my hundredth and nineteenth time. A few days after I came we had a General Review of all the Troops, they were all drawn out in their lines, and his Highness rode from on end of the Line to tother, and myself be sure in his Retinue, you cannot immagine how much I was roused by the Spirit Stirring Drum and the ear piercing fife with all the Pomp & Circumstance of glorious War. In the evening we had a fire of Joy on account of the Election, which was the Grandest noise I ever heard. The Dutch began upon the Left and from thence the fire came roaring and flashing along thro the whole line, for near ten or twelve Miles, that being the length of our present Camp.

I am mightily pleased with every thing in this way of life, as for the Grand Monarque he fled to Versailles, whenever he heard of my coming, which you may remember I told you would be the Case. Our Army is far from being in the desperate condition you immagined when I left Scotland. What our numbers are I cannot positively tell, but I believe we are little less than 40000, we expect the Hessians to join us in a few days. For some days after I came here the French advanced guard mounted every day in Sight of ours, and every night we were giving and receiving Alarms, but now the French have moved their Camp to Allost & we live quite peaceably how long it may be so I know not, but the Enemy seem not to chuse to hazard much fighting with us at present. And now ye Dear Beings all after amusing you with a deal of Skimble Skamble stuff, I must tell you that I long exceedingly to hear from you: I own that it is my own fault that I did not extort a Letter from you sooner by writing sooner; but that I hope you will forgive and I am sure if you are sensible of the Pleasure it will give me to hear from you you will not delay it Long. I coud send you Services from all my heart but I hope it is needless. 
Dr Jack, yours with

I am much Obliged to you for Answering the Inclosed & am Ashamed you shoud have so much trouble. The Candleshers looks very Learned but like most branchs of learning become familiar when known. I am sorry you had not the patience to take your lesson of so much consequence to your Eyes.

We have at last made our Way to this Place through many halts & much slow travelling. The Route we took by Birmingham Manchester &c considered as a Specimen of all England would give a very high Idea of your Industry & Skill in the use of Labour & consequently of your Numbers & Wealth, fully equal to the Arduous Contest in which you are engaged. By the Way You did not seem to know when I was in the South how much you owe to Lord Cornwallis. He has gained the Victories & made the Marches we see in the Gazette without consuming any Provisions from Europe. A Gentleman who is here & left him at Wilmington after having made the March  with him tells me so. He paid Friends for what was taken from them And gave Ennemies Notorious or doubtful, receipts of which they may avail themselves hereafter in case of any mistake now made to their prejudice. The heavy and almost insufferable burden of this War comes from the Necessity of feeding an Army in America from Europe why it is not published that we have done without it in this case & may in other Cases I do not conceive. But in this Zeal for National Affairs I must not forget what touches myself. In the first Place. The Pamphlet you showed to me at Windsor is but just now come to hand. Upon considering the Passage relating to me it appears that the author would fairly insinuate that Dr Piercy had a cheat put upon him at Edr in which I was a principal Actor. This puts me upon my Defence & I can do no more than plead not guilty. I trouble you with a Copy of My Declaration, if you chuse to permit me, I wish very much it should be addressed to yourself & be to so published in the most Current of the News Papers. If that  should not be proper, let the address be changed to the Publisher & if you will be so good as forward it with my signature I will be Obliged to you. Dr Piercy I believe passed some Days with Dr Blair & I do not know what may have passed between them: but I never saw him but once.

Although I do not remember the Authenticity of Ossian Poems was then Questioned, the Conversation certainly turned upon Antient Poetry: for I remember very distinctly having Shown to Dr Piercy and even left with him Some Scrap or Scraps of Poetry in the Earse Language as I myself had written them without any regard to the Supposed Orthography which I never acquired nor Attended to. If Dr Piercy is a keeper of Scraps he may have this still. Having long neglect and lost what I had picked up in this way myself I had got some such things both from Mr McPherson & from Mr Mc Lagan Chaplain to the 42d Reg't & cannot from memory distinguish which it was I gave to Dr Piercy. These Gentlemen I see are never to be convinced. If conjectural Evidence is brought they call out for direct Testimony: If Testimony they call out  for the Ipsa Corpora. If the Ipsa Corpora, then Mr Mc Pherson or some one Else has made a Translation into Earse from the Original English of Mr McPhersons Forgery. And I despair of seeing the matter cleared up to their Satisfaction as neither Original nor Scotch much less highland Testimony is to be admitted. If there be no merit in those produc they ought to have been forgotten So long ago. If there is I wish we had the Supposed Originals. The Specimens I have seen apart from The Curiosity of them are very Interesting as Efforts of the Imagination & the Heart Equal to any Poetry I know, & whether genuine or Spurious. I shall never be Ashamed of having mistaken them for Originals.

I am about to have the Roman History transcribed fair & am only Sorry I have not the means of Submitting it to your Inspection. I should be unwilling to make Booksellers risk their money without some better grounds than their belief of my Industry & Talents. Mrs Ferguson joins in best respects to Mrs Douglass. Yours most Sincerely


I have to remind Your lordship in this letter of two different Persons. The writer of it will sett his name at the end, and has no other Claim to Credit; but for mer instances of Your Lordships Goodness. The Other Person for whom he ventures to address your Lordship is Mr William Gardiner, who was some years ago admitted to Holy Orders, with a view to his becoming Chaplin to the English residing at Dantzick, where he has accordingly been with great satisfaction to himself & those with whom he was connected; Untill the Calamitous Defeat of the Prussians & the Advance of a Victorious Enemy whose threats of Destruction to every thing English on his Way, will account for Mr Gardiners Allarm & Escape to his own Country, where he has come with a Wife, and six Children. He now proposes to offer himself  at home, and hopes for a kind reception in the Bosom of that Church to which he belongs.

I was one of the persons who formerly bore Testimony to his merits and am far from having any reason to repeat the concern which I have repeatedly taken in his Wellfare. I trust you will forgive my endeavour to facilitate his Approach to your Lordships Notice. Your countenance must be of Signal benefit to him; And if I could in any degree contribute to procure it for him, should think I performed a meritorious office for a deserving Man. I am too old to be sure that my interposition may not be improper: but trust to your Lordships Indulgence. I continue to write I hope intelligibly: but my sight has so failed that it is with difficulty I read what I have written & must plead your excuse of inaccuracy.

I am sorry to find from your Letter to my Lord Milton that the dislike you formerly expressd to stay at Groninguen continues to give you so much Uneasiness. My Lord desires me to assure you that when he considered of a place proper for your Studies the only Reasons he had to prefer Groninguen arose from Circumstances advantageous to you. He thought that Retirement would be more proper and even more agreeable to yourself, than being exposed to Company who might divert you from your business & hinder the design which both he & you had in going abroad: For this reason he preferrd Groninguen to Leyden which is more frequented by our Countrymen & where they frequently interrupt & seduce one another. The Truth is that Foreigners generally attach themselves to one Another abroad which is a great disadvantage because they can reap little advantage benefit from One another & are made to neglect the business for which they went. There was another reason which made my Lord's choice of Groninguen appear extremely desireable to me, that I knew some worthy people there to whom I could recommend the Care of your health & in whose Friendship I thought you might entirely confide Which I hope you have found confirmd by the behaviour of Mr Falkner & Vandoeveren.

However I hope it will be in your power to prevent any  disadvantage My Lord apprehends in leaving the place you are now in and as you are so desirous of going to Leyden he yelds to your Inclination in that particular although his Opinion is still the Same. As this Step is entirely our own he hopes you will be upon your Guard against any ill consequence it may have. He has not desired me to repeat any of the Remarks he formerly made upon your Plan of Study although he is still of the same Opinion & spoke from the Experience he has had in the Study you are now upon.

It distressed him greatly to find you still under some degree of Uneasiness, but he trusts to time for the Removing it & to the assurances you will always have of his Tenderness as well as Care & attention to whatever concerns you. Any thing from myself upon this occasion may be extremely improper, but I cannot help repeating the sincere concern which I & your friends here take in your welfare. We had no occasion for professor Rcker's Testimony to satisfy us as to your ability in your Studys and hope you will be able to make Leyden more agreeable to yourself as well as equally profitable in your business. I am 

I received your Letter from Dover and forwarded the inclosed to Lord Milton who since I have been here has showed me a Letter of yours from Paris.

We are all very glad to find that your health is better and that you are so fortunate in the Duke of Bedfords attention and Civilities, Mr Forrester who is in this Country has written to second your former Recommendations. My Lord Approves of your following Doctor Pringles advice and thinks it very happy that you found so good an opportunity of going to France. He tells me that he will make up full Captains to pay to you from the date of your last Commission till you come to have it in the Regiment. The Regimentals of an English Officer are probably the finest Cloaths you need to wear even at Paris but in case the Stay you make there should be attended with a little extraordinary expence, he will make no difficulty of allowing you Fifty or Sixty pounds besides your ordinary Allowance for that purpose: but he thinks that you should not stay long there, that after two or three  weeks you shoud take your Leave of the Duke of Bedford in order to prosecute the Intention of your Journey.

I coud not tell who was Agent to your Regiment, but Mr Coutts I suppose will manage your Credite for you both with the Agent and in France. I beg you will write to let us know how you do.

Your Friends here were a little perplexed at first upon hearing you was going to France as they knew nothing of it from yourself at first, but I excused you on Account of the hurry & uncertainty you were in to the last moment. My Lord Milton was a little out of order the day I saw him which is the reason he desires me to inform you of the above particulars. This Country furnishes nothing new and I have got out of reach of London news. Your friends are all well. Your Horses leg continued a little sore and I was afraid to Trust him in so long a Journey. I left him with Home and took a Horse of Clerks which he had.


If your other friends are as Slow in writing as I have been you will imagine that you are neglected. I have for some years taken the Liberty to abstain from writing where I do not hope to produce some Effect & even where I intend writing habit & lazyness frequently get the better of me. Your Brother has shown me your last letter, & I hope that the matters may turn out as you wish them. Sometime in January last Coll. Mc Dowal sent me a Message to meet him on the Subject of a Commission from you. He told me that he intended to quit the Regiment but not the Service having a view to Change into the Dragoons; that he promised you the first offer & that you had referred him to me; He demanded 4. 000 Guineas. And was at that time on his way to London where he now is. I carried his Proposal to Mr Fletcher & Mr Alston who after considering what was to be done in the particular State of Lord Miltons Affairs determined that the Money shoud be advanced on your Security & your Brother the Coll's. And Referred the terms & the Conduct of the whole Transaction to Colls Fletcher & Mc Dowal at London. I thought  the affair woud have been Speedily concluded between them: but it seems some Missunderstanding has arisen to delay it which I cannot thoroughly understand either from Coll. Fletchers or Coll. Mc Dowals letters. There is a regulation of the Price of Commissions been lately Made to Which I imagine Coll. Fletcher wants to have this Bargain restricted altho' he does not directly say so, And Coll. Mc Dowal seems to expect 4000. He mentions offers that are made to him. But we do not hear of any formed intention to put a Lieut. Coll. over your head. Mr Fletcher sent for me a few days ago to Communicate your Letter & to desire that I woud write to Coll. Mc Dowal Informing him that he woud not insist on the new Regulation in the Article of the Price & was willing to agree to the 4000 but that he must insist nobody shoud be put over you while you are in actual Service & willing to purchase that he had written to the Secretary at War upon the report of such an Intention from you. That he only meant to prevent your Receiving any Injustice that whenever the terms were Settled with Coll. Mc Dowal he woud immediately join him in applications to the War office to have the affair concluded. This is the State of the matter at this Present Moment, My letter is gone & I hope  will bring an Answer that will contain no Difficultys.

I waited for some Conclusion in order to write you upon it but it is of more consequence to tell you how matters are while they remain in Suspence than even after they are concluded for they will then discover themselves. Your Brother & Mr Alston considering circumstances have acted kindly and readily and are dissposed to continue to do so, & I am perswaded that no hinderance will arise from them. Tho I am a bad writer I am so unreasonable as to wish to receive letters. Your simplest commands in any matter or any account of your wellfare will be most agreeable to me. And whether you hear from one or no you may depend on my not neglecting any thing else.


I received your letter lately and am sorry to find that the Climat is still at War with your health. I hope you will have no more attacks before your leave is obtained. It has been applied for some time ago & your claim is now Supported by such reasons as are irresistable. The Necessity of coming to settle your Affairs over & above your health & your having served your turn in the West Indies. You will probably have heard of your Father's Death. His faculties were very much impaired if not intirely gone almost two years & death came at last by the Slowest degrees. He has settled the Whole of his Personal Estate on his younger Children by which you are now Rich & in condition to make any purchase in the Army that offers. He always reckoned you in his Debt for the money advanced to buy your majority & pay Other accounts he often said so to me & did not forget it in making his Settlements.  He has ordered that your Brother The Colonel & Miss Fletcher shall draw each of them two Thousand pounds to put them as he seems to have understood it on a footing with you And The remainders to be equally shared with you. Mr Alston informs me that you will probably receive after all about eight thousand pounds. This will enable you to purchase when occasion offers & in the meantime will give a considerable addition to your income without encroaching on your Capital, Which I earnestly entreat you most carefully to Avoid. There is no fortune can bear the want of Oeconomy without it the Mogul would be a Bankrupt in six Months. Your Father is thought by most People here to have paired the Elder Brothers Estate very closs. He has left to the younger Children not only Brunstane but some farms likewise that were purchased contiguous to Salton. He has even left to them the Furniture, Plate, and even the Library in Salton House. I confess that I was sorry for this last Article And was  very much pleased to hear that Miss Fletcher had immediatly given up all claim to the Library to your Elder Brother. I feel it like a piece of proper Respect to your Ancestors & promised her that I would mention it to you. I shoud be very sorry that Andrew Fletcher of Saltons books were Sold away from the Family or that the Possessor of his Estate which you yourself may one day be shoud be obliged to buy them over again: but you will impute my saying any thing at all on the Subject to the freedom with which my very sincere regard inspires me.

If you have not written to your Coll. for his leave and Assistance in Obtaining The Kings  for your return I beg that you do it soon. I have heard nothing of Col: Mc Douall for some time. I believe he was glad to gain time: but in reality he coud not Obtain leave to sell out Otherwise he woud have had without hesitation all the money he Asked: but you can now act here & every where else for yourself. I am in hopes of seeing you Soon. Dr Sr your most

In compliance with your request intimated by Peter Roberston. Carlyle has procured the Duke of Buccleughs Roman Sword & I here with inclose a Shape with the Dimensions of it both Blade & Hilt in Paper. You have three patterns. N 1 is a Sword which I got made lately at Birmingham from a Pattern the Sword Slipper has by him & from which he told me that he had supplied some Corps in the Service. It cost twelve shillings but what is mettal in the hilt is plated &c. It weighs without Scabbard as you see marked upon the Paper one pound twelve ounces.

 N 2. Is the shape & Dimensions of the Duke of Buccleughs Sword The Blade seems to be Roman but The Hilt Gothick or Modern.  It weighs without the Scabbard two pounds four ounces and a half. N 3 is the Shape of a Weapon I got made by a Cutler here from the Idea I had of Antiques & drawings &c from imitating too closely a wooden Pattern I gave him. The Cutler made the Blade too heavy & the Hilt was to be made proportional so that the whole weighs no less than four pounds ten ounces & a half. But to make up for this inconvenience it is a Most tremenduous Weapon at either thrust or Cut or rather knock down. My Idea for the use of Such Swords to a modern Soldier was to have in Place of a Scabbard a Parma or oval shield to hang by a Hook to a little shoulder Belt reaching from the right shoulder to the left arm pit. That this shield should be broad enough to cover the Part of the Arm that carries it from the Elbow to the end of the Clenched fist. This I think in a man of considerable Size may be about 16 Inches & in length it  may be about two feet. To Stretch the Arm forward will be enough to parry &c. The Pattern I have got made is much too strong & heawy resists a Ball &c being a Plate of Iron & two plys of bend leather. The one I mean to have made for the Birmingham Sword N 1. Will be only a Plate of tinned Iron with one ply of bend Leather enough to resist a Stab or a Cut. I have the Project of a Shield which is to include the Knapsack & resist a Musket Ball but this must be for Some Other Paper.

You will expect to hear what is become of my tottering Nerves & Fibres. As I continued to mend at Bath so I have gone on since my Arrival in this Country & am wonderfully restored to my ordinary feelings so that making some allowance for the Diet you saw me keep & which I still probably must continue I have much animal Strength & my poor Pittance of Intellectual Strength in Statu quo. I mean to  use either however but Sparingly. I am getting my History transcribed And will begin as soon as I can with Safety to put My Lectures in writing but cannot set my Face to the labour of Delivering them this winter. So much for these matters.

I saw McPherson about five minutes when I was at London & our Other Correspondents about a certain bussiness not at all. I am something affraid your Announciation at Mr Edens may have been Mismanaged. I wrote to that effect as I hoped in time to reach before you: but perhaps not & if you are to be at Dublin the Effect if Material may be still to come. Your Friends here are all well. Poor John Home is much mortifyed at some feeling of neglect. I pray you correct it. He is gone to the highlands to see more of the Scene of the never ending War 45. I have brought the Picture from Sir Joshua Reynolds it is a Master Piece & greatly Admired. 

I have just now received the inclosed Packet from Lord Glencairn & tho I flatter myself I may see you before you set out for the South I send this packet to find you if possible immediatly that I may not be obliged to send it after you by post. I was glad to be told in answer to my last inquiries that you was gone to the Country.

Here is weather which puts an end to my Charioteering, I am affraid, for the Season. I have waited a few days to see if it woud change but as what I can use only in fair weather may serve at Boguhan as a provision against foul weather I detain it no longer. We are devouring your fruit, young & old, The Season must have been better with you than here. Otherwise it would not have grown & ripened So well without Fire & Glass neither of which I recollect you employ.

J. Home is to be a week or two longer  in the Country, as I am told, & soon after his return here will go to London. We are most of us Sick in this house but for Sick people are doing pretty well. The bearer will carry your Commands to Town. I am  

you may believe that Since I received your intimation of a desire to be lodged for the winter Somewhere in this Side of the Town I have not neglected to inquire if there was any Sort of House to be had. I have not been very Successful: but am this Moment told that Mrs Betty Johnstones house in what we call the Society very near hear is to be left furnished. It is a Storey in a Land. The Rooms are a Dining Room Small drawing Room two bed Chambers & a Kitchen as I am told very well furnished. The Neighbours that is to Say the People over head are too two Old Women who neither Spin nor make any noise whatever. I have made no inquiry about the Rent but shall if you desire it. John Home has been returned to Edr sometime and is  gone Again for a few Days to burry his Father in Law Mr Home at Foggo uncertain when he may return. The Old horse Arrived safe upon his own Legs. And when it is a tolerable day I almost repent having returned your chaise so faithfully. But winter is now so much in earnest with us that it is likely I shall not drive any more before Lady Day. Who is here but General Clerk. My Infirmities absolutely prevent my trotting after him or meeting him any where except when he calls for a little here: but I hope for a compleat set down from him before he goes away. Send me your Orders if you have any about the House it is possible you may have been in it perhaps to see John Johnstone who used to be there with his Sister. I am & most  


Mrs Johnstones Maid was here looking for you once or twice last night. We could tell her only not to be out the way this morning, which I suppose she will mind.

Mr Thomson on the Calton Hill is empowered to let the house & will inform of the Terms.

I wished to have got Speech of you yesterday to beg the Favour you would help at a party which is to be here at dinner on Friday next. The Company is Mrs Mure & one of her Daughters the Principal & his Family, And for your encouragement one of his Sons is come from India lately by Land & can tell of the Turks & Saracens so do not fail to engage yourself.

I find the Doctors or their Patients defer our excursion to Pennicuick sine die. And of this I think necessary to send this notice to Milton house that in case you be in Town the mere desire of giving us your Company should not carry you out of your way & give us the Mortification of missing you as well as Pennycuik in this fine weather.

My Man is just now returned from Bankhead having committed Such a Blunder as requires my going there tomorrow morning: but I wish to know whether I may hope to see you at any Other time, if not; This call to the Country must be neglected rather than be out of your way when you call. I should set out about 8 in the morning & return before four to Receive J. Home & General Mc Nab in the Evening. If I dont hear from you may I venture to think that you do not go before thursday  or Friday, so that I may find you at Milton House some of those days.

I received your Letter here a few nights ago & sent the inclosed to be put in the Post Office at Edinburgh next morning. I am much Obliged to you for the Attention &c you have bestowed on my Affair, and Am Satisfied with the account you give. The Principle upon which I proceed is implicit faith. If the undertakers are at ease I am satisfied: & with the immediate Prospect which you give of our seeing you shall for the present Say no more.

I am glad you remember the suggestion of some years back & should be still better pleased to think you in Earnest. Panurge is a Sage Counsel & his Scruples lead to the Point: So proceed. We have Still some  Sunshine here: but such a North east wind for Some days as requires more Cloathing than ever I carried in the coldest day in Winter & it puts me more in Mind of the See Blink which we read in the history of Green Land than of the Pine Apples you mention. We have better thing Viz. Eggs Butter Cakes & Cabbages & I have forgot every Complaint: but what the Soil & the Climat & the prospect of bad Crops of hay and Corn Occasion. It may be matter of curiosity to you to know that I have sold my house in Argyle Square for the house which I carried you to see at the Siennes, Property for Property without any odds or Ballance. And tho the Conveyances are not exchanged the Bargain is concluded as far as exchange of Missives can Accomplish it. My Object is  to have a farm yard at Edinburgh to communicate with this place. And exchange Dung for Hay & Corn &c &c &c. But since I am on the Subject of Property please know that I have three Mares & two of them taken  the Horse So that by this time next year I may have five Mares besides a She Ass that carrys her Load to town two or three times a week. But this is doing more tha you desired. I was only to tell you that you Letter came Safe which I hope the  will also be in due time. I am  

Least I should not have the pleasure of seeing you tomorrow and because the warning is already too short, I send to beg the favour that you will dine here on Monday next with Mrs Mure who nothwithstanding the lameness of one of her Horses has promised to come. I have endeavoured to rouse the Gallantry of John Home to bring her in his Carriage. If you had any thing in Town besides a Skittish Mare I should certainly  have applied to you. I am  

I am sorry that your Map, in emptying my Pockets, has been mislaid so that I cannot find it. I will continue to look for it: but that will be little consolation if it be not found when wanted.

I dont know what to say of this man, it is very teasing & yet this Edition is rather more Correct than I should have expected. It is scarcely worth while to think of it any more. It is strange that he cant get a thing printed in the same portable form with the pamphlet it answers. If it were necessary to do any more I would try to find out who prints the Actual Grubs that are hawked in the Street & so employ the same hands-but I doubt it is not worth more trouble. We shall consider it more at meeting.

I am exceedingly pleased with the Sketch & the Appendix, I have touched it with my pen where that appeared requisite but you will judge of the propriety of keeping my Corrections &c &c. I send it back with the least possible delay.

I hope you dont intend to travel today. I had enough of the Sun yesterday & mean to try what repose & shade will do today. I wish you would trust your Dinner here today at three OClock. Dr Black is commonly here & Dr Hutton often in the Afternoon.

This is to remind you of your promise to dine here at three O Clock. But more especially to let you know that Dr Hutton with all his impatience is to be of the Party. I told him of the Moor-fowls to tempt him. And so, he said, I shall have five minutes swallowing to make up for an hour or two waiting. Range matters if possible so as to dissappoint him of his waiting.


I will do my utmost to be with you on Thursday, & have not at present reason to doubt my Ability. It was mortifying that I could not be with you to day: but I must Sacrifice every thing to college Bussiness for which every slight cold almost dissables me altho I should feel no Other Symptom.


This is to let you know that I called at Milton house some days ago to inquire whether you could do us the favour to meet the Poet Burns and some Others at Dinner here tomorrow. I had his works in my pocket to show you & still continue in the mind that he gives the most indubitable proofs of Genius, which I hope will be some inducement to your coming here tomorrow.

I write that this Letter may ly for your inspection any time you arrive whether tonight or tomorrow Morning. I have more than one Letter from Jn Home who has been Swearing to the Identity of a Packet  be carried from hence on My Account.

I called to beg the favour that you will take your chance of a Dinner at the Sciennes tomorrow any time between three and Four. John Johnstone is now here and has promised to meet you with all his London news. I have also to tell you that I have a line from Sir John McPherson with news of an easy deliverance from his Tryal at the expence of 3000. He seems to be relieved of a great Load and breathes easily. Be sure you come tomorrow.

I hope you mean to be here today at Dinner. Andrew Stuart is in Town & if he should not be engaged I will try to make him meet you if not we cannot help it. Mr Pulteney continued last night in the resolution of departing this morning.

We came home last night & I would have been to call for you this morning if I had not begun my motions with a Travel to the west end of the new Town which disabled me both in point of time & strength to decline so far from my straight course home in the opposite direction. I write this least I should come too late in the morning to let you know I hope Bob Adam will dine here tomorrow on your Hare & Goose & will like them the better that you are here to Answer for their goodness so I beg no trivial accident may deprive us of the pleasure. 

As I trust David Hume the Professor is your acquaintance give me leave to ask the favour of your Company here to dinner on Tuesday next to meet the said Dd Hume & one of our Rumps of Corned Beef &c &c in doing which you will greatly Oblige your most

I have transferred Dd Hume to Wednesday for which day I hope you are ready to engage yourself. And that John Home also will be more free to come than on Tuesday the day on which he was engaged with you to Mr Rannies.

All this I hope will be more clearly discussed at Dinner if you favour us with the Sundays Call, Doctor Black declines exposing himself: but Hutton will I hope make his appearance at the usual time.

In my way to visit the Hudsons bay colony on Leith Walk with Dr Hutton we met them coming up to Town. The principal Curiosity among them Sails for the Orkneys on Thursday: but I prevailed upon them to dine here tomorrow & shall be happy if you can be of the Company. Your most Obedient 

I may be dead: but will not Otherwise fail to make one of the Party you mention for Saturday next in the mean time I am 

I long much for the return of old habits & Practices, was twice in the street this week with intention to reach Frederic Street, if I could; but found it rather too much with the prospect of coming back on foot. I am however very Ostensible within these Walls & have for some time ventured to the Parlour at Dinner time. If you have lost the habit of coming here of a Sunday & trusting to such fare as ours we shall go into mourning but I hope not.


I have notice of My Sons Josephs appointment a Cadet of Artillery to India & I feel a necessity of accompanying him to London that he may either take his passage in the Ships of this Season, or take benefit of the leave given by the Court of Directors to remain at Woolwich or some other Academy for a year the better to qualify him for the Service. I shall carry my Manuscript with me & so relieve you for the present of farther wading thro it. I think to be gone tomorrow or next day.


I doubt both the Grey mare & I will be puzled to repay our Obligations at Boghuan. She never could come to me at a more favourable time, I have pasture for ten or twelve Beasts & am made to expect that I shall cut a thousand Stone of Hay: Such a Stock as yours I know well is apt to overgrow & be felt grievously at a Pinch of Backward Grass, my first impulse was to take away the old mare as soon as possible: but on recollection that, besides her first unexpected Production, she is possibly nursing or to nurse a Second, this may not be proper. I might relieve you of the Colt at any rate if I knew how to have him Conveyed but I am affraid he will neither lead nor Carry. Be so good as order what should be done & if any careful person could be found to lead the little animal here, I would willingly pay Costs. All the above Profusion of Grass is not  at the Castle as you Suppose but at a new post I have just taken having evacuated the Castle. I remained there till near Whitsunday in the same state of uncertainty I mentioned to you about Christmas: The Grounds there were coming to be let, but without any prospect of my being accommodated on any reasonable terms. The neighbouhood of a little Town brought competitors with whom, it would have been very imprudent for me to contend. The Land Lords Passion was for Grassum rather than Rent & tho I offered 707 Grassum & a Rent of 22 for about forty Acres part Rocky & covered by Wood. I took occasion of the Report of a higher offer to withdraw mine & laid hold of this little Settlement at Hallyards upon the Manor on the other Side of the Tweed from Nidpath, where I am accommodated at once as above with a Small House, indeed; but excellent Offices & some fine Pasture of which some small part inclosed. Letters directed to Nidpath will find me but my new direction is at Hallyards By Peebles.

you have laid a difficult task upon me; to give way to my feelings & not to appear unworthy of your generous conduct towards me. I should indeed be unworthy if my feelings lay dormant untill this Occasion. You must it seems have heard of the difficulties I met with in trying to settle my Son in his Profession as a Writer at Edinburgh. There was a series of dissappointments & fruitless Attempts to Serve him, such as Obliged us at least to abandon the Project altogether, and has almost made me despond of any thing that can be proposed for him, to which his present inability to avail himself of your generous Intention contributes not a little. My Son had Friends who were kindly Occupied in his behalf. They projected a new line of Life for him connected with the Army but in respect to Bussiness rather Civil than Military. In this Line they hoped to assist him.  Of this I could not judge; but considering some of those who proposed it could not think it altogether Visionary.

The Scheme required in the outset that he should be a military man And that he should serve two years before any Such Appointment as that in View could be Obtained. In prosecution of this Plan Sir James Pulteney obtained a Commission of Second Lieu't in the 21st Regiment from the Goodness of H. R. H. The Commander in Chief. And My Son from his Experience as a Volunteer Office made no indifferent Battalion Man. Soon after he had joined his Regiment the Earl of Selkirk proposed to take him as Private Secretary on his mission to America. This after some months expectation Misgave & he returned to Quarters. Soon after another Friend General Don commanding at Jersey invited him to be military Secretary at his Post: but the Establishment of Such an Office it seems was to be Obtained at Head Quarters & I doubt is not thought expedient as he has been detained many Months in Suspence at London. But I beg pardon for troubling you  with so long a Story, much less might have sufficed to Show that your Generous proposals tho so well devised for his benefit when in the Profession of a Writer at Edinburgh is now only matter of Gratitude on us.

He is now Military & whatever is thought of for him must be in that Line or not inconsistent with it. And I hope you have not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction you Allude to.

It will be Some Consolation to embrace you once before I go hence and in this hope I shall Still remain for a Little.

I write now to account if possible for a Strange dreaming Epistle which I wrote to you yesterday. With such Eyes as mine are become I have often to guess at what I read. With no better information upon the first glance, I set about answering your kind letter. The words MrJohn Home Officer & at your Command struck me with a Fancy that you had bargained with Mr John Home for his Office to be at my Command. For whom? But for my Son lately a Writer in Edinburgh. Hence my long Account of his case. My esteem of your proposal as being well devisd for him in his former Situation: but not being applicable now; my hope that you had not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction. In Short it is scarcely Credible that a Head so Old as mine could run away so fast with a mere fancy, when the real matter was open for inspection. But so it was. I wrote seald and dispatched  my letter without looking a Second time at yours. Soon after however I did what I shoud have done before I wrote & finding how my head had run wild have been Anxious enough for its Reputation with you. Your kind offer to Strengthen my hands in the present possible Exigence of my Family is matter of grateful feeling which I shall not attempt to express. And I trust that you will not Suppose me to be actuated by any Saucy Conceit of Independence When I say that whatever may become of the Subject at last, it is now better placed in your hands than it would be in mine. The Publick and the World have been more propitious to me in point of Provision than I deserved.

It is true that I neither eat nor drank like a Prodigal: but a restless Spirit of Activity engaged me in what was no less improvident, a Contest with the Surface of the Earth itself, when it had nothing to Offer but Cold & hunger. And that I have not been abandoned to these at last, is more owing to the Providence of my friends than to my own. I am now far from being indigent or even much Straightened. I am out of Debt, or nearly clear of that in which my  Sons Affairs engaged me. And it is not fit that I should be encouraged to spend now, even on my children what had better be spared for future occasions. Your Proposal is matter of Obligation which I neither do nor wish to decline. Nor do I fear that the effects of any kindness on your Part would engage me in any thing that I should not do from long confirmed Inclination. If any occasions called for Aid I shoud be proud to receive it on the Quarter from which it is now Offered. With the Hope I expressed yesterday of being yet once more able to embrace you & yours. 

Here is yet another Letter. Since yesterday I have an unexpected Account of Debts to be payed for my Son which allarms me much, And the relief you have been so good as Offer will be most Acceptable.

If your Agent pay to Mansfield Ramsay and Co and send me their receipt to My Account, I shall still with the little Strength I have left be able to Surmount My Difficulties.

Having heard yesterday that an Answer was coming out to the reasons against a Scotch Militia I sent for it, & got the Inclosed. I have since shown it no Mr N   who is of the same opinion with me, that Such fine paper & Print &c is unsuitable to the Spirit of the performance, that it even mars the effect. He thinks it worth while to have another impression without loss of time that it should be in coarse Paper &c and Sold for a penny, no matter he says whether the Sale pay Costs that there  is some Subscription fund to which the ballance of expence may be charged &c &c. Upon this Idea I have Scratched a few touches for your use & correction. If you approve they may go into the impression proposed. N  is very desirous that it should be in the hands of the Cadies & sold for a penny at the Door of the Parliament house on Tuesday Morning. I hope that this will find you Safely arrived in Town. I am very glad you have had so good a day. We of this house hear much of your Olla on Tuesday but dont yet know whether we Should come to it or no.

Dugald Stuart was here to make an Appointment  to take us up in a Coach which I have agreed to at hazard tho upon counting noses I wish you may have room for every body whom the reputation of an Olla may Attract. Yours most Affectionately

This great bussiness is effected at last and I who never had a home till now must prepare to go home to Edinburgh O Dulcia Verba

I was with David last night to perswade him to go with me and if I coud conclude any thing from his hesitation I woud have hopes of bringing him but the Vis inertiae which I am now to pay to so great a regard to is all against me, & tho he went so far as to say that he wished he was in Scotland to put and end to all consultation about it yet I doubt much of his moving, he is gone out of Town to Stuarts for some days, & his want of resolution perplexs me, for Stowe wants me to go down with him & I cannot ingage till I know of Davids motions, I believe it will be proper for me to let Stowe set out & tell David I will be dissappointed of a companion if he does not go. I cannot yet fix upon a time  for being at Berwick. I have the Bussiness of some days besides a Visit or two to the Countrey. Lord Bute Garrick whom I have not yet seen Dido etiam qui rusticat & magnos timet Lucinae labores sed  vanae credo formidines.

You seem to expect Vigorous measures upon the present Alarm. I dont know what a grain or two more of fear will do, but we do not seem to be in a hurry here with any thing that points at arming the Countrey. We trust to the Fleet while the season keeps moderate weather & will allow our Ships to ly on the Ennemys Coast: by September we expect troops from Gibraltar &c & those who are at Home compleated enough to repell a French embarkation. We are again in expectation of a Battle in Westphalia. One Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland was advised by the French Minister at the Hague not to go to England in this troublesome time or if she did he offered her letters of recommendation to Monsr Chevert

 of Carlyle's affair

Clerk as per last with more bussy with the affairs of the Nation than people to whom they are entrusted. I will writec when I know of my time for setting out if I go he will desire our meeting at his house &  be pleasant, but I must lose as little time as possible on the road.

Make my comp to Mr & Mrs Home.

I find you have prevailed at last & if I were of opinion that successu crescat honestum I should shoud now make some addition to my stile. I may be Silent but the little Children will some day bless you for what I may by these means if I live  be able to do for them. I shoud have written immediately on receiving yours but wished to be at leisure when I wrote the inclosed letters to make as sure as I coud not to make use of any improper expression. I have yet told nobody here haveing Missed David when I called upon him for that purpose. I shall endeavour to see him & Baron Mure this Morning I know that David will be Almost as Glad as myself. I had a line from Sir John Dalrimple Last night in which he tells me that Sr Grey Cooper upon making his application found the affair was already  done & wished me joy. I shall in a few Days beg the Favour of Sr John to offer My respects and acknowledgements to Sr Grey Cooper.

You will be pleased to hear that the sense of this Countrey where it has been taken is every where favourable to the Militia. This meanest County in Scotland was keept from making any declaration. I hear only of two Objections to the Bill from those who profess to approve of the measure. The first Objection is to the Clause which permits the Army to enlist Militia men in Scotland. The Second is to the Substitution of Commissioners of for Lords Lieutennant. The first point I hope will be given up by The Friends of Government. And the second I woud fain hope likewise may upon farther thoughts be found an immaterial point.

We had but seven at dinner yesterday at the Poker & wanted one of the number required to make an Election but with much ado Got Bob Chalmers to come after Dinner & so Elected The Lord Advocate & Captn Elliott two  good acquisitions. A Number of us have had copys lately sent of a Pamphlet on the Rights of this Countrey against the Claims of America. I never had any doubt on any of the rights Established in this Pamphlet. The only Question with me was what this Countrey in Wisdom ought to do in the Situation at which the Colonys were Arrived. This Question becomes every Day more complicated & more difficult. I hope that some plan of Operation going to the bottom of all difficultys will be concerted & Steadily Pursued. But that is the Affair of those it may concern.

O pray you to make Lord North & Mr Robinson understand that I am truly Affected with the honour of their Patronage as being persons so justly Possessed of the General Affection of the Nation.

I am Such a Correspondent you see as usual & for some little time have been in doubt where a letter might find you. But David showed me a line from you today to day by which you desire to have your letters sent to London. And after such a preamble you may guess that my Silence proceeded in part from want of matter here. The Loss of one Friend & the danger of another are not Subjects that make people in haste to write. David I am affraid loses Ground he is chearful & in Good Spirits as usual: but I confess that my hopes from the effects of the turn of the Season towards Spring have very much abated.

A Journey to the South Particularly to  Bath has been mentioned to him but the thoughts of being from home, hurried at Inns, and exposed to irregular meals, are very dissagreeable to him. Black is of opinion that he ought not to expose himself to any thing that is so. And that for his Complaints the Tranquillity and usual Amusement of his own Fire Side with proper Diet is his best Regimen so that I think the thoughts of any journey are at present laid aside. I hope we shall see you here soon. And that your Attentions will contribute to preserve what we can so ill spare.

I am sorry to tell you that we receive the repulse of the Militia Bill with great Tranquillity & for ought I know the treatment of which our National Pretensions have met with from Baulkers in the house of Commons in the same manner.

I hope that we may be able to return to the Charge but I confess that I do not foresse  a more favourable opportunity. I see that I begin to reap the first fruits of my Pension not in money but in the news paper Abuse. This I confess when I have seen some people bear it ill, I have sometimes wished to try how I could Swallow, & so I shall may behave enough. I finish at College in about 10 days but you will find me at Edinburgh. As we have got a small house in Sight of our present Habitation, where we mean to continue all Summer for the Conveniency of the Children Going to School

Damn the actors that have damned the play, and think no more of it till you have time to do what may be necessary for the press, and then consider what is to be done with it. Besides the accidents you mention, I can conceive that the substitution of a love-interest for an interest of state, which the audience expected from the name of Alfred, may have baulked them; when they appeared to languish, you certainly did right to withdraw it.

I am put in mind by Creech of the meeting at Fortune's to-day, but dare not venture there. I have been colded for some days & am thrown into a Sweat by my Lecture which disqualifies me for any place but my  own fire or a little walk before I shift. This I am going to take & beg if General Campbell be in town you will explain my Absence to him.

I was Far from wishing, that you should take to write to me in your Illness: And took measures by means of a correspondence which I solicited from Home with Miss Johnstone, to have such accounts as were passing in the Family. It is now proper, that I acknowledge the receipt of your Letter. And the Inclosed discharge for Joseph of which I will not say much. I should long since have perceived the generosity of your mind. If neither my Family nor myself had been concerned, as we are in the Effects of it. The Boy himself if matters do not mend, will shed tears  for us all.

If your disorder complaint resist the Medicine That was thought proper for it, we must Submit. Altho Something is yet to be expected from  So much original Vigour of mind & of body: From my age, & infirmities you should have been the Surviver: but what is a Prolongation of life, for days, or weeks, or Years unless one had a Specific object, for which to live, under every disadvantage. I am fully persuaded we shall meet thereafter And know one Another, that you will know your Brother, & that I shall know you both: but in what manner, it is Probable we can know now no more. Than the child unborn can Guess what will become of him in the world he is about to enter.

For the Future, as well as the Present, it is our joy, That we are in the hands of That Power, by wch The Universe is formed, & Reserved with Supreme wisdom, & Goodness. May his May his Blessed Influence rest upon your Mind: & give you the joyful empression That you never can for a Moment be separated from him: you will probably read with Calmness what I never write wt Some Emotion  more a weakness Than the feeling proper upon The Occasion. I will be difficult for me to resist The desire of seeing you: & if I should indulge it soon or at a Milder Season, I beseech you to consider it no otherwise than a Message sent to enquire after your health. I shall dread to meeting your worthy Sister & your family more than yourself: but I wd fain hope they may have more occasion to rejoice before I See them.


I should have acknowledged your Favour along with the Russian Performance sooner but when I was about to do so a Letter to the same Effect from Dr Brewster telling me how the parcel came to him & that he had troubled with  of the Copies for me seemed as he was a Stranger to call for my first Acknowledgement so that he had the first Post & as I do not see to write more than once a day you have been deferred to the Second.

On p. 2 the handwriting is continued vertically, and it is as tremulous as in the last few letters, clearly from the hand of a very old man, endowed with imperfect sight.

Never was Parent less  able to distinguish his ofspring than I am in this Instance. All the Seasoning of Hallyards canno even make out my Name on the Title Page. Dr Brewster calls it my Principles but you guess Better that it is the Text Book under its last title Institutes. Dr. Bewster is your Acquaintance & I wish to be more known to him to this you can help on occasion. Observe how I have mismanaged this Letter in my blindness beginning on a wrong page but I am nevertheless with much Regard your most obedient humbl Servant


I know well how much I might rely on General Campbells kindness: but as I have been at some pains to bring matters to this point would rather borrow afterwards than not pay now So shall be glad to see you on Monday Evening as you propose.

Upon a Representation made by some of the Merchants of London trading to New York & Rhode Island; that the Commissioners of His Majestys Customs had declined clearing out any Goods for those Ports, as the Term limited for the Operation of the Proclamations issued for opening that Trade (being to the 1st of June 1779) must be expired before such Goods could Arrive at New York or Rhode Island; I am Commanded by their Excellencies His Majestys Commissioners appointed to treat &c of the means of quieting the Dissorders in America, to transmit the inclosed Copies of their Proclamations of the 22d April to continue in Force to the 1st of Decr 1779 their Former Proclamations relating to the Trade of New York & New Port in Rhode Island, & which were otherwise about to expire on the 1st of June; In order that these Instruments may if thought proper be communicated by the Lords Commissioners of The Treasury to His Majestys Board of Customs.

I have this moment received the inclosed Estimate by which the joiner work required in my Class amounts to 5. 19, which with about four pound allowed for Paper & Other repairs will I hope put the place in some decent order. This I hope the Comittee are sensible it needs & I beg that you will take the trouble to move the Council that I may be allowed ten pounds for this Purpose. I am Sr

I am now Charged by my Colleagues of this University to Return your Lordship their most Sincere thanks for the mark of your Attention and Esteem which they have received & which they will always think it a happiness to merit.

You will permit me My Lord in Particular to express my sense of the honour you have done me & to offer in excuse of my long silence my not having had an opportunity sooner of communicating your Lordships letter & presenting the Tournaline Stones at a public meeting.

I have made some trials of their force, and there is only one in which I once thought upon being heated with Scalding Water that the Electric power was Sensible. Among the numbers which are picked up in account of their appearances no doubt many must fail. I have the Pleasure to Observe that many of your Lordships Friends in this Countrey are well. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect My Lord

Your Queries came at hand yesterday; but in our Situation a day or two must intervene before we can Answer.

Ansr 1st I began by taking the Bath two or three mornings in the week, & as I found it agree with me came to take it every day. At first I remained in the Bath about fifteen minutes: but gradually prolonged the time.

2nd The hour of Bathing is in the morning, & the Patient returns to Bed that he may cool gradually.

3d My Apothecary's Name was Hay, a plain man without pretensions or Quackery.

4th I never used Dry Pumping.

Mr Hay prescribed a dose of Castor Oil to prepare for Bathing: but it did not operate & I went on nothwithstanding.

Whoever goes with the Single prescription of Bathing will scarcely need any direction but that of the Chairmen and Guides.

The Bath I used is called the Queen's Bath.

That which is called the Kings immediately over the Spring seemed too hot. 

There are Covered Baths made at a great expence with Marble Compartments for People who like to pay dear for what they have. I tried them but returned dissatisfied dispirited and felt colded for a day or two afterwards, so that I believe the Choice of the Queen's Bath is Material. It is open to the Air. Ladies, Gentlemen, Guides &c &c heep stalking about Pell Mell.

I felt or fancyed my Cure was advancing every time I bathed, & so I hope will Mr Stuart, or if it should come insensibly that will be alike in the end, & that he will make as good a Retreat into Old Age as I have done, that is shake off all responsibility and bless every day that he lives. I know nobody to whom mere existence should be more pleasing than to him. Let him have something to do that will neither confine nor fatigue, & then mere existence in the Company of God is exquisite. I have learned of late to call him The Principle of Existence, & in this denomination he can never be away: but I do not understand that the French Chemists have yet admitted him among their Principles. The Girls join me in best wishes. You should be well enough to make them a visit, the good weather is yet come and I am persuaded  The Excursion would do you good.

Give me leave to recommend to your Esteem & Good Offices my Friend Mr Gardiner who tells me his Friends in your University have proposed him for the Degree of Doctor of Laws. He has been long known to me by the best Character & I should have gladly Supported him in the Same Pretensions here: but his Application is so far gone with you as to make it necessary the matter should come to an Issue, which I make no doubt you will find Sufficient Reason to make the most favourable for him. I am Dear Sir, with the most Sincere Regard your most Obedient


A letter from me may possibly surprise you. I was very sorry to be obliged to leave Aberdeen without preparing you more gradually for the subject of it; but I hope that you will overlook every circumstance in the manner, for the sake of the very sincere good intention from which I act. The esteem and the love with which I am seized to you make me earnestly desire a much more near relation than that which has produced me the happiness of your acquaintance. If the tremendous name of Husband does not alarm you, that is the cousinship which I wish to bear to you. I would willingly carry this request to Aberdeen myself, but you will perhaps rather answer a letter than a verbal proposal, especially if your answer be such as I should be sorry to find it. My happiness very much depends on your allowing me to hope that I may see you before winter, and return from Aberdeen, I would fain wish, in your company, with a heart as full of joy as it was of regret at my parting with you last. If this proposal be disagreeable to you, I shall be most sincerely afflicted; if otherwise, do not torment me with reserve, where frankness would endear you to me so much. I am, with a very solicitous expectation of your answer,  and most 


I am just now returned from Glasgow, where I have seen your uncle the doctor, and hope that what he writes to you will favour my request. I had written to your father before I set out from hence, and am very anxious to know his mind. Is it not possible to reckon me too among the number who have a great affection for you and a great concern for your happiness? I would fain hope that I shall be able some time or other to make my title to a place in that list very clear. Meantime, I can only have the pleasure of writing to you and assuring you of a tenderness which I had rather that my actions than my words should express. I have barely time to overtake the post, and conclude with the most earnest request that, whatever these gentlemen may think, you will pay some regard to the sincere affection with which I am, your most ,



I have received a letter from your father, and am happy that no difficulty, either real or imaginary, has cast up on any quarter. It is with the utmost tenderness and joy that I think of you now as my own, and the happiest acquisition I ever made. As many circumstances at present make time very valuable to me, I venture to write to your father about every particular, and request him to settle matters so as to suit my present engagements. My mind is greatly to abridge formalities and points of ceremony. I like them not on any occasion, but when the heart is most of all affected and moved, they are impertinent to a degree of abomination will write no more at present, as I find I have my words to seek for.

I have been in the country all day, and have hurried to town in order to write your father. I only desire that you will make no difficultys about trifles.  I am, with the most affectionate regard, my dear Kate, yours

I had written Lothingness, but erased it, perhaps feeling a little unhappy about the etymology of that word.

Your letter is the most pleasant I ever received. Doctor Black and I shall be at Aberdeen the second of October in the fore-noon. In the evening, about five o'clock, I expect that you will be ready with a clergyman to put over our ceremony, that I may not be detained in the place where you are without seeing you.

I was to have written your father about some particulars either forgotten or not explained in my last. Be so good as tell him that my residence here is in the West Kirk parish; that is the designation to be put in any certificate of proclamation. Let him read this, that he may write me in what parish 


You have a paper enclosed which I should have sent to your father, if it were not for the inclination I have to correspond with you. Please deliver it to him: he will easily understand what forms remain on your part and his, and if there is anything amiss, it can be set to rights when we meet. It is such as a man of business here has scrolled for me. I have a line from your uncle the Doctor this morning. He is to dine here on Sunday next, and we set out on Monday morning for Aberdeen. I told you what was proposed in my last. We may be at Aberdeen on Wednesday evening, but I at present think it will be pleasanter on the road than there, unless I am permitted to see you, and we shall probably ly at Stonehive and go in to Aberdeen on Thursday the second of October, in the morning, to meet that afternoon, and I hope not to part again in a hurry. You will not be surprised at my proposing to leave Aberdeen again sometime on Friday the third of October; I have much to do here. But there or here, or wherever you are will be Paradise and every inn on the road a palace. Pray write to me, that I may know you have received my last and this, that there is no mistake, and that I may have the pleasure of receiving what comes from you. I am, 

My last letter was from Verona where I stopped two or three days, I am now at Venice as you See from the Date. A Town built in the Sea & with Streets & lanes paved with Water with Boats for Coaches & Chariots without which you could not Stir from the threshold of your Door without plunging in the Sea. All this you knew but knowing & seeing I find is different. I am strongly impressed with wonder at such a Place but do not delight in it any more than I do in Wapping or the Pier & Share of Leith. There are numberless Palaces all of Marble & loaded with ornament but my feeling is not pleasure but Still wonder how the Devil they got there. I have lost all relish for what the Sailors call Ginger bread work even in Marble & in the designs of Famous Architects & so I shall bid this Amphibious Town farewell as soon as I have seen what  it is the fashion for Travellers to see here or at least some part of it. To Verona I came post, perplexed at every Stage with the exchange of money which it was impossible to know so fast as it changed among my hands, There I met with a Florentine Horse Hyrer who had brought some Travellers to Verona. I made use of his Horses in some little excursions from that Place, Afterwards engaged him to drive me to Padua. And we agreed so well on the Road that I have made a Contract to be driven & fed by him on the whole road to Rome at a certain Price. This is a sort of Bargain very common in this Country. We shall travel Slow but I do not want to hurry through a Country of which every part will take my Attention. My Driver Antonio Lapini tells me we shall be a fortnight on the Road & I shall probably write again from some place tho I begin to grudge the Postages of So many letters of which the cost now must be a Considerable Sum: but it is your desire to hear frequently how I go on & you will guess from so much said in this letter without any mention of my health that I have no Complaint. I am certainly stouter than when I left Edr & more independent of  little accommodations that used to be necessary to me.

My Blessing to my Dear Children if they follow all the Dates of my letters on the Map it will help forward their Geography, I shall endeavour as soon as Possible to lead their attention back again through some Route to Edinburgh: but the winter must pass here with me & hope it will do so with you at Edr better than usual. I do not attempt to write to any body else till I get to some end of My Journey. 


I am strongly Solicited by a young Gentleman who is my Relation, to make offer of his Services & to beg your favour in procuring him a Commission in case the list of Subalterns in your Regiment be not compleat. He is confident that he coud in a few Weeks raise about thirty men, of whom Several, he says have already promised to follow him in case he shoud have occasion.

I have endeavoured to perswade him that it is next to certain your list is compleat  and that you must have had many applications for every Commission: but his importunity which I respect in the present Aspect of the Service has overcome my reluctance to take this Liberty with you. He is from Athol, his name Alexr Robertson, about twenty: is of a figure & Spirit that woud suit any Company of Granadiers. But this I am sensible may not entitle him to a preference among the many Solicitations which you must have had. But while I unwillingly trouble you with his request I am very glad of an opportunity to offer my respects & congratulations on the part you are able to take in what appears to us here a very pressing exigency of the State. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect



I was Sorry that I had not pleasure of seeing you when you was at Geneva because if any thing had occurred relating to the performance which you do me the honour to translate it coud have been better explained than in writing. I have agreed to retain the Quotations for the reasons you mentioned altho the frequent reference to my own book proper enough in a text intended for the Students at College does not appear equally so in what comes or is offered to the wide world. I have still retained the term Idea as an example of Metaphor in Science, because altho it has become in common Language another word for conception or Notion yet in the Systems of Locke and others it is in fact a Metaphor & if taken for mere notion or conception many of their supposed discoverys fall to the ground appear mere tautologys. As that for instance of Master Locke, that we can have no knowledge where we have no Ideas. I have no Objection to the term Idea when these Systems are not in question. I have yesterday received a few more sheets of your Elegant translation containing the fourth parth or that which treats of Moral Laws and their more general applications, I know how troublesome it must be to you to have any changes to consider after you have been at the pains already to follow a Second Edition: but I beg that you will excuse the Solicitude of an Author who cannot withold his pen when any thing occurs to be added or retrenched. I have done something of this sort which will make it necessary to remit these sheets again to you. I have likewise endeavoured to explain myself in French trusting to your Corrections & I hope that my French such as it is may be less liable to be misstaken than my English. I have Observed that you found difficulty in translating the Title of Compulsory Law & the Articles that depend upon it & that you have thought it necessary to Substitute Perfect Obligation in the place of it. I have many objections to this Language of Perfect & imperfect obligation because which it woud be much too long to trouble you with. My intention was to disstinguish the Dutys that may be exacted by force from those which must come from Choice and good will. I have endeavoured to express this disstinction in my corrections of the Translation, in the words, Loix de Contrainte & Loix de choix. This may be Barbarous French but I beg that you will correct me: but employ any Circumlocution to the same purpose rather than recur to the term of Perfect Obligation which I apprehend has a tendency to Misslead as if the Obligation of a man was not to serve his friend were not as perfect as the Obligation to avoid a trifling hurt to a stranger, yet the last is matter of Compulsory Law & the first not. But I beg pardon for troubling you with this ill written Scrawl which I write on the Booksellers table: & I hope that you will likewise excuse the additional pains which this little work comes to cost you from my being here. I have the honour to be with great Regard Dear Sr

My Lord Chesterfield has been pleased to show me a Note from you to His Lordship desiring to know whether I wished to have any thing in writing from The Duke of Chandos & yourself; as it is determined that I am not to go abroad with Lord Chesterfield & that the Commencement of my Successors Sallary is fast approaching. In order to discharge me from my Attendance on Lord Chesterfield; I am advised that directions in writing from both his Present and late Guardians will be necessary. You will Judge of the terms Proper for such a writing, & whether I shoud ask the late Guardians to put their names to the same Paper, or apply to them separately for their concurrence. As I conclude from your Letter to Lord Chesterfield that the 400 a year appointed for me during my Attendance on his Lordship is to cease on the 24th Instant, It is proper to inform you that I have received no payments by Advance And that 100 will be due to me at Midsummer for the Quarter that has passed from Lady Day. It is likewise material for me to know; to whom & at what terms I am to apply for the Payment of the 200 a year Settled upon me during my Life. Uncertainty on this point may Subject me to inconvenience As I have allotted to a Substitute all the Profits of my office at Edinburgh untill the Commencement of next winter Term, & shall not be entitled to receive any Sallary from that office before Whitsunday next year.

I have Also to inform you, that when on my Way  to Geneva last year I understood from Sr George Savile that the expences of that Journey were to be allowed me. I was detained about ten days at London waiting for instructions from My Lord Chesterfields Guardians and about as long at Paris waiting for a Pass by which means the whole expence amounted to 85. I have the honour to be &c

My Lord Chesterfield was pleased to show me a Note from you to His Lordship desiring to know whether I wished to have any thing in writing from The Duke of Chandos and yourself; as it is determined that I am not to go abroad with Lord Chesterfield and that the Commencement of my Successors Sallary is fast approaching. In order to discharge me from my Attendance on Lord Chesterfield; I am advised that directions in writing from both his Present and late Guardians will be necessary. You will Judge of the terms Proper for such a writing, and whether I shou'd ask the late Guardians to put their names to the same Paper, or apply to them separately for their concurrence. As I conclude from your Letter to Lord Chesterfield that the 400 a year appointed for me during my Attendance on his Lordship is to cease on the 24th Instant, It is proper to inform you that I have received no payments by Advance and that 100 will be due to me at Midsummer for the Quarter that has passed from Lady Day. It is likewise material for me to know to whom and at what terms I am to apply for the Payment of the 200 a year settled upon me during my Life. Uncertainty on this point may Subject me to inconvenience as I have allotted to a Substitute all the Profits of my office at Edinburgh untill the Commencement of next winter Term, and shall not be entitled to receive any Sallary for that office before Whitsunday next year.

I have also to inform you, that when on my Way to Geneva last year I understood from Sr George Savile that the expences of that Journey were to be allowed me. I was detained about ten days at London waiting for instructions from My Lord Chestefields Guardians and about as long at Paris waiting for a Pass by which means the whole expence amounted to 85. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect etc

I shall remain in Town till the Morrow Morning and shall wait upon you if you desire it.
To the Officer commanding in chief at Elizabeth Town (Lord Stirling).

I am commanded by their Excellencies His Majesty's Commissioners to request that you will forward the inclosed Packet, in the Manner and by such Comveyance, as to you shall seem proper.

If you are pleased to Order an Express the Expence shall be paid as you shall direct by the First Flag of Truce.


I was on Tuesday last informed by Mr Lovel Stanhope, that your Lordship with Sr George Savile & Mr Hewet, had resigned your Trust as Guardians to The Earl of Chesterfield, & had desired His Lordship to make choice of Persons more likely to be of use to him than had been in your Power. That Lord Chesterfield had accordingly made choice of the Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope to act in the Capacity of his Guardians. That a transaction had been some time depending & was then in a manner concluded, engaging Mr De St Germain to accompany Lord Chesterfield in his Future Tour abroad, And that after the 24th Instant my attendance on his Lordship woud be no longer required.

Some days after this communication, Mr Lovel Stanhope wrote My Lord Chesterfield desiring to know, whether I wished to have any thing in writing to the above purpose & informing him that If I did The Duke of Chandos & himself were ready to give it immediately. In Answer to this question, I wrote Mr Stanhope a Letter of which I trouble your Lordship with the following copy:

I saw Mr Stanhope a few hours after he had received this letter. He offered me a Copy of your Lordships & the other Guardians resignation, & told me The Duke of Chandos & himself woud give me a joint letter to discharge my farther attendance on Lord Chesterfield. That the 100 due at Midsummer shoud be paid. But that he was unacquainted with the other money Articles of my letter, & tho he believed they would fall upon My Lord Chesterfield at last, that he coud do nothing relating to them at present. I have last night received a joint letter from The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope stating the change lately made in the Guardianship of Lord Chesterfield & notifying that my attendance on his Lordship will not be necessary after the 24th Instant, but without any mention of the other Particulars in my letter to Mr Stanhope. I have thought it My Duty, thus to inform your Lordship of what has past since your declining to act as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield, And as the Gentlemen  who were joined in this trust are now at a distance from each other in the Country I trouble each of you Separately with a Duplicate of this letter. And beg to know whether you have any Objections to my being determined in my farther Attendance on Lord Chesterfield by the Directions of The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect

I took the Liberty, in the end of January last, to write a letter to The Earl of Chesterfield, in which I enclosed a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And Observed that the terms of that letter being conditional it was necessary for me to apply to His Lordship on the Subject. And referred him to Mr James Chalmer of St. Albans Street London who woud receive his Commands, being entrusted with My  letter to his Lordship & my Other Affairs at London. Mr Chalmers Called upon Lord Chesterfield several times, left my letter together with one from himself, waited some weeks for an Answer, & has since at my desire communicated his Bussiness to Mr Lovel Stanhope who has declined taking any concern  it. So that having no expectations of an Answer to my Applications from The Earl of Chesterfield I am under the dissagreeable necessity of stating the fruitless attempts I have made, and of referring the whole matter to your Lordship that some better way may be devised for comeing at the knowledge of Lord Chesterfields mind. I transmit this letter by Mr Chalmer that in case appearances be more favourable that they were when he wrote me last he may not trouble your Lordship with it.

I received last Summer by Mr Clow at  Glasgow A Copy of Mr Simsons Postumous works which he told me your Lordship did me the honour to order for me & I beg that you will now tho so late accept of my Acknowledgements.

I have some posts ago, had the honour of your Lordships Answer to my letter of the 10th of March. And am not surprised that Lord Chesterfield shoud forget particulars to which it is probable he gave very little attention. My Annuity never was mentioned in any conversation I ever had with His Lordship. But from what dropped from Others about the time of our separation I imagine that the Subject was then understood. Mr St Germain in particular  told me, that on his expressing some Reluctance at Supplanting me Lord Chesterfield to remove his Scruples said that I was to have my Annuity & to return to My Professorship, which it was likely I woud prefer to going abroad. I have taken the Liberty to communicate to M Chalmer your Lordships letter that he may know of Lord Chesterfields message to your Lordships man of bussiness. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I have agreeably to your Lordships desire signified to me by Mr Smith enclosed with this a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And am sorry that for weighty reasons mentioned to Mr Smith & which if desired he will communicate I am not at liberty to send the Original. At the same time Mr Chalmer  My Agent at London will receive Copys of that & of two other letters from your Lordship to me compared and attested by a Notary Public & by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh. Of which with your Lordships permission he will make the necessary use. If My Lord Chesterfield declare that on having these Copys verifyed by a Comparison with the originals he will perform the Condition that is to Relieve your Lordship of the Obligation contained in that which is dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 I will go to London & if he give me leave will wait upon His Lordship with the Original of that Letter. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I was last night agreeably surprised by the Arrival of Lord Chesterfield at this place. In a line which he wrote me from his Inn he mentioned his having acted improperly in the Affair of my Annuity, And afterwards told me that he meant to do all that the Law enabled him to do which was to bind himself for his own Life & for mine in case he survived me. He likewise gave me his Bankers name  that I might draw for 200 at Christmas next. I am extremely happy at this change of His Lordships mind as it may save himself from Censure & prevent any farther trouble to your Lordship.

Lord Chesterfield had been at york to see his Sister when he took the Resolution to come on here and after staying one night at his Inn is already Gone on his Return to England. I beg leave to trouble your Lordship with my humble Respects to Lady Stanhope & Lord Mahone & Am with the greatest Respect

I sometime ago communicated to my Agent at London the Contents of your Lordships letter on the Subject of what passed with My Lord Chesterfield here concerning my Annuity. And desired him to Consult with your Lordships man of bussiness on any steps that might be taken relating to that affair. I do not however find that any thing has been done, And in this state of suspence wish to know your Lordships opinion whether I may draw upon Lord Chesterfields Banker as his Lordship directed for 200 at Christmas to account of the Claim which he has acknowledged altho' he has not yet settled the mode of Securing it & of Relieving the your Lordship of obligations contracted on his Account.

I am extremely happy to hear of the Well fare of your Lordships Family. I had the pleasure to see My Lord Hadington & Lord Binnie here a few days ago. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

Your Lordship will see from the Inclosed letter that I have received by My Lord Chesterfields order 200 on account of my claim of an Annuity from His Lordship. I had transmitted the Contents of your Lordships last letter to My Agent Mr James Chalmer of Leicester fields & charged him to bring that matter to some final settlement. I cannot state his difficultys better to your Lordships  than by transmitting his Answer to me which I accordingly take the Liberty to do. And have the honour to be with the most affectionate respects to your Lordships Family

I have a few Posts ago received the Copy of an Indenture or Grant executed by the Earl of Chesterfield in my Favours of an Annuity of 200 during our joint Lives.

As I have in this matter, from the beginning of any Dispute concerning it, considered myself as a Trustee for my Family & not at liberty to obey any Impulse of sentiment that might arise in my mind I followed entirely the Judgement of Persons whose Authority might be Sufficient to Justify me, And am happy to find the matter come into such a State, as to require my  Releasing your Lordship fully of any Engagements to me, as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield.

Your Lordships Letter dated to me at Paris on the 6th of April 1774 has been some time in The Hands of my Agent at London who has Direction to return it in the same Cover with this.

I shall be happy to enjoy the Continuance of your Lordships favourable opinion & have the Honour to be with the most affectionate wishes for the wellfare of your Family.

I was on Tuesday last informed by Mr Lovel Stanhope, that your Lordship with Sr George Savile and Mr Hewit, had resigned your Trust as Guardians to The Earl of Chesterfield, and had desired His Lordship to make choice of Persons more likely to be of use to him than had been in your Power. That Lord Chesterfield had accordingly made choice of The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope to act in the Capacity of his Guardians. That a transaction had been some time depending and was then in a manner concluded, engaging Mr De Saint Germain to accompany Lord Chesterfield in his Future Tour abroad, And that after the 24th Instant my attendance on his Lordship would be no longer required. Some days after this communication, Mr Lovel Stanhope wrote My Lord Chesterfield desiring to know, whether I wished to have any thing in writing to the above purpose and informing him that If I did The Duke of Chandos and himself were ready to give it me immediately. In Answer to this question, I wrote Mr Stanhope a Letter of which I trouble your Lordship with the following Copy.

I saw Mr Stanhope a few hours after he had received this letter. He offered me a Copy of your Lordships and the other Guardians resignation, and told me The Duke of Chandos and himself would give me a joint letter to discharge my farther attendance on Lord Chesterfield. That the 100 due at Midsummer shoud be paid. But that he was unacquainted with the other money Articles of my letter, and tho he believed they would fall upon My Lord Chesterfield at last, that he coud do nothing relating to them at present. I have last night received a joint letter from The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope stating the change lately made in the Guardianship of Lord Chesterfield and notifying that my attendance on his Lordship will not be necessary after the 24th Instant but without any mention of the other Particulars in my letter to Mr Stanhope. I have thought it My Duty, thus to inform your Lordship of what has past since your declining to act as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield, And as the Gentlemen who were joined in this trust are now at a distance from each other in the Country I trouble each of you Separately with a Duplicate of this letter. And beg to know whether you have any Objections to my being determined in my farther Attendance on Lord Chesterfield by the Directions of The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect

I took the Liberty, in the end of January last, to write a letter to The Earl of Chesterfield, in which I inclosed a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And Observed that the terms of that letter being conditional it was necessary for me to apply to His Lordship on the Subject. And referred him to Mr James Chalmer of St Albans Street London who woud receive his Commands, being entrusted with My letter to his Lordship and my other Affairs at London. Mr Chalmer Called upon Lord Chesterfield several times, left my letter together with one from himself, waited some weeks for an Answer, and has since at my desire communicated his Business to Mr Lovel Stanhope who has declined taking any concern  it. So that having no expectations of an Answer to my Applications from The Earl of Chesterfield I am under the dissagreeable necessity of stating the fruitless attempts I have made, and of referring the whole matter to Your Lordship that some better way may be devized for comeing at the knowledge of Lord Chesterfields mind. I transmit this letter by Mr Chalmer that in case appearances be more favourable than they were when he wrote me last, he may not trouble Your Lordship with it.

I Received last Summer by Mr Clow at Glasgow A Copy of Mr Simsons Posthumous works which he told me your Lordship did me the honour to order for me and I beg that you will now tho so late accept of my Acknowledgements. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I have some posts ago had the honour of your Lordships Answer to my letter of the 10th of March. And am not surprised that Lord Chesterfield shoud forget particulars to which it is probable that he gave very little attention. My Annuity never was mentioned in any conversation I ever had with His Lordship. But from what dropped from others about the time of our separation I imagine that the Subject was then understood. Mr St Germain in particular told me, that on his expressing some Reluctance at Supplanting me Lord Chesterfield to remove his Scruples said that I was to have my Annuity and to return to My Professorship, which it was likely I woud prefer to going abroad. I have taken the Liberty to communicate to Mr Chalmer your Lordships letter that he may know of Lord Chesterfields message to your Lordships man of business. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I have agreeably to your Lordships desire signified to me by Mr Smith inclosed with this a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And am sorry that for weighty reasons mentioned to Mr Smith and which if desired he will communicate I am not at liberty to send the Original. At the same time Mr. Chalmer My Agent at London will receive Copys of that and of two other letters from your Lordship to me compared and attested by a Notary Public and by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh. Of which with your Lordships permission he will make the necessary use. If My Lord Chesterfield declare that on having these Copys verifyed by a Comparison with the originals he will perform the Condition that is to Relieve your Lordship of the Obligation contained in that which is dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 I will go to London and if he give me leave will wait upon His Lordship with the original of that Letter. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

I was last night agreeably surprised by the Arrival of Lord Chesterfield at this place. In a line which he wrote me from his Inn he mentioned his having acted improperly in the Affair of my Annuity, And afterwards told me that he meant to do all that the Law enabled him to do which was to bind himself for his own Life and for mine in case he survived me. He likewise gave me his Bankers name that I might draw for 200 at Christmas next. I am extremely happy at this change of His Lordships mind and it may save himself from Censure and prevent any farther trouble to your Lordship. Lord Chesterfield had been at York to see his Sister when he took the Resolution to come on here and after staying one night at his Inn in already Gone on his Return to England. I beg leave to trouble your Lordship with my humble Respects to Lady Stanhope and Lord Mahone and Am with the greatest Respect

I sometime ago communicated to my Agent at London the Contents of Your Lordships letter on the Subject of what had passed with My Lord Chesterfield here concerning my Annuity. And desired him to Consult with your Lordships man of bussiness on any steps that might be taken relating to that affair. I do not however find that any thing has been done, And in this state of suspence wish to know Your Lordships opinion whether I may draw upon Lord Chesterfields Banker as his Lordship directed for 200 at Christmas to account of the Claim which he has acknowledged altho' he has not yet settled the mode of Securing it and of Relieving your Lordship of obligations contracted on his account. I am extremely happy to hear of the Wellfare of Your Lordships Family. I had the Pleasure to see My Lord Hadington and Lord Binnie here a few days ago. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

Your Lordship will see from the Inclosed letter that I have received by My Lord Chesterfields order 200 on account of my claim of an Annuity from His Lordship. I had transmitted the Contents of your Lordships last letter to My Agent Mr James Chalmer of Leicesterfields and charged him to bring that matter to some final settlement. I cannot state his difficultys better to your Lordships than by transmitting his Answer to me which I accordingly take the Liberty to do. And have the honour to be with the most affectionate respects to your Lordships Family.

I have a few Posts ago received the Copy of an Indenture or Grant executed by the Earl of Chesterfield in my Favours of an Annuity of 200 during Our joint Lives.

As I have in this matter, from the beginning of any Dispute concerning it, considered myself as a Trustee for my Family and not at liberty to obey any Impulse of sentiment that might arise in my mind I followed intirely the Judgement of Persons whose Authority might be Sufficient to Justify me. And am happy to find the matter come into such a State, as to require my Releasing your Lordship fully of any Engagements to me, as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield.

Your Lordships letter dated at Paris on the 6th of April 1774 has been some time in the Hands of my Agent in London who has Direction to return it in the same Cover with this.

In answer to the two or three letters which you have written to me I can give you five or six which I had written in my own mind to you before I received any of yours. The first was from Geneva where having had the advantage of Lodging in Calvins own house & having access to some of his most Secret Manuscripts I thought myself without Vanity qualified to give you some light into the more Intricate recess's of our Church. My second was from Fernex the seat of that renowned & Pious Apostle Voltaire who saluted me with a Complt. on a Gentleman of my family who had Civilized the Russians. I owned this Relation and at this & every Successive visit encouraged every attempt at Conversation even Jokes against Moses Adam & Eve & the rest of the Prophets  till I began to be considered as a person who tho true to my own faith had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in Others. As my own Complt. had come all the way from Russia I wished to know how some of my Friends woud fare but I found the Old man in a state of perfect indifference to all Authors except two Sorts, One of those who write Panegyrics another who write Invectives on himself. There is a third kind whose names he has been used to repeat fifty or sixty years without knowing any thing of them such as Locke Boyle Newton &c. I forgot his competitors for fame of whom he is always either Silent or Speaks Slightingly. The fact is that he reads little or none his mind exists by Reminiscence & by doing over & over what it has been used to do Dictates Tales dissertations & Tragedys even the latter with all his Elegance tho not with his former force. His Conversation is among the Pleasantest I ever met with, he lets you forget the Superiority which the public  opinion gives him, which is indeed greathat we conceive in this Island. But he is  to make me forget all the rest of my letters. The third was from the face of a Snowy Mountain in Savoye higher than all the mountains in Scotland Piled upon one Other & containing more eternal Ice in its recess's than is to  found in all Scotland in the hardest Winter. The bottom of this Ice is continually melting in the Valleys like the bottom of a roll of butter placed on end in a frying Pan. It is perpetually Creeping down from the Mountain where fresh Snows continually fall. It hangs in Snotters over Cliffs & Precipices till becomeing too heavy it breaks & with noise louder than thunder makes all the Valleys ring or groan which you please. Masses come down from the mountains sometimes and shake all the Rocks with a force that nothing but an earthquake can imitate & drive the Air out of the narrow Valleys with the force of a hurricane that roots up trees in the opposite hills. I wrote you this letter in the full  belief that you are a great Natural  & dissposed to believe every word I say  fourth letter was written from the Innmost parts of Swisserland on a Sunday after church when I saw the Militia exercise. They have uniform clothes and accoutrements all at their own expence which is not a great hardship for it is their only public burden. They appeard to me to be a very effective Military Establishment And as they were the only body of men I ever Saw under Arms on the true principle for which Arms shoud be carried I felt much secret emotion, & coud have shed tears. But to conclude my fifth & last letter was from the Devils own backside in the neighbourhood of This place where every thing from a pair of Snuffers to the Venus of Medicis and the great Diana of the Ephesians is better provided than any where else where every one is bussy enjoying & no one thinks whence it came nor how it is to be keept.

I thought to have finished all  my letters here but as a frank will carry another sheet I shall take room at least to Sign my name. As I have already written you five letters & this new sheet may pass for another you will please to Observe that you are at least four letters in my debt.

I am much Obliged to you for your Goodness to my Wife & My Bairns, if I live to return to them we shall not part so easily again. You may believe I was much surprised at the Attempt of the Town Council to shut the door against me: but am Obliged to them for opening it again. I may be a great looser but the end for which I am persecuted cannot be gained while I have it in my option to return.

I have been much Obliged to the general Voice that was raised in my favour as well as to the Ardent Zeal of Particular friends. Islay Campbell has given me proofs of Friendship  which I can never forget. Pulteney has behaved to me in every thing as he woud have done at the beginning of the Poker Club. I have allways been an Advocate for Mankind and am a more determined one than ever the fools & knawes are no more than necessary to give Others Something to do. I saw J. Home in Town yesterday Morning he goes as Usual. Mc is listening to the reports of his History. I do not live among readers and am really ignorant of the General Verdict. I have been living here above three Weeks. A Charming Villa in a Magnificent Scene sed quis me sistat gelidis in montibus Pentland and this I do not say on Account of the hot weather tho it has been for three days the greatest I ever saw in this Countrey. Remember  my Blessing to Mrs Carlyle & your young ones of whose thriving state I am happy to hear. Tell Edgar when you see him that I have lately a letter from Clarke & shall write to him  meaning Edgar  soon.

Lazy as I am I must Answer your Letter:first as to Politics:it was understood here before I received it that the Aversion of the People in Scotland was not to be idly Crossed. Your letter put that Aversion in a much Stronger light to me than I had conceived & the Particulars I heard this Morning from Lord Linton make me think it a kind of Phrensy. My Opinion is that in all Criminal matters the Law shoud have its Course but how that is to be, in this matter I know not. The Law is terrible in the hands of People that do not appear to delight in its Severitys, & that never Shrinks; but as it is the Fashion here to say we have lost America so I expect to hear that we have lost Scotland but in that case I hope to be Reckoned not among the  losers but the lost.

I am in great hopes nothing will be lost not even the Continent of North America. We have 1200 Miles of Territory in Length occupied by about 3.000.000  People of which there are about 1.500.000 with Johny Witherspoons at their head against us And the rest for us. I am not sure that if proper measures were taken but we shoud reduce Johny Witherspoons to the small Support of Franklin Adams & two or three more of the most Abandoned Villains in the world but I tremble at the thoughts of their Cunning & determination opposed to us.

But so much for Politics. I was very happy in hearing that you had got the Better of your Complaints and of that Mrs Carlisle was  Well. You may tell that I pant after Scotland as the Hart Panteth after the Water Brooks & I have always thought myself within ten days or a fortnight of it but there is always some little remains of Commission Bussiness which woud need an Act of Parliament if the Commissioners did not Act. I thought to have ended the last  thing of that Sort to Day but it has become a Question whether it will not need an Act of Parliament & If so I decamp. I shall make no Answer to your fond imaginations about me because I know the meaning of them fully in your mind & how little there is corresponding to them here. I do not despair of the Republic, but it is every Man for himself & God for us all. If the Last shoud keep his Post we may do very well whatever part the others may think proper to take. I write to  the Bell-man with a full  to  henever he Rings. John Home is g to Bath with every Appearance of being well. J: Fletcher went with him & is come back. I hope that John will likewise soon follow for I am told that Bath is tiresome & this Place as far as I could Observe did not dissagree with him.


I hope you will have the necessary Indulgence for An Invalid & endure my Delays in writing without abating of your own good will to Oblige us in that Way. You make great Allowance for our Anxiety about the Children: you may believe it is much the less for your concern in them, & indeed is none at all.

I wished to turn a Stoop or two in this Race, I am running, before I wrote again. The Progress is Slow but I hope not the less certain it is even sensible for the Better & as the fine season is coming on I hope to be reinstated in the use of My Limbs & of Strength enough for all I have to do in the remainder of My Life. I use the  Bath about twice a Week & have not yet begun to drink the Waters. The operation so far is exceedingly Pleasant. There is still a little Coldness in the Wind but the Fields & the Houses & the Town & the Sky look more like a View in a Showmans Box than what is commonly to be seen on this Terraqueous Globe.

I have heard from Coll. J: Campbell at London & hope to see him here in his way to Ireland. John McPherson was much hurried in his Departure from London. I have been Lucky enough to receive two or three short Letters, he sent in search of me, since I have been on the Road, & he embarked: The last, after he was under Sail. To the Purpose of your Letter to him soon after my falling Ill; He tells me of so many Efficient People that had promised to Johnstone & him to take charge  of it; from the Chancellour himself down to Private Secretarys that I am perswaded it can want nothing but a proper Remembrancer which I must think of, at least, when I go to London.

It grieves me to think of these cruel Fasts you undergo with the Laird of Gilmerton. I am ry it is not in my Power  to mitigate their Severitys. I beg of you to indulge yourself now & then in a good Pot full of Kail Caststocks & a Bonum Magnum from some Chrystal Springs, I drink Bristol here but imagine that a good Stoup full from the Esk anywhere above Inveresk Village will be as good. I speak from Experience & begin to look as blooming & well on this Bread & Water diet as ever I did. We all join in the best wishes to Mrs. Carlyle & you

I imagine that if you had no Other evidence of my Convalescence but my deficiency in writing Letters you would think I was coming fast to be in Statu quo.

My silence, for some time, has not been for want of Scolding, & indeed, since She Scolds you at the Distance of five hundred Miles, what am I to expect here. I got a pretty good set down for having once written to you that we were not Anxious about the Bairns. Her whole concern now is to wonder whether Jamie will know her again. We are grown such fine People here that poor Rustick Jamie will not recollect that he had ever seen us before. I figure to myself that you are now very bussy with the General Assembly, of which I wish you a good deliverance, and offer this wish, with Some Anxiety, as you are left this year by the People who used to take care of you, The Principal & the Lord Advocate: but I hope that the Other Side will have Mercy, & perhaps pull the less if they do not feel any body to pull against them.

We have had you here sometimes blocked up, & sometimes Bombarded by the Dutch Fleet. Bruntisland was actually Bombarded in the last Dutch War & therefore I think you may lay your account with it in this. I think Bayley Cochran ought to have the Causway of Musselburgh taken up and I pray you remember that when a Shell falls  near you: you are not to run away but ly flat down till it burst & then take to your heel, as fast as you can, least any more should come. If you can only protract the War for two or three weeks I will come to your Relief & will bring two or three Muskets & Bayonets from Birmingham to Arm my Corps which consists of Peter Anderson a Noted Poacher at Bankhead & George McLean an eminent marksman & fishing Tackle maker at Edinburgh.

We are meditating a departure from hence about the 5th of June when our three months at this place will be out. Our Excursion to Clifton was prevented by cold weather, which with very little intermission has continued ever Since, & is the more grievous that is altogether unexpected at a time when people used to retire from the Heat of this Place.

To do him justice the Sun has keept his Word but this Infernal East wind chills to death while the Sun Scorches. I am now much Agitated with wishes to Comply with People who think it will be of great use to Bell to remain here some time behind us, & with the Difficulty of having her properly placed. We go by London, to make as short a Stay as Affairs real or imaginary will permit, you may be Sure that I shall endeavour to bring any commands your Friends may have for Scotland.

Excuse my Intimacy with Johny Wilkes. If you should be questioned about your Correspondence with him. Remember not that which goeth in to the Mouth defileth but that which cometh out so keep a good Tongue in your own Head you need not care who writes to you.
Argyle Square 24 Decr 1783


your Letter has put me into such a Flutter, that I dont know what to Answer to it. Suffice it, for the present, to say at having been tempted on Friday last to venture through the Storm of an Edr Sedan Chair to dine with Sir James Grant where I drank Cannongate Water & fed up Country Potatoes Turnips & Cabbages was put to bed at night in a fever tinued ill for eight & forty hours  then what would happen if I   Suffer myself to be driven to elburgh by your desires.  The Proposal makes me Shudder, and its coming from you makes my blood run Cold. If you have any Sinister intentions on my Life; I pray you may have a Sight of your Sins, & be forgiven: but such round about ways are not necessary; yo need not take a Hammer to break an Egg, as the Saying is. You have only, the first time you Come to Town, to bring a Pair of Bellows in your Pocket & blow the Smallest blast into any Cor of Argyle Square, my bussiness is  your Blood thirsty designs aplished. And so no more at this  but like Compliments from my  Spouse who feeds on decoction of  & calls it Tea.

I am glad to hear of your safe return as also of your purchase and am abundantly eager to see my new property but sensible that I must have patience till there is a proper guide not only to conduct her to this place but to lead her on to the place of her destination as I have no convenience to keep her here above an hour or two & even that under the nose of Dr Blair who objected to the smell even of a Horse. If your Broker can broke me also a travelling governor for her upon reasonable terms as far as Bankhead be so good as settle the matter with him & send her on to Argyle Square to receive Instructions for the remaider of her travels. I am sorry that her Pregnancy is not yet declared: as for the Opportunity you mention of making that matter sure, I am sensible there will be many able  performers: but what party do you recommend? I wish you may not mean to desert your own for in Such matters moderation does not become an Ass.

I expect two Forreigners and much broken English at dinner today so can even pun upon your Bonne Grace but imagine must be it is lined with something as you talk of its being too warm for Summer. My Wife joins in Complts to yours & is glad to find that her letter is still so near the first place Among her Comforts altho your Modesty is so great with respect to the first.

It is well for you that you got home on thursday night, if you had been with us at a certain Farm yesterday & drove home in the Evening in a certain Carriage with a certain wind & Rain in your Face your Comfort would have been cold with a witness & even that Witness not very warm. Once more for Dapple. If your Broker cannot provide me as above be so good as  let her pick about your Hedges till I can fix a time for her removeal, &c which I will do as soon as possible. I am with best respects from this house to yours Dr C your most


The Girls tell me that Mrs Carlyle or you were so good as to say that when we should have made our Settlement you would come and see it. It should be fain to hasten that visit while we may hope for some tolerable weather, having entertainment in some sort for Man & Woman tho not for Man & horse being still without Hay or Oats or Stabling or Pasture, if it were not for an eventual engagement with Sir John Mc Pherson to accompany to Alva wherever he calls me to Edr for that purpose his time was uncertain & so must mine be till I hear from him. As soon as I know that you may expect to find me at home I will let you know & leave you to Select your days.

If Mrs Carlyle were a Chemist like you & me she would soon find that the whole Atmosphere  here about is made of Oxigene or if she were a Poet like other People she would find that our Water is Nectar & our very bear bannocks not to say Mutton is what the Gods of Old called Ambrosia: But I am sensible it is a Sin to be tempting Peoples Appetites till they are upon the point of Gratification which I hope will be soon.

The Post here is a great Comfort being punctual to his time every day between 3 & 4. So send us your news that whatever we do may be concerted.

 I might take it for granted you know our direction but to make more sure than ever Certainly please to direct for me at Nydpath near Peebles.
Nidpath Castle 17th March 

I rejoice to find we are both alive that is to say have not forgot one another, as the learned say dead people do, so as hereafter not to have the least remembrance of their best friends. For us it is only letting a maid to loose to see her friends and presently our Splanghna Are moved as before without any of these downward noises which the Review tells me Dr McNight makes the sign of Pity as well as love: for why should you and I pity one another, we are come only where every body virtually wishes to be who wishes to live long, And you are in hopes of having five windows added in Front of your House for which you pay no Tax, & I who pay Tax have only one window in the Front of mine. It is a whimsical Situation we have got into to be Sure: but has its Alurements both within doors & in the  neighbourhood, where the People as you are told are very good to us. All the women who have drunken husbands very earnestly press me for their Houses. I am sorry to understand Mrs Carlyle now has so little occasion for my Services: but look forward with great pleasure to the time when we may hope to see your Sobriety here: for that is what I understand you mean when you say you have lost all your convivial faculties. The Air is good the Water is Good The Earth is dry And the Castle is lodgeable there is nothing amiss but the Slow pace with which I get into Possession of Country accommodations.

They are yet to come at Christmas Whitsunday & Martinmas next & even then little more than will keep a Cow & a Horse. The Dukes Factor has been here lately & we have arranged so as that the needful for the above purposes may come to me as they come to be Out of lease: but if we have little the less we shall spend which is all I am now good for.

I slept to Dalkeith House one of the times I  was at Edinburgh & felt then as I always did great Satisfaction in having been there. Lord Dalkeith and his Lady were then not come: but I am happy to hear Such Accounts of them. John Home & I have not been so long Silent in the memory of man: but I hope that he too is jogging as usual & that we shall know one another at a Game of Romps with David who I hope will be grievously dissappointed in finding himself an Angel of Light.

One of our pleasures here is a dayby post so that I beg you may not wait thereafter for the Coming a Maid for your letters.

Put, in your Post office at Musselburgh a  letter will come to Nidpath Castle by Peebles for two pence.

I am happy to hear from you even when part of what you say is not so. I am not accommodated at Nidpath nor there to remain beyond Whitsunday. I have had a grievous time of Suspence but can neither greatly blame myself nor any Other person. I cannot blame other people because I came here so many months, more than a year, before much could be Settled: nor do I much blame myself because seeing the Situation desireable I saw also that to preserve the Castle in a State to be inhabited I must take charge of it in Autumn last. For another winter with open doors & windows would have put it past any moderate reparation. When the time of renewing Leases came I made my offers, as I thought very high, but there were higher, and at that moment Halyards a place within two Miles became open, & I secured it.

You know enough of the Country to have some notion of Halyards; if not let time and personal Inspection when at leisure inform Mrs Carlyle & you. I enter at once into possession of as much Ground as I wish for, and, what is to me an inconvenience, a furnished house. For the Room being Scrimp the addition of  our furniture will almost barricade it against us, but as the Offices are good we mean to Contend chearfully against all inconvenience. We can Scarcely begin to move before the terms altho the place is already empty. Our Man Servant has been a thief & would have been sent to the Galleys if we had any Galleys; but we can ill move till a new come in his place at the Term. So that from the whole My Dear Carlyle you see that your prospect of handing me over from the Goodness of a present Duke to the goodness of a future Lord has proved Abortive. Their Goodness when we do not much want it is ever Abundant & Pleasant but the Lord preserve me from depending upon it for any thing beyond a Day & a Dinner. I remember however in the mean time that I except your Duke & Dutchess who I believe

are a real blessing to themselves, & that, in my notion is the best thing that Can be Said of any human Creature. I shall be somewhat farther from Edinburgh than formerly & in all probability more Seldom there. We join in best wishes & Respects to Mrs Carlyle. I am D. Carlyle

I Observe in the mercantile Style that you have Surmounted the quicksands of Holy Island & the Feasts of Newcastle; if you could with equal Success encounter the Pot luck of Hallyards I should think you invincible.

This Post was taken, as the saying is, upon the Spur of the occasion because another appeared not to be tenable. It is in many respects what I should wish: but if I had been free to chuse, would certainly have preferred one with a little more lodging. In order to have a Spare Room for whomever Chance may send on a Stormy night we ly Some of us, three in a Room & others occupy what in the case of a less numerous Family was destined for Servants. In our Chamber of Dine are mounted two Beds so that we can lodge while they agree any two persons of  the same Sex & even two persons of different Sexes even if they should not agree provided they are legally Connected: but as for an Inn to which you look for relief there is not within any practicable distance so much as an ale house at which to lodge a Servant; So that if Mrs Carlyle & you or J. Johnstone & his Tutor honour & bless us with a Visit, you must march like the Army of Wurmser at last in two Columns; And warn us of the time of your Arrival that we may have a Sheep from the Hills to meet you & give you a Warm reception with Batteries of Mutton and advanced Corps of Sheeps Head Haggish And Puddings such as may keep you alive for better fare at another place: I have now given you my Manifesto, And if you decline the encounter from mere Cowardice or say upon tryal that matters were worse than you expected you must not blame me. The Hurry of Hay sow making is over; tho so late, my Hay being all meadow Grass; And I have no Corn; what I  may have another year, I know not: but should be glad to have your Agricultural Advice from an experience which you probably have bought as well as myself.

Our Pasture was good in its Season: but is now I doubt on its Wayne. The best I can say is that all concerned Women Men and Slots are in a thriving Condition as to Health &c. The Girls send their most affectionate Complimts and I have reason to bless them for the Chearfulness with which they accommodate themselves to my retiring or sequestered Humour. The Neighbourhood is Sociable & we visit one another in Cartloads. The way is, I am told, for I have not yet seen, to you at one end of the Country & gathering like a snow ball as they roll aloft leave no house unvisted & no Soul at home in any house to receive a Visit till the following Season when the Snow Ball returns again to take them up. If I knew when it is to Roll, I should wish to have you in the way of being picked up & carryed to the next house. In the mean time it would give the People of this House great Pleasure to see Mrs Carlyle & you wherever the fates may order.


Let us know what is become of you. Mrs Carlyles letter to Bell bears that you have Suffered much and been in danger, which is more than we knew of from the first reports of your illness, & we supposed it to be no more than one of these feverish colds which are frequent at this Season. I was vexed at missing you when last in Midlothian; & I was prevented from repeating my visit by a Cold which confined me some days & hurried me home. If you should be unable to attend to the little Johnston; the greatest loss will be his. I felt the whole force of what you wrote respecting him. He has been long kept under the Awe of a Master & by forcible means: for restraint was necessary. But the time must come at which he will either bear himself up on feelings of a Gentleman or be lost to his Friends. When this Ora should begin is a question: One inducement to begin it now, is that you are in the way to watch the Effects with Fortitude & Temper. By all means treat him like a Gentleman, & let it not be supposed that he is to be treated Otherwise: but without express declaration that he is at Liberty to be perverse if he please. Such a declaration while he lives with  those against whom he has the resentment of harsh usage & whom he can vex by misbehaviour because they are accountable for what he is permitted to do, is but an unfair tryal of what he mighta do if left to himself among people whose only concern is not to be troubled with any improper behaviour, andb who by merely turning their backs can make him feel the Scorn he deserves. If it were not necessary to continue his Attention yet some time to the bussiness of College I should think of nothing for him but the Company of those whose frowns would make him feel his mistakes. And if this should not have the proper effect with him, the dissappointment may draw tears from those who had the happiness of intimacy with his Family or who even are acquainted with himself in his more pleasant and better moments in which he has scarcely an equal among Boys. The Revolt against harsh measures of restraint however necessary, we may Still hope in his case to distinguish from mere frowardness unprovoked. I was dissappointed in not having him & the party you mentioned here & the more dissagreeably that it may have proceeded from my Mistake of your Letter,  in which I thought you wished me to write, if there was any Objection to their coming.

My Accommodation here needs the excuse of Surprise; and I have known people pleased with a Scramble when there was not time to do better & this was necessary to me whom time itself would not enable to do better that is than kill a Sheep for the Christians, & send the beasts to look for Provender where it best could be found. That is not a treatment for which to give formal invitations. The Cold I caught at Edinburgh is gone & my other infirmities are no more than this time has brought forth. I wish I could say as much for the Church and State now Contending with Antichrist himself in the form of Democracy & Atheism. Here we have got a most beautiful retired Kirkyard in which the Ashes of the faithful may have peace without praying for it. This would be security enough to me against impending Storms if I had nobody to think of but myself. But matters are seldom so good as we hope or so bad as we fear. 

If what you write from all the sources of information in Scotland be not worth postage, what are you to expect from Manor Water where we have talked of nothing for three or four months but bad weather. G. Hamilton I think has got his revenge of H. G. of M. I would rather lose 3 Professor ships than run away from B. once.

I have got professor Robertsons Robisons book & have read the Introduction but cannot yet conceive what he is to make of a Subject meaning free Masonry without being to tell us first of all what it is. I am in hopes the Militia Act will be amended; for the Circumstances you mention make it a sort of Press Act; & the mad people it seems felt it so. If a young man is to be pressed because he is 18 & not 24 the natural Consequence and Spirit of the Act should be that at 24 he falls off to make way for younger men in their turn. My son now about 20 had some pretence to exemption his name being enrolled in some one of the  Artillery Companies but I thought the best I could do was to set an Example to my neighbour Farmers in chearfully giving up his name to the Ballot. And if College call him away I trust that money will procure a Substitute.

The French Revolution it seems is still a Curiosity; many things certainly led to it and the french heads a stir after new things made bolder and wider steps than ever were made before by Mankind in any case whatever: but all this would have come to nothing if the French Army had Adhered to their noblesse officers & to the Crown: but they did not; & they made the Revolution. They made & will continue to make every change that is to happen in France to the end of time. They were struck with democracy as with a Spark of Electricity or a Stroke of Lightening & have continued charged even Since. They will follow no General that swerves from Democracy & will cut the throats of all the Representatives of the People of France if the Cry of Royalism is raised against them. What sort of Whim is this? You will say, for an Army? But it is better founded than perhaps you think. 

Of all the Plebeians in France who felt the galling distinction of Noblesse Connected with the Monarchy. The Rank & File of the French Army did so the most. With Noblesse a man might have genius Bravery merit of any Sort; yet no Power could affect the meanness of his Condition or give him any hopes of preferment. The moment that the Sky broke over his head & he saw a Possibility of advancement he felt all the meanness of his former condition & grasped at the Change. Some of the first movements of the Democracy raised multitudes of Private men into Officers, & continue to allow a man in the Ranks to look up to any station in the Army. Do you wonder that they are Democratical. If Buonaparte or any one else should swerve from democracy, so long as they think Such Swerving leads to the former disstinction of Noblesse he would Succeed as ill as Du Murier or any one else. The moment I saw the Army Adresses to the Directory & to one another it was Evident that no Power in France could make Peace: that till the Army is disposed of & Satisfied, no one in France who has any thing to lose will wish to have Peace: for Peace  must bring the Army home; give them leisure to form pretensions & Claims in return for their Services or in Other Words to seize every thing at discretion Must they not therefore be kept abroad and otherwise employed. And if the Directory continue, this will one day gall them as much as it will any one else. What are we then to do you will say? Nothing in my opinion but defend ourselves & this with proper conduct we are certainly in Condition to do untill thing take some turn in France. The Name & Disstinction of Noblesse may be effaced in France & the Army come under the Management of Leaders and Reasonable men without the terror of falling back into the condition of Soldiers for Life without the Possibility of Preferment. I am perswaded that there is no high Officer, Civil or Military in that country who would not gladly be a General Monk if he could; but no one dares attempt it. What the Directory calls a Royalist conspiracy is the very Stale trick of Faction imputing Plots to those they are to ruin by taking the measures agai them which the prevention of Plots are supposed to justify & to require.

your Friend Collingwood is Certainly a man of excellent sense, I shall say nothing of Teneriffe false intelligence might have misled any body: but the Bombardment of Cadiz could serve no purpose but to disstress & to Alienate a Prople who I believe in their hearts are disposed to be our friends. I respect Mr Blacket greatly & am sorry not to have seen him. You do not mention J. Homes health & I am in hopes that besides trouts he may get Some Vigour at Longfarmacks as I yet here at Hallyards. The account of your Ducal Neighbours is very agreeable all to the Dutchess' complaints for which I grieve very Sincerely but hope they are not very great. Mr Pitts Supposed financial Sch sounds well. Every one I think should be willing to buy up his own Land Tax at 20 yrs chase &c &c. But let him not undervalue his Enn for want of Finance, there is nobody can tell how much they may still do without it. And let him not Scold the French Directory for refusing Peace they cannot make peace & they dare not attempt it. The Seeds in which I have been dissappointed this year & for some years past are not better than Carrots & Turnips: Robt Douglass at Galashiels has under taken for my field Turnips. And I shall move heaven & Earth rather than miss carrots another year. The kind I want is the Large Red Flander Carrot if you know any seeds man to be trusted with such a Commission let me know. They talk to me of horn Carrots orange Carrots &c &c but I like hemlocks as well....

I have read more of the Robisons book & think he has disclosed a scene of Villany to much good purpose. As to free Masonry I have been long apprised of the power of Arcana in gulling mankind, & what a shallow fellow he is who has no Secrets
My Dear Carlyle

I join with this whole house in thanking Mrs Carlyle & you for the Boon of your Bun. I have been cofined above three weeks by a Scald in my heels at first neglected but now an Obstinate Sore which will take time to remove. It not only Confines me but makes every motion and every posture uneasy.

James tells me there was a full attendance of all the militia men now under Ballot. But such is the effect of the Law that not one proposed to serve otherwise than by Substitute; & the Poorest Shepherd Boy proposes to spend the earnings of a whole life to procure a Substitute rather than enlist for an indefinite time for a Militia man. James and I are agreed if Substitutes  are not to be found he is to serve And he is the only one who will do so quasi willingly. But in these times every man must be military whatever else he may be.

Europe I see is to be again in a blaze of War greater than ever. God grant the fire Ball of France may break in the Scuffle. The Catastrophe of Greenfield is Afflicting beyond measure. To say that it is surprising is nothing; for such a thing certainly never entered into the head of any one to Conceive. It is miserable that no friend could interpose in time to save him: but what is to be done with Insanity for such it must have been of some kind or Other. For a Man to be convicted of eating turd when he not only had every Sort of precious food but also exposed himself to the gallows for what he did, is wonderful. I am Obliged to you for relieving me from the perplexity which  vague reports would have caused me.

My fingers are so cold & I write in so uneasy a Posture that I doubt your being able to read my letter & think it best to have done. I am with best respects to Mrs Carlyle.

If letters were of much use; you would have but a bad bargain in such a Correspondent as me. I am like other Sinners open to the checks of Conscience when I find the Consequence of my ommissions as I now do in your Silence when matters that interest me are passing in your neighbourhood. Mrs Carlyle to our Girls mentions Admirals Homes Illness & turn for the better. I hope it is a continued & effectual Recovery & that you will be disposed to tell me so without loss of time. I am myself at present under very Anxious Concern on Account of my Boy whom the Admiral left on Board the Caesar. I have a letter from Portsmouth telling me that he is sent there among the Sick & is in a state of great debility from a Fever & Diarhea. I endeavour  to be prepared for my loss: but it is his present State of probable dejection that affects me most.

The person, who writes to me, is a Mr Hunt employed it seems in the Care of the Sick & Hurt Seamen at Portsmouth. His letter is Obliging & Consolatory. He had engaged a proper Nurse for him & bids me rely on every attention being given to his Case and I have written to this Mr Hunt to thank him & request the Continuance of his good Offices: but we are all here in Anxious & Silent expectation. If Admiral Home is well enough to be troubled with questions of that Sort & has any Confident at Portsmouth it will be charity to send me his address & recommendation to his good Offices for me in this case; that I may enter into Correspondence with him not being at all acquainted with the above Mr Hunt, tho disposed to think well of him from the Stile of his letter. I am glad to hear that Mrs Carlyle & yourself hold out well. 

Our accounts from Edinburgh are of many Complaints there that make people envy us the sour exposure of our Tweedale hills on which it is most Certain that all of us keep health much better than is common in Softer Climats. Our Government I believe had good Reason for declining present overtures of Negotiation: Namely that our Cue for negotiating is to be taken  our Friends; not from our Ennemys who may possibly & even probably mean throw Squibs of Jealousy & distrust among us. This Answer I believe would have saved a great many Idle words in Ld Grenvilles Note & many more in his tiresome Speech which seems to imply that we are never to get out of a War till we have an Enemy who will make peace & war for Conscience Sake. With common Enemies it is enough that we beat them into the humour of making Peace or that we make it their interest to do so. On any other principle than this no treaties could be less secure than those with the Court of Versailes.


I have a second letter from Mr Hunt under whose Care our young Seaman is, informing me that he is so much better as to be able to sit up four hours a day & is likely to be able in a few days to write me himself. This is acceptable news here:But to the letter is written not at Portsmouth, as I formerly stated to you, but at Dartmouth in Devonshire so that I am in a sort of a Scrape with you and our Friends at Portsmouth. As for you I certainly do not grudge myself the very Affectionate & Obliging part you took in my concern: But I am a little out of countenance for the trouble we have given to Captain And Mrs Patton. They will be inquiring Anxiously for our Patient & not finding him will be at a loss how to account for it. Affraid to Alarm us least we should think the worst or imagine they had not made proper inquiry &c I must therefore wish you the farther trouble of a line to Captain Patton to tell him my mistake, or rather the Blunder I have committed  in reading Portsmouth in the date of Mr Hunts former letter when I should have read Dartmouth. But you will please to know that his D is very like a P having the upright line well marked but the round little or not at all marked till it comes on the back of the upright so (P) and I, reading his letter with some agitation having once read Portsmouth so likely to be the place of naval infirmary, did not return to his date for Correction but sent his letter immediately to my Son Adam at Edinburgh to direct him in making inquiry for a Student of Physick there to whom Mr Hunt referred me for information about himself & the treatment of Patients from the Fleet at that place. I at the same time altho Mr Hunt gave me no direction how to write to him guessed at his address & sent my letter to Portsmouth in haste to let him know I would Spare nothing that would contribute to my Sons recovery or present Comfort. This letter he will probably never receive:but he seems to have proceeded kindly without it & I now Answer his last in which he gives me his address pointedly. This explaination I owe to you & our friends & Portsmouth, not to  mention myself whose reputation for Soundness of head may be at Stake. It is not altogether the effect of Old Age: tho being now as I mantain in the 19th Century I have seen no less than two of them & if I should see a third will attend more particularly to the date of Strange letters.

The handwriting covers three and a half pages of the MS, the last half page being written upside down.

I have the long debate of last week And very much Respect our Friend D's Speech. But none of them all seem to know the real difficulty of Obtaining any other Sort of Government in France than this of a Military Usurpation. In  first place where there is a Professional Ar that take it in their heads to Govern no Other goment can ever take place. The French Army consisted of 2 or 3.000.000 low born men who never could hope for any preferment & 2 or 3000 Noblesse Officers who held the Others in the lowest State of Contempt. The Revolution dissmissed all the Noblesse Officers increased the pay of the Men & filled up every Rank to the highest without regard to Birth. Here is more than any revolution ever did for any Sort of men before. This is their liberty & equality they have fought for it with more impetuosity in Victory & with more perseverance under misfortune than ever any sort of men ever did before: They thought it most secure under a Republican Form: but they will prefer a Single leader if he is likely to secure them against the Noblesse Otherwise I doubt there is not force or perseverance enough in Europe to  reduce them under the old disstinction of Noblesse Officers, And every Mention of a Return to Royalty with Nobless does but strengthen the Rands of our Ennemies against us. And whatever we may think or wish or hope I would agree to whip a School boy who would talk to them of Restoring the King. Of all the people that dealt with Cromwell there was not such a fool to be found in Europe as to propose to him Restoring the King. Every Drummer in the French Army is a Cromwell & no man in France that is not a Soldier is worth a Pin.


I am much Obliged for your letter; It opens one way to the Admiralty & which I shall certainly take when matters are ripe for it. I had not any Conversation nor did I mean to have any with Mr Dundas on the Subject untill I could say we were in Condition for his Interposition. As the Term of my Boys necessary Service as a Midshipman draws to a Close, I am desirous to know when & Where & by whom Midshipmens examinations to try their qualifications for a Commission is made. My natural recourse for Advice & direction in this matter should be to His present Captain Newman of the Loire: But there is something forbidding in that Quarter by whose fault I know not on that Quarter. The Boy from his entry into the Service had a succession of Captains partially kind to him & this perhaps had spoilt  him, or made him ill brook the treatment for which he should have been prepared of a mere Seaman. I have endeavoured all I can to make him think of his Duties on board only let others behave to him as they may think proper. He was very impatient to be on board a Frigate as being more Active than a line of Battleship And I was looking out for a Captain to whom I might recommend him, When he fell in with the Loire at Plymouth & chose of himself to be transferred to that Ship. Captain Newman is by every Account a brave man And soon after he took My son on board, by Admiral Homes Advice I wrote to thank him for that favour but had no Answer, which with some other Circumstances makes the unwilling to trouble him any more. As the Loire may be at Portsmouth before my Sons tryal can Come on, I should be glad, if it be not improper to trouble Captain Paton in Such a Matter, that without any thing like Complaint of Captain Newmans dissposition towards us, he would advise how  to proceed, and if he have any opportunity learn from Captain Newman what the Boys behaviour has been & the propriety of his proceeding to be examined at the end of this Term as  a midshipman. Captain Paton Can at the same time Answer the Questions I put, When Where & by whom such examinations are made. I should have endeavoured to see you in passing through Lothian  if I had not found out that the person I had entrusted with stopping my letters for me at Edinburgh had done with my newspaper but suffered every letter to be forwarded to this place in my Absence & I was impatient to receive Some packets which I had reason to believe were waiting for me & required Answers.

Here all is Safe and a general Concert of good Wishes for Mrs Carlyle & you in which no one joins more heartily than

To answer as you desire by return of the Post I by no means feel bold enough to undertake for a Journey to Arniston in the course of a week from the present date. I have a very great desire to see My Lord Chief Baron but there are at present so many insurmountable difficulties that I must positively defer till I can find His Lordship at Edr. We are taken short here in the middle of Harvest with rainy and most Boisterous weather. There is not a Standing Stook to be seen but all leveld with the ground And the Pease sheaves are bickering over the Country at the Rate of ten miles an hour. As I have neither men nor horses but what the little farm requires the farm is my master and I cannot budge without its leave. Besides I do not know any safe Road from hence to Arniston but by Edr or at least Lasswaid.

You will make  my excuse for the present to My Lord Chief Baron. In going to Edr I but go from one little home to another & that is all I am fit for in the rest of My Life. You Youth have no idea of the bucklings I require Against Cold by day & Cramps by Night; and tho I envy your Ignorance, hope you never will know better from your own experience at least. I am really not a fit guest for any Gentlemans house above the rank of an Innkeeper. There are great preparations in this County for a Ball tomorrow, And a fine saddle I am told preparing to be run for by horses, which have been in Cart or Plough every working day for Six Months past: but I doubt my infirmities will keep me at Home. Here all join in best respects to Mrs Carlyle & yourself. I mentioned my wish for a Gardiner to you that is a fellow who would do any thing he is bid including digging & planting &c &c

In answer to the two or three letters which you have written to me I can give you five or six which I had written in my own mind to you before I received any of yours. The first was from Geneva where having had the advantage of Lodging in Calvins own house & having access to some of his most secret manuscripts I thought myself without Vanity qualifyed to give you some light into the more Intricate recess of our Church. My second was from Fernex the seat of that renowned & Pious Apostle Voltaire who saluted me with a Complt on a gentleman of my family who had Civilized the Russians. I owned this Relation and at this & every successive visit encouraged every attempt at Conversation even Jokes against Moses, Adam & Eve & the rest of the Prophets till I began to be considered as a person who tho true to my own faith had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in Others. As my own Complt had come all the way from Russia I wished to know how some of my Friends woud fare but I found the old man in a state of perfect indifference to all Authors except two sorts, One of those who write Panegyrics, another who write Invectives on himself. There is a third kind whose names he has been used to repeat fifty or sixty years without knowing any thing of them such as Locke, Boyle, Newton &c. I forgot his competitors for fame of whom he is always either silent or speaks slightingly. The fact is that he reads little or none, his mind exists by Reminiscence & by doing over & over what it has been used to do, Dictates Tales, dissertations & Tragedy, even the latter with all his Elegance tho not with his former force. His Conversation is among the Pleasantest I ever met with, he lets you forget the superiority which the public opinion gives him, which is indeed greathat we conceive in this Island....

I hope that you will not impute to the want of a proper sense of your Friendship the Liberty I have taken to delay so long any direct answer to your Obliging letter. My Packet in returne was for Obvious reasons addressed elsewhere & those reasons however trifling might still hinder my writing if I coud possibly avoid thanking you for the part you have taken in my Affairs, and of which Dr Black has told me the likelihood of a favourable Ishue. He has likewise repeatedly informed me how much I owed to you in this bussiness as well as in the kind attention of your family to mine in this sort of Orphancy. Both of which circumstances give me greater pleasures than ever my opportunitys perhaps will enable me to communicate to any one else. I am here in appearance but my heart & my mind and all my Sensibilitys are with you. Fortunately what engages me without a rival in this Peregrination is the Object of my charge. In this I find many good Materials a little neglected & requiring much of the back game a Phrase which for want of knowing Back gaming you may not possibly understand. All my letters have been dated at Geneva: but I have been settled here only a few days, the summer was spent in the Countrey or in excursions to the Kingdoms Dukedoms & Cantons which touch this little territory on different Sides. I am on this account yet little acquainted with the place or its Inhabitants. I have seen two or three Ingenious men but am not yet properly  Speaking in habits with any of them. The Silence of Politics here and in the Aristocratical Cantons of Switzerland is amazing: Government does not think itself safe but by keeping out of Sight. Notwithstanding the Democratical Dash which this little Republic has lately received All Deliberations are Secret. Elections never heard of till the day & then made in profound Silence. Even the Doors of the Presbitery are shut, so that all idle expectations of being sometimes amused with Republican debates are intirely dissappointed.

D'Alembert passed some weeks here a few years ago, chiefly at Voltaires, when some of the younger clergy in haste to show their enlarged Views talked a little freely & he was idle enough to put in his Encyclopedia that they are all Socinians, This raised a great Ferment in the Church of Calvin that is but now in some measure appeased. We are in the way to see most people that come & go into Italy many of them remain some time and we are a numerous Colony of English amounting when all are reckoned to near a hundred.

The Countrey is beautiful beyond description. The Lake is equal to the Firth of Forth & the banks somewhat better, with a perpetual View of the Snowy Alps in the heat & bloom of Summer.

The Principal Curiosity however is Voltaire. If he were less a humourist by Nature the continual empressement of all Strangers to see him woud of itself inspire him with whims. You have been told how much he lys abed & how little he comes to his own Table. He has no certain hours like most old people, is sometimes up early enough & dressed in a full suit laced or Embroidered which cannot be less than thirty year old to judge from the fashion of the Cuffs & the buttons: but is for the most part in his Night Gown a dark Tye Wig & a laced Crimson silk bonnet: His common Salutation is qui veut voire une Ombre. Vous estes bien bon Monsieur-vous venez  voir un Mourant un Cadavre. It is very difficult to Converse with him on this Subject. If you say you are Sorry  And pray Sr why shoud you be sorry Or if you insist that he is wonderfully well & Robust for his Age he complains of the Cholic which is universally understood as a Signal to leave his house. So that the only way is to let him go on. When in a few Minutes altho his legs be feeble his tongue becomes as frolicsome as that of a boy of eighteen. He likes the Crack of every Whip especially that of Infidelity. He professes a great regard for the Late Lord Chesterfield & for this Lord of Course so that we can force ourselves upon him at most times; Some time ago after repeated excuses to avoid being seen by a person that wanted to be introduced to him he Answered at last. Si je suis en View je serai a vos Ordres, Si je suis mort je vous en demande pardon d'avance. & Pauvre Diable de Ferney. Hubert of whose Inimitable talent you have heard, can cut him or pinch him out of Cards or Crusts of bread so like that you imagine you see him and have your imagination quite filled with him, he has lately made a picture of him come out of bed stand leg & putting on his breeches dictating to his a very fair Specimen of his Way.  something which Cramer gets hold of a bring through all the forms of Anonymous Squibs Pamphlets And Volumes. People have a notion that there is something now in agitation between him & the King of Prussia. The Latter has had an Officer residing at Voltaires above eight Months & the most probable conjecture is that this officer has brought Memoires of the late Wars to be licked up & waits to carry them back again. But if this or any Other Serious matter is on foot between them the Secret is well kept.

So much for Voltaire. I have mentioned only his humours but you need not to be told that he is in general what the  French call Aimable dans la Socit without formality communicative & Polite.

I condole with you most sincerely on the loss of Poor Keith. Such breacks make even home recur with an Air of Sadness. My best respects to Mr Bruce who I hope will succeed to our wishes. In case he should need farther orders from me to receive the Quarterly & Other Payments I shall not fail to send them punctually. I expect to pass the Winter here but may be in Spain in the Spring if you have any commissions there I beg to be employed. I am frequently questioned about the time of your next publication & make the wisest Answer I can. Your friend Lord Holderness has been here some months & has escaped from a dangerous fistula. He desires to be remembered to you & says you have put powder in his drink. My best Respects in your Family & at the Poker Club. My Little Stock I find is encreased. I trust that some of you will take Care of the Christening. My being so far off sometimes costs me reflections but better times I hope are coming.
Geneva Novr9th 1774

I hope that you will not impute to the want of a proper sense of your Friendship the Liberty I have taken to delay so long any direct answer to your Obligeing letter. My Packet in returne was for Obvious reasons addressed elsewhere & those reasons however trifling might still hinder my writing if I could possibly avoid thanking you for the part you have taken in my affairs, and of which Dr Black has told me the likelyhood of a favourable Ishue. He has likewise repeatedly informed me, how much I owed to you in this business as well as in the kind attention of your family to mine in this sort of orphancy, both of which circumstances give me greater pleasures than ever my opportunitys perhaps will enable me to communicate to any one else. I am here in appearance but my heart & my mind and all my sensibilitys are with you. Fortunately what engages me without a rival in this Peregrination is the Object of my Charge. In this I find many good Materials a little neglected & requiring much of the back game, a Phrase which for want of knowing Back gaming you may not possibly understand. All my letters have been dated at Geneva: but I have been settled here only a few days, the Summer was spent in the Countrey or in excursions to the Kingdoms, Dukedoms & Cantons which touch this little territory on different sides. I am on this account yet little acquainted with the place or its Inhabitants. I have seen two or three Ingenious men but am not yet properly speaking in habits with any of them. The silence of Politics here and in the Aristocratical Cantons of Switzerland is amazing: Government does not think itself safe but by keeping out of sight. Notwithstanding the Democratical Dash which this little Republic has lately received all Deliberations are secret, Elections never heard of till the day & then made in profound silence. Even the Doors of the Presbetery are shut, so that all idle expectations of being sometimes amused with Republican debates are intirely dissappointed. D'Alembert passed some weeks here a few years ago, chiefly at Voltaires, when some of the younger Clergy in haste to show their enlarged Views talked a little freely & he was idle enough to put in his Encyclopedie that they are all socinians. This raised a great Ferment in the Church of Calvin that is but now in some measure appeased. We are in the way to see most people that come & go into Italy. Many of them remain some time and we are a numerous Colony of English amounting when all are reckoned to near a hundred. The Countrey is beautiful beyond description. The Lake is equal to the Firth of Forth & the banks somewhat better, with a perpetual view of the snowy Alps in the heat & bloom of Summer.

The Principal curiosity however is Voltaire. If he were less a humourist by Nature the continual empressement of all strangers to see him woud of itself inspire him with whims. You have been told how much he lys a bed & how little he comes to his own Table. He has no certain hours like most old people, is sometimes up early enough & dressed in a full suit laced or Embroidered which cannot be less than thirty year old to judge from the fashion of the Cuffs & the buttons, but is for the most part in his Night gown, a dark Tye Wig & a laced Crimson silk bonnet. His common salutation is, qui veut voir une Ombre? Vous estes bien bon Monsieur, vous venez voir un Mourant, un Cadavre. It is very difficult to Converse with him on this subject. If you say you are sorry  And pray sr why shoud you be sorry? Or if you insist that he is wonderfully well & Robust for his Age, he complains of the Cholic which is universally understood as a signal to leave his house. So that the only way is to let him go on When in a few Minutes altho his legs be feeble his tongue becomes as frolicsome as that of a boy of eighteen. He likes the Crack of every Whip especially that of Infidelity. He Professes a great regard for the Late Lord Chesterfield & for this Lord of Course so that we can force ourselves upon him at most times; some time ago after repeated excuses to avoid being seen by a person that wanted to be introduced to him he Answered at last, Si je suis en Vie je serai  vos ordres, si je suis mort, je vous en demande pardon d'avance, L Pavre Diable de Ferney. Hubert, of whose Inimitable talent you have heard, can cut him or punch him out of Cards or Crusts of bread so like that you imagine you see him and have your imagination quick filled with him. He has lately made a picture of him come out of bed standine leg & putting on his breeches dictating to his C makes a very fair specimen of his Way. He... produceing something which Cramer gets hold of a brings through all the forms of Anonymous squibs, Pamphlets and Volumes. People have a notion that there is something now in agitation between him & the King of Prussia. The latter had an Officer residing at Voltaires above eight months & the most probable conjecture is that this officer has brought Memoires of late Wars to be licked up & waits to carry them back again. But if this or any other serious matter is on foot between them the secret is well kept.

So much for Voltaire. I have mentioned only his humour but you need not be told that he is in general what the French call Aimable dans la socit without formality, communicative & Polite. I condole with you most sincerely on the loss of Poor Keith. Such breacks make even home recur with an Air of sadness. My best respects to mr Bruce who I hope will succeed to our wishes. In cas he should need further orders from me to receive the Quarterly & other Payments I shall not fail to send them punctually. I expect to pass the Winter here but may be in Spain in the Spring. If you have any commissions there I beg to be employed. I am frequently questioned about the time of your next publication & make the wisest answer I can. Your Friend Lord Holdernesse has been here some months & has escaped from a dangerous fistule. He desires to be remembered to you & says you have put powder in his drink. My best Respects in your Family & at the Poker Club. My Little stock I find is encreased. I trust that some of you will take Care of the Christening. My being so far off sometimes costs me reflections but better times I hope are coming.  

The bearer, Joseph Ferguson, my son, carrys a letter from his Father to you which might be sufficient for every purpose, but I cannot let him depart without some expression of my affection for you and full confidence that as far as you have opportunity you will be as a brother to him. His uncle, Captain Burnett, will, I hope, be in Bengall to receive him at his arrival and be his parent there; but in his absence I shall rely on you and gratefully repay any supply that may be necessary to him. He has many letters: one in particular to Colonel Ross, in which I remind him of my thanks for good offices to you, of which I shall be glad to know the continuance. It will be obliging to drop me a letter with the return of ships from India with accounts of yourself and this young person in his joining the corps to which he is appointed. I am, ,  and most

... before this will have come to hand you will, I trust, have heard of the arrival of your friend, my son Joseph, again in India. He goes at the head of a Company. May his health continue better than it was when he left you (1793). The lot of a military man is to go where he is ordered or to quit the service. My blessing to him and you. There will be a letter for him from this family by the same conveyance with this.

I am sorry to acquaint you of your worthy father's departure from this life. At his age the event is not a matter of surprise, and he met it with great calmness and in the full possession of all his faculties to the last, though under much suffering and bodily distress. In the course of last year he had a paralytic stroke from which he in a great measure recovered; but in winter he became dropsical, and suffered so much from a stifling in his breast that for many weeks before his death he could not be laid in a bed. I enclose for your satisfaction copies of his will executed some years ago, and of a codicil subjoined during his last illness, in both of which he has with great humanity attended to the necessities of poor and deserving relations, by allotting certain annuities for which I make no doubt his funds are sufficient, although I have not yet received a particular state of them. This my son is now making out from the papers which are in his hands, and of which we shall transmit a copy to you. It was difficult to save much from the wreck of a fortune which was on the losing side of a great revolution; but there is reason to believe that he recovered as much as could be expected, and he lived in this country with but little expense besides some of the charities which he has continued in his will.

I reproach myself frequently for not more regularly acknowledging the letters with which you have favoured me. Not being much a man of business my habits have been during great part of my life to defer and procrastinate letters, till there was a danger of their being forgotten altogether; and as most of my friends know this failing, and that I would not neglect any matter of consequence, they were ever ready to forgive me, which I hope you will also, and not discontinue to me the satisfaction of hearing of your welfare. I send this little packet to my friend Sir John MacPherson, who I hope will forward it and direct it properly. As I have taken to a country life at this place you will please direct your letters accordingly to me at Hallyards.... Most affectionately yours

... I cannot enough express my obligation to you on his account, and your readiness in assisting him in getting forward in his line of preferment. It gave me some pain to hear of his anxiety to secure his debt to me by ensuring his life. The proposal when first mentioned to me I rejected, and signified so much to his correspondent at London; but it seems too late to prevent the Ensurance for one year being payed. I have since authorized my son Adam to forbid it altogether, and hope it will not be repeated. If there is to be an insurer, let me be the person. If there were to be a loss, that of the money would be the least. And I mention the subject to you, trusting you will be so good as to relieve his mind of all anxiety on this account.... I am commissioned by more than one person in this family to thank you for your letters, for if Joseph have reason to complain of our silence, we have you and Mr. A. Johnston of Calcutta to thank for the only account we have had of him for above 18 months. I am, , ly

Give me leave to indulge myself in the Satisfaction I receive on your Lordships accession to the Head of the Admiralty Board when your name is endeared to the fleet by the Memory of your Fathers Beneficence.

I always experienced from him a Goodness which flowed from the Heart and to which I was not insensible.

If his Partiality should be hereditary I may meet with a Notice from your Lordship to which I am not otherwise entitled. It is indeed  but an ill return on my part to be adding to the load of importunities to which you are now exposed but I cannot forbear reminding your Lordship that I have a son in the Navy for whom to implore your Protection in the Way of his Profession a Way in which he may incur Competition with Persons of a Class and was never surpassed by any order of Men in the World: but it rests with him not to be exemptd from this  and if so it will rest with me  thankfully to acquiesce in the Judgement you will pass on his Claims. He will be to Lay his Respects to your Lordship soon and will trouble you with his name & Services in a more legible hand than mine.

The Inclosed having come to me without Name on hearing it read I have felt the Subject enough to think it Worthy of your Lordships Notice. There seems to be a plan in this great Bussiness for that a human Proceeding for which  your name so distinguished and hence no doubt you will forgive this trouble.

I am obliged to our friend Mr Gardner for the agreeable accounts with which he Sometimes favours me, of your Wellfare & of the kind remembrance with which you honour me. I believe he was Surprised, in communicating your last Letter & stating the Purport of your Remarks on the Intollerance of the Grecian & Roman Republicks, to hear me say I was of your opinion. A Passage from me had given occasion to your Researches, & I was Stated as an Antagonist. In that passage however I looked no farther than the Supposed  Law of the XII Tables of which I wished to point out Some remarkable Clauses, tending to convey Some notion of its Spirit.

But even with this restriction I am sensible that the expression to which you allude is not correct & endeavour to amend it in a blotted copy of the Book which is by me.

I had taken my impression hastily or been misled by unusual punctuation in the Copy from which I took it. Whatever Slips of this sort may have been made, I am conscious of very great care to avoid them & in my desire to state every part of the Subject fairly, lost every predilection I might originally have had for Persons or things. If I become more correct on the Subject of your Remarks I must thank you for it, as I had not yet attended to the matter & might have overlooked it. Examples of  Intollerance are frequent in the History both of Greeks & Romans. And men will ever be disposed to restrain by punishment and Severity whatever they conceive as Objects of Indignation and horror, even Slight deviations from what they conceive as holy in words or Actions.

The Vengeance of the Zealot is not a Safe Principle of Compulsory Law, but few nations I believe can boast that they never adopted or Abused it. So far as it operates in repressing overt Acts of Injurious or dissorderly tendency it may be justifyed on principles of necessity and sound Policy: but its abuses in one Nation certainly cannot be Sustained as precedent to justify its missapplications in another.

I should have acknowledged my Obligation to you in this matter sooner if a slight Indisposition from a Cold caught in these  easterly winds had not prevented me, & still disposed me to delay. I now hasten however least my letter should not overtake you at London as Mr Gardner tells you are to leave it about the middle of May. I am with great Respect

I have received the Favour of your Letter with the Paper which you do me the honour to communicate, in two Packets. Having been for some days in a bustle preparing for a remove to the Country I am Obliged to plead this As an excuse for my delay in complying with your desire of an immediate acknowledgement & hope you will accept of it as such however insufficient.

Dr Gardner is not in Town: but you may rely on my punctuality in what remains of your injunction. When I see Dr Gardner you may expect to hear from me, & tho you may observe that my notions agree with  yours in the main point & that I am even ashamed of having appeared to mistake it in any instance: yet there is perhaps some difference in respect to the Principle on which the Intollerance of the Antient Nations you mention & that on which which modern Nations proceed. May not such a difference be inferred from the meaning of terms now of great import but without any corresponding meaning in Other times. Such as Infidel contradistinguished to the Faithful or true Believer &c. The Error inconsistent with, or the Creed that is necessary to Salvation. The Zeal for Prosylitism. The detection refutation or suppression of Heresy. The Canon of Orthodoxy &c &c. If you find besides mere expressions of horror & vengeance against Profaneness, any conceptions of the understanding that correspond to the meaning of the terms recited. I must endeavour  to correct my present notions on the Subject. And here I shall leave the Matter having gone farther than I meant in this hasty acknowledgement of your Favour and of the sincere Respect with which I have the Honour to be 


I have just received your letter inclosed to Mr Home, & am sorry that my omission in not writing you sooner shoud have given you the trouble of a second letter, or occasioned any degree of suspence with respect to my inclinations. I would have written immediatly on having the honour of your former letter, If I had not thought it unnecessary to give you that trouble. As Mr Home had Signifyed my intire Submission to My Lord Butes directions, & my willingness to be employed on any terms His Lordship thought proper. The proposal at first found one great difficulty with me in breaking in upon my Inclination to Setlement after some years of Wandering & uncertainty, of which I confess I was become tired: But there were considerations enough to remove that difficulty, & the principal one which remained upon My Lord Bute's Letter, was a very Sincere Anxiety about my qualifications to fill a place of so much consequence & such tender concern to His Lordship, & in which every circumstance I had access to know, made me think with pain of any degree of dissappointment to him.

I am extremely sensible of the honour of this Confidence from a Person who is so well apprised of the Nature & importance of it & shall endeavour to profit all I can by the views he will no doubt continue to give me.

I am just now upon terms for disposing of My Chaplaincy which is but a precarious Possession to one who has tired of following a Regiment, & who in time of service can have little more than the name & the chance of being suddenly called upon from Abroad. If I can get My Colonel to concur in this Affair I shall have litle further connection with the Clergy of Scotland & be under no necessity of appearing in their Character & shall be very glad if that Circumstance is equally   agreeable to My Lord Bute.

Home has left his quarters at Braid & lives in Town. He has finished the first Acts of Agis & they are now in the hands of a Copyer, & will I believe be sent to you when done. I dread the difficultys which remain in the Plan from the Mixture of two Objects & Passions, but I have avoided ever discouraging him upon a point which coud not possibly be altered. He wrote you by last Post & is now gone to the Countrey for a Day or two. I hope you will forgive the Length & the freedom of this letter & believe me to be

I intended to have waited on you a few days ago when I was in Town; but I found the House of Commons was Sitting & had no hopes of finding you at Home. I have a Brother in Scotland who is very desirous of being in the Army, & I wanted to ask your opinion whether in the Present Situation of Affairs, there might be any hopes of Obtaining a Commission for him.

Lord Milton gave me reason to believe it woud not be difficult, last year when there was a report of some new Levies, & My Brother had settled his Affairs w't this View: but these new Levies never were made; and I know it is more difficult to Obtain commissions when Regiments are formed, & every Colonel ingaged to Provide for his own connections. My Brother has some Military merit, which you must have the Patience to hear. He had been settled at Bourdeaux with an Uncle in the time of the last War, & from a fondness for The Army left that Place to go to Flanders, without consulting with any of his Friends or letting them  know what became of him: The Consequence of that Step was his inlisting in General Brags Regiment. Lord George Sackville I believe at that time had the Command of that Regiment. He was wounded at the Battle of Fountenoy & taken Prisoner. I afterwards found him out by Accident & prevailed upon him to let me apply for his discharge. I make no doubt but in your own Department your hands are full of Solicitations & ingagements, & it may be out of your Way to apply to any body concerned in the Land Service, and this may be My Lord Butes case too, & I woud not make use of the access I have to any body to teize them improperly. I will be determined by your opinion & have great confidence that you will excuse this trouble

I am glad to hear that Mrs Murray is well recovered. I have begun to revise the Paper you saw, & I am changing it to a Dissertation on the Vicissitudes incident to Human Society, & propose when that is done to write two more on the History of Manners, & on the History of Literature & to satisfy myself with what may be done in a reasonable time without planing out works for a Lifetime.

I am very much obliged to you for the trouble you took in writing me agreeable news, & I wish you joy of the Credit which such successes give to the Ministry among our Politicians. But I suspect you intended to Mortify Home & me who by the Conduct of the Admiralty are like to be dissappointed of our invasion which we both wished for, he to exhibit his Military Genius & I to practice my Philosophy which you may remember is the best calculated for invasions of any Philosophy now extant.

It seems plain that the French intended by Assembling their force to strike a blow in the Channel. And we are told here it has appeared by some papers taken from Marechal Contades that they had planned an Embarkation from the Weser & the Elb when they shoud become Masters of those Rivers, a stroke which woud have probably Surprised us in the North and  I make all the use of it I can here to horrify people who think we can be secure without a universal Militia but to no purpose, for Lord Littleton declared where he dined two days ago with the Provost that the only effectual way of serving our Countrey now was by helping to recruit his Majestys regular troops; which introduced great applause to your City Subscriptions & to the ingenuity of Poultney & Crawfurds double feathers.

Every measure seems to proceed on a Supposition that it is difficult to raise Men for the defence of the Island & those measures create difficultys. I wish by way of experiment that a King of this Countrey woud tell the people that he was threatened with a formidable Invasion, but that he was conscious of his Strength in the youth of Great Britain & desired they would give in their names in every Parish & County. You may easily figure what a list there woud be & what difficulty woud be found in reducing them to the necessary Numbers. I am affraid some of the Methods which are taken to defend us tend to make us not worth  defending. But this is perhaps more politics than you have time to read. I woud have troubled you sooner if any thing had occurred worth your Notice & if I had been less burried in Solids & fluids & Ratios. I like my Situation very well, & begin to admire Sr Isaac Newton as I did Homer & Montesquieu, but it is on Condition that he will let me go as soon as I become a tolerable Professor of Natural Philosophy. Home has been little here since I came, before he went last from Edinburgh he showed me a rough draught of the fifth Act which give me great pleasure but I am still affraid his Work is too great for his time. I have not heard from Robertson what he is meditating for the Subject of further Works; he probably declines being troubled with many opinions. The Wit and ingenuity of this place is still in a flourishing way, & with a few corrections, which however it is difficult to make, is probably the best place for Education in the Island. Ch:Townshend has got great Popularity here. Lord Littleton scarcely showed himself. I am D.r Sr

I suppose you are so bussy that you have no time to receive compliments either of condoleance or congratulation. I who only mix a little news paper politics with Natural Philosophy have been extremely embarrassed with the affairs of the Nation ever since the news of last week & as far as news papers go there is nothing you do likely to escape me for some time to come. With all the interest I take in the public however I would not have troubled you at this time, if some notions I have about a private Affair did not press me so strongly that I cannot possibly refrain. Home sets out for London this day it woud be ridiculous for any body to think that applications in his favour are necessary where he is going, but I am extremely Anxious that his friends should  think as I do of the manner of directing their kindness. It is for this reason that I trouble you and endeavoured to press the same notion on him at parting. A Subsistance altogether precarious however honourable for the present or big with hopes was never to my mind. Every man of Worth shoud have a firm bottom on which he may stand however narrow it is & I may say of myself what I believe is not true of him that I never coud love a man intirely whilst I remain in absolute dependance on him or at least that I never coud act if I did love him so. Give me ground enough to stand on as my Predecessor Archimedes said & then I will show you what kind of Mechanic I am. I therefore wish most earnestly that every Other act of Friendship for Home was thought of no avail till he is fixed in some moderate reasonable or even little provisions sure for his Life & if his fortunes carry more let him pay at hazard for the rest as much as he will. You will forgive me for  Supposing for a moment that you can need to have views suggested to you on a like this. But I am anxious that not escape you & am perswaded that doing wh call Justice to one of the most Amiable that ever existed since mankind had a being is of more consequence than half the Public measures you will pursue this Twelve months for more than that proportion of them will result finally in getting more Victuals for John Bull, for which I do not care one single farthing.

I most earnestly beg that you woud make Homes Friends beware of that most cruel Idea that if he is secure or independent for Life he will write no more. Make them beware of too great a fondness for their own Generosity to keep him in a situation that woud make them feel it every moment. None of these cautions may be needed & that will be a happy case; but if you are Satisfied of the truth of what I say I wish you woud not partys  concerned depart from it for ant. I know that tho Home is the bold in the World in interposing for Others he is shy for himself & may not see in so strong a light as he shoud do & I wish you woud add your Authority to what I said to him about it. Whilst he continues in his present Situation or any like it I shall always think of him with pain, as a man who is misplaced & who meets with injustice, if he shoud otherwise meet with all the marks of kindness that ever was bestowed on Man. I must repeat it again that half your Public measures will not be of this consequence.

Adresses are preparing from every corner & from what I can understand the Militia may be inserted in some places merely to pay Court.

What blessed days these are. I begin My Labours again in a few days. I am with The greatest respect

I set out for the Highlands tomorrow morning with the Mr Grevilles. I wished to see you that I might receive my Manuscript & any remarks you have taken the trouble to make. If you have any that can be put in writing without too much trouble I beg that you will deliver them with the Book itself to Mr Russell the Professor of Natural Philosophy, who will call or send to you for it. I have informed him of my intentions & entrusted him with any negotiations that may arise with Booksellers in my Absence.

Since the Date of the Letter which I had the Honour to write to your Excellency by order of His Majesty's Commissioners inclosing Copies of their Correspondence & proceedings that have passed since Lord Carlisle Mr Eden left New York; Application has been made to Their Excellencies setting forth that Sundry Goods Particularly Flax seed Staves, & Mahogany, ready for exportation to Great Britain have been long detained at New Port in the Province of Rhode Island And it has appeared to them expedient with the Approbation of His Majestys Principal  Secretary of State for the Colonies, that the inclosed Proclamation shoud be Issued, for the relief of Merchants & Others interested in that Place granting them a Freedom of Export to the same Extent & Under Precautions Similar to those that were Employed in the Proclamation of the 26th Septr published at New York. That is instead of the Port Officers Established at New York, empowering the Commander of His Majesty's Treaty at New Port Rhode Island to grant the Permission therein Set forth.

The Extension of this Priviledge to Rhode Island did not take place at the same time it was Granted to New York because it did not then Appear that Goods for exportation had been Collected at the first of those Places.

Your Excellency will farther please to Observe, that your Name is by Order of The Other Commissioners inserted in the Title of this Instrument & a place left for your Excellency's Signature that in case you shall approve of it & nothing appear to render improper the Publication & Effect of this Proclamation, it may have the Sanction of your Authority & being Communicated to the Commanding  Officer at Rhode Island it may be published in the News Papers of that Place & of New York or Otherwise As your Excellency many shall be pleased to order.

Originals of the within Proclamations having been sent to His Majestys Principal Secretary of State for His Majestys Approbation and if thought Expedient to be Committed to the Discretion of Sir James Wright Bar't now about to return to his Government of Georgia, it is thought at the same time proper to transmitt to you these Duplicates executed Signed & Sealed in the same manner & form with the Original Proclamations for Restoring the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to the Peace of The King, that in case  the Originals shall by any Accident Miscarry And that you find it expedient for the Service of His Majesty to declare either both of the Provinces of Georgia and South Carolina at the Peace of the King, one or both the Within Proclamations may be produced & published for this Purpose.

The State of my health having, for some time past, made it desireable for me to have a retreat from my labours in the College, I now resign my office of Professor of Moral Philosophy into the hands of your Lordship & the Town Council, presenting at the same time my sincere thanks for the honour, which has been done me and the protection I have always received.

I am commanded by His Majestys Commissioners appointed in Pursuance of An Act of Parliament passed in the eighteenth year of His Majestys Reign, to treat consult & Agree upon the means of quieting the Dissorders now Subsisting in North America, to inform you, that upon the Appointment of Lieut. Coll. Archibald Campbell to Command a Body of His Majestys Forces in the Province of Georgia it was thought expedient at the same time to furnish him with a Commission of Civil Governour & Commander in Chief within the said Province, to be produced & carried into execution by him if he should find a reasonable prospect of being able to restore & preserve the Civil Government of Georgia under the Authority of the King. But that if the Situation of affairs should prevent his Acting under this Appointment he should preserve it carefully within his own Custody till he could Deliver it to His Majestys Principal Secretary of State to be Cancelled.

That this Provisional Appointment of Lieut. Coll. Archibald Campbell may not in any Way obstruct your Return to the Government of Georgia to which you were formerly Appointed by  his Majesty the Commissioners have thought Proper by the Inclosed Commission to you to revoke & Annul that which they granted at New York to Lieut. Coll. Campbell. But, if as they have reason to expect you should not have occasion to Act under their Appointment it is their Intention & desire that the Instrument herewith sent appointing you Governour & Commander in Chief in the Province of Georgia should be Suppressed & Cancelled.

I thought to have written a long letter but shoud have done it before. I went out in the morning since which time I have by accidents been detained abroad. I coud not in my last tell you how much I approved of the Pamphlets inclosed. Tell F. that I had some knowledge of his Subject & I am highly delighted with his Picture. I am affraid we shoud not agree so well about American affairs. I think Greenvilles Stamp Act a very unlucky affair for this Countrey. It has brought on a disspute in which this Mother Countrey Countrey as it is very properly called has made a very shabby figure, And I am affraid cannot mend the matter. We are at once Tradesmen & Soldiers to America. When we bully them as Soldiers they threaten not to employ us as Tradesmen. And the Question has now become complicated in the highest degree. I cannot fully Satisfy myself about it: but I wish it had never  been Stated, or that Some way coud now be devised of leaving us just where we were in Possession of of all Monopolys with America. I mean the monopoly of Arms of Government and of Trade & leaving them the Right of Taxing themselves, as the exigency of their Affairs & the Influence of Government here coud Obtain. I dont wish to see this Countrey in Possession of many Provinces a Prey to Rapacity And perhaps an Engine to be turned against this Countrey itself. If this Countrey is to Subsist long enough till Engines destroy it from Abroad. I have often wished to be on the Spot that I might shoot at the flying follys of the times: but I am Sensible of the disadvantage of being at a distance & not hearing of a Subject untill it is too late. I find that People of Letters think there is a dignity in keeping aloof from present affairs & writing only for Posterity. I am of a Contrary opinion. I believe what is done for today has more Effect than books  that look big on the Shelve  coud help to bring the  to some innocent termina

Speak like a Stranger and lose the Effect. I am not at hand to repell first attacks or replys. In short I cannot write a Pamphlet but I will continue to write you what occurs to me. Adapt yourself to the meridian of the Place. If I had written the best that the occasion requires I shoud be averse to be mentioned to Grafton as a writer. I coud come under no Obligations which I am affraid the Step your Friendship Suggests woud seem to Promise.

I promised in my last to recollect if any thing coud be done: but I have Succeeded very Ill in my Recollection: If I am turned out from being what I am I see nothing I am fit for but to be either King or Prime Minister either of which I woud Undertake without any Hesitation even bad as the times are. I am glad I have not Room to Sign this letter.

I have just received your letter by Coll. Campbell who being in haste has sent it with a very obliging Mess & defers the pleasure of seeing him till his returne to this place about Christenmas. I have without a moments delay taken this paper & shall not think of any thing else till I have sent off a letter to you. Yours have all come safe at least do not refer to any more than I have received. I coud muster up some excuses for not writing: but mus confess on recollection that the Principal cause has bee a senseless habit of Procrastination. I sometimes waite for one event & then for another. Some months of the long Silence passed even in expectation of seeing you in India & I had the womanish humour of wishing to surprise you: but of this you have heard as I guess from a letter of yours to Doctor Robertson and I need not to tell you how that matter went off, the wonder is that it ever  encreased a little since you heard of me.

Bell has got a little Brother about three year old & a Sister about eight months. The little boy has a good deal of Stuff in him, both attention and Vehemence. I begin to recommend him in Time & shall bequeath him your Friendship as the best part of his Inheritance.

His name is Adam & I shall call him McPherson too if you please. Mrs Ferguson & Bell Join in their be Respects & acknowledgements for your new Present which was not landed when Coll. Campbell ft London but they hope will come Safe. Mary too ill have a share of it and thus you have a Catalogue of all my children. My demerits as a Correspondent s diminished the frequency of my Intercourse even ith Charles Greville. His Father is dead within a few months. He will be in Parliament for the first time this winter. I have heard nothing directly from himself.

 I did not expect the Instrument was to have Magnanimity enough to behave properly to you. The Lustre he wished to assume required keeping you out of Sight. But I hope that the other party concerned has had sense enough to see and acknowledge the truth. The Company has received some blows within this Twelve month & is still upon the Anvil to be hammered into nobody knows what. But I hope and believe, that no ha will happen. I shall be sorry if any thing be done  hinder The Companys Servants from acquiring fortunes in an Innocent way Abroad for after all that has been said this I believe to be the likelyest way of bringing wealth from India to Europe. The State I hope will leave the Company in all matters to Govern itself, & it will be wise in any Minister to leave them accountable for what happens there but it will be allowable likewise to squeeze them to the last farthing they can pay in consistence with that Interest they ought to have as trade to manage their aff  no opportunitys of writing to me, tho I do not deserve letters yet I enjoy them Sensibly & am anxious about the wellfare of my Friends tho I think my own shoud be taken for granted when they dont hear from. Mr s Ferguson joins me in most affectionate Respects & I in name of my little Children earnestly pray for your wellfare.

I have just Received your Letter which came under Cover to Lord Warwick & deserve that you shoud hesitate about writing to me but shoud have been very unhappy if your Doubts had ended unfavourably. It is most certain that the habit of Procrastination & other reasons or rather faults have hindered my writing to you till about the beginning of Last winter when I determined without delay to acknowledge your Favour by Coll. Campbell. What I then wrote will I hope come to your hands sometime before this And Satisfy you that I am at least willing to acknowledge the Indefatigable  Affection with which you are pleased to honour me, I feel it and am vain of it beyond what I can express to you. But you will perhaps be Surprised to find me here & I must Satisfy you on this Point first. You must know then that I am as little as ever Connected with Ministers & find no reason to entertain the Views which you present to me. You have received Some Alterations in the Government of India at the head of which some time or Other I hope to hear of you. My views & Object here is different. I am on my Way to Join Lord Chesterfield now a young Man about 19 years of Age on Travels abroad. His Guardians secure me in an equivalent for my Place at Edinburgh & I am again come into the world  to Scramble. I am likely to be Separated for two or three years from My Family, but Submit to this Circumstance in hopes of Seeing them again more at freedom to Disspose of myself. I Received your Letter from the hands of Charles Greville who is now elected Member of Parliament but has been prevented by an Illness of many weeks duration from taking his Seat.

He was made a Lord of Trade in the Room of his Brother upon his Election And I have every reason to believe will turn out a Man of Bussiness & in every Respect worthy of the Affectionate Regard you express for him. The Elder Brother is now Earl of Warwick as you will probably have heard. Robert is in Quarters with his Regiment. When any of this family are  Ministers I have some chance of being a Favourite as you propose, & that you and I may have much to Say in Europe as well as in Asia. Charles Grevilles Illness was what I believe the Physicians call an Abscess near the Anus and a fever the last is removed & the first in a fair way of being entirely healed. I set out for Paris in my way to Geneva tomorrow & in my hurry write this hasty letter rather than delay my thanks for your Affectionate concern in my Wellfare. And here you will perceive probably from the change of Ink that I have been interrupted & write at a place different from that in which I began my letter. You have Judged well in not deciding against me when you hesitated in writing for I consider your Friendship as the happiest  Circumstance of my Life. Fortune has taken a pleasure to cross me in many other things but in that she has been truly kind. I told you of my children in my Last. The Boy is destined to your Protection in case his Father should fail him which is very likely. I intend this letter shoud go by Joseph Burnet the youngest of My Wifes Brothers he has at present some hopes of getting A passage on Board a ship Captain Thomson bound for Madrass. He has been bred in a counting house at London but turned out of place by the failure of his Master. He has a brother Captain of Artillery on the Bengal Establishment & has been this year or two endeavouring to meke his way to India with no better Prospect  than that of hanging upon his brother till something could be done for him . When there were thoughts of my going to India he was to have gone with me. The Ruin of Sr George Colebrooks Interest cut off all the hopes he had in me. A License to go abroad is all that we now hope for & tho he goes by a Madrass ship he is really bound for Bengal unless you can find some employment for him. And I shall say no more to recommend him to your friendship. If he shoud not himself find a Passage to India I have directed him not to fail in forwarding this letter which I scarcely find time in this Town of hurry & interruption to write. How do you find time in the midst of  Camps Conquests & Intricate detail of Bussiness to write to all your Friends. What do you think I feel on the Continual Proofs I have of your your Friendship. The Bill to Lord Warwick is not yet come to hand tho he too has received a letter. I leave the Management of it to John Home who remains here after I am gone. You cant imagine how fortunately that 100 had arrived to buy me French Cloaths while the Plan of your Appartment at Bankhead is making out. That place to be sure is my favourite & I now Submit to make the Tour of Europe that I may be at Liberty hereafter to Live there the year Round. & yet I hope that you & I may Meet on better Ground. I need not tell you any thing of your Private Friends here for they will probably write you. Fingal has got a Machine carrying ten or twelve Volumes in Folio which he turns round & extracts from them a History of England from the Restoration to the year 1720. The Adams have had a Lottery in which they heve sold but half the Tickets but having got most of the great Prizes are delivered from a dreadful Situation. Make my best Respects to Mahomed Aly or if he will not Accept of them to Flyder Aly. I forgot to tell you that your Friend Depr is in perfect Esteem & good reception here nothing but extreme hurry coud have hindered my waiting on him as a relation of yours, & the same hurry must be my excuse for sending you such a Scrawl as this.

But I hope you will not hesitate to believe that you are the man in the world of whose merit I have the clearest conviction.

I wrote you from this place about this time last year by My Wifes Brother Joseph Burnett for whom I coud do no more than procure a Passage to India where he wished to Join his Brother Captn. James Burnett of the Artillery who is since dead. A Missfortune which happened a few Months before Josephs Arrival & probably exposes him to much disstress. I have procured & sent him some recommendations in Bengale & I know that if you have any means of aiding us there you will not neglect it. I have passed last year mostly in France & Swisserland & Received your last letter at Geneva.

Lord Chesterfields Affairs have required his presence for a little in england & we have been out three months at London & are at last come to Blackheath for the remainder of our Stay in this Countrey. We have  about eighteen Months to spend abroad, At the Expiration of which I expect to returne to my usual Affairs at Edinburgh. I have keept my Professorship one year by a Deputy & mak application to have the same Indulgence prolonged for another. My Wife & Children of who I have four keep house with their Uncle Doctor Black. So much for my own Affairs, And  yet there is still something more. Charles Greville has payd me Since I have been here One hundred Pounds on your Account. I do not know if your Old Acquaintance the farm of Bankhead deserves to have so much Additional expence laid out upon it but if I live to see or to Inhabit that undutiful place I shall make it carry some mark of your Friendship which is a better fruit than it Commonly bears. Lord Warwick and his Brothers are in the Midwifes Phrase doing as well as coud be expected. Charles is in the board of Trade & if he were not carryed away by Virt woud make a Statesman & I hope in spite of Virt will do So. He applys to Bussiness & has been Speaking in the house of Commons. I never cease to Goad him on that Road. Robert has at least got the Rank of Captain in his Majestys Guards. He has Penetration attended with  Very pleasant humour & has in reality better Conduct than either of his Brothers. Your Friend James McPherson has Published his History in two Vols. 4to & his State Papers in wo Vols more. I am told he has Sold greatly and iven great Offence to Familys & State Partys. You know how little he is dissposed to Palliate he vices or follys of Mankind & how little likely  please those who consider their own Party  or their own Ancestors as Heroes. I am apt enough to believe that he has carryed the humour of depreciating too far & from this way of expression you will learn that I have not yet Read enough to form a decisive Judgement. The Dissipation of London is inconsistent with any reading but news Papers. I have brought the Book hither last night & will be through it soon. As far as I have seen; The Characters he draws and other Prominent Passages are very Masterly. The General Course of the Narration Inferior.

John Home has been at London some weeks has in his hands some Dramatic Works for the Stage but not for this Winter. The Adams as you will have heard have by Means of their Lottery & great Good Fortune escaped from a Storm & are again in Prosperity. The Nephew a young man in whom I have always perceived much goo Sense & excellent disspositions; having come into Parliament at a great expence, which was much Censured; has shown himself well qualif for that Station & has well Justified the Conduct of his Friends in bringing him Forward. Adam Smith tells me he is just finishing his long expected work on National Resources and the Policy of Trade. And now My Dear Sr for the Pen of Angels if I had it to tell you of the Critical State of this Nation, And  the wonderfull events that are in Suspence. The Americans have destroyed much of your Company Tea. Government here got Angry & made Acts to Chastise them. They have accumulated their Insolence And Government their Acts. They are Arming a we are Arming, each I believe hopes to bully the Other but Bullys have sometimes drawn themselves into a Serious quarrel and so may wem The consequences look so tremendous to m. And are so slightly Treated by the Retainers of Government here that I am apt to think myself in a Misstake about them altho I wait at least with a very high degree of Curiosity or the Ishue. I am affraid that we never sha have genius enough to turn the great resources hich are presented to us in The East or the est to Account. I have heard of your intention  returne to Europe & likewise of the Probability that Lord Pigots appointment & Arrival at adrass will detain you in India. In that I wish ou to do what is best but cannot help remmending to you to Collect the fullest detail ou can of every circumstance relating to the tate & operation of Policy in India & so equipped  be ready to present yourself here by the time India Affairs come again under the Review of Govent, which cannot, by the term of the Charter, be  far off. This Letter goes by My  Friend Captain Thomson a young Man of great worth to whom I earnestly wish your Friendship. I have likewise a Friend and Namesake at Bengale whose Adventures, by the loss of a worthy Brother murdered at the Cape of Good Hope, have been more Tragic than those of my Brother in Law Jos. Burnett. If you can  by your Correspondence there make him feel any Effects of your Friendship to me I shall be greatly Obliged if any thing can Add to the sense of Honour and of pleasure which your Affection gives me. That you may the better apprehend what I mean by the detail I have mentioned on the last page. Select some Town & its Disstrict. Procure if possible an account of its extent & numbers of People. The different class's of that People the occupations the resources the way of Life of each. How they are related & their mutual dependencys. What Contributions Government or Subordinate Masters draw from the Labourer of any Denomination & how it is drawn &c. But I beg Pardon for saying so much of an Object which you must know so much better than I do. The man who can bring light from India into this Countrey  And who has address to make his light be followed may in a few years hence make himself of great Consequence. And here I shall conclude my Letter. Be so Good as direct for me to the Care of Mr Robert Mayne Banker in Jermyn Street London. 

I had the pleasure of your letter from Dover & was extremely happy to hear you were arrived on British Ground. The Other Intimations in your letter Tho very general gave me likewise very great pleasure. I have waited with some impatience for your Second letter from London in which I hoped to find some time mentioned for your Appearance in This Countrey And this I still hope will be in your Power in this remiss time of Bussiness. You do not say whether you are come home for good & all as John Bull says, or only for Some Special bussiness. 

Nor do I know which to wish. Here is certainly much bussiness to be done relating to the Countrey you have left & I am very glad there is such a person as yourself in the Way to be employed in it. I hope we shall meet before the whole of it is adjusted & I will stretch all my Politics to show how much I wish you Success. We are so disspersed at Present that I have not seen either Jno Home, Carlyle, Dr Robertson or Doctr Blair Since I received your letter. Jno Home will certainly pass the greatest part of Winter in London but is here till near Christenmas unless some thing particular require his going away sooner. Your friend Mr McKenzie has been settled some time at London as an Agent. I saw him upon a Visit here a little before I received your letter but not Since. I sent your obliging  intelligence to Lieut. Bruces Father who expresses the warmest Gratitude and Affection for you. I am extremely happy to find that you come home on the best terms with Coll. Stuart. I saw a Letter from His Brother Andrew lately to his purpose. How Politics may steer I know not but this last I will venture to say among the Ablest & fairest men you can have Connection with in this Countrey.

Your incloseing me a cover in your last letter was a Sufficient hint that I ought to write to you and you perhaps have not yet found out that it was directed to me instead of yourself & I shall now turn it back to London to see what it will bring from thence.

I did not want disposition to write even without this hint & had sent a letter inclosed to Governour Johnstone but from your not acknowledging it suspect the Governour has been out of Town & either not received it or not known how to forward it. Moreover Dr Robertson told me about ten days ago that your Brother by a letter of his own from Skye was comeing here in about a fortnight to meet you and I have long flattered myself with the hopes of seeing you, Circumstances which woud have damped  a much greater Ardour than mine is in writing letters & prompted by a much greater collection of materials than this place & my Situation Affords. I have however now lost all hopes of seeing you for the Season & procrastinate no longer. Andrew Stuart told me you had taken a house in Parliament Street but as he coud be no possitive and particular enough I send this under cover to that Never do well James McPherson.

I suppose you are deeply & I hope Successfully engaged in India Bussiness. Not merely who shall be condemned or acquitted in late Affairs but what is to become of the Interests of this Countrey in India for Centurys to come. It is full time at least that this Subject were, in the news paper Stile, on the Tapis And there is no time fitter than when you are at London to aid with  your Lights that reach not only to India but to Other Similar Scenes in the history of human affairs. My notion is that instead of making up the Suit here The Taylors shoud be sent to take the Gentlemans measure on the Spot endeavour to fit him & report on their return for the approbation or dissapprobation of those it may concern here. But I will not puzzle my brain with projects. Andrew Stuart is gone from here very earnest in his Brothers Cause & very Sensible of your Friendship which I shall be very glad what both of you Cultivate. I have been much with John Home lately & we were in hopes of being Surprised by you. He will probably be soon in London. Your Friends Robertson & Blair made a long Journey into England and I a short one into Perthshire. My wife has been in mighty disstress in the Rheumatism for many Months past. But my Children in Number five Comeing Six in the most perfect health and Vegetation. You are  probably as Anxious as we are to have news from America and I hope by this time more Successfully. We are certainly under a necessi at least for our own Credit, of giving that people if we can join them a sound drubbing: but I protest that if we had news to morrow that Howe had beat Washington and Burgoyne Arnold the use I woud make of it woud be to leave America with contempt. For it looks as if no Calamity woud force them to Submission & if it did their Submission is not worth haveing. Their whole resource for any Visi time to Come will not pay the Army that ke them in Submission. So I am partial enough to Great Britain to wish them in the bottom of the Sea. My Affectionate Respects to the Grevilles who I hope will soon be in London. And believe me to be

I this moment have the pleasure of your letter & the only consolation I coud have in the present state of public news, to learn that our future Efforts are to be made with British Subjects not with forreigners. In this way if we neither acquire any thing abroad nor even keep what we have we shall end the War at least with Swords in our hands & be in Condition to defend ourselves.

My first Bussiness will be to see Banachar which I hope I shall before this letter is sent off. I will afterwards deliver your Message at Dalkieth. As to the  letter you left for my perusal perhaps the Silence you enjoin me woud be the best Course if it were practicable. In the first place the Thing Speaks for itself & I am very Ostentatious of it. Mr Wordie too I have made free with. You were not gone 24 hours from hence when I had a Call for part of what that hopefull place you was to see has cost me. I chose to owe you rather than the other person & even ventured to put your Building scheme to some risk at least of Delay. I Deliverd your Canes & Mrs Ferguson delivered your Muslins. I believe really that we are all vain of these marks of your Regard.

The Principal who is a great Speech Maker chose to expatiate on My part of the matter & without knowing the  whole ground said what is true that if my own Son had returned to me in Prosperity I coud not be made to feel it more Sensibly. And I who am not a Speech maker am nevertheless very glad that he has furnished me with this. My Blessing to the Grevilles. I hope to see you & them before Summer begins in the mean time get some franks from them directed to yourself & inclose them to me. I shall write and send packets with the less Scruple that they are not to be paid for. I have had long Conferences with Banchar Since the Above was written & been so much occupied with him that I do not know what is doing by any body else. I do not know what stir there is in the Nation in General or if any body be likely to move in this Countrey. I shall deliver your Message half joke half Earnest  to the Duke of Buccleugh & offer to make him Chief of the Mc Phersons the best feathe if it were fixed in his Cap that is to be seen there. O thou General Howe who will put us again in the Pasture which we had the beginning of last Campaign & which you gave up. You Blockhead or Wor. But I am so tired writing that I can scold no more And so Am

I am to Answer your letter of the 9th and have much to Say. This is not the Season of building, & Bankhead Hall must remain in its present State till that season returns as must the settlement of my Accounts with you to a time when I can speak my mind with more Power & Freedom. I often feast even in the midst of circumstances that are dissagreeable to me or the Recollection of three Friends that have fallen to my Lot & who have more than Compensated all that ever has been adverse in My fate by the mere Sense of having had and having them. You will guess I am perswaded that I mean David & John Home & yourself. You will have some Sauntering Evenings or Mornings at Kensington Gore. I pray you collect all you can get Relating to the Emperor Julian & see whether he does not appear  to you as great a Man as  ever Nature Produced. Christian writers either from Prejudice or to avoid offence Speak of him with horror but it is Curious to See the touches of innexpressible praise that escape them. There is a short French life of him by an Abb La Bleterie who will verify this description and point out the other Sources of information Concerning him. But it is probable that you will not have much time for matters of so old a Date.

I am much disspirited about every public Prospect. I hope it is not Supposed that India Affairs will wait till we have Settled America Or that the Councils of State in these times have nothing to think of but the Management of Parliament. I imagine that no less than three or at least two Powerful bodys will be wanted to retrieve the Affairs of Government in America. One to make War on the Coast of New England Another from Canada on the Back settlements & a third perhaps to mantain this Ground we have chosen to take in Pensilvania if Peradventure we  have it in the beginning of next Summer. And the Object of the Campaign shoud be to have the exclusive possession of Hudsons River with the Lakes. Places of Arms at New York and Albany & an open Route for the War from Canada on the North as well as from the Coast of the South. In our Way to this Object the Rebels may be induced to prefer accommodation to the Continuance of Such A War. But Lord have mercy on those who expect any Good in this bussiness without Sufficient Instruments of Terror in one hand & of Moderation and justice in the Other. And so much for the opinion of us here who Govern the world at our own fire Sides. I was Elated for a while with the Spirit which the people show for new Levys upon this occasion: but alass without Straining every Other Nerves & exerting high measures of Ability & Conduct how unequal to the Difficulties.

Your Caledonian Duke did not want desire to bear his Part but in the Quality of a Politician of this little Corner was Anticipated by the opposite Party & thought he coud not move without driving their Wheels. Such however I  Suspect was the motive of his Council seldom better advised. For his Countenancing a thing for the Public even when the Other Party by Accidents had the lead woud have been so much the Stronger Proof of his Affection. However he is capable of the best things & is a Noble and agreeable Connection. I wish that Ministry woud consider him apart from his Supposed connections here, who may be good Servants to him or to any body else but bad Masters. I have a Comm for my Nephew in the new Lewys in my Power but in this General exertion of Influence Power & Money on all hands have despaired that so poor a Man as my Brother coud make out the Quota. If in the Removes & Vacancys occasioned in the old Regiments by these Lewys an Ensigncy coud be got by way of favour I shoud be greatly Obliged by it.

...most sincere Attachment both to Master and Man in the Present Gov't And yet I earnestly wish that they woud hoist a Certain Sail, which without perhaps any better Steering than the present may land us somewhere. The Sail I mean woud be to America the very Signal which I think we shoud make to them of an Intention not to Invade their Libertys but of a Resolution to Support the Authority of the State by their destruction and at any hazard of our own. Nothing can be done,  for which a Minister, will not be exposed to be tore to pieces. We need bold men who will do the best they can in contempt of that Danger.

My Idea of a General Parliament for America may appear odd. What Unite them; shoud they not rather be keept Separate that we may govern by dividing. I have much to say on that Subject being much impressed with a notion that one great state is much more easily Governed than many Small ones.  As to Jo Homes Play, whether it was oweing to his own Neglect or to the Caprice of the Public let it go. We who know him must not mind such trifles as that. On looking back to this letter I find it so Abrupt & Enigmatical that I am tempted to keep it till I have time to translate it but perhaps it may Amuse you more as it is. Of all things let us not be lulled by any fancyed Appearances of peace not to double & redouble our Armament on that Very account. And so wishing you much Success with Tua & him success in all his Affairs

Leaving you to Suppose that we have had a Good passage and Every thing of that Sort agreeable I write now merely to tell you That as soon as Mr. Stracheys departure for Europe was known the Commissioners resolved to appoint me as their Secretary & have honoured me with a Commission of which the Inclosed is a Copy. No pecuniary appointments are Specifyed that Point must be fixed & the whole confirmed by the King. I need not mention how much I rely on Your Good offices  to help me in both these points, my Views are not high on the first, or rather I wish that something rather more Permanent than great were done. I write to The Solicitor General to Mr Robinson & to Mr Pulteney on the Subject with a Copy of my appointment to each. So you will take what help you can from those Gentlemen or any Other person you think Proper. I set out from Home Philadelphia with a Flag and a Trumpet for Washingtons Camp in my way to the Congress: but was met at one of the out Posts of their Army with a Very Civil Letter intimating that he from General Washington coud not grant a Passport without previous instructions from Congress. The Dispatches went but there is yet no return & we expect none till  after we are settled at New York. Proposals are made which the Congress will scarcely be being able to reject without losing The Support of their Constituents. And yet Gfalou and Dough so as I am at this writing very much affraid. I wish to God I had been at the Ear of Tua & listened to when certain orders were given. The reasons may have been good & the Event may dissappoint our fears in all which we shall rejoice. Pray Make up my Wifes letters in packets bundles & send them by The Packet to New York or Otherwise. Say nothing of My Conjectures when they happen to be dissagreeable. Write me what you may expose to be miscarryed inspected or lost. I am most Affectionately

I wrote you a short line as this is likely to be by the last Packet that was dispatched from hence. In the way of Bussiness I had only to put you in mind of what I hope you have learnt from My former letters That I have been appointed by The Commissioners here their Public Secretary. I cannot find out what The Appointments of My predecessor were & if I could find it out must look for The Kings Approbation before I can Avail myself of this Appointment. I have Ventured however  by the last & present Packet to write to Jeremy Sneyd at The Secretary of States Office in Cleveland Rowe who is Agent for the Commissioners to Undertake my Bussiness likewise in case My Nomination is confirmed by The King. I beg of you to try what can be done for me in the way of present Emolument & future Provision or half pay &c all which I must leave you to consider of on the Spot. I have written to Mr Sneyd that if he have any Funds of mine and my Bill on Doctor Black at Edinburgh for 100 is presented to him. He will be pleased to pay it I beg you will tell him the Same thing & Avail yourself of the Credentials I have given you in my letter to him to do in My Affairs as you think proper.  News nor Politics have I none or at least I do not chuse to break bulk till we meet nor trust Private thoughts to The Seas troubled as they are with Ennemys And Prying persons of so many descriptions.

If there shoud be any Good news however before this go Away you shall have it. 

I have been much dissappointed at not hearing from you or by you in the last Packet which Arrived with Miraculous Safety & Expedition.

The Rebels in concert with the French attacked Rhode Island but the French Fleet having gone to Sea after Lord Howe met with a Gale of Wind two or three of their ships were dissabled. Appeared again at Rhode Island but after a few hours Stay  put to Sea again Supposed intended for Boston to Refit. Lord Howe is after them & we are in some hopes he may intercept them. The Rebels in the mean time have retired from Rhode Island Re infecta.

I wrote by The last Packet to C:Greville. I began my letter in hopes of great News. If such news shoud come I shall soon have another occasion & will write him again.

I did not advert that your letter required an Answer I had just written to Mrs Ferguson full of Anxiety about my not hearing from her for eight months past. I have just opened the Letter again to tell her how glad I am to receive her letter. I can say nothing about a place of Rest for a Day or two I have come like lightning from New York to Jermyn Street & have not had off my Cloaths for three nights. Charles Greville wished you & me to come to him this Evening at 8 O'Clock. Let me know what you propose to do perhaps it woud be Charitable to make an excuse for me & put off the  Party to another Night that I may Sleep however I will do what you please. If you can within an hour look in here, I shall be glad to see you for a Moment although we cannot just devour every Subject that may Arise till we have more Leisure.

I am arrived here about a week, found my little Flock in perfect good health & mindfull of you & your kind attentions.

I have delivered my very worthy young Friends safe at their Uncles as I hope by this time will have appeared from their own Letters. George fell in a Crying when my Children came about me, I was affraid he was ill, but upon my questioning him, as soon as he could Speak I understood it was the Memory of his Parting with his Father that moved him. I pray you to call next Door & mention the great Satisfaction I have had in their Company. I have likewise seen my Lands which I must confess, notwithstanding all the Mischief they have done me, in  this Bloom of the Season look gay & even pretend to be rich. I have seen but few of Our Friends. I have been with Smith & Black & Hutton. The Principal & Dr Blair called here when I was not at home. I am just now going to look for them & some Others but choose to write this Letter before I go abroad least I should be any way entangled for the Day & hindered as usual from writing at all. What is become of the War & the Politicks I have felt it very grievous to be moving away from the center of Intelligence & increasing The Distance from News by a week or a fortnight: but I hope you will not let me Starve outright, once it begins to drop we shall keep pace with you tho a few Days later: I have been thinking whether in case you are Conquered in the South we may not rebuild Grahams  Dyke or Severus' Wall & so set up for ourselves. If the Ennemy should land any where in this Island & attempt to keep a footing I am without any Joke of opinion that the Clans should be moved in a body against them, And think with as little Joke that the Posse Comitatus may be every where made of great Consequence against them. When you have got a good Post well manned with firm Troops that will keep the Ennemy at Bay what you want next is a great number of if possible a whole Countrey full of People firing & shooting at them from every Hedge & Bush & never Suffering them to move or to forrage or to halt undisturbed nor to be quiet in Front Flank or Rear. And never to hazard any Other Sort of Fighting with them except at a very great Advantage. And such is my Plan for the Invasion War if there should be Such a Bussiness  of which indeed I have no doubt unless it be prevented by our Vigilance & the imposing Aspect of our preparations.

But I pray you to send me News. You are the Person from whom I expect to hear What is. In return I can only tell you what ought to be; two things which I have generally found very different, & so there is some hopes that there may be some Commerce or exchange of Commoditys between us. When I was away from here I used to send my Blessing to those I liked best & not to change my Language at once pray God to Bless you all. Make up for any defect in my acknowledgements to those to whom you know I am Obliged And believe me to be most Affectionately yours

if you were a bad Correspondent that is to say lazy in writing Letters I should not be uneasie at your long Silence, but I have taken it into my head that you are disstressed or at least much occupied with news from India & wish much to hear from you merely to know you are Well. Perhaps you are Affronted that I did not send you immediate accounts of our Invasion here by Paul Jones: but the truth is that living at the Back of the Wall Paul Jones was gone out of the Firith a whole Day before I knew he had been there. We are grown familiar now with the American War The French  War The Spanish War The Combined Fleets And a Fig for their Invasion. I begin really to feel bold & wish I knew what our Land Forces at home now begin to Amount to that I might indulge myself in the thought that our Fleets may next Season be employed offensively whenever it may be proper & the Ennemy find it as Ridiculous to attempt coming in Force here as we should to attempt going to them without some previous footing or Possession in their Countrey. What I have always wished is to see this Countrey safe without a Fleet that is while our Fleet is protecting our Trade & Annoying our Ennemy with a few Hulks to make a Part in the Defences of Portsmouth & Plymouth. The People here are wonderfully Alarmed about Ireland & so I confess I am likewise: but willing to believe that after near a twelve months Warning we have certainly made some Arrangement &  have not left ourselves to be driven by demands into Concessions for which we shall receive no thanks & which in reality will lead to Other Demands with which we Cannot comply & end in a Flame which we Cannot extinguish. The utmost precaution should be taken to prevent a Flame in that Countrey for if it once break out many years will not extinguish it nor relieve this Countrey of the Internal troubles that have already so Effectually served the Purpose of our forreign Ennemys.

When I began to write I had no mind to trouble you with Politics tho I am fool enough Scarcely to think of any thing Else. I wish to make you write to me & took in hand to Solicit a Cause in which I am not much Interested for many reasons, 1st My Connection with the Man is very Slight no more than a recommendation which makes me believe him a very Innocent Person. Next My Opinion that he is in a wrong Scent for what all men desire bettering himself or mending his Condition: but to do Short. A Modest well looking young man brought up to Letters & on  the Point of becoming a Probationer was brou to me this Morning & gave me to Understand his Ambition was to be Chaplin to some of these New Regiments. That he had Applyed to Ld In Murray & came too late for Coll. Reid. That he heard 5. 000 men were to be raised for the West Indies, that these probably must have Chaplins, that he was willing to raise ten Men if he were appointed Chaplin to all the Rest of the Regiment. And in short I took the Resolution to write to you. If any Friend or acquaintance of yours is getting a Corps, ten men, may be a Conveniency to him & with or without that Circumstance I beg your Assistance in behalf of Mr James Scobie who appears to be a good young Man wonderfully smit with the Desire of seeing the World. Since he was here he has given me to understand that he would be happy even in being Appointed Chaplin to a Man of War. And so I pray you write a short Line.

I am anxious to hear of G:Johnstone but shall not write to him least my Politicks should become too Particular for the Post. All is well here & most affectionately mindfull of you.

I am much Obliged to you for the Scribles as you are pleased to call them they are my Sole Information or at least I never think myself sure of any thing untill I have the Hint of it from you. I am not at all Ashamed of being in your Debt, for where nothing is nothing can be furnished. In these times even Old Women & Children can speak of nothing but Politics & I have lost relish for that Subject without having any Other to put in its Place. I most Sincerely Respect & love the Perseverance of our Friend in tugging at this Oar while the Bark appears to be deserted or even misguided by every one else. To leave any principal Station at present to the first occupyer I fear might be ruinous. But in the name of all the wonders in the World how can  he think to go on without being able to command the Cooperation of Other Persons & without making it the Principal Study of his Life, to seize every little Spark of genius or Ability that any where Appears for the execution of Service. How comes the man who with so much Ability & Courage Covered the Attack of Silence to be no longer Employed? Mc Lean & Campbell one made Adjutant the Other made Quarter Master General at the principal Seat of the War in America are still capable of giving a favourable turn to our Affairs: but if we are to employ the first that offers without discernment or choice no Power no resources no perseverance can ever avail us in any thing. But so much for Politics which I had a Mind to foreswear in beginning this Letter but Naturam expellas Furca tamen usque recurret. And since I am in for it, take likewise my hearthy Approbation of the Propositions respecting Ireland. I willingly hope that  they will meet with no Difficulty besides that of the ordinary contentious opposition. For Reason and Justice I think should reconcile all Partys, who wish bona Fide to remove Grievances & obtain some Equitable Measures for the improvement of their Condition & Propertys. The Object I confess for which I pant is a compleat Union with Ireland: this may not be practicable at Present: but I am perswaded that in the last Period of twenty years it might have been Obtained And am willing to hope that in the coming Period ot twenty years more if the conjunctures are watched & improved it may Still be Obtained. And I should consider it as little less than doubling the compacted Strength of these Kingdoms.

As for America, I thought our Cause there was good & might be brought to a favourable Issue so long as we could make it likewise the Cause of a great Body of the People there, to whom, with our Exertions from Europe, we might give the Ascendant over their Ennemys & our own.

But if instead of improving this part  of our Strength, we Suffer our Friends there to moulder away or to be finally tore up and Ruined, not all the money that change Alley can furnish not all the Armaments we can fit out & what we seem to attend to more not all the Speeches we can make in Parliament will give me any Hopes. I troubled you with a young Clergymans Suit to be made a Chaplain without thinking the matter of much Consequence to him & without chargeing myself very deeply with it even if I had thought it more so having matters, if this were a time to urge them, of much more concern. I have a Brother a man of very great worth with a Numerous Family, who had Sold a little Property he had in the Country to a Gentleman in his Neighbourhood, thinking he could do better for his Family with the money than with the Land. The Money lay in the Purchasers hands, who has just now become Insolvent & reduced us to the Prospect of great  Disstress. If it were possible to procure him some of the Inferior Offices in the Custom house Department of this Countrey that of Land waiter or any Other it would be a seasonable relief and lay me under great Obligations. I mention it in perfect confidence that you will be as ready to forgive my mentioning proposing an improper thing as to help me in what is proper with our advice & Assistance. My Brother is the Father of the young Man whom C: Greville & you provided for in the Marines last year. And whether any thing can be done for him or no I could not sleep in quiet till I had communicated My Case to you.

John Home has come a few days ago with Leave of Absence from his Quarters at Aberdeen & has gone to the Countrey for Mrs Home to pass the Time of his Forloff here if the change which I am told is making in  the dissposition of our Forces here does not proceed upon Some Circumstance that may require his Attendance. I have been some time of opinion that if the Army upon Paper now within this Kingdom be properly formed & Commanded we are certainly in Condition to repell any Practicable or likely Invasion from our Ennemys & that our Fleets may act on the offensive wherever the Ennemy are Vulnerable. But I confess that I would not rely on the Levys made or now making for this Purpose so long as there was a Creditable & able bodyed Man within the Kingdom without Arms in his hands. I should not mean to embody the whole People. But I should certainly try to make it the Fashion for every Sober Landholder & householder to have a stand of Arms in his House. This I believe in Reality would make us invincible. If an Ennemys Army come here tho inferiour to our own  the chance of a Battle is doubtfull And I think that we should have a better Tenure than the Chance of one Battle however favourable Arms every where in the hands of the People will expose an Ennemy to be shot at wherever they go. And will enable us to raise Army after Army, if we should even be reduced ad Triarios in defence of our Countrey. And if we were fully in condition to make war to this Extent, I believe it would not do us any harm to be tryed. The Ways of some Men are past finding out. It is impossible for me to conceive why Government should give their Countenance to one part of the Countrey in Arming themselves & not the whole. If Government Suspect that they have Ennemys as well as Friends it is upon this account the more expedient & proper it is to Arm their Friends: for the Consequence of their neglect or equal treatment of Friends & Ennemys will be that their Friends will refrain Arming from Respect And there  Ennemys will be Armed in Resentment & Contempt. I pray you to write me as often as you can for the mere Satisfaction of seeing your hand writing & knowing of your wellfare. We have seen all overtaken here with an Epidemic Distemper and are somewhat Shattered with it. I intended to have written my respects to Mr. E. on the Subject of his Letters; sed ter Patriae cecidere manus & I am now too late.

My Little Flock here, any more than Mrs Ferguson & myself, never forget you. My Friend Johnstones Boys are at Dumfries where I do not hear from them but believe them to be well & there never were more promising Children. I pray you to offer my Respects to their Mother. The Father I hope fera parler de lui & to the Comfort of his Friends & the dismay of his Ennemys. yours &

I have written you the Inclosed Ostensible Letter as you advised on the Subject of my Brother. If his Case were less urgent I should make you Apologies: for I well Remember the Proverb relating to the Willing &c. I have had a Letter from him within these few Days which Disstresses me much. These are unsettled Times, my little Resources part depending on a Lawsuit which Lord Chesterfield not yet determined & part depending on Circumstances perhaps not less precarious will not enable me to Assist him Effectually or certainly. Among Other Evils of the times perhaps one will be that of making Such requests as these Appear impertinent. 

Fortune seems inclined to favour us, & the Nation is in Condition to make great & I hope successfull Efforts. The Affair of the Dutch Ships will require a Steady hand, nothing to be done but what the Laws of War & our own Defence make necessary: but this is not the moment to make a Single Concession: we had better be at open War with all the World than Suffer ourselves to be betrayed under the Shew of Neutrality or Peace. This Cloud that is gathering in Yorkshire Alarms me more. That County seems to be forming itself into a Republic, with meetings continued by Adjournement, different departments & an Executive Council. It should in Appearance be taken very Lightly by Government: but is in reality or may be a very Serious Matter. Countrey Gentlemen tasting of the Importance they get in Public Assemblies by making Speeches, tasting of Party Applause & receiving the Infection of Party Enthousiasm  rise above all considerations of Reason, of Private Interest or of public Order. Direct Opposition is like a Bellows to blow up the Fire. The Bulk of the Countrey Gentlemen throughout England I hope are on the Side of Government & Monarchy. I think it is probable that all the Counties as well as Burroughs must Speak upon this Occasion. & I am inclined to think that where the Majority is most inclined to Support Government, the Plan should be not to Fly in the Face of Yorkshire: but by a moderate Address to Parliament express their Zeal to Support the State in this Arduous Situation of the Nation recommending at once Oeconomy & the necessary Supplies. But the best way perhaps of Silencing all murmurs & discontents at Home is by vigorous & Successfull Efforts in the War to fill the Gazette &c. I am glad to hear Sr Joshua has done his Part he will eclipse the rest of My Gallery  but so much the better. I have not seen Carlisle but will execute your Commands when I do. J. Home is now a householder in this Town well in point of Health & I think recovered all the Effects of his Accident of last year. All this House joins me in most Affectionate Respects. I am My Dear

I have written by this Post to the Lord Advocate in order to bind myself in obligations for whatever he may do at your request. He has many qualitys fitting him to be a considerable Man, Temper, Perseverance, Resolution. And, what is of most consequence is felt by his friends as a Man who will not desert them nor trifle with his connextion. He has likewise shown a disposition to carry the opinion of Respectable People along with him and as Matters now stand if he does not appear to run to fast may securely outstrip his competitors.

This Town has been long thought of consequence, my opinion is that the way to gain it is not to make direct applications here but to show the  possession of power and consideration at London.

If your Riots are not over my nostrum is suspending the Habeas Corpus act that Idle people And Madmen may be laid up till the Sober. The law is slow and will not make effectual examples. Military execution in the streets would be dreadful and would introduce only the start of order that prevails at Constantinople; the consequence of systematic or repeated riots near the vitals of Government are such that I think the Habeas Corpus should be suspended as often as a Riot is continued or repeated after 24 hours. But this not appearing to wiser heads makes me doubt of the propriety of it.

I received a Packet last night on the Cover of which there were a few Words from you.

As to the Bussiness of the Packet, I should write to our Friend: but the Principal Party & Jn H- being absent & their latest Intelligence from the Countrey being unknown to me I remain in Suspence. How matters Stood or Appeared by the Tuesdays Post I believe they wrote. When I hear farther I will write fully.

I saw the Lord Advocate soon after my last to you. He told me there had been a Mistake in the Warrant for a Land Waiter Vice Gifford. That he had returned the Warrant, probably to Mr Robinson through whose hands it  had come to him. That he wrote to Mr Robinson his wishes in filling up the Landwaiters Place were for Mr Ferguson for whom Mr McPherson has asked the Place in his Name: but as they are very much Intent in Plying every Engine to direct the next Elections here, if they would Send down a Blank warrant he would endeavour to make the best Political Use of it or if nothing material could be done in that way he would fill up with the Name of Mr Ferguson to whom he wished and originally intended to give it, The Blank Warrant being out of Rule. They probably deferr the Appointment untill it appear what use may be made of it.

The Lord Advocate is much occupied since the Court of Session broke up & has been in the Country. I have been confined some Days with a Cold that affected  my Eyes: but the Inflammation is much abated & I will endeavour to See him in a day or two. I have perfect Confidence that he means me kindly in this Bussiness & acquiesce very chearfully in the cause of Hesitation. I am well aware of your probable occupations at this Time. The News Papers set your Friends agog by sending you to the Supreme Council in Bengal. Whatever be the Truth I hope it will be what you like: but do not pretend to Judge. Can you procure me a copy of the Code of Indian Law which Mr Hastings had procured to be Compiled & Translated. Johnstone had sent me a Copy by Jn Home but he has lost it & it is not to be bought.

Since your last to me I have ventured to give some introductory letters to oblige my friends here, and I am sensible that I ought to spare you a trouble which your situation will draw upon you most abundantly; but the bearer of this has too strong a claim upon me to be resisted. He is the son of my brother, one of the honestest men that ever lived. He was born in America, and I have never seen him, but am certain he will not disgrace your protection.

His father and he are refugees from that lost continent, and partake in the distress which a rooted affection to this country has brought upon many. The son, by the unalterable kindness of G. Johnston, and his insuppressable favour in behalf of honest men, has obtained leave to go to India, though without any destination or appointment. I have reason to believe that he inherits part of his father's sense and worthyness, and is qualifyed for business, and hope you will find protection and good offices for him without interfering with pupils of more expectation. His name is Robert Ferguson, and so I present him to you.

We are here nearly in the same state as when you heard of us last. The children all well; your namesake John particularly thriving, though he is not yet apprised of his relation to you. The mother and I frail and useless, with little object but that of keeping ourselves alive till the others can do for themselves. In all this I hope you will not perceive any touches of melancholy, for my spirits play very easily upon a Gentoo diet without being tied down to the formalities of any caste or exposed to the caprice or rapacity of any master, whether Christian or Moor....

I have long since heard of your good Offices to My Nephew Robert Ferguson, & felt my Obligation the more that I had not ventured to Solicit you for favour to him. I supposed you indeed to have trouble enough of that Sort without any addition from me. I hope however you will give me leave to Assure you that your kindness has not been unobserved & to thank you most Sincerely. I have never had an opportunity of knowing the young man personally but have ever had the best accounts of him and trust he will deserve your Protection.

Captn Burnett who is just now  Setting out for London undertakes to forward this line from me. Mrs Ferguson you may believe joins me in thanking you also on his account. She regrets very much the Reports of your Intended return to Europe; but as the Time will depend on yourself or My Lord Cornwallis your Friends in this Country will expect it with pleasure. If I have the honour of being remembered by His Lordship I should beg leave to offer my most humble Respects, My best & most Affectionate wishes have ever attended him in every Bussiness in which he has been engaged.

As to news we have many things new in Europe of which the Gazettes will inform you as they do me. Not only a new Town and a new College of Edinburgh but a new Republick of France and a new States General of Brabant & Flanders. People ventured to tell the Court of France that in abeting the  Revolt of America they were setting a dangerous example to their own people: but even the persons who said so did not distinctly perceive or believe it. The Noblesse of France have had a greater fall than the King. It is resolved that for the future there Shall be no distinction of Persons in that Country, whether they can keep to their resolution is a doubtful question. The experiment is matter of expectation to us for a twelve month or two to come & to you a matter of Curiosity at the Arrival of every Ship from Europe. I think that what they are engaged in will make them better neighbours both in Europe & Asia than they have been heretofore.

you have heard that there is more joy in heaven over one Sinner that repenteth than over ten thousand that never Sinned & so your Letter has gathered charms from your long Silence. Charles Greville forgot to Send me any intelligence & I picked up what I could from other quarters judging of you as I have frequent occasion to feel in myself that one days procrastination produces ten more & so on in decimal proportion. I wish this letter may overtake or meet you at Geneva for altho that is a most Sensible corner of the world there is not much laid out in the way of Courts or Parliaments to captivate strangers. My hopes are that some one will put it in your head to see Mont Blanc & his Glaciers that you may do homage for Bennevis & Cairngorm to that King of Mountains & take his Instructions  how to keep their Snows a little better than they do through Summer. My whole Flock little Johnston and all have been at Leith for Sea bathing about two months whilst I alone have been here en hermitage but they are coming up this very day when matters will be as usual. John Home is gone to Lochaber so that he may not hear of your Melpomen for some weeks. Dr Black shall hear of his heavenly muse very soon. And so shall the Principal & Others who are all well. Mr Pulteney has been here or hereabouts some time on occasion of Elections, he has made a good Batch of Parliament men five in England & one in Scotland. I think he is in better plight quoad animal Life than formerly. We have seen upon your Subject & his mind is as you know. The Hill is still to be fought up with certain persons with whom you will do more by giving them a good opinion of themselves than by giving them reason to think well of you. However  the matter may come round when you seem careless about it. 

The remaining copies of My History of the Roman Republic are now the Property of John Stockdale Esqr Bookseller in Piccadilly London.

General Clerk & even my Man of Bussiness altho he draws Six Shillings & eight pence for every conference were so sick of Booksellers that they could hold out no longer & so we have sold the remainder of the impression as above for a Slump Sum which I have pocketed. I am bound not to make another Edition for five years the Period Mr Stockdale thinks necessary to sell off &c. It may go faster however in his hands than it did in ours. The French are too bussy translating their Monarchy into a Democracy to mind the translation of Books. The Author of that you Saw is as bussy as the rest being in the National Assembly.

I am well disposed to take the course you mention with Joseph & shall point the few Guns I have in that direction. I have more Satisfaction in little Johnston than I expected when you Saw us. I have never ceased to think of an excursion to Italy: but the charge of George Johnstones Son  forbids it. If ever it take place it must be a Solitary course. My infirmities disqualify me to keep with any Companion & the notion that I was a hinder to Others in doing what they wished would be intolerable.

If France were perfectly  quiet I coud proceed in a Chaise d'une place from Edr to Brundisium or Rhegium without tiring. The many things I am prepared to look at perhaps to correct myself in, would be occupation enough. Your friend Smith is no more. We knew he was dying for some months & tho matters as you know were a little awkward when he was in health; upon that appearance I turned my face that way & went to him without farther consideration & continued my attention to the last. He burnt all his Papers except one on the History of Astronomy which will probably come to the Publick. I wish you may be able to read what I have written. The Paper being given to blotting I have used a sharp pointed pen & little Ink so that I can Scarcely read but your eyes are better & so God Bless you. From your most

I wrote you a line from Ostend to give notice of my Safe Arrival on the Continent. I have Since made out so far of my Journey. To this place, where I halt a Day or two: but do not find that I can venture to go in Search of the Marquis Lucchesini & therefore inclose your Letter to him & consign it to the Post with my regret for not being able to do more. Military matters are well here, a Devision of French Prisoners has just past a Second is expected at Night & a third tomorrow amounting in all to about three thousand men taken in Battle lately by the Duke of Brunswick but I cannot learn where. You pelted me with Letters from the Continent to which I was not enabled to make any Answer, I should be sorry to return you the Compliment exactly. My pelting will be very Moderate And your Answers I hope will come, tho I dont at present know where to  direct them nearer than Rome to the Care of Mr Jenkins Banker, And there, in the name of God let them come as many & as soon as Possible that is to say much Sooner than Gleich & Geswind which I have generally found to be as slow as possible.

All I have to say for the present is that travelling even here is certainly a very healthy bussiness, for I thrive wonderfully upon it. I have some inducements to go by Munich & to take the Inland Route by Nurenburg &c as I know less of it than I do of the Other & the Road I am told is good. I sometimes torment myself with thinking what is become of the World: but as I have no Commission to govern it, the wisest course is to mind my Route & so shall do in the best humour I can muster. Believe me to be

Here I am at Munich in a most prosperous course of travelling waxing in Strength and Patience. I sent you a line from Frankfort intimating my intention of sending your Letter to the Marquis Lucchesini with my regret for not being able to hunt for Military Quarters in Person. I did so in the best french I could muster.

The Elector of Bavaria said at his Levee yesterday that the King of Prussia had declared his Intention to winter at Berlin & to leave his Army under the Duke of Brunswig. There is I find a hankering inclination to Censure his Majesty on a Supposition that more might have been done in the Campaign but I am of the opinion which I guess is also yours that to hem in the French and give them as few opportunities as possible to take what we call crop to themselves is the very Perfection of Conduct. There is a Report here that The Emperor is about setting out  for Brussels & that even part of his Equipage is in readiness.

I surprised James Stuart by meeting him here & find we shall be much together at Rome &c. It is now about forty years since I have known him to be one of the pleasantest Naive and best hearted Creatures in the World. I am introduced to Mr Walpole here & was a vraie diner D. Ambassadeur, all English at his house yesterday: but I shall make no Stay being very impatient to get within the Precincts of the Old Republick & no less impatient to be at some place where I can hope to hear from you & learn something of what is doing in the World for in this Way of Life we are hoodwinked and know no more than can be seen when the glasses of the Sulky are down. 

I write merely to let you know of what is become of me & the sum total is that I am well & have come on as prosperously as a Speculative Master and a dumb Servant could do without any Other Aid. I wrote a line also from Frankfurt or Munich with an account of what I did with your Letter to Ct Lucchesini. I see from News Papers Since that if I had Stayed but a few days more at Frankfort I should have seen him there: but the Secrets of Kings who can know & I should have thought myself in a Scrape amidst the Scarcity of Horses caused by His Majestys Motions.

In the way I took by Nurenburgh & Munich I avoided that disstress, came prosperously through the Tyroll and at Verona began to reap the Fruits of my Labours. If you remember the Cimbri or Teutones are said to have performed wonders against Catulus the Roman General in that neighbourhood  And tho it be not of much consequence whether that Tale be exaggerated or not yet I was anxious to judge of its Credibility on the Spot & got on Horse back from Verona for that Purpose & reconnoitred the banks of the Adig for Some little way.

neighbourhood

So far I had Come Post: but there I fell in a Florentine Vecturino who had brought Some Travellers from Florence. I rode his Horses at Verona & agreed with him to drive my  thing to Padua we agreed so well on the Road that I have I have lodged & boarded myself with him all the way to Rome. He Seems to be a good humoured Careful Creature & I am happy to escape the Blustering Postilions of the Ecclesiastical State. I told him I should be at Florence soon, tho at Present I go by Loretto, And if any Distress befal me my point of Rallyment will be Florence being under the Special Protection of Ct Manfredini so that Antonio Lapini this Veturino & I are already a Sort of Compatriots. I languish for news from England. I call for News Papers every where  but nothing has yet overtaken me more than I knew & in part witnessed in passing through Flanders. I sometimes flatter myself that you will not have waited for Accounts of my Arrival at Rome but will have written under Care of P. Moir or Jenkins the Banker, if you have not, pour l'amour de Dieu delay it no longer. I could not pass this place tho it is much too modern to be any Object to me: I wonder at it: but am not much delighted, Si je n'avais que Soixante & dix Ans as Voltair used to Say I would read its History with great Avidity: but that is for the world to come.

I went to the Opera last night & was truly entertained with the Audience.

I know very well the disinclination to write letters when one cannot trust the Post with whatever comes uppermost & have myself the folly to harp on publick affairs of which no part is entrusted to me; so wish I could let them alone; take my share of the profits when they go well & leave the Glory to whom it belongs. Go, as the Scripture says and do thou likewise. I have mentioned your Respects to those you mention & we are all happy in the thoughts of seeing you in Summer: But it is an ugly trick with you of the South to put off your Journeys north till July August or September when our rainy Season is come & little pleasure on the Roads. May & June tho less convenient in Some respects are Certainly preferable & so I think you should have as much of the Summer before you as possible at the outset. Poor Blair has lost his Wife within these few Weeks & I am sorry to say my case is so likely to follow. 

Mrs Ferguson is now so intirely worn out with Continued disstress to which a considerable degree of fever is now added that little hopes remain of her recovery. On seeing her just now my impression is that no one ever recovered whose Countenance & Aspect was so much altered. You will forgive me for troubling you with this particular I have reason enough to know that nothing Concerning me is indifferent to you. Doctor Black is also far gone in a Consumption & neither it is likely will long Survive the Other. But people who live long like me must be Content to be the last. Of my Books I would rather work on Philosophy than Roman History to which I have little heart in the present State of the world altho it is that to which the bookselling trade directs my attention.

In Philosophy I should be doing what I am more likely to continue when I quit this scene of things. But the truth is I do little of any thing & expect no Attention if I were to do more. Here we have been living in Nova Zembla & are yet travelling through Lapland: Many old people have died  but I am yet as well as you saw me. My thoughts are much set at present on retiring to the Country for the remainder of my Life. I have no bussiness and as little pleasure in Towns, And it is wonderful how little occasion I have for the bellows of Neighbourhood to flow up the little fire that is left in me. I cant yet cry and talk admire and blame by myself & so I did in my Sulky through all the Roads of Germany & Italy. When you Come here I shall not have the same liking to Solitude. I think with great pleasure that our friend at Florence has got the innocent people of Tuscany into some shelter from the Storm that threatens.

When you write be so good as mention the Respect & Affection with which he impressed me. My Blessing to the Grevils I hope Charles has forgiven that I claimed a 40 years acquaintance with him at my time of Life the difference of ten or twelve years goes for Nothing. If Robert be a favourite so much the better for the Court, I could Submit to be a King myself at that Rate. I am My Dear Friend  & 

The Event apprehended has taken place. Mrs Ferguson died about an hour after the within was written.

Tho' the time is now approaching at which I have for some time past flattered myself with the hopes of seeing you here; I take my chance of overtaking you at Brompton with a few lines.

The Scheme of a Country Life, which you proposed to dispute, still remains with me; And I have been looking out for some place at which to Settle. Among Others I have seen the Castle of Nydpath on the Tweed, belonging to the Duke of Queensbury. It has been lately dismantled or Stript of its furniture & so far destined to become the habitation of Bats & Owls or what is little Better such a Tennant as I am. The Servant who showed the place told me that His Grace has been asked to let it: but declined, which makes my prospect somewhat desperate. I have nevertheless made proposals in Form to the Man of Bussiness here. And beg the favour that if you should see the Duke of Queensbury you will try to incline His Grace not to forbid any transaction from with me. And I undertake to satisfy you that the Scheme I propose is the best for my family as well myself. I am 

I wrote to you a Post or two ago to request your Interposition with the Duke of Queensberry to be appointed Keeper of His Graces deserted Castle of Nydpath, as The King appoints keepers of that Sort without a Salary: but instead of saying more on that Subject I write now to request that you will renew your Thanks to Mr Mc Kenzie of seaforth for his kindness to my Son Joseph. He paid for his Lieutenancy & now would be glad to pay for a higher step which he mentions as likely to go in Regiment.

If so it will be a favour of Mr Mc Kenzie or whoever reports in the matter allow my Son to come on in his Turn for whatever may be going by purchase or Otherwise. You see that a long Silence is soon broken when any thing is to be got by it. I am My Dear Friend yours

I have just now the pleasure or your letter & feel greatly Obliged for your immediate movement in my Affairs & to the Duke of Queensberry on your Acc't. His Graces leave to live at Nydpath was the utmost I could wish.

The Castle has not been inhabited but has been kept tight appeared perfectly dry & so far as I Observed not in want of much expensive repairs: but before I take any resolution must have a tradesman to advise me. The taxes will amount to something & what Ground I have must pay rent: but with all this it may be the most Oeconomical Situation for me & this is my Object.

I have nothing to do in this Town & wish to avoid the expence of living in it. So that my continuing to breath may be of some use to my family which it now is not: but of this move when you favour me with your Arguments per Contra. I shall endeavour to have something agreed  upon with the Duke of Queensberrys Man of Bussiness here to be Submitted to his Grace as soon as possible. The He has already told me that The Duke cannot give a Lease beyond his own Life. But with this I should be Satisfied or even his Saying that he will not remove me &c.

The Timber I understand is to be Sold & the Place therefore not likely to Tempt a Succeedeng Lord so that I should have little apprehension of being removed during my Life. As for the Company in Seaforths Regiment I have had letters from Joseph about it. The Price he states of 950 which I have agreed and am ready to Lodge whenever called upon to do so. I do not know whether this price be considered as the difference between the Lieutenancy & Captaincy or how it is; but I am determined to make no Stop in the Matter. I pray you to ply the Duke of Queensberry for instructions to his Agent here to Settle with me as we best can: To say the truth I do not much regret the Prussian Peace &c &c yours most Affectionately

In Consequence of your good offices and Coll' Mc Kenzies note, I, by this post do the needfull to forward My Son Josephs promotion. As my Credit at London is with Messrs Coutts & Co I have instructed them to pay to the order of F. H. McKenzie of Seaforth Esqr 950 or 1000 as he shall require upon my Sons Appointment to the Command of a Company in the 78 Regiment of foot. My Account from the Regiment mentioned the Lower Sum which occasions the Alternative in my instructions & you may be sure I do not chuse to volunteer even with 50 if it can be avoided but the needful must be done. Your letter refers the Appointment to the 2d Battalion my letters from Joseph refer to the first in which he now is. And tho it would be ridiculous to keep in the Army & yet talk of chusing the place of Service yet this is of some consequence to our feelings.

My Son was in India & returned hastily on account of his health we have a kind of Hydrophobia towards India: but in my Instructions to the Banker  I have mentioned the 78 Regiment without disstinction of Battalions. I know you will forgive my Sending this notice to you to be Communicated to Mr Mc Kenzie of Seaforth. And as Coll' Mc Kenzie required the money to be lodged with any Banker in London I trust that the ordinary place of my dealings will be found proper enough for the occasion. The Duke of Queensberrys being out of Town may account for his Silence to his Man of Bussiness here about my future Castle & Other matters: but his orders will come when Convenient to His Grace. And I hope you will appear in this Place also when Convenient to you.

There is a kind of good luck in being Otherwise occupied till we can meet without interruption or Care. If you have Bussiness at Edr your  has had bussiness at Edr and here for Some weeks past that would overwhelm an Upholsterer a Bookseller & a Scavenger. No matter when it began it is continued & far from being ended.

The dinners you talk of &c &c may give time at least for so much order as to make this Castle habitable. The Woods The Hills The River &c are Elysian And the Atmosphere all composed of Vital Air. So that your journey hitherto has agreed with you you may here expect the Completion of all its Effects.

I write merely to prevent your making such engagements at Edinburgh as will detain you there longer than necessity requires. Beware of Edr it is a cramming Place & come here in time to digest and Evaporate all its Mischief. 

if your bussiness be any way relaxed I pray you to come here, it is ridiculous to wait the final Settlement of Order either here or elsewhere.

The best that can be said even of the Universe itself or any Created thing is that it is Coming into order. And so are my Chairs tables & Books &c &c but if you were here we should not give ourselves any trouble about them. I have been just now writing a Long Letter to your Friend Sr William Pulteny & have told him of your being at Edr: but I had better be trying as I now do to bring you here without loss of time or if that be more Convenient to Summon me to Edinburgh. I am My Dear Friend

I received your letter yesterday and it is but this moment I have come to the resolution to let your dinner pass without my exemplary Sobriety to check the Consumption of Mr Walkers Wine & butcher meat. I am helped in this resolution by a little fretting uneasiness or inflamation in one of my eyes: but a more real cause is that I am indifferent about the mixed Companies and merry meetings & this is a natural effect when tete a tetes are interesting in a Certain degree. As you are to be so little time in this Country I Scarcely wish to see you any Otherwise than alone. But how is this to be? Your letter does not much savour of the excursion to Alva we mentioned & I am truly reluctant to your  breaking any party or deviating from any route merely that I may See you. If in reality you mean no more than to be transported to Ireland & reach your Port by Glasgow & Aire, Peebles is but a trifle out of your way & by Coming here you will see the fine new road which I am told is made from the through of Tweed to the through of Clyde not to mention that both these throughs are themselves well worth seeing & being traveled.

I have seen a letter from London in which are these words. The greatest Armament that ever went from the Ports of England is now assembling for the West Indies under Gl Abercrombie. I would give a great that I could forget the fate of great Armaments & not think of the Risks now to be run: but he who made the Seas & the Climats & the fevers dispose of us as to him seems best. The French Convention are Surely very impudent in pretending to prescribe to the great  infallible Sovereign People of France whom they shall elect. There are now two long years past since I have seen very clearly that the Armies are to dispose of France. These have shown themselves deeply impregnated with the democratical Furor consider themselves as the joint Sovereigns of the Country & will proceed to dispose of their interest in it as soon as external Ennemies permit. I hope that our fate is not to depend upon what they are pleased to do.

 On comparing the dates I find your dinner must have been nearly over before I received your letter, And it is some Consolation to me for the want of your Company that my being of it was actually impossible. I deferred closing this letter till the post of today came. I have a letter from Sir William Pulteney which I hope you will see before you go to improve your understanding in Ireland.

The expedition to Alva is much to my mind but I would fain Spare your Carriage coming so far to fetch me when you may possibly have occasion to use it in Edr. We have a Fly goes of to Edinburgh on Tuesday by which if the tickets are not all out I may be with you at 2 OClock on Tuesday: as tomorrow is Sunday I do not know whether you will receive this letter before Monday morning & I certainly cannot have your Answer before Tuesday afternoon by that time the Tuesdays Fly will be at Edinburgh & the first appointment I can make to go by that conveyance will be friday following. If I knew your precise time of wishing to Set out for Alv I may possibly be able to get a chaise at Peebles in the mean I am never from home & can be ready to depart at half an hours warning by day or by Night. I am My Dear Friend ly

I am happy to receive your letter from Carlisle. Although I am not an Astrologer I thought I saw the right Ascension of Stars that caused your declination in our horizon & your course due south is what I wish.

The world is likely to become more tractable in proportion as its difficulties or next to impossibilities increase. What a Crisis? This comes of Waiting till our ennemies could not find paper to make Assignats or Shopkeepers not willing to take them even with a bayonet at their breasts. Your Poets and repeaters of Poetry are great fools. It is not Rusticus expectat dum defluat Amnis: for Rusticus knows better: but Aulius expectat is true reading.

The continual burden of my song has been, trust not to what the Ennemy may fail in, but to what you yourselves can do: but this was imputed to my drinking water while the world about me drank wine. But a Stout heart will yet do much;  Is all Europe to Shrink before this mixture of madness and Affectation? Yes, if Europe be on the verge of madness also what will save it. This Corner I think should be the last to take fire we have the sea to surround us and may have Armies of men interested to preserve order and repel Ennemies: but this is all raving & I write in haste to overtake you at Chester & should have written sooner if I had been at home to receive your letter when it came.

I went to Edr to meet our Friend Johnstone who at my perswasion came to Consult Doctors. Here the Sky continues to lour & makes me waken from every sleep with something heavy on my mind to be recollected as memory returns. My boys should have much to say to you. Adam is returned from Ireland and I doubt must think how he is to pass the Rubicon of Writership. For John I shall certainly think: but much should depend on the Charon into whose barge he is to Step. While this country lasts the Navy is likely to become its most important Limb & the career it opens very proper to be run by youth of Vigour especially with collateral Support. 

But as we are, it is best to take our chance & sink or rise in doing our best: the particular circumstances in which the first step is to be taken may determine much. God bless you. I shall write to Sr Wm p: soon meantime I need not tell you to mention my affectionate Respects. I am My Dear Friend your

If ever you enjoined me to return the inclosed; that Circumstance escaped me and it was carefully laid up among my Archives as a monument of the times. I rejoice however in the Idea that you have now occasion to call it forth. The times, upon the present Rout of the French on the Rhine & the difficulty of restoring their Force in the present state of their Finances, are probably as favourable as those to which the Paper refers. As to myself I have now only to tell you that I have no hopes of my Friend at Alva.

That I am impatient enough to have some settlement at Nydpath to Authorize the repairs &c which the weather shows to be necessary.

And that My Son Adam is now a Master writer or writer to the Signet at your Service & ready to take the trouble of any ones bussiness who will employ him.

I have just now received your affectionate Letter with the inclosed Commission of Bussiness for Adam The Writer to the Signet & write merely to get out my Breath on this plaguy Situation into which I have got; without the accommodation either of Town or Country. Till now we have yet Sheep to kill but this is at an End & nothing almost to be had nearer than Edinburgh with this we could fend for the present: but the prospect is yet no better for another year. I do not know Whether Mr Tait has sent my Letter of which you have a Copy to the D. of Q. nor whether it will procure any Answer if he has. You may remember I had some forebodings of this Situation but was in hopes that the D. would either extricate me or leave me to extract extricate myself by dealing with the Housekeeper for what he allowed her. I now see the  mistake of having thrust myself into this Situation before it was cleared for me one way or another: but I reasoned that I must either occupy this Castle before winter to keep it in repair or lay aside thoughts of it altogether to the last of which I was extremely reluctant.

I am sensible what I should do now is to wait the Chapter of accidents, but Patience. The great virtue for Succeeding in any thing has been but very Scantily dealt to me, Old as I am I had rather be doing any; than wait doing nothing, of which this letter is itself a Sufficient Proof for it certainly will do you no good nor me any other than employing some minutes of this woful time I have to wait for some Instruction to his Man of Bussiness from the D. of Q. So much for one Du if ever I have to do with another I will give them leave to Duck me in the first Horsepond. I am Most Affectionately

I wrote what you have on the opposite leaf immediatly upon reading your letter but have time before the paper is folded to tell you upon reflection that the matter is worse than you are likely to conceive it. If the warning for the Housekeeper Mrs Donaldsons removeal is not here before the end of January I shall have no hopes of a Settlement & for ought I know die of wexation for having been such a fool, leaving my Children to shift for themselves. For Gods Sake try what you can do to have a speedy decision either for or against me for either sooner Obtained would have saved me from much inconvenience.

you would perceive in my letter of yesterday that a grievous dissappointment in my expectations of a Settlement at this place begins to stare me in the face, if it shoud actually come, I am certainly in a great Scrape with all my trumpery brought here at a great expence and dilapidation. And it stung me particularly to think that I had ventured so far upon mere words of Politeness from His Grace of Q. in conversation: but you will See from the inclosed Copy of a Letter which I obtained from Mr Tait that I was not so much to Blame & did not proceed so far without official Communication. And as I am more reconciled to myself shall wait the event with less perturbation. You would possibly Observe in the Copy I sent you of a Letter of Mr Tait, why I am so peremptory in my request to have the warning of removeal to the Housekeeper by the end of January. That is the time of warnings for the whole year. Then habitations are given up or taken & whoever does not provide himself  then must wait for another year, And this to me would be a more expensive & disstressing Situation than any I ever was in: But as I made a great Effort at my Age to get here, if the worst should come must repeat the same to get away. Mr Taits Letter even if I were disposed to go to Law is probably not Sufficient ground for any legal Claim, What he did was for the best: And there was nothing amiss but in having to do with a man of Quality whom the Concerns of little men do not touch & who must not be teased with such concerns or who is perhaps fully exculpated by his State of health. I write this merely to correct the Chagrin & impetuosity of what I wrote yesterday, & unless you should find it perfectly easy & proper to stir in the matter to beg that you will leave the Surge to beat as it may. I am glad to know your thoughts on the Prospect of Peace. One Effect the very prospect may produce which is to make Parties in France anticipate the Speculations or practices I Expected from them when relieved from the Pressure of War. I had a letter from Sr W. P. at Oxford in his way to Shropshire. He proposed that my family here should be an Asylum in Vacation time to his young Nephew upon the loss of his Second Father at Alva. I can no more think of declining it than if I were his nearest Relation. But I have not the necessary Accommodation at present & may not have any better when his Vacation begins.

Here are no Events, no approach to Negotiation with France, no termination even to the treaty of Nidpath which tho least is not the last in Care. If any body think me a Philosopher he is grievously Mistaken. I have done nothing but Peste and Scold inwardly for three or four weeks not to say Months. I do not mean to molest you with these fruits of my Philosophy: but if I do not write something there will be nothing from you. And from me it can be only what I have. The Dukes orders to finish with the Terms have been here about a Month And my Assent was not withheld a moment: but the Conclusion is Still unaccountably delayed. This I mention not in the way of Complaint. The Duke you say is already disspleased with this and other delays, let us do nothing to irritate: Mr Taits manner to me had every appearance of Candour & Obliging disposition. And tho I cannot explain the present delay but: am Anxious least  by any accident or interference of Interests here it should prove fatal to the Scheme of retreat I had formed & which I am now almost too old to look for any where else. Without molesting the Duke with more applications you may perhaps Observe what is passing & prevent any imputation of the delay from to any hesitation of mine in accepting the Terms. You do not tell me in what quarter of the map I am to look for your Country retreat. The extreme of Midlesex is too near. Hertfordshire is too Cold a Soil; Essex is too low. Kent or Surry must be the ground: but wherever it is I hope it will prove some break in the Eternal repletion of the London eating & drinking As for chearful festivity; from this I doubt you will find no retreat post Equitem sedet atra Cura: And so be as chearful as you please provided you keep a good clear Active meagre habit of Body. I have little correspondence with Edinburgh & feel nothing but the vexation of little troubles in my Situation here. But believe me most Affectionately yours

I wrote lately rather a flapper in the Laputa Stile to keep you in mind, than a letter. & it is but fair to tell you that I have since procured a Step to be made in the Nydpath Treaty. Having expostulated with Mr Tait on the delay he wrote me for Answer that untill he received my Letter he believed that a draft of the Lease was sent to me & that the delay was owing to Myself. It is a curious bussiness that goes on of itself without the knowledge of those who should be the doers of it. The draft however was then sent & I have demurred only to one Clause by which it is proposed that I or my Heirs shall be bound to leave the Castle &c at the end of the Lease in Sufficient Repair. I always imagined that as the Castle was dismantled & left to the mercy of the Elements I was to preserve it in the manner necessary for my own Accommodation & that whenever the Rent Taxes & Repairs exceeded my means, I was  to leave as I found it destined to be the Habitation of Bats & Owls. It never entered my head That the Duke meant, when my lease was out that there should be a ground of Action in favour of his Heirs of Entail against my Heirs of Nothing Obliging them to Rebuild his Castle for him altho it be already as old as the oldest Ruin in all the Country. This however I hope was matter of form in the draft & will not be persisted in. And this is certainly a negotiation very fruitful in Letters to you since you must hear both of its delays and its Advances. It is not however altogether the occasion of this present writing. I find in the Edinburgh news Paper The Death of a very Remarkable man & much in your Thoughts as well as Mine James McPherson The Reviver of Ossian. You certainly know if true what I was told that he had made out a fair Copy of the original Poems. Mr McKenzie Secretary to the Highland Society of London told me he had the Manuscript in his Possession and that a fund was already provided for the expence of Printing it: That it was deferred merely upon a question which had not been determined whether it should be printed in the Greek or Roman  Character. I had a Specimen sheet sent me two or three years ago, in the Roman & Another in the Greek Character. With a Literal Latin translation word for  on the opposite page, the form in which I was told it was intended to print the Whole. I now see or Suspect that the whole load will fall upon you. The question relating to the Character is a Trifle & whether the Greek or the Roman be employed, James McPhersons orthography differing much from that employed in the Bible &c will require to have prefixed an Alphabet in which the Power & Sound of every Letter will be ascertained as much as possible. You will be able to inform yourself fully how the matter stands & I most earnestly entreat that you will take it up Seriously & earnestly: for if we die also before it is done I doubt the Papers will be lost & the fund provided for Printing remain unaccounted for.

I have heard no particulars of the manner in which that Indignant Soul departed: but he seemed to be drooping about two years ago when I saw him last.

I forward your Paper as desired to Jno Home & Dr Blair, we shall be happy to have the whole when done. My earnestness for pacific measures on our part has long been great but my hopes of actual Peace very little.

The Republick of France has no chance to exist but in the turmoil of War & if its leaders should have no pretence for war with Europe in General they will try to keep up the delenda est Carthago against this Country. What a Prospect for Ages to Come it has been louring upon me from the first day of the War & may not clear up while I live. And here is a new & most interesting Crisis. An Assembly of the Batavian People met on the first of March to Supersede all former Government and deliberate on a new one.

The Result is uncertain: but probably the  democratical leaven  once admitted into this Batch will never be cleard away So as to restore the former Self electing Aristocracy. It is also probable that the impulse given to that supposed but mistaken Phlegmatic mass on the prospect of Democracy or what is now called Liberty, will produce in that country a new Scene of Energy or national exertion. What are we to do in this case?Are we to brave the Hostility of this rising Power & press it down into the Scale of France So as to leave no chance of Counterpoise in the rest of Europe. May God who has preserved us hitherto forbid. We have nursed the French Republick in its Cradle we have tended it to school & brought it for ought I know to a state of Confirmed Vigour in the Issue dangerous if not fatal to Other Nations of Europe: or which certainly the half rotten or Slumbering monarchy can ill resit. If the new republick of Batavia is to have a separate existence from that of Gaul I would willingly nurse it as a young Hercules who may one day be our Friend and Assistant against this Hydra of France. Their own Jealousy may naturally enough take this turn against  the Power that is most likely to keep them in bondage & certainly some direction may be taken even in the Conduct of our present War with the seven provinces or in our declarations and Policy with respect to them that may facilitate their Coming into our Scale at last: but I must leave every body to his own Affairs & mind my own. The Negotiation of Nidpath is in a better form than I have known. While we were deliberating on the Safe clause of lease respecting the obligation to keep & deliver the Castle in repair the time of Advertising other Subjects in the Neighbourhood is come on. Mr Tait has been here visited the Premises & has agreed with me that the best form of Proceeding for me is to Come forward with other adventurers in an offer at once for the whole of what will accommodate me here & the whole be made out for me in one lease. In this I shall be ready before the 21st of April the time at which I am told that offers are to be Submitted to his Grace. And I trust you will be glad to find some load taken off your Back as well as my own.

I send this line without the usual cover because a little possible delay in passing through hands may occasion what I wish to prevent.

The direct call which you mention of my Son Adam to London. I dread for him the Plunge into idleness of which he has too much at Edinburgh. The example of Dissipation & the impression of what is called Genteel in opposition to Bussiness. He was at London some years ago to see the Town for a few days & this I trust is enough till bussiness carry him there at some unlucky Clients Expence. I wish Burnet & he to be diverted from it at present without any apparent negative from me. It is only letting it drop to another Season when it may be less inconvenient. If the matter were in a certain forwardness any restraint from  me might produce more pain than good & therefore I wish even Burnet who may blab not to know what I write. I have been at Edinr for a day to confer with Mr Tait. The Matter of Nidpath now is upon Such a footing that I must be a Bidder for the accommodations wanted & we cannot by any means wish that The Dukes interest should give way to favour. I mean to go as high as the Subject will bear upon me up. And trust only that Ceteris paribus, the keeping of the Castle will procure me a preference in the disposal of its appendages. One thing is pleasant that I now have my chance for the accommodations essential to my Settlement here, that I may or be entirely dissengaged, if these should fail me. If there should be any offer exceeding mine I shall request Mr Tait to let the Duke know my willingness to go as much farther as necessary. I called for Blair to discuss Some of his difficulties, relating to the Concern of Forreign Powers in the internal money Circulation of France; but he was confined with an Epidemic Cold &c &c.

I Join the writer to The Signet in most sincere thanks for your good Offices; he has forwarded the letter to Ruthven & will transact the Bussiness with Mr Charles Gordon when he goes to Edinburgh. The Bussines of Nidpath is well over as you have seen by the documents I sent to you. Thank the Duke for me. My new Situation will not be so Ducal & of course more Professorial. We shall move soon but the direction of Letters may continue the Same till farther notice. You cannot long be at a loss for Places about London & therefore Ryegate need not disstress much. Your publick Language is what I have wished from the beginning of the War: but my Doctrines are not fit for Publication that is not fit to be told to the Ennemy as well as a Friend.

I therefore wish I could hold my Tongue even in Company: for I can Conceive what is said upon the Tweed to be repeated at Paris. The Ennemy ought not to be told what we rely on for that is telling them to what point they should direct their Force. For this Reason Divernois's Pamphlet appeared to me a  very improper as well as mistaken publication.

The French account of the Battle of Montenotte if true is very Allarming: but my Faith is not fixed. They write in the Stile of Quack advertisement & carry the same Caveat to distrust. The Battle I take it is fought to prevent their getting Possession of Genoa. And whatever happened in the Field that day: if they do not get Possession of Genoa they have lost the Battle.

I shall apply to the Dukes man of Bussiness to know what I owe for the time I have occupied the Castle. 

As I write in Some hurry I had almost forgot your Inquiries about the Dictionary of Italian Geography. It is here Safe, I have looked at the Article San Marino and see some short notes of yours Scarcely to be read by any one but yourself. I mean for the hand write. Shall I send the book to Edr to go by some conveyance from thence. There is another thing I should not forget. I have lately received a Letter dated at Turin & Signed the 5th of of July 1795 & Signed If I read it right Le Baron de Chambreis, together with two Copies of an Essay on the Law of Nations about which the Author wishes to Communicate with me & in which I am very desirous  to Comply. And if I knew how to forward a Packet would prepare one for him as soon as the plague of changin Quarters will permit. In the meantime I would willin write a short Line to exculpate myself for the delay that has already taken place. If you have any Access to the Minister from Turin or any one who can tell us about the Baron de Chambreis & correct me if I read it wrong I beg that you will inquire. There is a great fault committed by People in writing names in the same Slurring manner that they write Sentences in these a Sentence The Sense helps to read: but in names there is no Help but the distinctness of the letters so as not be mistaken.

I will tell you next time what I hear about the Burroughs if any thing past worth attending to

I approve much of your intention to be in Parlt.. It is well understood at London that is the only condition on which one can be of Consequence to the publick or himself. I am not for much of a new Ministry but a new Parlt may turn a new leaf & Something is necessary. If the Duke of Brunswick understands the State of France; he is I suspect the only Prince in Europe who does so. Who has looked so far beyond the present System of Europe, where National exertions are made only from the Surplus of Population & Revenue. So as to comprehend what a Nation can do bringing its whole capital of men & every resource at once into Action & where every individual from the Lowest is actuated or affects to be actuated with the Passion for democratick Power & national Glory. Such a Nation may want Constancy & steady firmness: but they may act with an impetus which cannot be withstood. Nothing can can destroy them but tranquillity & inaction from abroad which leaves them to pray upon themselves at home. To understand  this Game every mere Soldier is as impotent as any mere tradesman of any Other Sort. Regimenteering discipline, & even a good Military Head will not do. We must be prepared like the Antient Statesman to meet all the human Passions in their inmost recess. Nations of old brought their all into Stake in every Strugle if worsted they were undone if successful they made the world pay. This is the Game which France is renewing in Europe. And it is not by furnishing them with new occasions of exertion that we are likely to evade the Consequence. I should have been glad to have had you canvassing Burroughs in our Neighbourhood: but approve your having taken other Ground.

In this District there are 4 or 5 under the Separate influence of at least 3 Dukes who I am told have Compromised matters by agreeing to have the Seat for a Friend each in his Turn. Your D. has had his turn in the last Parlt. The D: of Buccleugh comes next & intends as I am told his Son in Law Ld Stopford. What the D. of Q. could mean by wishing to engage you I know not if it were not to keep up his Interest at your Expence at least in one burrough. I am glad to hear that by all accounts he is likely to gain a clear hundred of Grassum by my disertion of the Castle. I was certainly  a very improper Tennant to be in the way of his Operations. I am now at Hallyards about three miles from Peebles & my Letters may be directed as before changing the title of Professor for that of Grazier at Hallyards by Peebles. I am to have Highland Cattle to fatten for winter Beef in the mean time I & my Cabinet Council are as much embarrassed with a Refractory Cow that will not let herself be milked as you I hope will be with this explosion of madness that threatens Europe.

In a former letter you mentioned your namesake John, who is now boarded with the schoolmaster at Peebles & something of a destination of C Payne for India in which you proposed to embark him when ready but I was uncertain whether you meant when C. Payne was ready or Cabin Boy John.

It will be a pleasure to me to think that part of my Blood is to flow by Sea as well as by Land in this Contest & if it come any thing near a Catastrophe in My time I shall be happy to meet it with my old blood in the Front & survive to see the Country Safe or die before it is Otherwise. You may laugh at this but it is often the best consolation I have between Sleeps in the Night. Let me see your Frank as soon as possible, or never Spare me Postage out of the profess of Grazing. I am now glad to See that The Honble Robt can help us now as well as the Honble Charles. So God Bless you all

I must thank you imprimis for your Friend John. His Ardour for Seamanship seemd to abate at a distance from the Other Boys that were also so disposed; but he says that he would like it above any thing else. I do not trust much to his Judgement: but wish the choice to be his own that he may not blame me for his Sea Sickness. This I doubt might repell him in the first outset if he had a retreat before it is over & therefore I wish him to be in a Kings Ship & on a Cruiz before he taste of it & will send him to London by Land if I can find a right opportunity: but this may require Some delay. As for the World I have no hopes but from God & the chapter of Accidents. It is like John Bull to cry out against all Continental Connections, now when his very existence is at Stake without them; And I can only repeat what I have formerly said that he never knows how to behave himself to Other Nations. At one time he would govern every body, at another he cares for nobody.

This war should have been merely defensive  from the first & terminate as soon a Possible, for it has Served to rock the Demon of Mischief in his Cradle: but we would plunge into it trusting to the Cooperation of Other States & now we are over head & Ears & ought to Catch at a Straw, we will have no Assistance. This, in the Sequel of what is past, is the Continued Road to distruction over all Europe, to which there is no Safety now but in the Strict union & Concert of Nations whether in Peace or War. If we have given Other nations occasion to think that we mean or meant our own agrandisement, it is full time to undeceive them by the most Sincere declarations, that we withdrew from the Continent because we could promote the common Cause more effectually elsewhere. That we meant no acquisition: but in the way of pledge for the rights of our Allies as well as our own & there is no conquest but we are willing to relinquish for a proper Adjustment in the common Cause of Safety to the Nations of Europe. And there is no exertion which we ought not make in this matter. People talk of Allarms from Russia: but this compared with The Allarm from France is a trifle. I am not much  for Active Hostilities against France for this is like probing the wild beasts to make him foam & Roar: but show a firm Resolution throughout Europe not to be the Dupe of his Affectations: or the Ambition of a few upstarts to govern the world under the notion of Liberty to them. How I write, you will say, as if I were a Statesman Consulted in the Bussiness. I would give much that I could banish the matter from my thoughts but this being impossible my next resource is to give vent. I have retired to the Country on purpose that I might have a number of little Objects & Cares to divert me from things in which I can be of no use either in Practice or Speculation & so much for every mans importance to himself in which I know that you will forgive me my Share. I am My Dear Friend

I just now receive yours of the 23d about half an hour after the departure of your little Friend & Namesake for London, so that the Die is in some measure thrown for him. I had written to his Brother here to make inquiry about a proper conveyance for him, And yesterday between 4 & 5 in the morning at Hallyards received an Express informing me that my Friend Sir James Stirling Provost of Edr was to set out for London with a young Son of his own whom he is to enter an Officer in the Guards & that on hearing of my occasion desired to inform me that he would take Charge of my Boy & see him safely to any place I should direct in London. This was so favourable an opportunity that I could not hesitate for a moment in seizing it, accordingly, as fast as sleeping persons could be awakened and dressed, set out for Edinburgh, took my Boy in passing through Peebles who then heard for the first time of his immediate destination, & carried him through among his Companions waving with his hand in a transport of Joy. And he is set out this Morning with Sir Ja's  Stirling who will be a Father to him, till he is Consigned to his Uncle Samuel Burnett of Iron Monger Lane N 26 Cheapside or to your Order. He has letters written at Hallyards one to you & another to his foresaid Uncle given him more to serve as a direction where he is to be delivered than to carry any inside Contents.

He was taken up at Peebles & forwarded from Edinburgh in the very State of a Peebles Schoolboy, in which this Sudden order to March Surprised him, & it is perhaps better that he should be fitted out at London with Particulars suited to his destination than that we should attempt any equipment here & I write to His Uncle Samuel Burnett N 26 Iron Monger Lane Cheapside to find him in Necessarys at my expence. Be so good as let the your servant carry the inclosed to the penny Post for that purpose. You will decide for me what is farther to be done. I mentioned what Passed between Mrs Nugent & me on the Subject & wished you to disscuss the matter with her. She said Captn Nugent wished to take charge of a Boy of mine & offered to carry this Boy to London with her. I took the matter into Consideration but she departed without Saying any thing more of the matter; Least she should be affronted or affect to make a Quarrel of our taking to any Other protection at Sea; I pray you to take the choice whatever  it be on yourself & recollect what was my wish that Captn Nugents mind should be known before we recurred to any one else. There is indeed no one I should prefer to Captn Nugent & should think My Boy Happy either with him or C. Payne whose handsome Remembrance gives me reason to augur well of the Project.

My heart is full, & if you were by, my Silence would express enough. We look for Major Burnett with some fond expectation, if he should overtake me here it will be pleasant to show him the Way to our Country retreat: but if I should be gone Adam will attend him thither. I too perceived what Sort of Ennemy we had to do with & would have directed My Politics to guard against the Precise thing that has happened: but this world is a Series of Progress & Decline of Flood & Ebb. Of Volution & Revolution but the State of Europe &c before the year Ninety was such that I saw nothing but the too near approach of a Comet that could occasion any general Reverse. I am glad you see things in a more favourable light, And whatever is to be the event endeavour to perswade myself that it is more fortunate to have our Lot amidst great Events than in times of undisturbed tranquillity. I only wish if I am to live & see much that I were forty years younger.

Being to inclose in Covers within Covers unnumbered letters from this Family to the Soldier & Sailor, I acknowledge At the same time your kind reception of our little man at London. He will certainly profit at an Academy or School by any Object that is presented to his Senses & had by any little manual operation he is led to perform. It will grieve me if he should be much embarrassment or trouble to you & therefore I earnestly pray there may be no more of this than your usual temper will enjoy as a pleasure. I am full of Anxiety as usual about the publick & your share in it. Remember I pray to distinguish what is proper in Parliament from what would be so, in the executive Council.

In the first every thing that is said goes to Friend & Ennemy alike, whereas an Ennemy should know no more of our mind: but that we mean resolutely equitably & fairly to all Parties. To a person who has long revolved an Idea it appears perfectly  clear & in no need of explanation or Comment. To Others it is not so. It would instruct you on this head to have seen a correspondence which I held in the course of last winter with your Friend Dr Blair on the Subject of your Printed Paper which I sent him at your desire. He could not  away with the Idea that we who have so much paper Currency of our own should pretend to restrain the Currency, that is The making Assignats Ligal tender in France. How do you steer with Sir William now, there is no man I believe better meaning in the Kingdom: but I doubt he is tired of letters from me as I am of writing them. He does not Win by a popular Surface either within doors or without; yet all parties listen to him with respect & if he were the mover of a reasonable national measure I would have some hopes. It is pleasant to be talking pacifically when the tide of war as I hope it may is turning in our Favour. And I hope that our government will seriously think how they may convince the world that the continuance of War should not be imputed to them. Most Affectionately yours

I pray you excuse so many inclosures &c. The Letter to Sandie Johnston contains some letters from the young People here to the Soldier at the Cape of Good Hope or elsewhere. If S. Johnstone is not gone some of your people can give in The Letter at Mrs Fords in passing. The Letters to the sailor may lye till he cast up himself.

your Letters always give me great Comfort And in Contemplation of the memoir Sur le project de L'Empereur Leopold in Particular I cannot refrain some hopes that the Nations of Europe will not tamely wait for a peace that is to arise from the Successive & Separate Surrender of every State to the Republick of France. If there were a Congress of Nations, it would Certainly hold a different Language. For the Memoir or project itself does it not need some farther explanation. Two questions may be asked. In what respect does the French Revolution invade the general System of property in Europe? And how is that invasion to be resisted? &c.

Much Obliged for the Plan of The Academy. It is certainly the best place at which our little Friend can wait for his Turn of going to Sea: but as I believe after all that the best Education for a Profession is had in the very scene of the Profession itself & in seeing the Actual duties of it performed. I hope it is consistent with The Plan of the Academy to  charge Pupils for the time they remain proportionally without remaining the year and that we shall be ready to accept of a Berth at Sea when a proper one opens.

In this I understand that there is School on board for young people & that our young Friend will find the proper lessons in Navigation as fast as his years qualify him to receive them. The midsummer vacation may not yet be over at the Academy: but I desire my Friend Burnet in Iron Monger Lane to take your orders respecting Johns Entry & to draw upon me for his outlay payable at the Counting house of Mansfield Ramsay & C Edinburgh, Which is all at present from your

 I live in hopes of hearing from you what is actually doing & mean to repay with what is thinking here.

I have to thank you for two letters since I wrote last, one inclosing the Correspondence of our little Seaman to be, the Other informing me of your Country acquisition in which I cordially rejoice. I hope it will occasionally give you that possession of yourself which the Town is so apt to disturb.

You are still Consolatory on the State of publick Affairs which is very fortunate for me who have had no Other Consolation for years past. In recollecting some little experience of my own however I come to think that if one does properly what the occasion requires whether adverse or prosperous Events are not such bad things as they appear to be, & do I shall leave the subject of Politics a Vous Autre. Thank Mrs Nugent for me on her Project of having our little man rated on board the Caesar. I need not say how happy I shall think him under Captain Nugent. I trouble you with the inclosed Correspondence notwithstanding your being in the Country may increase that Effect. However it may be forwarded when you are writing to your people at Brompton however or when you go thither yourself. We have had a Visit of Dr Black here for about a week but we could not detain him, he cannot pass his time in Country, he says, or away from his ordinary Occupations. This I understand. I hope that if you do not take to Country Cares & attentions you will at least have your pen and Ink & if not Rus in Urbe, Urbem & Mundum in Rure.

My Hay is all Safely got up & yet I am not satisfied till I have better news of Europe. I am My Dear Friend

I Sit down to write, without knowing what, farther than that I am to inclose Some Correspondence for our little Friend from his kindred here that he may not imagine that he is forgotten. It pleases me to think that he conciliates good will where he goes & I hope that he will not be deficient in Spirit but for this there is better chance the sooner he makes his transition from the ways of mere land men to those of the best Philosophers of modern times who Can mount the Waves & Triumph in the Storm. There is besides this enclosed Correspondence a certain duration of Silenc which becomes difficult to endure. I blame myself for my not hearing from you when I recollect that there is more than one letter Since I wrote last. I hope you go on with an Anxiety, to be Sure, for the Subject deserves it: but not with so much expectation of what certain persons may be induced to do as can disstress or chagrin you. For my own part I like to put things at the worst & consider how I can bear that  and what is best to be done under it. If they should turn out better there will be less to endure. I have been diverted of late with a Hypothesis which I by no means adopt; That our two great German Allies have playe booby in this War. That the Austrians have given way in order to be quit of the Low Countries & have pretensions to an equivalent more Conveniently Situated for them & That the Other has withdrawn from the Contest & never exerted himself in it to bring Ruin on the Former & have a farther distribution of Territory in which his Lot may be extended. I hope it will appear in good time that the Austrians, who certainly do not play Booby in Italy; will fall like the destroying Angel upon those who venture to drive them on their own ground. The Arch Duke Charles is I hope now in the first Act of this After Piece in the Drama. I flatter myself he is not to quit Mr Jourdan till he has completely cut him up. Even if Moreau in the mean time should advance to the Gates of Vienna his Situation may be made much the worse by a Victorious Army coming in his Rear while the Levies of Hungary & Bohemia salute him in Front. Yet with all this flattery of the imagination I have no Comfort in this Paradoxical War, in which Scarcely any event beyond the boundaries of France can do us any Good. Our Defeats  weaken us & Our Victories Strengthen our Ennemies they unite France against us & it is from the division of France that its present Rulers our Ennemies have any thing to Fear. If we should kill them fifty thousan men in one Battle, they will have just so many fewer turbulent Subjects to Govern And the remainde will be the more earnest to Support them against the ennemies of their liberties and of the Glory of France.

This is the engageing point of view in which we of this Island are made to appear whenever Fortune is pleased to favour us. The War I am told is by no means Popular in France: but the continuance of it is imputed to us & of course the less Popular it is the more we shall be detested. I am curious to know whether we Still expect to Make Conquests or at least that our Ennemies are on the Eve of being palsied a la Diverno. That is certainly a Vexatious Z & not very wise to believe him. Yours most Affectionately

I acknowledge the receipt of Mr Wraxals Publication & have seen nothing else so likely to do good on both Sides of the Water and so having no more to say at present trouble you as usual for the mere Evasion of Postage. The enclosed is an Answer to My little mans first letter from Portsmouth, he has seen the Caesar and did not know there was so large a Ship in the world. His letter also includes one from a Poor Cottager here who has a Son on board The Glutton which the news Paper says is just now gone in to Dock at Portsmouth for a little repair. There used to be much intercourse betwixt John & the Parents & there will be great joy at the delivery of this Letter. The older Sailor I guess would risk his life at any time for the younger one. My head is full of news Since I read last nights Paper. What is become of our great & Good Ally the Empress of Russia ad Inferos out Superos. Will there be any great change of the Scenes. Or who is to be the Empress next: Will the Guards at Petersburgh put up with a Male Sovereign &c &c? What a Report from the executive Directory to the Counsel of 500? Never did State anounce its own extinction in plainer terms. It is a trick on which to found Some new measures of Finance. The news paper bears that it is meant to usher in the proposition of a new fabrication of Paper, if so now is the time for your Traveller to Speak or is it meant as a Ground of exculpation for the Concessions they are making towards Peace. This is what I wish. And I hope that we shall not quench the smoking flax by Screwing up our demands: for I return to my old Doctrine that tho Peace may be friendly to the Nation it is hostile to the present Rulers. And I am still of opinion that the best way of making War is to have peace with them. I think that I understand the State of affairs in Italy through the mist of opposite reports &c And the Party which perseveres, repairing its losses even under Defeat will prevail at last. I have not yet transmitted the Pamphlet to Dr Blair; being willing to Spare his Purse I wait for somebody that will bear it for nothing, and in the mean  time he may be Otherwise Supplied. I believe the Regions are dancing & that Nova Zembla is now here. We have little or no Snow but the Thermometer at 10 of Farhenheit, so much for the weather wishing to hear little from you

The direction of the within should be to John Ferguson with Captain Nugent of His Majesties ship the Caesar at Portsmouth unless you know better.

in your last, I think, you ask me how the Farm goes on. O fortunatos nimium Agricolos: if they would mind their own Affairs & forget what may happen in Europe, till it come to their own doors & then is soon enough for all the good they can do. I asked a neighbour farmer lately why the late owner of this place was so fond of it as I had been told: because, he said, it gave him a great deal to do. And do you think it a good reason? For us, not, he said unless we gain by what we do ________. I do not expect much of that recommendation for what I do: but am never idle & can tramp about with unblacked boots or wooden clogs for two or three weeks together, for my Valet de Chambre is gone to the Plough and I am myself constantly at work opening drains & turning aside torrents and  yet I am more harrassed with news papers than with all this. It is Sun Shine with you Sometimes when it lours elsewhere: pray let me have a little Glimpse. Say that the Austrians tho' beaten in Italy more than any thing ever was beaten will not accept of terms for themselves without including us. That Buonaparte is not to go on forever &c &c. I blush for your Alexrs and Caesars who should be ashamed of having strutted so long  on the Stilts of military fame for having with some great advantage on their Side won a few Battles against inferior Ennemies: But now I think the Miles gloriosus bussiness has worn itself out, And I shall never admire any more, except the valour that is employed to repell wrongs & protect the Orphan & the Widow. To boast of mischief is the worst Sort of Pedantry & Nonsense. And yet I wish for a little of that Sort of Pedantry which the Ennemy seems to exhibit in all quarters, in order to meet them if they should come here.  Which I believe in my Conscience they will do Wind & weather Serving even if our fleet were as great again as it is. You and I it seems cannot agree about the Parish exercise of Arms, I grant that, like most new things, it may be attended with Risk: but the greatest Risk of all is from the want of it, I. E. Subjugation to a Petulant & outrageous Ennemy who will boast of the Horrors they excite. Government will come to this measure as they do to many others when too late: for its operation would not be immediate, if would only Cultivate the nursery from which Government would be enabled to transplant Shoots indefinitely for the Battalions to be formed for Specific Service at home or abroad. And the People even at their own homes instead of kneeling for Mercy might frown an Ennemy into Respect: But not to disspute any more; there is more good news I expect from you: That there is no ill military humour  on the Ganges; but what My Lord C can appease. No subject has been more in my thoughts than the danger of making the Use of Arms a Separate Profession. If so it must be the highest or lowest & fraught with mischief in either. To Civil Governments who must have Armies in the pay, one of my nostrums is, look forward to what the Army may, one day, reasonably Ask, and do it Silently before it come in their heads to ask it. And if possible let their heads never Come together upon any Subject of grievance or professional pretension. If you deferr to grant till they have demanded, no reason will satisfy them. What has the Court of Leadenhall Street done in this matter. But here is enough tho not much about farming.

We had a Letter from your little Friend at sea in bad weather he had been Sick he said at first but that was over. We hope he is now at Spithead & that we shall hear from him soon. 

I have to acknowledge two or three letters with their respective inclosures Since I wrote last, in return to which all I can do is to give inclosures at least in equal numbers. I owe some letters to our Seaman at Spithead which I now endeavour to repay. If you meet with Rear Admiral Nugent at London pray tell him that the Little Proteg began his letter from Spithead in these words, It is impossible to express how kind captain Nugent is to me. And you may be assured that I feel no less than he does. Congratulate the Admiral for me on his Promotion. And Congratulate me too on the nomination of Rhoddam Home to the Caesar on the prospect of his Flag being Removed to Some Other Ship. I  should long Since have written to my Relation Robert Ferguson in Bengale: but the Vis inertiae is so Strong that without some particular occasion I should never have acquitted myself of that Debt. The occasion on which I write to him now is no less than the Death of his Father A most respectable & original Brother of mine Whom if you had Known you would have thought a most precious Acquaintance. With the wreck of a Little fortune saved from the Revolution in America he has contrived in his will by little Annuities to asswage the Necessities of a Number of Poor Relations whom indeed he was Supporting for years past. As the Publick has become a painful Object at least to us in this Corner who can do nothing for it, I am glad to have any thing else to write. That your Farm should be pleasant and promise to be profitable I rejoice. Mine is I  believe like the general System of Nature itself better fitted to our exigences than we are always willing to acknowledge; that is; it is fitted to our exigences by giving us something to Complain of & by never allowing us to rest. What an exotic man you are who never complain. If you should ever again be in the humour of coming to this Countrey it will be matter of great joy to me.

Here I am bussy Sowing oats not wild oats but very tame ones I can assure you. Take my thanks for the Thoughts on the late Negotiations. I am perhaps the only person in Tweedale who can trace your Steps more or less; but I think I perceive them in certain meetings mentioned in the news paper. If the Snow is not too much frozen the Ball you have begun to roll must increase. And so I hope that good will come of it.

Having little to say I have long delayed writing & should delay still but for an occasion to Peebles that hurries me being in haste to be gone & we are both perhaps Obliged to it for preventing the effusion of human Ink. 

I dont know what has occasioned so long a Silence between us altho I myself am more to blame in it than you. On receiving your last I was to write immediatly & having scarcely any thing to write here except the weather was to descant as usual on the political Sky. The Aspect indeed to me though changeing to the common sight has been ever nearly the same. I saw the French Monarchy overturned by a flash of Democratical lightening, striking the Armies of France. And I now see the fate of Europe urged by the Continuance of a Democratical Change in that tremendous Conductor. This even the Officers commanding this democratical Army understood not And many of them have been knocked down Successively by coming too near a Battery which they did not know to be charged.

Layfayette Dumurier Coustine Montesquieu &c &c thinking that because they got Victories & were Popular  the Army would follow & Support them in any plan they chose to follow. All these instances were much alike whenever the democrates became Jealous the Army Suffered them to crush any General or do what they pleased with him: but Dumurier is most to my purpose. He gained Signal Victories and the Army called him leur Pere but the moment he swerved from Democracy His Chamber and Quarters were crouded with Grandiers having the Buttside of their hats turned foremost & with Republique written upon them in letters of Chalk. A Brigade marchd without his Orders & when he questioned them on the Road he was obliged to swim a Canal or leap a Ditch to get away with a Shower of Musket bullets about his Ears. The Democracy of France is represented in the Council of 500 chosen by the People: but three men not chosen by the People, got into a Disspute in which they called the Representatives of the People Royalists & instantly the Armies of France declare against the Representatives of People And the Three had the whole military force of France at their disposal to Suppress the Civil & Political Democracy of the Country. Whence comes this. Have  the Military no feeling of the Democracy for which they affect so great a Zeal? or have they some view to a manner of enjoying it, which has not yet appeared to other People. It is possible they may have such a View or it may be opened to them: but for the time past & the present I believe that they felt the Spur which drove to Democracy more sharp than any part of the People. I believe that among the points in this Spur the sharpest was the Contemptuous distinction mantained on the footing of mere birth maintained against the whole Body of the people in France.

This disstinction was made more grievous to every common Soldier than to any other Person in France & the entire removeal of it is a triumph to him which he cherishes & glories in more than any other order of men can do. In the late Monarchical Army Officered with Noblesse & recruited from the People The private Soldier was a kind of Dog or worse. A Gentlemen would caress his Dog: but a Soldier might die in the Kennel he was too mean a thing to touch the gentlemans notice. The Line of Distinction between them was so insurmountable that no merit could carry a private Soldier over it, he might storm Castle  or turn the fate of Battles; no matter his blood might flow where it would; he must toil & Suffer & be a Slave for Life it would contaminate the whole Race Of Nobl to treat him with any Notice. Can any one wonder that when a prospect opened of being able to break this film all the privates in the French army ran thr the Breach & still glory in the Idea that they are in the vulgar Phrase as Good as their General & may come to Command in their turn. This for the present I believe is the great charm of Democracy to them & who Can doubt its Effect. They may in process of time demand Settlements & retreats from Military Service but that time is not yet come. Thus in my opinion Stands the case with what we and all Europe not excepting the Directory & Democracy of France has to Contend.

We Blame the Directory for not making Peace they neither dare nor can make Peace. The Army must have forreign Ennemies to Devour or will devour at Home. What Conduct this may suggest in this Country I know not: but I am sure that no conduct will be right where the case is not understood & hence the whole Series of our Conduct hitherto or The Coalition of Europe by which we roused excercised & confirmed the Democracy of France .

Within you have a full Sheet that is almost as much as your Unciarium priviledge can bear, but there must be a cover besides with room for much Wisdom if I had any to Spare. The Plan of operations in such a War is not very easily Settled. The Ennemy desire no better than to be violently threatened with attacks on their Republick one & indivisible. One thing however is certain that every nerve must be strained to put this country in condition not to be Subdued without having its people destroyed first & the more this is believed, and that we mean no more in the War so much the better.

There is talk of representations and Appeal to the sense of the world. Good words I pray, for what have we to do with censures of what French do to one another. There should I think however be one burden to every Song, that our enemies seem disposed instead of allowing their Armed Citizens to repose in the Arms of Peace with the rewards & Settlements they have merited, seem to meditate relief, from their claims & pretensions by their destruction in operations which cannot be of any benefit to themselves or their Country. God Bless you all from  &c

your writer at Edinburgh has a report that you are to be this way in May which I rather wish than believe. If it should be So you will find that I, tho a Warlike Philosopher, am far from being against your System of Property & National independence altho I do not know of any way to preserve it among Thieves high way men & conquering Nations but Force alone & to this we must look for Safety & even not rely on ordinary means of defence So long as there is Such an Army & Such a directory in France. As the Combina of Kings served the Jacobin cause in France The Threats of the Directory serve the National cause in this Island. They will teach & drive as I trust to assume a just Military Posture which no effort of theirs will reverse. And if they persist will I trust not be for a Moment or a Single generation but for Ages to  come. For this purpose I wish only in adition to what is doing that the current of Estimation & honour should be turned as much as possible into this Channel. What is become of Trade? My Answer still is let so much of it as is inconsistent with National Safety go elsewhere. A Valiant People & independent State cannot want for Resources. My only difficulty is to hit the just mean between the danger of Subjugation & the danger of wishing to Subjugate Others for men are Such Idiots as to Think that conquests is prosperity & for themselves would sett no limits to either. We complain that the French would be a Conquering & the great Nation by Land: but our publick Scribblers at least are as Offensive in their turn by Sea. Is not rule Britania ovr the Waves as bad as a ira. The best of us should have a bridle in our mouth & a hook in our Nose or at least have our tongues pulled out.

There was a poor Idiot in my Country who used to call himself Rob machg an Duig: but Others called him Rob Gorrick. It is piteous to hear fools talk of the Soveregnty  of the Seas while they own that there should be no Sovereign of the Land beyond his own territory. If vainglory had effect to raise or preserve a just national Spirit it might be endured: but I distrust the effect it is provoking to Others & fraught with inefficient confidence in those who entertain it. So much for Moralization which if does not Correct the world may at least tell us what to think of it. I have seen some extract of a Work of Dumurier. It is strange that these Frenchmen should know human Nature & its affairs so much better than we do. We think that Law and Act of Parliament should do every thing they have more experience of the minds & humours of Men. What I liked most in the land tax Scheme was that it gave prospect of a more fair Assessment hereafter: but I think it seems to languish. If you be idle enough to come here you will find me at home for the printers are at work on the Roman History & tho they are far from sending me a proof to correct every part I am obliged to be in the Way &c. I am earnest to have it as right as I can make it.


My Silence is not negligence nor forgetfulness if I had ten thousand of the best letters that ever were written you should have them all: but what I can write from this post, at which my prime consolation is that I have nothing to do but to wait quietly till my time comes. The French I trust, altho they may tease, cannot subdue this Armed nation; and all Speculation on the Subject is at an end. I have in my view a most delightful Kirkyard retired & green on the bank of a running Water & faceing a Verdant hill which in your part of the World would pass for a tremendous mountain: but to me it gives the Idea of Silence & Solitude away from the noise of folly. And so I fancy myself laid there with a Stone to tell the Rustic Moralist what  he will not understand; because I sometimes project it should be in Greek as follows:          but then Again I wish to explain it. And so it should be. I have seen the Works of God, it is now your turn. Do you behold them and rejoice. I would speak my verve for Agriculture in Greek also    And you may judge of my willingness to write when I put all this on paper to you.

I have not stirred from home for many months past, till lately, when Admiral & Mrs Nugent being at Edinburgh, led me thither to gratify my sense of their kindness to my little Seaman. And I am Still the more Convinced that Nugent is the most amiable faultless Creature upon Earth. In that excursion I met our Friend Sr John Sinclair in the Street: this put it in his head to write to me since my return hither, an Account of works he is projecting to promote what he calls Statistical Philosophy. I hinted that his project is too vast: but he tells me that his mind  is made up, to draw it on a great Scale and on as perfect a plan as possible. And that he never Startled at any difficulty that could be Surmounted ever Since he collected as far back as the year 1780 One thousand & two hundred men & in one days time made a road of Six miles long over a mountain till then thought impassible. The fact is that he has got an instinct to be doing which other people ought to know how to employ without turning him out of place. Altho I have so many excuses for writing so seldom, I am not willing to Allow you any, so I pray when you are writing however let there be a Scrap for me even if you should not be able to tell me what is become of Buonaparte. By the by is that a genuine Prussian paper in answer to the French demands, which we have in the news paper. It is menacing and I do not see how the great Nation can give way to it without appearing to be cowed. They certainly meant to gall us & to secure the Co-operation of Prussia against us by transferring Hanover

To begin where your letter ends. Amicus Amicissimus Indefatigabilis After having Splashed you before with bad Greek you are well off that there is nothing worse now than bad Latin. I do recollect hearing S. J. E. desire to have some land Property near his Native Spot but at present know nothing more nor do I know of any fit place at Peebles for your Ward: but shall inquire. There is no property in this Country you know without a Doer as Allan Ramsay used to call the Writers when he was Angry with them which he was indeed for the greatest part of every hour of his life. If there be any Subject on which to make us your Doer We shall not neglect to do what is proper, And for the Sequel if there be any Sequel it must Come as God will have it in the whims & inclinations of those Concerned. As to the World I am glad  you think Buonaparte is gone upon a mere trading or plundering Voyage. In that way he cannot ply long without having the Seas disputed with him. And I patiently wait for the Consequence without Supposing that every encounter of ours must be Veni Vidi Vici for even the great Julius was a Puppy at a time & more so than has yet appeared of Buonaparte.

A Combination of Europe including Russia if not properly directed would do us no good. You may possibly remember my Bull. That the proper way of Making War on the great Nation is to make peace with them. In this they are too wise to be caught. I mean their Directors but I think we may make a War as like peace as Possible especially if Europe Combine in it, by keeping them at Bay, leaving them no outlet from home nor goading them with any trifling attacks to keep their attention and Animosities directed abroad. There was an expedition to Ostend And there is one again now the newspapers say from Margate mere proofs that we have not yet learned the Character of our Ennemy or the nature of our Contest:  but of that no more. I am no oppositionist and this moment think the nation in a most prosperous State. That is to say we have Men Arms & Spirit, & if we should come to have less wealth we must consume the less either by having fewer mouths or putting less in them.

I was in Edinburgh for a day or two when your last letter came here to Hallyards. Or Otherwise having now three or four such favours to acknowledge shoud have done it sooner. The Roman History advances but Slowly. The Printers have much Other work when our Law Courts are sitting; Then much of the bussiness proceeds by a kind of paper War from the Press. Five Octavo Vols. are projected but little more than one is yet printed. I shall be Obliged to your German Author for his prolongation Scheme, tho having Annuities & Sellaries from Other People'tis like they think I have prolonged enough.

here is a are two packets in return for all your kind remembrances. If I had better you should have it: but confinement has given me something worse than nonchalance about writing: this comes from a Scald in my leg which I met with above four weeks ago. The Surgeon always tells me it is haleing but it is never hale. I am nearly of Dr Thompsons mind about the Ambition & projected Progress of France. I am only surprised that in this mimickry of the Romans so Aspiring a Genius does not stand in Awe of the proverb Imitatores Servum pecus. The case of Europe is truly alarming and if there were such a Profession as Physician of State I should be for calling a Consultation to prescribe for the Patient whose life is at Stake, Altho  if we are to believe Satyrists & dealers in Ridicule Of all the pretended Markets for Wisdom that of a Consultation of Physicians is the most ridiculous. If I were to prescribe myself, it should be a bandage of dead Wall round the whole Circumference of regal France so high & impervious that nothing could come to the Republick from without & nothing perspire from within for at least ten years if in this time there appeared no returns of Sanity I would agree to have the whole interrd under an appropriate inscription. Here lyes a Singular Genius possessed of eminence in every Science & Art. He lived a great statesman & Warriour but died a Coxcomb and now lyes here in sure and Certain hope of raising at the last day to have a dance.

In failure of the Above prescription my nostrum is that we should take such a Posture of defence as we Can keep till God & Nature  cause the Storm to pass away; for I really do not See any thing we can do to hasten its dispellation. The Armies of France will thrive in the midst of opportunities to Scatter their glories about & while they are pressed from abroad with Counterrevolution have such a Noblessephoibia that they will cling to any thing that calls itself Democracy the Reverse of all Armies in the World whose devotion has always been towards a Leader. I am glad H. R. H. keeps so good Company. If you can infect him with a little of your temper so much the better for us all at least for those who may live to See or feel it. This will probably find you at your Farm & I'm affraid the inclosed will be troublesome: but our little man has had so tremendous a Cruise that I am impatient to him & his Shipmates Joy of their Escape.

I have been in Edinburgh hunting a Militia Substitute for one of my young Men & we have had such falls of Snow & such storms of drifting wind, Since, as threatened to carry away our roofs and bury us alive so that I have literally forgotten at what point our last Correspondence ended. But I still retain my faculty of troubling you when any thing pinches. You see my young Seeman has made another Admiral & therefore has a new Captain perhaps another Ship to look for. It has run in his own head for some time probably at the Instigation of some of his Ship mates that it would be best for him to be on board a Frigate, and it may be so: but I have no will in the matter. Admiral Nugent has always expressed a Sort of Paternal good will to him And I  trouble you now merely that I may put you upon considering his Case with Admirable Nugent that if a proper berth occur to you for him it may be looked after. And since I am upon family matters I must recall to your memory what you Once questioned me about before I. E. The future Profession of another Son who is Still at College. He is a good figure & has not a fault: but I am sett against the Law or any profession more learned than a Soldier: besides that this is likely to be the Staple trade of this Country as long as we can defend ourselves against the devouring Volcano of France, and when that is no more we may be indifferent about every profession, but the Grave diggers.

I have hesitated too long & I believe must think seriously of concerting the matter with himself & so push for a first Commission in his Majesties Professional Forces by Purchase or Otherwise only wishing to  make the matter as Speedy and as easy as I can & I mention it to you that if you should have an Opinion on the Subject I may know it. Our Roads are so blocked up that I have no prospect of getting to Edr soon where my first Steps are to be taken.

I have not heard your Lamentations over the most Innocent King of Naples but have no doubt they are loud enough to be heard at Canterbury. I was blockhead enough to conclude from the Neapolitan March that all Germany was to be in motion at the same time: but I shall for the future as long as I live, think that an Italian Court may play the fool more readily than the torpor of Germany should rouse into Seasonable Action. It is said that the Neapolitans advanced because if they had not the Enemy was coming upon them: but is there no difference in Europe betwixt a Ruin which it will be said the King brought upon himself & therefore deserved And an act of unprovoked injustice & Rapin committed by the general Enemie of  all nations. After this I have for the present no more politicks Short of the Union with Ireland, in which I have no vote. If your Government have no controul over that publisher of the Sun newspaper let them say so. If they have for Gods sake Silence him that he may not continue fomenting bad humour by his impertinent Remarks & absurd Zeal for a cause which he is no way qualifyed to promote, non tali Auxilio nec defensoribus istis tempus egit. I am provoked at every turn of a leaf to see news mongers instead Of telling what has happened continually giving their opinion as if it were of any Consequence what they thought. And when I have said so much am sensible of idleness in thinking to controul news papers.

you have reason to expect a more immediate Answer to your last: but having to consult the principal party concerned in your kind offer of a Cadetship; the late irregularity of our communication with Edinburgh has occasioned this delay. You have made two happy persons. By the account I just now receive, my young Mans mind was nearly in the same state with my own; for some time past hopeless of his present Studies: but unwilling to disstress me whom he knew to be for Steadiness in a pursuit once begun. His thanks therefore are very Sincere. If the Cadetship be in the Cavalry so much the better but if in any other Department of the  Service your friendship is the same. And we shall be ready at a call upon the Shortest Warning. I can Scarcely find any Subject but this at Present for a letter & before I have done with it; please to know that you young Friends Name is James Ferguson least this should be wanted before you hear more.

You ask about my Book in the press we are well entered on the fifth & last Volume: but our press is slow especially while the Courts of Law are sitting & it may be towards Summer before we are done. As to my part of the Edition I shall transcribe the Conclusion of a Note or Advertisement which I am preparing to be prefixed Containing a Summary View of the Authorities upon which the narration is founded for the Satisfaction of English readers, And shall inclose it with this if it can be  any Satisfaction to you. I will not answer if  it will be in the words: but to this purpose I sincerely wish your ArchDuke Bleu Ribbons and as much better things as he can desire: but for the Politics my trust is in Providence. I see no head in Europe that is fit to make peace or war in proper season. The French have dealt more Artfully by the House of Austria than people think. The transfer of Venice and its territory to the Adige is a masterly Stroke, Coming in place of the Low Countries it rounds their extensive Monarchy and cuts the thread by which they were Connected with us. As for the Russians poor passive bears I am affraid they come westwards only to be ridiculous. You are a great Medicin tant mieux. I am affraid the reverse is growing upon me: but if I knew how to live in hope & not to be dissappointed I would prefer it much. I congratulate Charles Greville on the Highland Presidentship. I hope he Sung his Gaelic Song: but all nonsense apart 

I have just now received your Letter in the same cover with our Seamans dispatch & experience in every thing your kind attention to my requests.

My Answer to your last was delayed by Accidents but I hope will have reached you before this. You will there see our sense of your good offices & may perceive the joy with which we avail ourselves of them. It occurred to me that you might wish without loss of time to have the young mans Name Viz. James Ferguson. But his age I did not think of. He was born in the year 1778 of course is now turned of twenty but not twenty one which I hope is still within the Age at which Cadets are taken into the Service; if it should  exceed the Age of Admission we shall be woefully dissappointed As we have all agreed to prefer the Cadetship you mention even to an immediate gift of a first Commission in the Kings Service. I write merely to Convey this information of our name and Age & Shall not detain my Letter for any Other matter whatever. Believe me to be

I have received your packet inclosing Admiral Nugents line to you & our Seamans dispatch to me. In the last I am sorry to see some traits of ill humour like a spoilt child when he is taken away from his Mother & cannot brook any less attention than used to be payd to him. I wrote immediately without your Cover least you should be out of the way to check this as soon as Possible. He is impatient to be in a frigate & consequently out of humour where he is but my doctrine to him is implicit & even chearful Obedience & I hope he will recollect himself. His conditions as a Sort of favourite with his two last Captains may have spoilt him a little & piqued his Competitors in the Ship: But I hope it  will go off. And I shall be glad to take any occasion to trouble to Sr J Saumarez with my Solicitude on his account. Our wou'd be Cadet is now here Ayant pris cong d'Edinburgh And as we mean to do nothing here in the way of fitting out, can be at London when required as quickly as a letter by the Mail Coach. He is Armed with a proper Certificate of his Age from the Minister of the Parish. It appeared upon inquiry that he was born the 15th of March 1798 & consequently that it is thus & no nearer with him being now 21 out.

I have not yet seen Adam Since this bussiness came on the Anvil, he is much detained by Volunteer Duty & would have my Consent to accompany his Brother and thank you for me as I am too old to do so myself: but am doubtful whether in these times he can have the necessary leave of Absence. War here or in  Ireland if not on the Seas between us and the Enemy we are likely to have. So if we  are not victorious, in my mind happy is he who falls: but I am willing, here in your medicinal Stile to believe the best. If we have heads we want nothing. What say you. Will the Austrians who refused to answer a question be bullyed by the March of an Army. & so bid the Russians go back. My wish is that they would tempt the French to advance into Bohemia or Austria & then receive them on the flank with an Army of Russians & the other with Germans: but we shall see who is fool now. I am well enough Aware of my own chance for that Disstinction: but never cease to be my Dear Friend yours most affectionately

If you & I were two Ships at Sea we should have long since been haling what Chear Ho. But as we are at least one of us an Idle fellow at land who neglects the small duties on hand merely because he is overrun with leisure or nothing to do. This however is no new case I have known an Idle man delay Bussiness for months: which a very bussy man never deffers a moment to execute. With all this delay I have been not a little Anxious to hear from you What has become of your Friends at Florence. The news paper report put our Friend M   in disgrace. This however undeserved, among Courts, will not greatly surprise me, & may have happened in particular under the Influence of Vienna &c. But I hope you can relieve me from this Apprehension. The Enemy I trust must Evacuate Italy And Swisserland &c. But our Project of restoring Monarchy with Priviledged  Noblesse in France has many difficulties. Property Again to change hands. Low Born men both in Civil & military Stations to lay their heads in the dust from which they arose. It was much easier to lay the frivolous corrupted pretenders to Aristocracy in the dust than it will be to bury their Rascally Successors. The former exclusive pretensions of Birth to consideration & preferment will never be restored as long any shred of the low born republican Army Subsists. I have been saying so for years tho nobody seems to mind it. Every Army would prefer the Monarchy of a favourite Leader to any Other Government. And the whole French Nation Soldiers & all may be asshamed or disgusted with their tryal of Democracy if they are only allowed to Suppose; that want of birth for the future is not to stifle merit of any Condition.

So much for the great Scene of Nations. There is another too about which I am somewhat anxious. Do you know Mr Mc Intosh whose project to give Lectures on the Law of Nature & Nations has been Announced in a preliminary  Discourse? Have his Lectures taken place? With what success? The Specimen I have seen inclines me to think he is one of the greatest Moralists this Island has produced & I consider the publick Character as involved in his Success.

Has my new Edition of the Roman Story reached you, have I done right in Spelling my forreign honours at full length, I could not find out the Customary Abbreviations; you may not be sensible of much improvement. It was a Satisfaction to me while in Italy that I was not made sensible of many Blunders by seeing the Country or its Antiquities. Believe me to be most

As the Summer is now passed I take courage to write in hopes we may pass through a winter and see a better one. Man is Surely a vegetable & will yield neither blossom nor Fruit when the season is backward. To this I hope you will impute my Silence & what is worse than Silence a listless indifference about every thing that is passing in world even about my own books Authors & Readers. I am nevertheless willing in the language of Lloyds Coffee House to under-write your Verses to the Arch-Duke if he will reinstate The Mentor where he found him. If you know any particulars I am very Anxious about him.

I hear very favourable accounts of Mr McIntoshs performances at Lincolns Inn. As I judge only from his pamphlet his Tone tho' perhaps more harmonious is in unison with mine. He had his reasons probably for not mentioning me & I am not Solicitous about them. He will probably procure the moral Philosophy that Popularity in England which I wished for but have been unable to Obtain. His taking  his ground in the Law is not so apt to allarm the Universities & the Church as if he had called his Object Moral Philosophy which those Authorities sometimes mention among the Corruptions of the Times. I need not Ask you about the Roman History; it would be very bad indeed if you did not commend it: but even if you should not I hope its faults are fewer than they were. I wish the same thing to befall my Other more recent Book, And have warned the Bookseller that if they think it will ever bear being reprinted now is their time; while I have faculties left to Curtail its faults. If not my amendments must go to my heirs & take their chance. By the By as we say upon the Tweed I am just now meditating a work of no great length or moment. It is to be dramatic and you with Some Others a Principal Actor. It is to tell what I would have done with my little effects after I am gone. I mean you to have a Duplicate & will place another with my Friend Sir William Nairne One of Our Honourable Judges if he accept as I doubt not he will. In the mean time My Land Lord is building for my Convenience an addition to my house as if I were to live on through the next century.

Your Magazines &c that talk of my Life have robbed me of a year for I was born in 1723 &  am of course 76 now past. So indulge me in a little prating about the times that were. If you should the times that are will not be offended; for I really think them better than any we have formerly had. The Madness of France has made us understand and relish the Sobriety of our own forms. The multitude & insolence of so near an Enemy has roused every Soul in Britain to Politics & War as well as Trade. Women & Children can listen to talk about matters of Consequence to Mankind. The Evils and follies of one quarter become lessons of Wisdom to another And so the world is guided. Storms & Tempests have produced Architecture And the Manufacture of Cloth. So much for moralizing & it is well the end of my paper is in sight otherwise you might have more. It is long since I heard from you, I am affraid by my own fault, however I hope to hear soon you are well & about reaping your harvest, if so late with you when may we look for it here. I am away from any means of knowing Fordyces Motions Otherwise should certainly endeavour to find him.

I have had the inclosed from Dr Blair with instructions to return it to you. Justice is done to our financical Policy & if omnia si su with our Armed Landmen & our Glorious Seamen we would be a fortunate People: but something as you hint is wanting in our Conception of things abroad. Some people I find are of opinion that we ought to be sending our Troops abroad to see Service. If this Policy be adopted let them go to the Rhine or the Danube to act under Suvarov or ArchDuke Charles: but not where  to retreat they must reembark in presence of an Ennemy & be cut off or lay down their Arms. The habit of begging for Quarter is not a good lesson of Service. You touch the Convention of Pilnitz. I believe very fairly & all I have to Say on that Subject is that whenever mentioned it should be particularly Specifye & not passed over in general terms. When we are beat we desire no more than Safety to Publick and private property but when we are victorious we would have something more for our trouble. In the first Case our Ennemy woud give us peace in the Second we wont have it. So I dont know what is to happen to us. We would have a Peace in which  it will be safe for us to dissarm; But such a Peace I believe we are never more to See. While France exists whether under Military Government or a pretended Democracy This Island must be Armed to be Safe.

The late question has been not whether we would conclude with Buonaparte on any Specifyed Terms: but whether in the present circumstances we would Suspend all our efforts & those particularly in concert with our allies to try what sort of Terms Buonaparte would offer.

To the last Question I would give a decided negative tho I am inclined to think the terms in the present Conjuncture might be better than we may ever after get Sight of. This Recent Usurper might agree to any thing Short of his own resignation or a relinquishment of the Equality which his army claims. Any treaty Concluded with us would imply the Acknowledgement of his Sovereignty & this he would buy at a great Price. And he would have so much to do in restoring his Country from the dilapidations of recent folly: that I believe the person is not alive who would see it his interest to go to War. Nay but he would make a great Fleet so much the Better as Frederick of Prussia once said. The nglish will take them all. Nations would never be atisfied till they have nothing to fear from Abroad. And if they should ever Come to think so the greatest ation on Earth would be undone. I am projecting this for a Cover merely to the inclosed as more might exceed the legal ounce: but how it is to fold I know not: be that as it may. I  must tell you of a recent relief from anxiety & even desponde in the recovery of our little Seaman from a Fever under which he has been sent ashore to sick Quarter at Dartmouth. I have corresponded with his Medical Foru and at last have a letter from himself saying he is almost quite well. It is pleasant to read with what triumph he speaks of his Captain Sr Jas Sumarez kindness & of every Officer & Man about him. That is a noble class of men noursed in continual hardship & danger to a contempt of every thing but generosity and Courage. God grant me but a little Spice of their Character.

I have been remiss in my Correspondence of late And have to thank you as usual for kind attention to my Concerns, What you try to Alleviate my Affliction is not without Effect. Your own presence to my mind is powerful. It is indeed the condition of old age and long life to Survive many we would wish to preserve. Poor Josephs Life has been Short: but not Sunk in dejection. He had the esteem & regard of those about him without mortification in his little course of Ambition. And it is Some Consolation to me that when he looked to me for Aid my Circumstances did not Oblige me to refuse it. And for ought that appeared to him he was a fortunate man which is the utmost that mere life whether long or short can procure to any one. For the Sum when it is Gods Will we should die it is as good as to live Or rather as I am perswaded it is to enter on a new life. And thus reason is easily Satisfy'd altho  to Taste the draught is bitter. His name has never yet been mentioned here & we commonly meet with recent mark of Tears, which we endeavour to conceal And this he would have done for us.

You may believe I anxiously wish you Success in the transaction you mention or what is Still better indifference to what may happen. It is supremely pleasant to lean upon those who are disposed to befriend us but not less so to be independent of those who are Otherwise. If you have a fault it is believing that all the world must be sensible of the good you intend them. I would be Selfish so far as to do what is right merely that I myself might enjoy it; Be the Theater on which I act great or Small. It is impossible to be more Obscure than I am in this place: yet my thoughts I trust will habitually place me in the presence of a Majesty beyond the Universe itself & to which the Observation of all mankind if it could be Obtained were as nothing. The Intelligence that Conducts  the Universe is here present & intimately know what we think and do. May he never be Absent from our thoughts. Believe me most Affectionately yours &c

I write merely to inquire, how you do. From hence there is little else to be either said or done. Let that then be the first question. Next are you likely to have any concern in this Liquidation of Arcott Debt which the news papers talk of. Then. What sense do you put upon this soi disant new Constitution of France. I understand that the Premier Consul is a great sovereign, Supreme & Absolute standing upon the Pinacle of Military Merit & Force. That apart from Subsistence & self preservation there is no principle of Action in the State but military Preferment. If there be any Other pray tell me of it: But dont put me off with saying that the publick Good is a great Object. I own it: but I never knew the hundredth part of mankind actuated by that alone. Men are like Planets they must at least have two forces to make them go in their Orbits. One a Projectile by which they would fly, God knows where. Another a Central whose pressure  in eyery moment is only Nascent but continued & keeps them from flying off. Mans Projectile Force is Directed to some personal Advantage: but there is a central force that keeps him more or less Correctly in a track of innocence or beneficence to those around him. Take the Projectile force from him, he might not go wrong:but for the most part would fall into the heap and not move at all. I must repeat however that this is to Speak only in General: For I believe that there are individuals who would be inactive if it were not for a principle of good will to their fellow Creatures which does not allow them to be idle. This Principle however I do not believe is yet the Ruling Passion in France. If you want me therefore to believe that this new Constitution of France is any thing more than a projected Contre Dance in which Couples are made to Stand up without a fidle to put them in motion you must tell me what is to bring the Cantonal Assemblies &c &c together. In short what is the Power or Emolument to be got by running the Career of Communes Cantons  Districts & Departments of Senates Tribunates Legislatures & Privy Councils. I know What is to make a man become a Soldier & seek preferment in his Battalion, in the Legion of Honour & so forth to the very Pinacle of Chief Consul. Even if there be emolument as well as Title in Civil preferment & Office, If such be in the gift of the Chief Consul alone The way will be to pay court to him not to run the Career of an Actual Political Life. Solve me all this & then I shall have the Pleasure of a letter from you.

By the Way I have one from our Friend Mr McKenzie Secretary of the Highland Society telling me of a Subscription on foot for some Badges of honour to My Friends the 42. When a list of Subscribers appears I shall be proud to stand at the tail of 5. 5 or some Such Pittance, And should beg of him to insert my name but nothing I doubt can be done without publication of Names and contributions as in Other projects of a publick Nature. Our Season I think begins to mend on our hands: but we shall have verdure here for the most part of two months to Come. You I trust are far gone in Harvest. But tell me how that is and Believe me to be most

what is become of you? Are we to have Politics only in our letters? And has the peace made an end of our lucubrations? I hope that some of these questions will be Answered in the negative and that if we are not in the humour of writing long letters we may have the pleasure of short. Cicero that great Pattern of Eloquence epistolary as well as declamatory when from hope wrote to the Mother of His Family: Si Vales bene est ego Valeo and this with his name at top made a whole letter. I have sometimes attempted to mimick it & think I can do so now. If you are well so am I. I shall think such a letter from you Cheap of a Shilling, & therefore I pray you withhold it not. As for the peace I think it is a more alarming Crisis than any we experienced in the War. I am however far from thinking that War would relieve us.

I am at least two letters in your debt & yet find myself in a fair way to be waiting for a third without considering that at my time of Life there should be some evidence of experience & fact of my being alive to endure any one to trust matters of consequence under my address. The Fact then is that I am alive & will be happy on any occasion that may make what I know of your merits the topic of discourse. As to effects they may be little:but that is not what I have to Answer for. You have probably by this time seen your Friend Otto on Board & I am sorry for it as I believe he is averse to Mischief. I flattered myself once that his Principal  was so likewise: but now see that the mountain torrent of Idiotical Ambition is too Strong for any reason. What the Devil Inducement can Master Buonaparte have to be hasten all Europe under Despotism to the Ruin of France as well as the Rest & the Suppression of every Spark of Political Life or Ingenuity in the world. I trust we are to see an Age of Glory not of degradation for this Countrey. I pray you to Congratulate your Friends in Administration on the State of Political Controversy. They have got two or three excellent Props. Their own good Intentions. The attack of Grenvilles And the Support of Fox & Sherridan with all the Unshackled Artillery of publick expedience And good Sense. I long to hear from you & am &c &c

I sit down in darkness or in a State approaching to blindness with sore Eyes to acknowledge your kind letters. & my Seamans Triumph in being passed for Lieutennant. Of what is to be done next I am intirely Ignorant & will therefore Submit to any orders he may receive & hope he will be ready Serve in any quarter of the World. My Constant injunction to him is to mind his own Duty not how Other People behave to him. It is not always Good to be a Favourite with those who Command.

I hope I shall at this time make no mistakes in closing My Letter. I recollect being in a hurry  when I proposed to inclose your Friend Otts letter. I have now Some Curiosity to know what went instead of it. I hope it was not a Billet Doux from any of the Octogenaire Nymphs of this Nighbourhood. If so I can only beg of you to be discreet. I am happy to think you have so much Scope for the exercise of your Beneficent & Peace Making temper. Reading or writing is a principal Prohibition under which I now lye & therefore Conclude with my most affectionate Respects to you &c &c

I return Sir W. Ps letter as you desired And Mr Fordyces also as Sir J. Sinclair through whose hands it came is so good as to give a Pass for the return also. I doubt Mr F. mistook the effect of my meeting with him for the Ordinary State of my Being. I have heard of young or midle Aged People having their hair turned grey all in one night from the effect of some dissappointment or Sorrow, I do not see why a meeting of Friends might not turn grey hairs black; there is indeed nothing but the want of Facts that prevents my believing it. As for the twelve years he Assigns me I dont doubt but he would give them with health & joy also: but that is not  what I look for; decrepitude and dullness of Sense is the lot of Age And our Author is so good as to let us live sometimes till we are tired of Life. Even with this prospect I have my Comforts. The Beneficent and The Great at whose disposal I am does not permit to dread or to regret any thing I cannot help.

As to your affairs I need not entreat that you will let me know the Consummation as soon as it takes place. I am reading the life of Sir W. Jones & am glad to be confirmed in an opinion which I took upon seeing him as I once did in Company at London; that he was made for better things than the mere literary Curiosities Antient or Modern which his singular Talent for Language led him at an early period of Life to explore. This talent very naturally pointed him out as a proper Instrument of our Asiatic Government. But I am not so easily reconciled to the detrusion of our Country mana McIntosh into the same Grave. 

It is melancholy that we have no place in our Domestic System for Moral & Political Wisdom Armed with glowing Eloquence; these indeed I have been told from great Authority are not the Spring or Pulse which gives the movement to our Blood. We must have Party & the jargon of Party not the Love of our Country and the candid voice of unbiassed judgement in our debates: But be it so if this choice piece of Machinery would otherwise cease to move.

I cannot rightly account for my Silence Some time past: Anxious untill I heard the India Bussiness was so far Settled; & since somewhat remiss; or rather averse to the Subjects, which we used to write about; & but for the two last copies* which you have sent me, I should have no heart to write now. These Copies I approve much. Your own from Calcutta was a proper Warning to the Direction at Home. What they ought to have been prepared for & what they ought to have done but they were a part of that very Publick from which you had no popularity to expect. Montesquieu Attempted to fix the Principles of different Governments & if he had touched on Mercantile Government, he would have said the Principle was L'Argent not publick but private Pocketting: with your Publick & Liberal Views you was neither to be Understood nor Considered. You do  not tell me what Sr G. Dallas was, at that time: but if my feelings of the Mass be the reverse of Admiration, his part compensates. A more manly friendly & Sensible letter I never read; I am not anxious about any Effect his Suggestions might have. You are, I trust, above any uneasiness of Fortune; & his Testimony is worth many Millions to a Mind that can enjoy itself. Give me some Comfort, I pray you on the state of publick affairs; I mean the War.

We engaged, without the possibility of an Object: but that of defending ourselves: Are we in a Condition to do so? Are we now to find out that the Strength of our Navy was Neglected; And the Enemy have only to Threaten us at home to be masters every where else. De Republica non Desperandum is for men in Active life. But for the Superannuated & Idle to be secure  is little better than Indifference. I am about closing my 82d year so I trust you will pardon a little peevishness.

I am sorry to hear Complaints of your Health; And wish you had been more particular. If it proceeds from the habits of a Town Life continued beyond the meridian, a retreat to the Country is surely the best remedy. This however I doubt is not to be had within the Atmosphere of Tunbridge Wells. And I am perswaded your wisest Course woud be an excursion to this Country & a few draughts of this Highland Air you would be surprised to see how we baffle even Old Age itself in this part of the World. That is to say by the Continuance of animal Life or at least Vegetation. As for capacity & Energy of mind these are reserved for another Life. I  Suspect you are too much Agitated with the winds that blow from so many different quarters of this Political Horizon. We who are not entrusted with either Sail or Rudder ought to take our Station as Passengers & not accountable even if the Ship should go down. Such is my Preaching if not my Practice. You may believe at least that I am not indifferent to L. Ms Affairs. That Brush is the worst Effect of Party that has past in my Time; but I trust that The Mass of the Country is still so untainted with Faction that he will have his Rank in the Publick Esteem. Two or three publick Measures which I am Confident were his would have set him very high in my mind even if he had been personally negligent of me as I am affraid he was too much so of you. The Commutation of a most Absurd & Oppressive Tax on Water borne Coal. The affection of all Highlanders gained to the State & The King by the Rstitution  of forfeited Estates. The Arming of the Country &c &c Are measures untainted with Party or with party Interest & the work of a mind that had leisure to do good as well as to Strugle for Power. I have not heard of his Arrival in this Country but when I do shall be proud to leave my Name at his Door.

Your kindness I am affraid does but tempt My Son to be troublesome at London. His present excursions thither is against My Mind. His Profession Prospects in this Country as I formerly mentioned are Small: but the Horizon of London & the world beside is no better & I have wished him to abide by what I can do for him here: & if there be no World for him on which to Range that he be Contented with a Nook & a Kail yard on which to breath. Send him down then I pray you as soon as you Can & if you come with him so much the Better. You may growl over publick errata here as well as at London. 

It is long since I wrote but I trust you will not Suspect my Silence of unkindness or neglect. You have heard of Old Age & its numberless defects: but indiference is none of them; it magnifies every Care & every Anxiety: but has no Energy to relieve them. I believe it is the Intention of Nature to wean from this Scene of things & reconcile us to the end of it. And I would willingly be reconciled to its Continuance & take the consolation which Madam Roland one of Revolutionary Ladies of France had in her imprisonment viz. that she had nothing to do: but to be there. But to have nothing to do because we can do nothing is but indifferent Comfort. 

Who is this Mr Keene who attacks you? Some of those perhaps who disliked your Government in India. Are your affairs Still in Suspence & likely to remain so beyond the present Session of Parliament by mere Arts of Procrastination. If so my firm perswasion is that you cannot do better this Summer than make an excursion to this part of the World. Two or three weeks at Hallyards with your namesake the Seaman whom we expect to see every Moment would repell every attack of Ill health &c.

People should be cautious how they Speak of themselves: but when attacked the Publick may Sympathize with Defence. If you were here I think that you  and I could give such a Simple and unvarnished Accout of all that has befallen you as would choak the breath of Malice if it succeed so far as to delay your Affair to another Session. Think seriously of this. And be Assured that independently of every Other Consideration the very journey is an Object & may do more to your Health than even your Farm Airy as you may Suppose it to be. My He is wonderfully Good. I go into the Wa Bath every Day like an Old Rom. It has banished Cramps Rheumtism & does not Confine me for a moment but while I am undressed in any weather Summer or Winter. I have been free of Colds or other Complaints for two years. I bath every Day because I have nothing else to do. If you were here you should have the bath every Other Day & I am Sure it woud do you good. Most Affectionately

There is a Gaelic Proverb which I once had occasion to translate VIZ. He who will not Sow in cold weather will not reap in Warm Weather. And I can match it now in the correspondence betwixt you & me. He who ill not write Letters will not have any to read. For ought I have to write the Silence might still continue: but how am to bear your Silence on every Good or bad that befalls you & in which I have to partake. My Son The Man of War wrote me how much your looks were improved from the time he had seen you. And I hope that you are put on Some Moderate  Regimen neither Starvation nor repletion that may Support you in the State to which Cheltenham has brought you.

Man has been called a Microcosm but you are rather a Macrocosm & must have aliment for feet and Inches. The Rate must be fixed by Experience & dont decide hastily. The result of two or three Mohs at least is Necessary to determine. I never felt any inconvenience from the lowest diet to which I have ever been reduced but this may not be the case with you. Have you any Leisure or Stomach for Politics now? You used to be a Medicin tant mieux but I doubt you much change your ton. Half the Kings & Emperors of Europe  were your Friends. Never was such a Contrast of Ability on one Side to Torpor or folly worse than torpor on the Other. The Austrians were tempted to Temporize with Bonaparte by the gift of Venice which he made them. The Prussians by the gift of Hanover neither consdering that he who would make such Gifts could give away their Capitals. Europe is still ignorant of what has happened to France. A Revolution which kindled a Fire in the heart of every drummer in the French Army & plucked up Leaders of Supreme Genius from the very Mud in which the common State of Things would have burried them. The Cocks are now pitted on the Frontiers of two great Empires in Poland: For I  think that the West from the mouth of the Elb, the Straits of Dover and the Pillars of Hercules is as much united under one Head as the East from the Vistula to Camshatka. And if the latter can do nothing to rouse their People to some degree of uncommon exert they will very soon tire of the War.

I do not see why the Emperor Alexr despising the charge of Plagiarism may not copy Napoleons Legion of Hono. All Europe must now see that the Choice every State is to make, is either a Sort of Existence by the permission of France or an exertion for Independence.

But I have said enough to condemn myself for being so tardy in writing on the excuse of blindness & old Age. I have written this letter but cannot read it. But am most Affectionately yours

I went into the Case drawn up by your Friends at London, as soon as I received it, And very highly esteem their  part only in it, as well as the Ground That was laid for them, And attempted to write to you immediately; sed ter cecidere manus. I should be sorry to break upon that confidence in Mankind & in Justice which has been a Characteristic of you life. At the same time I wished to guard you against the wounds of Dissappointment in this Appeal to Justice, and Candour. What we have to dread is no a direct negative to our Claims, but the delays which Insidious malice may  still procure & with a more cruel Effect than any immediate decision could have. These were topics on which I could easily say too much and on which after I had written I wished to retract. In short, I applaud your confidence in all worthy men: but would join with al indifference to those who are Otherwise. When Alexander saw Diogenes he felt immediately that next to Conquering the World that was the very part he should Act. Here is a Tub more roomy than that of Diogenes and it would be joyous for me to see you every moment of My Life.

You mention a letter of Sir John Dalling* but did not inclose it. If it be material that Fordyce should see it: please send it to him.

I have a kind hint on the back of a letter from Sir Jn McPherson franked by you; that the Answer might go through your hands also. I accordingly take the benefit of this Hint & the Rather that it gives me an opportunity without attempting an adequate Return to the great dispatch with which you honoured me too many months ago, to deprecate your contempt of me for having so long failed in that matter. This failure at least may inform you that I am in fact superannuated & so far one of your Pets which you wish to preserve as long as possible. It is to be hoped that some of them are of more use than I am otherwise you may e'en let them go in course. Here are three of us born the same year Viz. 1723.  There is little difference in our Appearance only that I am the least weather beatten of the Three. I have had the advantage of exemption from Toil & they till of late have had the advantage of Sobriety: But there is another twelve years older than we are having been born in 1712, A Peasant of this Parish his Sobriety you need not doubt. The World for ought he has seen of it may not be twelve Miles broad or long: but he has been distinguished through Life for Vivacity, is Veridick open Spoken & quoted for bon mots. He was of a good Aspect & Stature: but is now blind & much Shrunk, goes through his usual haunts without any assistance or guide is even offended at being offered any. I see as well as you do of a dark night he said to me, & why may not I find my way as well as you do. They tell me I have lived long: but it is just a Gliff.

I have often thought to get our Minister to Answer all your Queries respecting this Person: but you know the Consequence of Procrastination after four Score. I have the honour to be

I have just learned by a letter from my Seaman John that I am now possessed of your kindness and friendship to this Seaman as formerly to his Elder Brother and I would do more if I could than hasten in this way to Acknowledge it but I despair of being able to fulfill your kind intentions by attempting to write a letter of solicitation to His Grace the Duke of Buccleugh. The little access I personally had to his Noble Father would not justify any such liberty. I should by that means be known to his Grace together with my Son as a Bore for life this word is possibly now out of fashion but it was used in my time to Signify any person or thing that was carefully shunned forever. That man was a Bore who repeatedly teased you with long visits and dryed up the source of every agreeable  conversation by continual returns to some tiresome Matter in which he was concerned- he was called in Italian Siccatore a name more easily understood from its derivation than Bore which owed its meaning to the application alone.

Unless therefore you think yourself Warranted to recommend our Seaman to the Duke of Buccleughs notice as a young man of Merit to be received occasionally into his Graces Company and unless his Grace should find him so upon tryal I should despair of any advantage to be gained by a connection formed in the Character of a Bore. His Grace's Father I had occasion to observe had some predilection for the Character of a Seaman  it is open  it is Candid  it is Manly and not to be shaken  trifling difficulties and therefore acceptable as a Companion to his Grace.

You will pardon any  thing that is wrong in this Letter and believe me to be though little accustomed to dictate what others are to write.

His Majesty's Commissioners finding it expedient to ascertain the Quantity of ship Tonnage at present within the North & East Rivers and the Sound, I am to request the favour of you to prepare and transmit to me as soon as convenient an account of such part of Such Tonnage as is engaged in His Majesty's Service within your Department that I may lay the same before the Commissioners for their excellencies Information. I have the honour &c &c 

I was made very happy last night by seeing your name on some covers directed to me & as I suppose you knew the Contents It is with great pleasure I hasten to give you my thoughts on the Subject. If Mr Wilkes had been contented to pass through Parliament inobserved I should have been averse to move his expulsion for the Prudential reasons with which This Speech concludes. But as he himself dared the house to enter on the consideration of his Subject, How was it possible for the house of commons to avoid declaring that he was or was not an infamous person unworthy of a share in the Legislature of his Countrey. On such occasions The Populace are to be told that The house of commons is not to be governed by the consideration of their disspleasure: but that they are to be Governed by the decisions of The House. 

The Whole Arguments of this Speech proceed upon false Suppositions a misstake of the Spirit of our Constitution and indeed of what is Possible in the Nature of things. The House of Commons is addressed as a Court of Justice & expulsion is treated as the Punishment of a Crime. In Our Constitution the Legislature & Judicature are carefully Separated, except in appeals to the House of Lords. But the several Branchs of the Legislature must have the Power to Suspend all Jurisdiction and all execution of the Law whenever this Power is necessary for its own defence. It is in The Capacity of a Branch of the Legislature acting in its own defence that The House of Commons decides concerning the Priviledges Elections & Qualifications of its own members. When Acting in this Capacity the House of Commons has no Superior No Lawgiver no Equal. Its Duty requires that it should Effectually repell every attack and remove every Danger; that it should preserve every Priviledge & this with or Without Precedent, according as the case is new or otherwise  And according as the former proceedings of Parliament in such cases have been wise or Otherwise.

This I shall be told is supposing a Disscretionary Power in the House of Commons. I know how Odious the name of Disscretionary Power is. Our Constitution abhors it in the King or Courts of Justice except when acting in their own defence. It abhors it Likewise in either house of Parliament except where they concur with The King in some Act of Legislature or in the Defence of their own Priviledges and Separate Rights. But in all these Instances Disscretionary Powers are necessary in the Nature of things & no Government ever coud proceed without them. What is our Security against the abuse of such Powers in any branch of the Legislature. This abuse may be supposed to affect some other Branch of the Legislature. In this case the Security arises from the Collateral Power that is invaded & qualified to defend itself. But the Special abuse now apprehended is the encroachment of the house of commons on the general Rights of the People. Can any one imagine that  This Constitution coud have existed so long, if the security against this abuse had been derived solely from forms & Precedents. If forms and Precedents coud give this Security why are we at pains to send Representatives from all the different Parts of The Kingdom, why have we so carefully Specifyed their qualifications but in order that they might be men of Like Passions and Like Interests with ourselves. To continue the Language of Scripture our Security is that they are bone of our Bone & flesh of our flesh. That they cannot tear a bit of our flesh without tearing their own with it. This is what The Constitution means when it says that we are safe under the Protection of our own Representatives. If it be aledged that the Safety or the Authority of the Commons in any case  is in danger. This Alegation must be dissproved, or the necessary measures must be taken to remove the danger. How absurd woud it be to say that  these objects the safety or Authority of the commons must be given up because there is no Precedent according to which  they can be defended. With humble Submission therefore to the Able Speaker I must Insist that he ought to have shown that neither the Authority nor the Dignity of the Commons had been attacked in the case of Wilkes. Or if he confessed that they were attacked, his denial of former effectual precedents to guide the house; only proved the necessity of having Recourse to something new. He has reasoned with great Power and Elocution upon the same Supposition of a Judicial Tryal Against Punishing Mr Wilkes twice for the same offence &c. Does our Constitution then say that expulsion from the house of commons is a Punishment? What was it in those times of our Constitution when the Duties of Parliament were considered as a Burden? Is Mr Wilkes to be Punished only by putting him in the same Situation with every Gentleman in this Kingdom except a few hundreds that Sit in Parliament. The Courts of Justice have Punished Mr Wilkes And Our Constitution Says that he cannot  be tryed repeatedly nor by different courts for the same offence. He coud not therefore be tryed Judicially by the House of Commons: but it having appeared from his Tryal & Condemnation elsewhere & from the undenyed grounds assumed in the Motion; that he was an Infamous Person. The house expelled him. He was not Punished but declared unworthy of a share in the Legislature of this Kingdom, And this expulsion   xxx of an Infamous person when moved or stirred by himself or any other I humbly think was necessary in order to Mantain The Authority and the Dignity of the Commons of Great Britain. I confess I am Surprised to hear any body alledge a dangerous precedent in this Case as if the House woud be led to do wrong hereafter by doing right now: An Unjust Action is always a bad precedent. Even a just Action performed by improper persons is a bad Precedent Likewise. But a Proper Action proceeding from the Proper Authority Cannot be a bad precedent merely because it is alledged there is no prior example to be followed  in the performance of it. This however is the Stress of this Speakers Argument. I do not conceive what he can gain by quoting the example of Mr Walpole: If the act of Corruption he mentions were true The House did right in expelling Mr Walpole And their the Successors did wrong in ever admitting him to sit in Parliament. If we consider the use which he afterwards made of his great Power I think we need not be affraid to say that this Nation coud have well disspensed with his Services. The first Resolution however with respect to him was held to be final & his Constituents did what the Constituents of Mr Wilkes must  apprehend for the Preservation of the Constitution be obliged to do: they must acquiesce in the Resolution of the Commons.

I allow that this Contest has brought on a dangerous Crisis & think it the more so perhaps for being at a distance from the Scene. But was this Crisis to be Avoided by giving way to the Pretensions of an Infamous Person Supported by a deluded Populace. I apprehend  for my own Part that if the Authority of Parliament and of the Government in all its Parts is not Properly Supported the State will be in the utmost danger. Our Constitution knows of no Authority but that of King Lords & Commons but we are now fostering a fourth Power in the State, That of the Populace of London, and at the time in which they are become most Corrupted we are inviting them to a share in the Government.

I know not the Present Ministers nor am qualifyed to Judge of the Rolls of Parliament but this I am sure of, that it is the Interest of Every Person Possessed of any Property or consideration in the Kingdom to Suspend their personal dissputes untill they have taught the mob of London not to Interpose. If the present Ministers were bad & the Present Parliament ill chosen I woud neither dissolve nor dissplace them, when such an Action must necessarily lay the foundation of Popular Pretensions ruinous to order & Government. I have heard with  some degree of Affliction that you had embarked with the opposition on the present occasion. I shoud not have regreted most assuredly your Opposing the Measures of a Minister on any Particular occasion. But if I understand the Term opposition, it is joining with a Party who are engaged in disstressing the Government in all Possible ways, who will allow no body to differ from them in any point whatever Nor to serve the Public in any office but in Conjunction with themselves. With this meaning in my head if I had been at London I shoud have prostrated myself at your feet to have hindered your forming any such Connections. But perhaps the Report is false. There are Views I am sure more worthy of your Understanding & of your heart. It is to try whether a Neutral Interest can be formed by men of Property & Family to Ward off the Evils with which the  Constitution is threatned in the Ishue of a Contest between Mobs & Military Power: for I tremble at the Thought of its coming to that without any body at hand to insist for the Constitution. Our Government is said by Mr Montesquieu and others to be perfect. They only think of the dangers to Liberty that come from The Crown. They do not consider the dangers to Liberty that come from the Populace. The Habeas Corpus & the Tryal by Juries bind up the hands of the King: but unless The Riot Laws are amended there are a thousand hands for one let loose. These reformations cannot be made untill our Present Gamblers for Power are made to feel that they cannot rise upon the shoulders of the Mob. I have written all this in great haste in hopes of Pardon for Inaccuracys & in confidence that one point will be well understood my meaning and Intention  towards yourself. If I had been at London & within reach of knowing your sentiments as they arose I make no doubt but you woud have carryed me along with you as you always did here. But I write in the Dark & without knowing Particulars. Believe me to be

I cannot have done. The apprehension thrown out in this Speech that on the supposition that the House of Commons were to judge of the worthyness or unworthyness of persons to have a share in the Legislature of their Country: they woud become Electors is extremely groundless. In the first place the house of commons does not exist untill it is chosen by the People. In the next place persons so chosen act by their Majority. They may go wrong in Particular  Instances but never to any extent that is dangerous to the Rights of the People for they themselves are people & can have no rights when those of the people are given up. If it be said that they may sell their own rights and those of the People the Constitution on this supposition is undone & I am sure that the freeholders of Middlesex will not save it by chusing infamous persons to serve in Parliament, nor the Gamblers for Power by supporting them in that choice.
Bankhead Decr 1st 

I wrote a few days ago a short apology for my apprehensions of the London Mob. It is not the courage but the Cowardice of them & their opponents I Dread. Recollect & you will find that cowardice has raised & Perpetuated more Military Governments than ever courage did. Sylla is the only man since the Beginning of the World that ever had the Courage to lay down a Military Government at the head of which he had offended. If you drive a Coward to the wall he is more dangerous than a brave man in another Situation.

Having been bussy all the week with my affairs at College I came here to pass a night & find myself engaged in the affairs of the Nation. I threatned to differ from you about the test of well constituted Government, about the fact in our own constitution, & tho I might agree with you about its differ disstemper to differ nevertheless about the Remedy: but as I have not your letter by me must write at Random and  shall be very glad not to differ from you at all.

In speaking of well constituted Government I must define Arbitrary Power which you seem to think inconsistent with it. This is not a Power exempted from the obligations of Justice nor a Power that can make wrong right or right wrong. There is no such Power neither in heaven above nor on the Earth beneath. But an Arbitrary Power is that which may determine itself according to the Specialtys of every Particular case having no rule prescribed to it nor being accountable to any Other Power. Now the test of well constituted government is not the want of such a Power: but the committing of it to the safest hands. A Government without Supreme unaccountable or Arbitrary Power is as inconceivable as a circle without a Circumference. The Government of France is not well constituted because Arbitrary Power is committed to a very unsafe hand, that of the King who has a Partial Interest to Support & who sacrifices the Wellfare of the people to this Interest. But the Government of Great Britain is well constituted because it commits Arbitrary Power to King Lords & Commons, who according to the constitution in its sound State comprehend all the Interests in the Kingdom which ought to be reconciled in every particular case before any resolution can be agreed to by all these three members of our Sovereignty.

Now as to the fact in our constitution. King Lords & Commons have Arbitrary Power. And they have made a Good use of it. In the first place they have divested themselves of the exercise of this very Power as far as is consistent with their Supremacy. They coud not delegate Legislation without ceasing to be Supreme; but they have delegated Jurisdiction & the execution of the Law to Judges & officers of the Crown to whom they have Prescribed Rules & who are accountable to themselves for the Observance of those Rules. So much that every Subject knows as far as the Nature of Government will Permit the Rule according to which he is to be governed. In the next place they have enacted in general very good Laws & have interposed their Supreme & Arbitrary Power by Bills of Attainder &c only in extraordinary cases, & for the most part with good Effect to the Publick.  When you acknowledge that King Lords and commons Jointly are the Supreme Power in this constitution: you have acknowledged that each of them separately is Supreme in what is required to its own defence. I do not ask what their proceedings have been in matters of this sort the supposition of a Power is the supposition of a right to defend that Power. Let the Commons be attacked in the Priviledge of any member, in the improper nomination of any member, they cannot hold their share of the Supreme Power if they cannot repell that attack without being accountable to any other Power whatever. If they must have the Authority of a Statute for what they do: they cannot defend themselves without the Consent of King & Lords: Let the King or Lords then be the Invaders, as may well be supposed, & the Commons are undone. The Lords determine who are their own Constituent members & so do the commons. In this they are not jointly but each separately the Supreme Legislature the Supreme Judicature & the Supreme executive Power. Their  History will prove; considering the frailty of human Nature, that their separate as well as joint Powers have not been abused. Their Subjects have been the freest & securest Subjects on Earth. They act by the Majority & the Majority can have no interest in groundless oppressions that might one day reach any of themselves.

Now for the disstemper. The Majority of The Commons are under Influence of administration. And may abuse their Power to pay their Court. Granted.

What is the Remedy? A Farther extension of the Remedy that has been already in Part applied. All officers of the Revenue are already excluded from the House of Commons. Exclude if you will every other placed or Pensioned Man whatever. Or of this be too much let the Secretarys of State. The Boards of Treasury. Admiralty and Trade &c have each their single Representative in Parliament & no more. Give the Countys a greater Representation & the Burroughs less. Let the People take care whom they chuse. They are  concerned not to bestow unworthily a Power that in the Nature of things must be Arbitrary because there is no superior to give it Law nor to call it to account. It is the Spirit of our constitution that Members of Parliament shoud be well chosen but that being chosen they shoud be Masters. How absurd it woud be to name an Abeter with full powers without minding whether he were an honest man or a knave & then talk of Limiting his Power when there is nobody to controul or direct him. I woud fain think I do not differ from you in my notion of the Remedy Altho you talked of a Statute to restrain the Powers of the Commons. Which I think is either inconsistent with our constitution & woud either be neglected or have a bad effect: but the first it woud most certainly be. Let your Virtuous opposition Speak. I know what they will chuse when it is in their option when it is in their to hurt administration without doing good to the Public or to do good to the Public without  hurting Administration. I shoud be very sorry to see men all of one mind in Parliament: but either this manner of Party or the State itself I am perswaded cannot last. How can a State Subsist when every one out of Pension or place and even some that are in think themselves entitled to disstress it. I am perswaded that Sr George Saville & you cannot be serious in apprehending that the expulsion of Mr Wilkes is a bad precedent for you. I shoud think it a very bad precedent for you if such men were allowed to sit in the house. The Power of expulsion has never been so much abused by the house as to merit any notice in human affairs. Till now it has been in my memory never exerted at all & yet the Majority has always been on the Side of Administration and opposition has always been troublesome. Why shoud the Majority expell they are already Masters. Why shoud the most corrupted of the Majority chuse to expell, it woud only serve to Lessen their own Consideration & to bring down the Price of their Votes which is always highest when Partys are nearest Equality. 

Such men as Sr George Saville and you never were since the World Began expelled from any National Assembly or Senate except when there were Sentrys at the door to keep them out. The London mob may soon make it necessary to have sentrys in a certain Lobby to keep themselves out what farther use may be made of those Semtrys I know not. A Popular Party in the house having the Majority within & the Cry without may proceed to the fury of mere Party expulsions: but a Corrupt Minister will be glad to sneak through with his Majority & will surely avoid the odium of expelling any worthy man when by the very supposition of a majority he can go on without any such measure.

Since writing the Above I have returned to Edr & have read over your Letter with great pleasure. I think the difference between us may be reduced to the following points. You seem to deny the Supremacy of the house of Commons in matters of their own right Establishment. This Supremacy I hold to be as  well ascertained to the commons, as The Supremacy of all the Three orders is in matters that concern all three. The Practice of the Commons has been uniformly agreeable to this right of Supremacy & without that Practice in the Reigns of James & Charles they woud have ceased to exist.

You seem to think that this power to expell and disqualify is matter of new Pretension: but it has been exercised when occasion offered and never questioned till now.

You seem to think that a Supreme Power altho it cannot receive the Law from any other Power may nevertheless prescribe Rules to itself & cease to be Arbitrary. This I think a deception of words. A Persons own Rule is but his Resolution which he may keep or neglect at Pleasure unless there be some other to whom he must render Acc't.

If there be any Power so constituted as not to be subject to render Account, Care must be taken with whom that Power is  entrusted it is vain to employ ineffectual Rules. You will say perhaps that my Remedy mentioned above is impracticable. I am sure that in this Reign something very considerable in that way might have been obtained. If Gentlemen in Opposition had chosen to do any Good. You observe that Parliament men are not Bone of our Bone &c That is not the fault of the Constitution: but of their constituents, here the Remedy recurs again.

You insist that Expulsion from Parliament is to be considered as the Punishment of a Crime. Be it so. But it is still of such Crimes considered as rendering a person unworthy of Parliamentary Trust. I never knew a Person unworthy of that trust today become Worthy tommorrow. I am a Farmer if I had turned a fellow out of my barn for theft, I surely woud have a right to turn him out not only once but every time he attempted to come into it again. You observe that if the Character of Wilkes had not been infamous  the people woud have been unanimous on his Side. Most certainly if his Character had not been so I in particular woud never have thought that the House of commons did right in expelling him. It is hard in matters of Judgement to make people accountable for their actions & their motives too. If the action was right we must in Political matters put up with any motive or presume the Proper one.

As to the Resentment of People here to Mr Wilkes, if he deserved their Notice he woud certainly merit the other. There are some english Gentlemen established here & in the way of Preferment, if any body were to revile their Countrey in order to injure them I believe he woud be more detested here than Mr Wilkes ever was. If I know my own heart I shoud feel more indignation than ever my contempt of Wilkes Suffered me to feel in his case. The Reception his Scurrilitys found was inpitious not Provoking. When we find that the State is brought into some danger by such unworthy fools this is Provoking and Alarming too. 

I am a little piqued you shoud Suppose I thought the London Mob terrible in War. I know that they will fly from sharp shot but I know likewise that not only the Mob but the very Women & Whores at London may make Military Government appear Necessary to those who ought to prevent Military Government if they are encouraged & cannot be governed without it. I ought not tox have said any thing of the Riot Law without having read it, but in its Effects it does not appear to have been very Powerful where it was applied: Innocent and respectable people were attacked in the streets and in their houses & these crimes passed unpunished. In a Countrey where a fellow cant take a few shillings on the high way without being hanged.

I regret with the Deepest concern that you have not some Active hand in the administration. Government needs hands that can drive with resolution & stop short of extremes. I am glad of your opinion of some in Power: but the Party that wish for confusion & trouble are Strong & yet this may be a great Session. Pardon so much

I wish I coud write any thing that merited your desire of hearing from me before the meeting of Parliament. A few hours conversation might do what I see that letters cannot effect, & I might be made Sensible that The Present opposition is innocent in respect to its means and its end & woud be innocent in its Success & that therefore any Gentleman may Lend his name on the present occasion as opposed to Government. At Present my opinions on all these points are extremely different. They The oppositions have acted very unwarrantably & their Success woud be a Ruinous encouragement to many Crimes. They have endeavoured to delude the People by representing an Innocent and even weak Reign as Violent & oppressive.

I speak not now of the particular point in disspute between you us but of Other Grievances and apprehensions with which they have dissgraced human Reason. Such falsehoods must disscredit even truth hereafter. They have employed the Populace of London to Intimidate the King and his adherents A Practice which if continued must in my opinion end in Military Government. Whoever attempts to Govern by force attempts to Establish Military Government. There is a great difference between a Mob of weavers or Taylors led by some folly of their own & having the whole Authority of Government and of all the Superior orders in the State against them. And a Mob that is raised by one half the leading men in the Kingdom against the Other. Townshend & Sawbridge Restrained the Weavers without Military force. And we may Always keep the lowest of the People in tolerable humour if we take  their Demagogues into office. But it is a question whether this be governing the Mob or being Governed by them. Tho I were fully of the opinion that The house of Commons exceeded its Powers in excluding Mr Wilkes from the Present Parliament: yet I woud think it my Duty to join Government in every measure the most effectual to keep the peace of the Countrey & repelling every Motion made to give Effect to Petitions that tend by raising Animosytis to promote the Interest of mere faction. I am sure that if people are to be judged from their motives as well as from Actions few in the present opposition woud have merit ever where the Action was right.

I am however extremely sorry to differ from you: Still in the main question between us. It appears to me as clear as day Light That the House of Commons is the supreme Judge of its own members. That it Judged right in the case of Mr Wilkes. That  Expulsion in the Nature of things must imply not merely the Trouble of Reelection but an exclusion from that Parliament. If there be any Instance from which it woud appear that ever the matter was Understood Otherwise I shoud think it an Instance of Mistake but I know not of any. If there be any Instance quoted in Pamphlets I beg the favour you will send me a Copy. I have the Journals of the Commons by me but we scarcely see any Pamphlets here. But this Power of the Commons whether inherent or usurped may be abused & one Point in controversy between us is how to Prevent this Abuse. The way you propose is by a Law to define or restrain it: That I mentioned was, by Laws to exclude those who may make a Majority in the house inclined or Interested to Abuse it. I give way to your Argument that Rules or Laws have effect even where there is no Authority to enforce them. And yet as far as I coud Observe,  former Laws had very little weight in determining the right of Elections where The House of Commons Judged. And I never coud Observe without regret the Indifference of many members Otherwise very independent and honourable on questions relating to Elections. The sneer with which the merits &c were treated, & the event in general of most Petitions. A Law directing the house of commons can have no Superior to enforce it unless the sense of the People at a Reelection is considered as such & to have this security short Parliaments are wanting. But a Law excluding or dissqualifying Particular Persons may have Penaltys Annexed of Which the Courts of Law may Judge, and Candidates may be Sufficiently deterred, as I believe all officers of the Revenue are, from ever coming before the House of Commons with Illegal Pretensions. When I dropt that any statute restraining the House of Commons in matters relating to their own Dignity & Priviledge  might have bad Effects. I meant that such Laws might if observed hinder their defending themselves against the Intrusion of very Improper persons. The Courts below as well as above may be corrupted or if they be not Will the Lawyers of the Crown Prosecute to conviction a Member of Parliament whom the Crown wishes to retain in the house. But I meant farther that the Proposing of such a Law might have a bad Effect by Missleading the attention from better & more effectual Preventives of the same Evil.

Reduce the Duration of Parliament again to three years at the utmost. Give us more Countrey Gentlemen that have a natural Interest & fewer buyers of Burroughs &c but I beg Pardon for repeating all this. If we can but confine the Authority of Government to persons interested to preserve the Constitution they will not need the Direction of many  Laws. And if restrictions on many occasions woud hinder them from doing wrong they will likewise on many occasions hinder them from doing right, for no Rule whatever can comprehend the specialtys of every Particular case And the Power of Every Judge in spite of what we can do, will be, in a high degree disscretionary. I mantain that Laws, in any controvertible Point do not inform the Partys what Judgement they are to expect. In this Countrey at least I should like as well the Throw of dice. But yet Laws here relating to Life & Property &c have this good Effect that they make it difficult to disspossess. This is not always Just but it is in general expedient. I say so much to show you that possibly when we meet we may differ about the Effect or Value even of Laws. My Object if I had influence in Government woud be to raise up men that might be trusted, not merely to make Laws to restrain knaves, which  I shoud consider as a hopeless attempt or not likely to serve the Purpose long. But while we are agreed about the means and we need not to disspute about the means, we may agree to take as much of every sort of means as we can get. But I enter my Caution against not only the means that tend to a Dissolution of Parliament but even a change of Ministers, Untill this contest between Mobbing & Government has ceased & untill that designing & Dangerous Demagogue L-Chatham has again taken the Gout.

But to return to the Contest with that honourable Gentleman Mr Wilkes. If the Populace of England Espoused his Cause for his Virulence to Scotland I think the Populace of Scotland do right in wishing to have him dissgraced. And I will mantain in behalf of my Countreymen that the Censorial Power of Parliament which has been frequently exercised was never  more Justly than in his case. I by no means think that even a single disgraceful member in Parliament is of little consequence. He may one day upon a chance equality of Partys give the Law to his Countrey. And What is worse he may render the Legislature itself contemptible.

The Romans were so sensible of the Ignominy of having dissgraceful persons on the Rolls of the Senate or the People that they empowered the Censors to Garble those Rolls & leave out whom they pleased. And I believe that in their case the exclusion of six unexceptionable members woud not do so much harm as suffering one exceptionable one to remain. If the Censorial Power is unsafe with the House of Commons so is the Legislative, and they may give up the Rights of their Constituents to the King & Lords or to Ministers in the form of Statute as well as of Resolution. If  they be dissposed to give them up in any form I think that the grounds of the present alarm do not imply that we are to expect Protection from The King or his Ministers. The fact is that the Safety of Popular Rights arises from the great Power of the Commons in our constitution. The Persons of Members are Priviledged as those of the Roman Tribunes were sacred & their resolutions in certain matters are Supreme that they may be irresistible in defending the People. The Separate Powers of the Lords are & must be somewhat analogous in defence of their own Order. The Case of Lord Banbury which you mention is for me. Lord Chief Justice Holt Sustained his Peerage But he never sat in the House of Peers. Another chief Justice might now grant the Priviledge of Parliament to Mr Wilkes on the Credit of his Returne from Middlesex: but he woud not therefore  sit in the house of Commons. The House of Lords may for ought I know expell every Peer that has been Created since the Union And I know Nothing to hinder them only that they are not mad And this is likewise the only reason that hinders them from expelling Sr George Saville & you: Whose name I beg you will pardon my Coupling with yours for I am far from being Satisfied with his conduct, A Man who lends his name or his Purse to Support other Gamblers is as bad as if he were a Gambler himself. I care not whether Sr George Saville aims at Power in his own name or in that of The Marquis of Rockingham. I must likewise beg your pardon  for troubling you with so much loose & incoherent talk in the midst of Bussiness Private & Public which you must have. The Dissposition from which I write is my Security  that I can have said nothing Offensive to you. God Bless you & enable you to take a firm Clear & decisive part for yourself & your Countrey whomsoever it may please or offend. I never thought to see a time when a firm & resolute adherence to the measures of Government was to be as honourable as the most free and Independent Part that coud be taken in Parliament even in the worst of times. You say that all this dust which some people have endeavoured to raise has not distressed Government. I am glad of it: but I am sure its Authors then will be dissappointed. And so be it, for I am very Angry with them & expect no good from any of them, not even from their fine writer Junius. If my paper were not done I shoud run on idly enough: My only purpose is to please myself by writing to you and your taking so much notice of what I have written I consider as a mark of that Friendship which I have long valued above most circumstances of my Life.

As my Situation is likely to become very delicate upon the Resignation which I am made to expect, I wish very much to have your opinion whether I shoud not before this change is declared apply to those by whom I am placed here for their Instructions how I shoud act upon this occasion. Or whether I shoud wait in Silence for their declaration & then observe to those with whom remain connected, that as the Authority by which I hold my place has ceased to exist a new appointment may be necessary to my continuing in it. And whether if they decline making any such appointment or otherwise declare their Intention to part with me & talk of the terms on  which I am to withdraw, I may not take the Liberty to mention you as a Person to whose opinion in concert with any one they may be pleased to appoint, I am willing to Submit all my Claims. Smith woud occur to some of them Perhaps as the proper person to treat on this occasion but one Philosopher is enough in any one bussiness, And as I have nobody else besides yourself I most earnestly beg that You will not decline it. The part you have always taken in my Affairs woud make any apology in this particular case or for this letter impertinent. When you take the trouble to write be so good as keep in General terms without nameing Persons or things least a letter shoud fall by or get into improper hands here. I am My Dear Sr with the greatest Respect 

I have had a pretty Long Conversation this Morning with Lord Cornwallis. Part of my Intention was to give him the Best Impression I coud of our Friend P. Ferguson & both for that & Other Purposes as I have an Apprehension that The Chief Command may devolve on His Lordship I wish to show him P: Fergusons Sketches & last letter to me: but in Strict Confidence. If you Approve of this be so good as send  me the Papers. I have promised Lord Cornwallis to see him again before he sets out. He has Understanding & Temper, that with a Proper Assortment of Officers to Form His Family , may do most Valuable things for this Countrey in the Present Situation of Affairs. I have already told him so much, & mean to continue the Subject, a Freedom which he takes in the best Part imaginable.

I write as you desired merely to tell you what is become of me. I continue to mend. & I hope soon, taking the whole complicated case of my Diet & recovery together to be in a better Animal as well as Intellectual State than I was before my late Illness.

I am hastening to put my Papers on the Roman History in a form to go out of my hands whenever it is proper. And shall proceed to fill up my Lectures to the same Purpose And then I shall be at Liberty to  commit myself entirely to the newspapers & watch the Affairs of the Nation. In the mean time I Observe it is said that Lord Cornwallis has joined Arnold: but to what Purpose I know not And the thing certainly merits consideration. I have been regreting all the Way in my thoughts on the Road that our Friend Gl Clerk is not in Parliament. A person may as well think to be of consequence in France without being a Gentleman as here without being in Parliament. I own The Case occurs in both Countrys: but what a difference there is here. A Private Gentleman may hunt a Minister for a whole Winter without being able to see him. A Member of Parliament demands an Interview at pleasure. A Private Gentleman can never see a Minister except formally & at an Audience, a Member of Parliament can catch  him familiarly in the House & fix his Ear in the time of dull Speeches & in the Intervals of Bussiness. The Minister shuns the Application of Strangers. He covets the Courtship of members of Parliament And fears to offend them. In Parliament without making long Speeches a person can discountenance nonsense with a very few Words And a Person who has once made an able Appearance in Parliament is a person of Authority within the whole Kingdom. Fools commonly consider every one who differs remarkably from themselves in Private as a Madman. But the Publick one way or Other where they are the judges distinguish between a Fool & a Man of Parts & Sense. I have Sometimes thought it might be made a question at the Robin Hood or some Other Such Place.

Who incurs most contempt a Fool among wise men or a Wise Man among Fools? If the wise Man should not take care to Manage  his Superiority he will be in the worst case of the two. In Parliament a Man of Parts is independent of Fools or more so than anywhere else. I hope that you will admit these Arguments as of Force And now that Gl C Health & every Circumstance makes the Ordinary Attention of Parliament easy to him I earnestly wish that some opportunity were seized to get a Seat: but of the matter I can say Nothing farther And say so much only to set you a thinking of it in case it has not occurred. I am Dear Sir With the greatest Respect

I write to you in consequence of a conversation I have had with Mr John Clerk whose office of Secretary to the Commission of Annexed Estates determines on the proposed restitution of these Estates to the heirs of the former Proprietors. This very laudable measure I confess will cause some regret to me, if it ends in turning Mr Clerks Ardour & Ingenuity aside from the Publick Service in which I thought they were likely to be usefull. What Provision it may be thought reasonable to make for him upon the Reduction I know not: But I am satisfied that with respect to the Objects to which  publick money is destined in the change which is now to be now made his usefulness may be greater than it was likely to be in the former Establishment.

His Relations, not very wisely perhaps, in laying the Plan of his Life entered him first as a Student of Medicine, then changed his destination to that of a Merchant, next for that of an Undertaker in Coal Works, but in all these Capacities his thoughts turned upon Works & undertakings more fit for the Publick than himself, Canals & Fisheries, not to mention Naval Tacticks & the fighting of Battles at Sea. More than one of his Brothers was were an Engineers. and Four lost their Life Lives in the publick Service so it was thought impossible that he also could be destined to serve the publick in any such Way. The Consequence is that his genius has been continually pointing to one Sort of Objects & his Lot fixing him to another: But was in hopes that his Situation under the  Commission of Annexed Estates might open some way for it; nor do I think by any means that these hopes ought now to be laid aside. If the Publick now adopt the Forth & Clide Canal & set about nursing the Fisheries, Mr Clerk may be a most useful Agent in both, And I would fain think he may be continued in the publick Service without any Other Change than that of being employed to inspect the publick concern in the inland Navigation & fisheries. Whether he be employed or no, I doubt he will think of nothing else for some years to come, & he appears to me to have very sound & Ingenious conceptions on both these Subjects. But if I mistake not you know him nearly as well as I do, and can distinguish in this Account, what may be ascribed to personal kindness & what to conviction of Judgement. I certainly would not endeavour to pass the one of these upon you for the Other, And am willing to risk the  whole of my Credit with you upon this point that Mr Clerk will be a most useful Agent for it the Publick in what they do to compleat the inlan navigation from Sea to Sea & to promote the the Fisheries.

This matter being So stated to the best of my judgement, I am next to intreat, that My Agent Mr Chalmer being soon to conclude my transaction with the Booksellers, may be allo to wait upon you with some Account of the matter before it is ended. It is of little consequ to the publick but not so to me: and it will  a great Satisfaction to me, to have your Approbation of what we do. I am with the greatest Respect

I received your Letter on the subject of Mr Carmichaels dismission, & having had some conversation with Mr Williamson, went to my Friend of the Board of Customs, in whom I found no disposition to relent.

After reading the papers which were communicated to me I am intirely of your opinion, & returned the Papers with expressions of Surprise that we should differ so much; Said some strong things: but my Friend declined the Argument, said there was no redress to be hoped for but from the Treasury. That he would be glad the Treasury reversed their Sentence but that they themselves could not do it. I ventured to propound two maxims for the Policy of their Board. Imprimis. That no unfaithful or negligent Servant should continue to be employed. 2d & not less Essential to the Service, That no faithful & diligent Servant should be Sacrificed to private Malice or Pique.

All ths was true: but they could not recall a Sentence once given. And in the conversation a Case cast  up, relating to a recommendation of mine, which had past some years ago. The Person concerned had behaved so well at a Northern Post that they removed him to a more difficult & more profitable Station, the Bay of Glenluce; but he was not there many months, when upon a complaint like the present, he was dismissed. The Board I am now told soon after found that they had been imposed upon by a combination formed against this man whose Fidelity was not convenient to some of his Bretheren. And it was proposed to restore him: but it could not be done. No reason is Assigned to me for this Policy; but I Ascribe it to a rooted Jealousy of all the Underlings at the different Parts. And next, to a maxim that as often as a Smugled Cargo escapes; the nearest Officer concerned must Suffer Guilt or no Guilt. And last of all, that they are never to remitt a Sentence once past. This last may be thought to strengthen their Authority: but so long as the Treasury can reverse their Sentences, it would Shake their Authority less to be reversed by themselves.

If this matter must go to the Treasury, I was inclind to put the merits in the form of a reclaiming Petition which with the Answers given to it, might be more accessible to the Consideration of the  Treasury than the whole papers as they were given to me: but as the Board of Customs here is now very thinly attended, the effect of this measure would be delay.

Mr Reid a very Consequential member of this Board is now at London & it is material that you see him. I take for granted he will be heard of about the Treasury. I take a very Sincere concern in Carmichaels case. The Effect of the Policy above mentioned seems to be, that no one having Other pretensions, will risk them on Such a bottom, And the Board will have no Officers but such as they will be in the right to distrust, & to dispatch, as soon one after another, as possible.

Your Friend Jock is well, with a wonderfull proficiency in the Scots Tongue: but tenacious of some London Notions & habits to a degree that is Scarcely credible.

I have no Tidings of my application for a Cadetship: but wait with all due Patience & Resignation. 

In a pamphlet, intituled An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems ascribed to Ossian, having read the following passage, p. 45,  Mr Smith mentions Dr Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he says, the Doctor confesseth, that he himself heard pieces of it recited; and being compared with the translation, exactly corresponded. Dr Percy does not understand a syllable of the Earse, and therefore could be no judge. The truth is, Dr Blair and Professor Ferguson, when Dr Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young student from the Highlands, who repeated some verses, of which Professor Ferguson said such and such sentences in Fingal were the translation. To prevent any inferences which might be drawn from my silence, I think it material to declare that the above passage, so far as it relates to me, is altogether false; and that I never was present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a young student from the Highlands.

In an advertisement, dated Carlisle, November 10, and signed Thomas Percy, the attention of the public is recalled, among other particulars, to a declaration signed by me on the 21 of July last. My sense of how little consequence the subject is to the public, would hinder my intruding myself again in this manner; and my very great respect for the station in which Dr Percy is placed would incline me to be silent where I have the misfortune to differ from him on a matter of fact, if I did not apprehend that silence in this case might be interpreted against me.

At the date of my former declaration, I had found myself charged in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's poems, as accessory to a cheat which was put upon Dr Percy, in a recital of some pretended specimen of that poetry, by a young student from the Highlands. Whoever may be the author of this charge, I thought and think myself entitled to say it is false.

I had many reasons likewise to deny my having ever been present at the recital of verses to Dr Percy by a young student from the Highlands; and it caused me much surprise to find, in a correspondence on this subject, which took place between Dr Percy and Dr Blair, that Dr Percy had conceived of me as having not only been present at the recital of verses by a student, but as sending for a student into his company, who, in a deliberate manner, passed upon him what he afterwards believed to be an imposition.

Dr Percy may not have been aware of the part which he assigned to me in this imposition, as it depended upon an inference to be drawn from my knowledge of the Earse language; nor was it credible that he meant to apply it to a person for whom he still professed some esteem. But whatever may have been the idea, I flattered myself that upon recollection he would think it more probable that he himself had committed some mistake in the fact, rather than that I should have concurred in such a cheat. In this persuasion I wrote to Dr Blair the following letter, to be transmitted to him; and am now very sorry to publish this or any thing else on a controversy in which neither the attack nor the defence can do credit to any person whatever.



To the contents of this letter I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own handwriting, I likewise procured a student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.

Having received the following letter from Governor Johnstone at his departure for England, I think it my duty to fulfil his intention by publishing it for the satisfaction of those who may desire to know the reasons that have induced him to suspend any particular discussion of the charge, on which a late resolution of the Congress, respecting himself, is founded. The intimation contained in this letter will, in the mind of every person in any degree acquainted with his character, have its proper effects; altho' I am, both by his injunction and by the considerations he mentions, restrained, at present, from giving any particular account of the evidence intrusted to me.

Be so good as furnish Mr Clason with a Copy of The History of the Progress & Termination of the Roman Republick to my Account. I am your most 

Altho Mr Creech has had access to know our progress in printing the work about which we have been some time agreed. It may be proper for me to acquaint you that it is now finished & that you may chuse your time of publication. I shall wish to have copies sent in my name to General Clerk in Mansfield St Cavendish Square. To Mr Pulteney Bath House Piccadilly. Mr Dundas Secretary of State Mr Pitt first Lord of the Treasury. Lord Loughborough Loughborough. Mr Small late Surgeon to the Garrison of Minorca. And Sir John McPherson when he returns to England to whom you may also give on my account as many copies as he shall be pleased to call for.

I have looked over the Essay on the History  of Civil Society: but find nothing material to offer. It is properly introductory & Stimulating to the Study of its Subject & without going farther into particulars must remain in its original form.

Mr Eden has just now transmitted to me a Minute of Mr Smyth's which is of a very different Complexion from that which you understood to have been Sir Henry Clinton's Conduct towards him.

If you can give me any Information tending to corroborate or invalidate the one fact or the other, I should be obliged to you for it, as I much wish to send to Mr Smyth an Answer as soon as I can.

I should be extremely sorry that a Fact so cursorily mentioned to me by Sir Henry Clinton and in which there may be some Mistake should in any degree affect the Consideration of Chief Justice Smith's Services & Claims. The Minute which you have done me the Honor to communicate to me appears to refer to extraordinary Services in his Journey to Fort Stanwick & repeated Voyages to Rhode Island, the last as Commissioner to enquire into the Loss of the Gaspee Sloop. For these Services he would probably have thought himself entitled to some Reward or Compensation, even if he had continued to receive the ordinary Emoluments of his Office in the Jerseys.

If he actually now receives, as I understood from Sir Henry Clinton, 400 a Year on the Army Contingencies, he considers this  Allowance probably as a Subsistence given to him as such Allowances are given to other displaced Officers of the Crown in America, as some Compensation for the Interruption of their usual appointments in the Provinces. If Chief Justice Smith really receives 400 a year it will be stated in the Army contingencies, and if not so stated, I must suppose that there is some Mistake in that Matter.

The very great Expence of living now at New York makes 400 a Year a very scanty Allowance, and may very naturally appear, to Chief Justice Smith, not enough to preclude him from stating any Claim he may have for former extraordinary Services.

I have the Honor to be &c

I am by Command of their Excellencies His Majesty's Commissioners to inform you that having issued a Manifesto and Proclamation of which the inclosed are Copies, they did without delay direct Packets as in the inclosed list to be carried by an Officer with a Flag of Truce to Annapolis in the Province of Maryland; but having reason to believe that those Packets have not been delivered at the Place of their Destination; they think it their Duty in a Matter of such High Concern to direct a few Copies to you by a different Conveyance in order that you and the People of Maryland may know the Contents of said Proclamation.

And the more fully to enable all whom it may concern to avail themselves of the Gracious Intentions of His Majesty and of Parliament. I am farther commanded by their excellencies to inform you that the Original Instruments executed in due Form shall be sent as soon as your desire or that of the People of Maryland is signified to that Effect.

According to your desire I have read with attention Mr Alisons Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste; and am happy to inform you that they have given me much entertainment & instruction. I consider them as a valuable addition to the Philosophy of the human mind. They are written with great elegance and purity of stile, and discover in their Author an uncommon share of sensibility to whatever is sublime or beautiful in the works both of Nature & Art.

At the same time they prove him to be possessed of a very considerable portion of philosophical acuteness in tracing the sources to which all our emotions of this kind ought to be referred.

The work now published, which consists of two Essays, is only part of what the author intends on the Subject of taste. In the first Essay he examines the effect which is produced on the Mind when the emotions of sublimity & beauty are felt: And, in the second, he investigates the qualities in material objects that are fitted to excite them.

The Theory which Mr Alison proposes on the first of these Subjects, as far as I know is entirely new. He ascribes the pleasures of taste, not to any  particular faculty implanted in us by Nature for receiving them; but to the union of the pleasure of simple emotion with that pleasure which is annexed by the constitution of the human mind, to the exercise of imagination. The effect therefore produced on the mind by a sublime or beautiful object is compounded, according to him, of the elevated or agreeable emotion which that object is fitted to excite independently of its sublimity or beauty, and of the agreeable exercise which it gives to the imagination by suggesting a train of associated emotions-He has conducted his investigation very like a Philosopher; in the course of it he has illustrated several important principles in the science of human nature; & in particular he has shewn more successfully than any preceding Author the extensive influence of the Principle of Association over all our pleasures & our pains-

The second Essay treats of the Sublimity and Beauty of the material World. The object of the Author here is to shew, that the qualities of Matter have not in themselves any natural & independent Sublimity or Beauty; but all their power to excite these emotions arises from their being associated in our imagination with  qualities that have a reference to Mind; or to use his own language, from their being the signs or expressions of such qualities as are fitted by the constitution of our Nature to produce emotion.

From this account you will easily discover that I have formed a very favourable Opinion of Mr Alison's present publication; and that his friends may safely refer to it as a full proof of his Abilities. I admire especially the graceful ease and perspicuity of his language.

As the Charts belonging to Vancouvers Voyage are cumbersome and exposed to damage I have thought it best to have them & you will accordingly Observe that they are delivered by the bearer. I am 

I am happy to know you are in a fair way of recovery. I am little better than I was when you were here tho from a fresh cold. Europe is so different from what it was in my time that if I were going abroad myself it would be to grope my way & look for the places at which to make any Considerable stay.

The North of Germany however I believe is the least altered; And as one of your Objects very properly is to see military forms these are also to be found in the greatest perfection there. Brunswick in my time had many advantages there was an Academy And the Court was very gracious as I suppose it still is to travelers from this Country and as language is one of your first Objects, you may there learn both German & French. The People speak the one And Gentlemen the other.  But at whatever place you may settle for a time at first you will probably shift places to look about your Courts & Cities and fields of Battle or rather Campaigns are worth your seeing. And if you carry a few military narratives along with you And consider the Country itself as your Map in reading; that I think should help you to become a Soldier above the Common Brute. The method of traveling abroad is no where the same as in England. That is to say Chases are not to be had at every Stage you must have some vehicle of your own & post horses are to be met with every where. You should have a Sober & trusty Servant to continue with you from home. And trust to every place you come to for a Valet possessed of language & every other requisite for the place And try to find out what is best to be done.  I know not of any Rule but to be attentive & cautious not to offend against the manners of good Company wherever you come. And if there is much profit to be made of your travels most of it may come upon experience and reflection after you are done. Sett out with a Resolution to respect men & end with a proper knowledge of them. This is the best qualification of a Soldier as well as a Statesman or Gentleman. I am unwilling to detain your Servant or do not think myself qualifyed to be of much use if I should take more time. & I can scarcey write legibly for the returns of a Cough. You may however be assured of my good will.

.... If I had not been in the Highlands of Scotland, I might be of their mind who think the inhabitants of Paris and Versailles the only polite people in the world. It is truly wonderful to see persons of every sex and age, who never travelled beyond the nearest mountain, possess themselves perfectly, perform acts of kindness with an aspect of dignity, and a perfect discernment of what is proper to oblige. This is seldom to be seen in our cities, or in our capital; but a person among the mountains, who thinks himself nobly born, considers courtesy as the test of his rank. He never saw a superior, and does not know what it is to be embarrassed. He has an ingenuous deference for those who have seen more of the world than himself; but never saw the neglect of others assumed as a mark of superiority....
Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh who is come to a great Age is I am informed taken Ill & considered as dying. That place is at the Disposal of the Town Council. And in case of a Vacancy The person who appears fittest to me for the Office is Mr Adam Ferguson at present Professor of Natural Philosophy. His Character is well known to My Lord Bute & his Affection for His Lordship is a great merit with me. He has already given proof of his merit & Abilitys here by contributing in his Station to raise the Reputation of the University since he has been a Member of it & by increasing the number of Students particularly in that branch which he teachs. He has also gained the Affection of the youth and acquired a degree of Esteem & Authority peculiar to himself.
Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh, who is come to a great Age is I am told taken Ill & considered as dying. That Place is at The Disposal of the Town Council in case of a Vacancy I woud recommend The person who appears fittest to me for the office Mr Adam Ferguson at present Professor of Natural Philosophy. He is well known to my Lord Bute & his affection for His Lordship is a great merit with me in his Station. He has already given proof of his merit & abilitys by contributing to raise the reputation of the University since he has been a member of it & encreasing the number of Students particularly in that branch which he teaches. He has alsogained the Affection of the youth & acquired a degree of Esteem & Authority peculiar to himself.

All the other persons who are supposed to be Candidates have either reached a Period of Life when Men cease to exert themselves in a new Situation or are engaged in cares & occupations that must in part call off their Attention from the Dutys of this Station Office; or have been already favoured with other Preferments. Mr Fergusons sole occupation is Science & Literature, there is no other kind of Preferment within his reach  besides this office of Principal, which may be considered as the proper reward of a Professor who has disstinguished himself. As he stands at the head of the Course of Philosophy a sort of claim seems to result from thence & such a Claim is well supported by the Esteem of People of discernment, & by the Testimony of those who upon the occasion are his Rivals every one of whom I believe if he himself was out of the question woud name Professor Ferguson as the fittest man to be Principal. If being in orders was a necessary qualification which I believe it is not although the office has been generally possessed by Clergymen, Mr Ferguson has that qualification with this advantage that he retains the Character without being incumbered with any charge out of the University.

I shall be glad to know My Lord Butes opinion & yours in this matter. From the Papers which you sent me The Spanish War appears to be the Sequel of a haughty manner assumed & of unhappy Altercations which now begun by a former Minister, which his Successors could not Alter without Lowering the Character of the Nation. For ought appears to me both Nations may have been brought into a War which neither of them really intended shoud take place. And in this belief I woud willingly hope that from a proper Management we may still entertain the Prospect of no very distant peace.
Since My last Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh is dead. I have already given you my opinion about the choice of a Successor.

The Clergy I am told lay Claim to any Preferments of this kind which fall in our University, as being the only rewards which their order has to expect & the only Objects which are left to excite their Emulation in Literature or any Other kind of Merit by which they may distinguish themselves. This claim of theirs however does not exclude Mr Ferguson who thoat present a Professor in the College is likewise an ordained Minister. But without excluding their Pretensions any prejudice to their Pretensions I think it unjust to exclude Professors in Universitys from the hope of the same preferments which may likewise excite their Emulation to distinguish themselves. Literary merit shoud meet with its reward in them as well as in the Clergy. Clergymen are frequently called to fill every kind of Vacancy in our Universitys and are made Professors in the different branchs of Education Science. And I do not think that the little which I am told some of them pretend to have to be the exclusive Claim of being promoted to the head of Colleges shoud be acknowledged.

The practice hitherto has not been Regular in their favours. For at St Andrews and Aberdeen there were likely three heads of Colleges who were Laymen. One Mr Young a Layman was head of one of the Colleges at St Andrews before the two Colleges were United. At Aberdeen Mr Blackwall who is lately dead was Principal of the one College and Mr Chambers is now Principal of the other and both Laymen. were likewise exceptions to the Pretended Rules And I do not apprehend that any difficulty coud arise from this quarter in the present case. Mr Ferguson however whom I mentioned in my Last is not affected by this question because he is a Clergyman in fact tho at present a Professor in our University.

And I think it my Duty to inform you of every circumstance relating to matters of this kind this affair.

Please pay to Messrs Mansfield Ramsay & Co ten days after date two hundred and Sixty nine pounds twelve Shillings and Six pence being the ballance due in my account with you.

His Majesty's Commissioners finding it Expedient to ascertain the Quantity of Ship Tonnage at present within the North and East River and the Sound, I am by their directions to request the favour that you will be so good to order the Agent for Army Victuallers and Store Ships, and the Agent for Transports to prepare and Transmit to me as soon as convenient an Account of such part of the Said Tonnage as is engaged in His Majesty's Service within their respective Departments, that I may lay the same before the Commissioners for their Excellencies Information.
 
This will be delivered by Robert Stuart who, you inform me has been named by Mr Dundas, Cadet in the companies Service to India. I trust he is furnished with the proper Certificate of Age, & will be obliged to you for the proper credentials to the India House.

you call upon me to declare how I stand affected to the sale of my Palace in Rose Court. I persist in the purpose to sell it and a Purchaser may have possession at Whitsunday next. It would be  present circumstances very convenient to me to have it turned into cash.

Adam is threatened with a remove to far distant parts in his rank of Subaltern & presses for aid to buy Promotion. We are Straining every Nerve for that purpose. I believe I told you  the Price I sett upon the foresaid Palace was 500. I shall be glad to know your Resolution soon as the time of letting approaches when we must determine what is to be done for a year to come.

You should have told me how your Father holds out. He is to me the principal Figure in the Picture.

I have received your Letter acquainting me that you accept my Offer of the House in Rose Court at Whitsunday next for five hundred Pounds you having entry to the Premises at that Term and paying the Price at the time of getting possession when I will give the proper Conveyance to the Property. To these conditions I now agree. And now write to Warn the Tennant of this Circumstance and the Necessity of her removeal at the next Term of Whitsunday 1808. And am Dear Sir your most obedt

 As to publick Gardens on the House in Rose Court I can give no distinct Account. They had run in Arrear in Adams time. And I was made to pay 10 for the time he occupyd the House what was abt two years. The Regiment to which he belongs has warning to prepare for a Remove to the Cape of Good Hope and he tho now Aid de Camp to Gen. Don in Febry has warning to attend if whether we have hopes of being allowed to purchase a Company if occasion offer & have lodged mony for that Purpose but this is doubtfull.

I am Glad your Mother is recovered and that your Father is well. At any rate he must not presume to go before me who am his Senior.

As the Tenement in Rose Court will be getting open to your Possession about this time, it was my purpose to be in Edinburgh to finish the Bussiness: but I am not so far recovered from my Spring indisposition as to venture so far from Home. And must refer you to Mesrs Ramsay Bonar & Co who have an ample Factory from me & do every thing for me. They are in possession of the Full Deeds to that little Property & when it is convenient for you to proceed in the transaction will employ to some proper  Person to attend you & when the Disposition is made out it may be sent here for my Signature before Witnesses. Mesrs Ramsay Bonars & Cos Receipt to my Account will be a Sufficient discharge for any Money on My part.

I was Surprised to find that no Copys of the Second Edition of my Institutes had been sent to London. In order to have a Copy to carry abroad with me I have been Obliged to Borrow from Sr John Pringle one which I gave him last Summer at Edinburgh. I must now beg the Favour that you will take the first opportunity to replace it & send him on my Acc't at least two Copys. Mr John Home likewise wants to have some Copys Sent him & this you may do by the Waggon. It is likewise called for in the Shops. I write in great hurry on my way to Dover. And Am Dear Sr your most Obedient 

As I have a little business on which I should be glad to converse with you and am confined by a Cold you would Oblige me very much by calling here either now or any Other time today that may be most convenient for you.

I wished to have called upon you today but the Air is so cold that I dare not venture into the Streets. Be so good as let me know if you have any accounts from London of any Parcel of the Roman History sent to you or when it is to be expected. I am told of some periodical Publication Review or Magazine in some  of the last numbers of which there is a Life of Mr Logan at Leith: this I mention as a mark of the publication I mean: be so good as send me so many of the late numbers as you have & order the coming numbers for me. I am your most

I was informed last year by a Friend, who was then at the Court of Brunswick, That The Duke did me the honour to mention me as an Author, and it was Suggested at the Same time that if I should publish more it might be considered as a proper mark of respect to send a Copy to His Highness' Library.

I wish for an opportunity to do so & have mentioned the Commission to some of my Friends here who are going to the Continent particularly Sir James Hall and my Colleague Mr Dugald  Stuart who attends Lord Ancram in an excursion abroad.

Either of them if he goes by Brunswick will take charge of a Copy of my History And you will be so good as deliver it to my Account. I should be glad it were bound Simply & elegantly but not finely. And marked

My transcriber being out of the ways I have been Obliged to run over the inclosed myself but hope it will be legible & serve the Purpose.

As I have not time for long negotiation I hope your Correspondent will be at a word with me & I shall wait his Answer.

I should wish to have the work printed here that I might attend to it: for we should not have the command of the Post from London, now as formerly. If we do not agree I shall wish to have the inclosed returned to me here.

you may remember I took from you when last in Edr Count Rumfords 6th Essay of which the Title is Of The Management of Fire & Oeconomy of Fuel. This is bound separately but is intended as part of a Second Vol. You will therefore now please send me the preceeding five Essays forming Vol. 1st, And all the Subsequent Essays except the 6th which I have already got as soon as they come out whether separate or in a Vol. If the 7th Essay is come to hand please send it now by the  Carrier & along with The first Vol. The Carriers name is Steel, he puts up at one Patersons the Sign of Harrow in the Candlemaker Row & leaves Edr on Friday morning. Direct your Parcels to me at Hallyards by Peebles.

I return by the bearer Dryden's Works 4 Vol. 8vo: but as I have not had time to look into Thomson's Chymistry more than to incline me to see more. I take the liberty which I understood you gave me to carry the Book to the Country for more leisure.

I have just received your obliging letter & notwithstanding the other Prospect Home mentioned to you which is precarious I will make some inquirys about what you mention. When I heard some time ago that Mr Ruat was engaged to go abroad with Lord Hope I was told at the same time that he had obtained leave to keep his Professorship but that The D:of Argyle had insisted upon having the Salary for some other purpose of a public nature during his Absence. If that matter is intirely at the disposal of people here my information is probably right, yours seems to imply that the College will interpose & in that case the matter may be still uncertain. I have seen your Brother once or twice with John Home & that acquaintance has given me great pleasure, he has a great deal of Lord Elibanks Ingenuity of whom he talked by the hour with great Understanding. Youll have heard of J:Dalrymples Scuffle, it raised a sort of Laugh here against the Scotch Lawyers but Jack by good luck had none of the  ridicule but what was forced upon him. The Other sent a Chalenge to hinder his pleading a cause in which it seems he himself was formerly employed in Scotland. Jack went first to Mr Elliot to advise about this comical Situation, who remitted him to Sr Henry Erskine by whom & by him the Answer to the Challenge was dictated viz. That as he was engaged to plead the cause in question on the wednesday following he coud not in honour expose his Life till he had acquitted himself on that trust, that afterwards he woud be ready  wait upon him. After sending this Answer Jack stepped in to the Coffeehouse where he met his antagonist & being pressd to an immediate engagement declined it upon Sr Harrys principle And was called Scoundrel & Coward upon the Spot, which provoked him to draw and a Scuffle ensued in which the Combatants tumbled over chairs but were prevented from doing more mischief by some gentlemen from the other end of the Room who attended them up Stairs & made up the Quarrel before they parted. I send you this account partly to amuse you in case you have not heard it so particularly & partly on Jacks Account because such things are often misrepresented. 

We have scarcely heard of any thing this Winter but Scotch Authors, we have been impatient for Smith's book some time & I was vexed to hear Millar had some doubts about publishing it this season, however you will probably know more of that from himself. Here is a History of Gustavus published, which looks as like Hume & Robertson on the outside as can be conceived but it is the most amazing Stuff that ever was seen.

Sir Henry Clinton has given me the draft of a letter he intends to send by the Packet to Lord George Germain in order to be Communicated to His Majestys Commissioners. I beg to know what time it will be convenient to receive it. The Packet will fall down to Sandy Hook tomorrow forenoon. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

The Circular Letters being ready to be signed I am hindered by this heavy rain from waiting upon you for any farther instructions. I send you the Letter to Sir William Erskine which is in the same words with the Rest And that to Mr Law which Varys a little. You will please examine both & be so good as Return them if you think proper that I proceed. Observe whether Mr D'Erbage has not made a Misstake in Mr Laws Title.  Will it not be proper that I show the letters to Sir Henry Clinton and Apply for a Serjeant to carry them Round.

I have thought it is best to send you all the Letters that you may see the number is Compleat.

Mr D'Erbage goes with The Letter to Admiral Gambier to be signed. To Avoid Repeating the word Received twice in places so near we have been Obliged to leave a Blank for the word favoured or honoured as you shall chuse. And Mr D'Erbage will fill it up as you desire.

When he comes back I mean to send him to Mr Cherry & Will Wait upon Admiral Gambier. If you have any Commands be so good as let me know  I am Otherwise to dine out of Town at Lord Cornwallis's but will wait upon you before I set out.

I have just now received The Inclosed from Mr Rivington with Intimation that the whole impression of 200 is cast off & waits the orders of The Commissioners.

I imagine that no use can be made of this printed Copy till the Signed original is posted up & this can't be done till Sir Henry Clintons Subscription is Obtained.

It is of moment that it shoud not be delayed. And if you think so it may be proper to Apply to General Jones or The Commanding Officer here for An  Orderly Non Commissioned Officer to go to Sir Henry Clinton with it in the Jerseys in order to have it Signed. If you think that this can without inconvenience be delayed till monday I hope That I may then be well enough to Undertake that excursion. If you see Lord Carlisle tonight be so good as Settle what is to be done & let me know your Commands. 

I must beg the favour that if you can stay at Home a few Minutes you will give me time to come to you with a Question which some Merchants of London have this moment put to me Respecting the Meaning of the Word Stores in the Commissioners last Proclamation on which I intend to wait on you at Greenwich.

I have been much disstressed yesterday & today; confined to My Bedchamber & mostly lying upon the Bed, which hindered my writing upon you for more particular Directions about the appointment you mention. I imagine I shall be able to make all the necessary alterations in Campbell's appointment to Apply to Sir James Wright but wish to know whether his Name in this Manner will be designation enough. I am now ordered to go into the  Warm Bath, will stop at the office in My Way & endeavour to have the Clerk come to me this afternoon to have the Commission drawn up.

As the Secretary of State has taken upon himself the conduct & execution of the Proclamations respecting Georgia & South Carolina; I have been considering whether it will not be best to send the Duplicates likewise to the American Office, there to be employed, as the Secretary of State will think fit, for the purpose that Duplicates commonly Serve to Secure against accidents  the End for which the Originals were prepared. When it occurred that these Proclamations might be sent by me to Sir Henry Clinton it was expected that the Originals were to return from the Secretary of States Office & go with your Instructions to Sir James Wright. But as the matter now is I imagine these papers should go to Sir Henry Clinton from the Secretary of States Office. He may be at a loss what to do with them if they come from me without any Notice from thence. I am sorry to give you so much trouble. I shall send Coll. O'Fannings Papers & the proposed Answer to Ld. Carlisle this Morning.

I send you some Notes that have occurred to me in considering the tendency of the Inquiry now depending. I have been particularly Attentive as you desired to State the Rules of War &c but have been hurried into some General Animadversion of the whole Cause, you will attend only to what you think proper & consider if you please whether some General Views of this Sort ever Published might not have more Effect than longer & more Laboured Discussion. Whatever use may be made of it the faults  are Submitted to you & reserved for your Correction.

As your name in The Title of Letters addressed to the Earl of Carlisle surprised me very Agreeably I proceeded to read them as you may believe with great Avidity: And should have troubled you with my first thoughts on the whole or particular Part if I had not been prevented by a kind of Epidemical Cold or Fever which disqualified me some time for my ordinary Bussiness & by a Relapse which has given me a Listlessness under which nothing but your express commands could make me venture to Write.

The Example which you with a few  Others have set, tending to rescue the Subject of Politics out of the Hands of Anonymous Party Writers who too often abuse their Concealment, may I hope have very good Effects & multiply Publications from which we may expect Instruction as well as Entertainment & every degree of Ardour on public Affairs without Inventive or the Misrepresentation of Persons.

On the Subject of your first Letter in which you referr to the State of our Partys & the multiplied Descriptions of Persons who presume to think & to prescribe for the State The Sum of my opinion is that our Constitution has Always engendered such Partys & Multiplyed such Descriptions. That they are in our State the Symptoms of Political Life, And under this Aspect to be cherished in Speculation even while we censure & condemn them in Particular Instances. While the Constitution is safe; Ambition & Faction will be Vigorous & Free, & we may owe to them very great & Material Favours. 

But I would not be carryed by this Consideration so far as to justify Faction in any Single Instance in which it made a Sacrifice of the Public Safety to Private Ambition or Interest. If such offences are necessary, in such a Constitution as ours, we may trust to this Necessity for Produceing them. Men need not be tutored to Faction, we may even try what we can do to reclaim them. & now will remain to show that the Constitution Subsists & presents the Unusual Baits to Strife & Contention.

We may Applaud Mr Dempster for boldly passing to the Side of Government in great & Momentous Questions of State, we may Condemn Others for Persisting in Opposition to the very Brink of National Destruction without any fear that such Notions of Right & Wrong will mar our Politics or deprive us for the Future of all opposition to government the Acknowledged Check to Abuses & Spur to Public Exertions. I have heard People talk as if it were understood that because Faction  is a Physically necessary Physical appendage of in our Constitution, that therefore every degree of Faction is to be morally Licensed, & that we are so far to forget the Distinction of Right and wrong as to hold, that to be streight in Politics, which we hold to be crooked in Private Life. I mean Evading & Dissfiguring the Truth of Serving the Ennemys of our Countrey in order to hurt our Rivals in Power. I do not know whether this may Suggest any thing to you to be either affirmed or denyed in the additional Miscellaneous Remarks you propose on the Subject of your Letters: but this is the way of thinking to which I endeavour to bring my own mind, tho I am not Sensible that in Political Argument I should take the Liberty to Suppose an Antagonist guilty of the Political Vices I have mentioned.

As to the Nature & Object of the War although I set out with a resolution not to make any  Panegyrics yet I cannot help saying that you have stated them with Truth & great Energy. We certainly have many difficulties but The Stake is likewise great, & we may lose it, but it would be as Absurd, in my opinion, to cease Contending for it, because we may lose it; as it would be for a man to cease endeavouring to preserve his Life, because it is in Danger. There never was a National Cause more just than ours is at Present against France & Spain and all their Abettors & tho I trust nothing to this yet I hold it to be a matter of great Importance in the minds of the Partys themselves & of the Bystanders. I am not fond of National Animositys but I feel & indulge the Indignation of the present Case with much Satisfaction. Every well meaning Clergyman ought to Stuff his  Sermon with it on the Approaching Fast Day. And to tell the Americans in Particular how they Were favoured Spared by Providence, while their wishes in Appearance Sincere for the Redress of Grievances, but how they & their Mighty Friends have been Scourged since they rejected the Redress of Grievances to become Traytors to their King. And their Fellow Citizens & Instruments in the Hands of Inveterate Ennemys for the Destruction of Both.

I am sensible that we must endeavour to take the Offensive in this War & make every Effort to Annoy the Ennemy in order to preserve ourselves. The mere Defensive is always Tardy & Feeble & ineffectual. It was the Constant maxim & Practice of Caesar, whom I have been Studying much, to occupy the whole Attention of the Ennemy, as soon as possible, in finding out what he was  to do; so as to leave them no time to think of any Project for themselves. And this I think we should do without giving it out as our Intention: for Talking of which we have already too much often marrs Bussiness. I admire as you do the Talents that appear in both Houses of Parliament but I wish with all my Heart we could lend the use of them to our Ennemys for a year or two.

The Object of our Ennemys last years was to have the Superiority in the west Indies & on the Coast of North America & to have acted Offensively from the one to The Other as the Season or Other Circumstances required & with the Remainder of their Forces Collected to Strike at this Island. For this object they neglected their own Commerce & they spared ours. But as they have Failed in their Principal Intention the Secondary  Losses they have had And the Advantages we have had in the Petite Guerre will be felt very Sensibly. I cannot guess what their Object will be for next year. But I think that our first concern is at Home to have this Island in a Military Posture far above Insult. A Numerous Army well appointed in the Field And Arms every where in the Hands of the People. Many are Averse to the last Circumstance from a Notion that it will make the People Idle & endanger the Peace. And I have been so long upon that Hobby Horse that I am perhaps blind to his Defects: But the only People in Europe who are regularly Armed are the most Industrious & the most Peaceable Citizens, and I believe that there is no Power in Europe that can Invade their Countrey without exposing himself to Disgrace & Ridicule. There are many Differences between them & us, I own:but none to make me Suppose that a  Land holder & Father of a Family will become Idle & Riotous upon having a Stand of Arms in his House, here, any more than there.

Highly as I rate the Force of our Present Army I should be sorry to risk the Fate of this Kingdom on a Single chance of the Die between them & any Army which an Ennemy Superior at Sea may Land here from France. A People with Arms in their Hands, contain many Arms & gall an Ennemy with Hostilitys wherever he goes. This Aid would be usefull upon every Supposition & may be Absolutely necessary if to Act offensively we Detach much of our Army & Fleet to a Distance.

To Effect this I apprehend that little more would be necessary besides some little Honorary Prize to be Annually shot for by persons of a certain condition to exclude the Rabble who have Arms of their own.

There are besides Ideas respecting the Army & the State which haunt me, & which as  I have no character to lose by uttering things out of my Sphere you shall have with my other Dreams. I wish therefore for some decided way of distinguishing Officers who perform Successful Service. I mean not only some Reward to them which may excite Others by their Example but likewise a way of hastening them up into Situations where such Services are of most Consequence. This can be done only by giving one or more Steps to the Officer who is greatly distinguished by Success, for I wish not for many reasons to admit of any Other Proof of Merit. This it will be said may be hard on Other Officers who are equally Capable but have wanted the opportunitys: If Officers feel it so, let them Court the oportunitys & Strive to improve them: This is one great Purpose of the Rule. And if it were Established I imagine that Officers would be as little mortifyed to see another over them for having beat the Ennemy as they now are in Seeing officers over  them for having a Commission of an Older Date. This Rule of Seneriority which we profess to follow can produce nothing in the Army but Purchasing of Commissions & Mediocrity of Character or Patient Service. As for the mere Reward of Service that may be any thing which the Party likes. In the case of Prevost for Instance who by repulsing Destaign at Savanna has done this Countrey a most Signal Service, let him have almost any thing he will as be made a Baronet & Peer & have an Estate or any thing. I was angry with him for what I thought a premature expedition and Attempt upon Charles Town; But it is to his Success at Savanna I wish to Annex this Reward that The King may be understood to Say to every Officer in his Service go & do thou likewise beat the Ennemy.

My other Wish is that some Arrangement were thought of to make our Statesmen Warriours & conversely. I see you make some Objection to things being done on the Spur of the Moment: but  alass if things calculated merely for General Good are not begun at least, upon the Spur of the occasion that calls for them they will never be done nor attempted at all. What would you think of a Party of Chess played by six of a Side of whom each professed to know only the moves of one Piece.

If ever we are set down again in Peace with any thing like our Old Connection with America I should certainly Venture a Croisade to Obtain an Association of some Leading & fashionable People to send their Sons the Tour of America & the West Indies instead of France & Italy & to Visit Camps instead of Conversatziones and Operas. There is one thing however I am sure of; that our will not to put a Single word of all this, in your Additional Remarks. Nor should I, if I had credit to bring any thing like these about in the Army or among Persons of high Rank ever Say a Word about the Matter untill I had done what I could. It will be well if you dont turn away from every Thought of this  Kind with disgust, as being Visionary & impracticable. This is common enough with men of Bussiness, who mistake the Purpose of General Reasonings, which is not to Ascertain what is practicable in any Particular Case, but what ought to be aimed at as far as it is Practicable, a measure which they only who know all the Circumstances of the Case can Assign. I am far from any Hopes that we shall see, as in the best Times of the Roman Republic, a Head or Heads on the same Shoulders equally qualifyed for the Council, or Senate, The Popular Assembly, The Bar, The Judgement Seat, The Camp & the Head of the Army, & indeed Admirably well Qualifyed for all of them: but I am Satisfied it would be a very easy Matter to Make Military as well as Political Consideration a necessary recommendation to the Council the Cabinet or higher Departments of State, And every man who is to decide in great national Questions perceive with his own Senses the weight of  every Circumstance he is to admit in the Scale.

On the Subject of our Resources any more than the loss I have mentioned I certainly cannot say any thing that is worth your Reading. Our Resources are certainly great & our manner of calling them forth is certainly Fraught with great Present Efficacy & Power what may be the End I know not. It is matter of Conjecture & the Data from which to Conjecture are far scattered & deeply hid among the Circumstances which are to Limit Check extend or promote the Future Progress of our Wealth. The Politicians who pronounced the downfall of this Countrey from the Pressure of its Debts: forgot that no measure of Debt will ruin a Party whose wealth encreases more than his Debts or who is a gainer by the whole adventure in the case of every Debt he contracts. To Effectuate our Ruin it is not necessary that our Debt should encrease; the Diminution of our Funds to Pay it will have the same Effect: Nor, to save us, is it necessary that our Debt should deminish the Increase of  our Funds will do as well, & both would certainly do best of all. We have, I imagine, great as our Debt is, been gainers upon the Whole Adventure, tho Losers by Particular Parts: by that which we laid out for Instance in preserving the Ballance of Power in Europe unless we suppose, that this has saved us from Destruction, an Article which must be left out of every Account because it is invaluable. What we gained in East Indies if it could be ensured, would Ballance a hundred Millions: but alass Riches in that Part of the world have Wings. And I most earnestly recommend Plucking them as fast as is consistent with Justice & Prudence. For I see no immediate Resource so great as that.

I perhaps do not differ from you materially on the degree of Reliance to be had on contributions raised within the year & in some measure Voluntary to meet the Exigencys of Government. The measure is attended with so many Difficulties as to prevent its being attempted in the ordinary Course of things: but I should be unwilling to have it understood either  by the Ennemys of this Countrey or by the Lenders of Money that is impossible; That they may Urge us indefinitely, that we are ruined when we are driven to this Expedient. The Fact is that great & Prosperous Nations have been driven to this Expedient & have risen from it as with a new Principle of Life & resumed their Career with Fresh Vigour. Our Ennemys will never have felt the whole Force of this Countrey till a fourth of its People are in Arms & every farthing that can be spared by individuals given to the immediate expence of the War. This I own is a state not to be wished for but in computing the Chances of Life we are by no means to neglect or despise this last one which in our case will not fail if the Spirit with which it ought to be taken does not fail first.

This Letter is already so long that it ought now certainly to come to an End. From the State of Health in which I began it you may  believe it has cost repeated attempts, And I would close it for good & all begging every possible indulgence for the Contents. If I were not earnest to know whether I have the Missfortune to differ from you materially on the Subject of a Possible or Eventual Union with Ireland which you mention with some degree of Reprobation. My predilection is in favour of Small States & Separate Legislatures but I would carry this no farther with respect to the States I love than is consistent with their Safety. It appears to me that as our Rivals in Europe have been advancing the Union of Great Britain First & next that of the British Islands will be necessary to consolidate the Strength with which we are to withstand them. I therefore consider the Union with Ireland as the first great Political Event which some well improved conjuncture may bring about, & which will give us all our Boats  aboard to make us tight for any Storm that may Assail us.

I honour the Irish Patriots of our time  they have shown that the Effort they have made is a virtuous one for the Relief & Prosperity of their Countrey in which I wish them every Possible Degree of Success. I rejoice greatly over this & all the Other Fortunate Events in the Catalogue. I earnestly Pray that every Nerve may be exerted & every Capable & Brave man encouraged that Since Fortune is disposed to be with us we may put ourselves in the Way of her Favours.

I beg my most Sincere Respects to Mrs Eden Miss Eden & My fellow Traveller. My whole Seal & two or three more super-numerary members who have no Room on the Seal would join me if they had the Honour of being known to Her. I am with the greatest Respect

I am much Obliged to you for your fifth Letter & see with great Pleasure the same Tendency as in the former Letters to remove the gloomy Colours which Party is throwing upon our National Affairs.

I am not learned in the Writings of the Author to whom you chiefly refer on the Subject of Population. He deserves respect for openly standing forth in what I am perswaded he thinks a publick Cause but being myself no Calculator his numbers appear to me  too Abstruse & his Reasonings too Shallow.

I rejoice with you in the Continuance of favourable Events & begin to flatter myself with hopes from every Quarter. Mr Elliott of New York two Boys are arrived here & give very pointed accounts of Persons & things at that Place.

I had written so far for some days ago when I was interrupted  a Circumstance which in my Way of Life is enough to put off a Letter for a week together. We were under some Uneasiness here about the Event of political Strugles or rather about the Effect of a new Species of Government forming in some of The Countys of England. This Cloud however may pass as Other Clouds have done with a day or two & a Debate. The Account of what has passed confirm this Expectation & I begin to hope that the State  will actually profit by the Labours of Opposition. That they will enable Government will be enabled to make some Reforms that might Otherwise be difficult and that our Fleets & our Armys will be employed to find Answers to their Complaints & Accusations. If I had written on, when I began my last I should have I should have given You a Dissertation on the Influence of the Crown & the Supposed Expedience of reduceing it, which you have happily escaped. I mean nevertheless to inclose a few Notes I had taken on that Subject after being somewhat puzled with it. I make no doubt but the Questions in Agitation may have given you thought more Apposite to The Times: but this is all you can expect from this Land of Speculation & Metaphysics.

I rejoice to See Lord Carlisles name at another Publick Appointment & feel the  Temptation to trouble him with my Congratulations as I did formerly, indeed more Strongly, in reading His Lordships Defence of the Commissioners Manifesto, published from his Speech in the House of Lords.

My poor Brother who is dispossssed in Rhode Island & come home writes me that he took the Liberty to Pay his Respects to you & to Lord Carlisle, And I am much Obliged to you for the Notice you were pleased to take of him. He has asked my opinion about the Chance of a Favour or Protection & I am very unable to Advise him, my opportunitys made me feel how much Government had to do in behalf of their Friends in that Quarter but not their means of doing it. I shall however in any proper way that may occur rely on your Kindness. I have the Honour to be

I have sent to My Lord Carlisle the original of which the inclosed is a Copy. And must repeat to you what I have mentioned to his Lordship, that I distinctly remember the particulars for which Mr Holland referrs to my knowledge; And that the other parts of his representation are agreeable to what I was made to understand when at New York. He is pleased to desire that I would add any things farther that my  recollection of his Services may Suggest. But I am sensible that the case is Sufficiently affecting not to need my assistence if the protection Mr Holland Sollicits depend on your feelings.

I am to take the opportunity to thank you on account of my Brother, who in writing to me of the Continuance of favour to him imputes it to you & Sir Grey Cooper, And I beg that you will accept of My Acknowledgements joined to his. I have the honour to be with great Respect

as Mr Fletcher is a litle better within this day or two I have taken the resolution to set out on my return. I am sensible of the precarious Situation he is in but I think it more agreeable to his Fathers intentions to leave him here under the inspection of proper people than bring him back to Brittain where it woud be difficult to setle him so well as he now is with Le Moine. If it please God that he does Well it will give great Satisfaction to all his Friends. If any change to the Worse happens I hope he will not want for proper care. I have been With Dr Van Doeveren this morning he has promised to advise with you about Mr Fletcher & to take care of his health & as I have told him his whole case you may be free with him upon it.

Mr Le Moine will give you notice if he Observes any thing amiss about Mr Fletcher, in particular if he disscovers any intention of leaving this place, I should consider that as a symptom of his dissorder returning & woud think it necessary to detain him even by force & to hire a keeper for him, till further directions can be had from his Friends. It was his Fathers intention that he shoud have the laying out of his money,  & he has disscovered Nothing hitherto that shoud make one alter that circumstance for he seems at present no way dissposed to throw it away. I have desired the Favour of Le Moine to give great attention to his expence & in particular to bring to him regularly every week the demands of such people as furnish him any thing. If notwithstanding, you find that he does manage his Money matters well, pray take the trouble to give his Friends Notice of it, & use what methods you think most proper to keep his next quarters allowance from coming into his own hands. In that case some Friend here must have credit for, & the dissposal of what money may be necessary for him. I have not explained the whole case to Le Moine but he has promised me that upon seeing any thing amiss he will let Dr Vandoeveren & you know it immediatly, when you will be able to determine what to do. You see with what Freedom I trouble you & do not in the least doubt your Willingness to Oblige My Lord Milton & contribute to the Wellfare of a Very worthy young Gentleman.

I am by the Direction of His Majesty's Commissioners to inform you that they have received your Letter of the 1st of July, with printed copies of several Acts passed in the last Session of Parliament relating to America: that they have judged proper to have these Acts reprinted here and that the copies are accordingly sent to the Press.

I am directed by His Majesty's Commissioners to inform You that they received your Letter of 3d June inclosing the Petition of Zebidiah Story of Newport Rhode Island shewing that the Petitioner having bought Flax, Seed, Staves, Mahogany and other Goods or Merchandize was desirous to export the Same in two Vessels to Great Britain or Ireland and humbly praying that it might be recommended to His Majesty's Commissioners to grant him the Relief requird. Soon after the Receipt of Your Letter with Copy of the above Petition, Newport Rhode Island was invested by a Rebel Force on the Landside and blocked up by the French Squadron by Sea. The Subsequent Attacks on the Place have been defeated but with some Loss of Ships that were destroyed to avoid their falling into the Enemy's hands.

There is not any particular Account what Share Mr Zebadiah Story may have had in this Loss. But if he be still in Possession  of Merchandize which he wishes to export it is the Purpose of His Majesty's Commissioners to give Relief in this and every similar Case as far as shall appear consistent with the State of His Majesty's Service by sea and Land.

As it appears that from some Inadvertency the Dispatches from His Majesty's Commissioners to the Secretary of State have not been properly numbered, I now inclose a List of them and beg you will number, according to this List, those You have received, as I have done the Copies We have kept.

I delivered the day before yesterday, at your Office, a Letter from His Majestys Commissioners & to Lord George Germain inclosing a Copy of a Memorial from the Merchants trading to Georgia, And a Proclamation in consequence of their Request to restore that Province to the Peace of the King. I have Another Copy of the same Proclamation intended by the Commissioners to be sent to Sir Henry Clinton least the Former should be intercepted or lost. And you will please let me know whether the  measure is Approved of by His Majesty, in such manner, that I may proceed to forward this Duplicate to Sir Henry Clinton accordingly.

It is the opinion of His Majestys Commissioners that Similar Proclamation should be prepared & committed to the Discretion of Proper Officer in America for Restoring South Carolina likewise to the Peace of the King. Such Proclamations are accordingly prepared & already Signed & Sealed by two of the Commissioners & will probably have the Signature of The Third Commissioner today. Be so good as inform me whether I shoud send one of the Copys, as I did of that respecting Georgia, to Lord George Germain & if approved of transmit the other to Sir Henry Clinton to be produced or Suppressed at his Discretion or that of the Officer Commanding in South Carolina, in Case His Majestys Troops shall have obtained a Proper Footing there.

I shall wait upon you today at The Office or wherever else you shall appoint, at one O'Clock, to know what Report I shall make to The Commissioners on these Several Particulars.

I enclose with this Letter Duplicates of the Proclamations framed to restore the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to The Peace of The King, and which The Commissioners have the Satisfaction to learn from Lord George Germains Letter of the 31st March are Approved by His Majesty, & confided with the necessary Instructions to Sir James Wright. These Duplicates it was thought proper to execute  in order that His Lordship if he thinks proper may send them by a Separate Conveyance, the better to secure the accomplishment of His Majestys gracious Purpose respecting those Colonys.

I inclose with this Letter Duplicates of the Proclamations framed for Restoring the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to the Peace of the King & which The Commissioners have the Satisfaction to learn from Lord Geo. Germains Letter of 31st March are both approved of by His Majesty &  Confided with the necessary Instructions to Sir James Wright. These Duplicates, it was thought proper to execute, in order that His Lordship if he thinks proper may send them by a Separate Conveyance the better to Secure the accomplishments of His Majestys Gracious Purpose respecting those Colonies.

The Commissioners find great Difficulties in executing the Proclamation to prolong the Effect of their former Proclamations at New York beyond the 1st of June. These Difficulties arise Partly from their not having received the Official Requisition to that Purpose from the Secretary of States Office & the opinion of The Law Officers. It is Proposed that they should meet at Lord Carlisles at  One O'Clock today & I apprehend that those Papers will be necessary to Enable them to take any resolution.


That no time may be unnecessarily lost in dispatching the Inclosed Proclamations respecting the Trade of New York & Newport in Rhode Island in case they shall have His Majestys Approbation I am directed to send them to you without waiting untill The Commissioners have Signed the Letter to Lord George Germain which ought to accompany these Instruments, & which may with Equal Propriety Accompany the Duplicates which I am directed to forward tomorrow.  In the mean time it may be proper to mention now for His Lordships Recollection what their Excellencies may State more fully in their Letter. That after the 1st of June Next there will not without a New Act of Parliament, remain any Power Sufficiently authorised to Annual Revoke New Model extend or Restrict any of these Regulations now made Respecting America.

 I likewise Inclose with this a Letter for Sir Henry Clinton containing  a memorandum which I take the Liberty to Mention to him by Direction of His Majestys Commissioners, & must beg the Favour that you will be so good as forward in your Despatches.

I had the Honour to send to the Secretary of States Office on the 22d late at Night two Proclamations executed by His Majestys Commissioners relating to the Trade of New York & Rhode Island, & hope that those Instructions arrived in time to be forwarded in case they were Approved by His Majesty, to the Place of their Destination And I have this Morning sent Duplicates of the same Proclamations with a Letter from his Majestys Commissioners to Lord George Germain. I herewith inclose to you  the Report of his Majestys Attorney & Solicitor General relating to the Validity of these Proclamation, having keept a Copy of this Report for the Satisfaction of the Commissioners.

I send you with this Letter Duplicates of the two Proclamations of the 22d April respecting the Trade of New York & New Port in Rhode Island That His Majestys Secretary of State for the Colonies may if the said Proclamations are approved of by His Majestys order them to be forwarded & published agreeably to the Purpose for which they have been executed.

I have often Encouraged my acquaintances here with hopes that the Friends of the English Militia woud support our Motions in Parliament, and was perhaps in danger of encroaching a little on the Art of Political Lying if I had not been sure of your Lordship to save me from that Reproach. If your Old Ennemys are still in Array against us there is no help for it. I joined in the Clamour of which I sent your Lordship some Specimens & did all I coud to encrease it, nor with any very Sanguine expectations of Success but with a Conviction that at all Events this one of the best objects which we can have in View. Even the English Militia may for ought I know fall into dissuse after a Peace; but I apprehend it has already given a twist to our manners, & may like the infusion of so much new blood bestow at least a temporary Vigour & serve to  prolong the Life of the State. The next best thing to the procuring of Actual Political Establishments for this purpose is turning the Attentions & desires of men to such Establishments & to make them think & disspute about them. There has been Nothing worthy of Notice published since the last Paper I sent your Lordship. But a Numerous meeting of Country Gentlemen has been held to think of the Proper methods of applying to Parliament for a Militia & that care is now devolved on about twenty of the Number under the Name of a Comittee who meet frequently & with other things have sent Circular letters to all the Counteys & Burghs of Scotland to recommend this Subject as a proper one on which to instruct their Representatives.

They write Likewise to some of The Members of Parliament at London who were most Active in supporting the former motion. We already see Some cause to rejoice in the Zeal which is discovered by Numbers here, we shall see more if Politicians Elsewhere from Affection Candour  Remissness or Stupidity in which last they are not perhaps always wanting shoud suffer our Motion to be made & our Law to pass. We shall at least by returning frequently put them to their Shifts for Evasions & this too in my Philosophy is doing a good thing. So that you see I am not hard to please on the Article of Success. I woud willingly hope however that we may prevail some time or Other. Mr Hume instead of being Averse to Turbulent Conversation has made himself Member of a Society who call themselves the Poaker Club in Alusion to the use of that Instrument when fires like ours need to be Stirred. But I write with so much pleasure that I forget the time it would take to read my letter. If there was any thing either to amuse or interest from this Country I woud lose no opportunity of expressing the Respect & Esteem with which I have the Honour to be My Lord

I have made up a Packet of newspapers for your Lordship. It contains some Specimen of the Controversy which Subsists here about the Militia. Our Cold reasonings deserve very little notice at London, but there are some strokes of a different stile in some of these Papers, & I cannot resist indulging my own Partiality to the Subject. I believe your Lordship has been told of an object which I have a view to here in the way of Preferment. I mentioned it lately to Coll' Clerk & must refer to him for Particulars. It is the place of Principal in Our College, The person who holds it now is very old & I am just now informed that he is taken Ill & considered as Dying. How far your Lordship can or ought in Propriety to interfere in it a question which I avoid thinking of. It is a very great Pleasure to me to think that I coud have recourse  to your Lordships Protection & favour upon a proper occasion, without expecting any Attention to my request where it is improper. This place however stands in my way & is the only one which from my Situation I coud expect to Reach, Which is all the Apology I can make for this Trouble And am with the greatest Respect

I have received your letter containing the two copies of the inscription on your fathers Monument one for Mr Dempster which I have delivered & know his Sense of yr Kind Remembrance as well as My own of the Honour you have done me  In these acknowledgements I am afraid you will think me all too Slow but this is now the mode of my Existence & ill qualified to change it. It has enabled me to communicate with some of the learned men who join me in applauding the Eloquence & the appropriate terms of that composition. The Authority of Dr Gregory has no need of such Supports but I am fond to mention it. I thought your Fathers Birth & mine had been more scarcely dated but I see his preceded Mine by two whole years  altho I have survived so long to become my own Monument perishing you will say  but only more so  as less permanent than some other Grave Stones. I remember to have seen in Italy Miles & Leagues of ancient high ways strewed on right & left with continual Vestiges of Monuments now destroyed or in ruins with scarce a Name to Mark for whom they were intended but your fathers Memory is independent of such materials more fortunate than Tacitus or Livy. His works entire remain for  ages indefinite to shew that in his time the British Stile in able hands was fit to Emulate & cope with theirs it were too much vanity for me to think the opportunity will last of giving judgement how little I had profited by the Example he set me of liking talents & intellectual Eminence. My way is now directed to the trackless Grave & there My course Should terminate but for the happy thought that there is somewhat after death to which this nursery & school of human life is no more than preparation or a prelude.

As I perceive that something must have happened to prevent my Manuscript going to the Press at the time you proposed; I shall be glad to know the present State of it & when I may expect a proof sheet, as I must take care not to be out of the Way during any part of the bussiness. I have intimation of Leave to dedicate to the King & shall in due time send you the Form in which I mean to profit by it. The fifth and Sixth books are under review & correction. Least a fit opportunity should not offer to send the whole at once I shall have a Copy  taken to go in separate Packets by the Post.

Be so good as advise me what is to be done in case the Dissolution of Parliament which is so much talked of should not take place. And whether we may trust to the Franks of the Post masters during the interval of Parliaments. I have set one of our Artists here to work in Sketching some Maps, but I find it difficult to give both the general views & the Particular Scenes which I wish for; you shall know what occurs in the progress of the bussiness. I most sincerely wish you joy of your late news from the west Indies. They may help us to procure Friends or to make peace with our Enemies. I would heap Mr Rodney with Rewards, not only for his own Sake, but as Voltair said of Mr Byngpour encourager les Autres. 

Here is miserable weather scarcely a day of Summer continual returns of east Wind & Rain. Your Friends of this Place are all well. I beg My Complts to Mr Strahan & Mr Cadel.

I returne the first Proof & thank you most sincerely for the attention you have bestowed upon it. I hope you will always find me very ready to profit by your hints or corrections. When you proposed a change I have adopted it: or where you expressed a doubt have endeavoured to give some other turn to the expression.

I send it to the Post tonight but may not always have this in my Power, your Post may not arrive so early nor my labours be so light. I wrote to you on Thursday last wishing to know what your Packet of today has told me. I suspected that all your hands might be laid up with the Influenza or as one of my Correspondents calls it the news paper Fever which seems to  Spread as far any news paper can procure any Intelligence.

We had a report yesterday of a great addition made by Lord Rodney to his former Victory & Captures, come by Vessels from Jamaica into Clyde: but I have not heard what todays Post brings & need not inquire for your Information you will have it if true from Other Quarters. Wishing Success to our Work & our Correspondence

I am much obliged to you for your Admonitions both general & particular, as you may see from the use I make of them. The danger is that I change too much. Hitherto I hope that the Number of Types or Letters is not much changed but be so good as tell me when I am likely to tresspass too far. My manner of writing exposes me to this need of correction to the last moment; The first draft is always made very rapidly in order to overtake the matter which is likely to escape me. In this work my Object was to state the Subject. & I thought simplicity the greatest beauty of Stile. If I could attain to Purity as well as perspicuity all would be well. In this I hope you will continue your Assistance. When I come before the Publick I shall hope for Indulgence. But the time to indulge me in any thing I can correct is not yet come.

The Death of our Worthy Friend Dr Blair is to me a very real Affliction. The Effect of it to his young Family will continue to be Felt. By one letter in which it is mentioned, he is said to have died Suddenly; but I have not yet got any particulars. My Complts to Mr Strahan & to Mr Cadel when you see him.

I returned the proof sheets which I received on the 12th by the same post & then likewise gave my immediate determination on the question which you proposed relating to the delay of our publication for another year: you will possibly still expect my more deliberate Judgement upon it. The Gentlemen you mentioned & most of my literary Friends are in the Country or away in excursions to a distance And indeed if they were here, I could not in this state of a Bussiness so interesting to me be governed by any Other than the decided feelings of my own mind. From my Friends I have already had the most unequivocal encouragement to think as I do in forming the Resolution I have taken. I have been about twelve years employed on this Subject, my Efforts indeed have been directed chiefly to the matter: but the Stile I trust is plain & manly, if it does not abound in the ornaments of Composition it is probably not the less worthy of a Subject which is far above such ornaments. The want of them is an effect not of my failure but of my  Choice. I wished even where the grounds of Applause or Censure are evident to leave the application of them to the Reader Content to relate, to state the transaction, & to specify Characters without intruding with my Judgement. This sort of retention which I think proper to History I have not been always able to Observe even when perhaps most proper & the performance must come forth with this & other defects on its head. If it come with reports & prejudices against it: it may not meet with a fair reading but it will sometimes or Other meet with what it deserves & this is all I am entitled to wish.

Simplicity & plainness of Stile I confess do not imply negligence or want of Care. The Stile of Xenophon I believe was studied as much as that of Isocrates tho to a different & a better purpose.

I pant after propriety & purity more than I ever can reach. I have great confidence in your Ear accustomed to a better Dialect than my own & in your Eye accustomed to the minute inspection of the best writings. I have seized your Amendments greedily for I felt the propriety of them  for the most part, & even where I should not myself have felt the necessity of a change, gave way to your better discernment. It was sufficient that I did not perceive my meaning Suffer by it, I took it for granted the expression was bettered. But if the changes I myself have proposed be too much I pray you will admonish me: for I am willing to risk the Publication with such corrections as the press may require or such as are practicable & easy.

I do take very kindly your Solicitude on the question of delay. You promised that I should be Obliged to you & you have kept your Word. The 12th proof sheet is this moment Arrived with the King's Speech for which thank you and am glad to see an End of Such a Session. The post has been late of coming & I wish I may be able to return the Proof with this. In the mean time I finish my Letter

I have received no Proofs since the 18th & was somewhat alarmed least any untoward accident had happened: but am now glad to see your Name on two packets received yesterday & today with Sheets of the Fair Copy. The Interruption is probably owing to some incidental Bussiness, & considering the kind attention you give me I must complain of Nothing: But you probably do not consider or know that my bussiness at College begins about the middle of November & that it would be of the greatest consequence to me to have as much of this work then over & as little to do after that time as possible. This makes me languish for every proof sheet that comes. In the mean time to be doing something I send you my Dedication with Copies of Lord Shelburnes Letters or  Messages to My Friend Mr Greville authorising me to prefix it. I send you likewise Copy of an Advertisement respecting the use I have made of Geographical names Antient or Modern. This likewise may be prefixed. I have now received all the sheets of the first Volume except one which was overlooked in making up the Packet I received yesterday. The Sheet 3M from page 448 to page 457 is missing be so so good as remind your People to send it. Now I have got the Whole to that Sheet stitched together & cut I can go over it more carefully & if there be any Errata which I suspect chiefly in the Quotations to which I gave least attention in the Proofs I will send you a Note of them & the whole together with the above Dedication & Advertisement may be printed on the same Sheet with the title page. As I suspect this first Vol. will be the thinnest, It may not be improper to annex the  Index of  each Separately. Each of the volumes as I now project will have a Map; the Second Volume will have four Maps or Plans. The sooner & the faster the press goes on the better. I am in the mean time with many thanks for your past attention & hopes of the future.

I wish with all my heart that the addition you mention were made & the time may come when I may endeavour to accomplish it. But you will please to consider that it is actually one of the most Interesting parts of the Imperial History, that I should be obliged instead of breaking off into general Reflections at the Accession of Caligula to continue the detail through his Reign that of Claudius & Nero, with the great Contest that Followed to the Victory of Vespasian. This Reign with that of Titus, Domitian, & so on to the Blessed Scene which opened with Nerva & which I should be happy to be able to represent Altho I am affraid the Materials are rather fit to furnish Characters of men & opinions of things rather than detail.  For the present at any Rate the attempt is impossible. My College Bussiness which begins next month, altho it admits of what may be done by Snatches, is altogether inconsistent with the pursuit of any continued & uninterrupted Series of Subjects. I am now engaged in a bussiness of years, but what may fall in with my labours in the College as they come, to put in writing what I used to give there in the form of Prelections.

I am forbid much writing with my own hand & therefore try a new method of dictating to a Clerk. I am much Obliged to Mr Gibbon for wishing to have my hand come So near his Work & if the Publick do me the Honour to bear with a Second Edition should think myself very well employed. However the Reception that may be given to past Labours will very much determine what is to be done with respect to any Continuance.  As to my diligence in forwarding the proofs, I should certainly be very earnest to have the work go on with the least possible interruption, if it were only to catch you so long as you are in the mind to give me your Attention and Assistance And since you have done so well & will very near have Swallowed the Cow by & by, I hope you will not worry on the Tail. As to the Period of my History as it stands if you have looked at the last part of the Manuscript you will see it is Completed to my Idea landing the Roman Republick to a compl Revolution in a confessed & hereditary Monarchy.

If the Publick call for more however I shall be very glad to be able to furnish it. 

I am not at all Surprised that you should lose patience or that I who abuse it should be scolded: but I hope that matters will turn better at least that they are coming to an end, Seriously I am exceedingly Obliged to you for your Continud attention: I have been considering often in what terms I could thank you; for I never felt my Obligation more in all my Life: but I hope that you are a Stock holder just now and that you will be rewarded  for your good deeds even in this life. I pray you mark me among the next corrections if we are to have Peace. I

In this & two Other packets that go by this post I inclose a list of errata, on to the 321 page of the 3d Vol, so far only the fair copy has come to my hands, if any more should occur in the Subsequent parts I will endeavour to send them in time. Together with the errata I inclose The Table of Contents, the five books transcribed from the printed Copy & at every chapter referring to the page. The contents of the Sixth book are transcribed from a Manuscript & could not refer to the page: but this defect the Compositor I hope will Supply from the Printed  Copy which by the time he comes to this will have been in his hands. How far such a table as I send will be useful or acceptable to the reader you will please judge & determine accordingly; my health & engagements would not permit my attempting any thing more.

These particulars will find room enough in the first Vol. The Order as appears to me Should be the Dedication  The Table of Contents  The  Advertisment, which I sent you some time ago about the Geographical names. And the Errata. In these last there are some, undoubtedly defects of the Manuscript rather than the Press.

You will find by a Letter from Mr Bell by this Post that the Plates with the Impressions he took of some of the maps are now sent off. I was willing to hasten the arrival of the Plates as much as possible & therefore have sent them by the Stage Coach paying the Carriage here. I have had them carefully packed in two Cases, to bear the violent motion to which they will be exposed in the Coach. If they should go safe there will be some danger in opening the Cases as every Vacuity is filled up with Slips of wood glued in. The Plates are wrapped up in Paper & this will help to distinguish them in forcing open the inner box which must be done very cautiously to avoid mischief be so good as caution the workman who opens them of all this. The Coach they go by, puts up at Mr Wilsons the Swan with two Necks Lad Lane London  You may expect them to arrive on Wednesday the 15th & I am promised they will be delivered to you on Thursday the 16th Inst.  Mr Bell will inform you that he has at the same time sent a packing Box with some of the impressions he had taken &c. This I am affraid you will not receive before the 30th. The waggon puts up in Basing hall Street.

Before I had the very great Satisfaction of your last of the 18th past, I looked impatiently for the time at which I should repeat my thanks for the continuance of your kind attention to my publication. I am very sensible that if this work should meet with a favourable reception, much will be owing to that attention & to the indulgence with which you favoured me in my manner of treating the proofs. I inclose all that occurs to me for the Title page. You will please to consider whether the reference to my former publication will help to make  me known or any way contribute to set off this. 


My having been abroad on an excursion for some weeks has delayed my troubling you as you will find I have done by this post. Six months being elapsed on the first Ins't from the Publication of my History of the Roman Republick; I have according to our agreement drawn upon you to Mansfield & Co' at twenty days after date for a thousand pounds.

I mentioned this matter to Mr Creech who thought I should proceed in this manner leaving the partners  to settle this with other particulars of the transaction among themselves.

As our second term of payment is come I have drawn upon you of this Date payable at twenty Days after Date for 500. This is the time of Payment which gives me Par here. And I hope that this Advice will find Publick Affairs verging towards some settlement that we may cease to be what I am told we are the derision of Europe. I forgot to Mention that My Bill is to Messrs Mansfield Ramsay & Co. I am Dear Sir with great Regard

Though the Controvery repeckting the Authenticity of the Poems acribbed to Oian*, has already filled many Pages of our former Volumes, we cannot forbear inerring the following Elucidations that have lately been addered to the Public.

In a pamphlet, intituled An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems acribed to Oian, having read the following paage, p. 45,  Mr Smith mentions Dr Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he ays, the Doctor confeeth, that he himelf heard pieces of it recited; and being compared with the tranlation, exactly correponded. Dr Percy does not undertand a yllable of the Eare, and therefore could be no judge. The truth is, Dr Blair and Profeor Ferguson, when Dr Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young tudent from the Highlands, who repeated ome veres, of which Profeor Ferguson aid uch and uch entences in Fingal were the tranlation. To prevent any inferences which might be drawn from my ilence, I think it material to declare that the above paage, o far as it relates to me, is altogether fale; and that I never was preent at the repetition of veres to Dr Percy by a young tudent from the Highlands.

Having no interet to gratify but the love of truth, I have no reaon to be orry when any falehood is detected. Mr Ferguon has denied that he was preent when the attempt was made to convince Dr Percy of the genuinenes of Oian. My relation was not from my own knowledge. I deire to acquit Mr Ferguon, whoe preence or abence makes no difference in the quetion; and I am too well upported by truth to need, or to wih, the help of falehood. The attempt was really made, and Dr Percy was for a while credulous, with which I do not mean to reproach him; for I have confeed that I once was credulous myself: but I shall be credulous no more till the Works of Ossian are produced.

In one or two pamphlets lately publihed, concerning the authenticity of Oians Poems, great liberties have been taken with my name, and two advertiements on the ame ubject, igned Adam Ferguon and W. Shaw, have appeared in the news-papers; one of which only came to my notice very lately. It is with the greatet reluctance I enter at all into a controvery of which I am o incompetent a judge, from my utter ignorance of the Eare language; but regard to truth compels me to give the following relation of a fact repecting it, which has been greatly mirepreented.

On October 8, 1765, I arrived at Edinburgh, where I paed five days with the Rev.  Dr. Blair, who, among many learned and ingenious men, introduced me to Dr Ferguon, Profeor of Moral Philoophy. To this gentleman he mentioned ome doubts I had entertained concerning the genuinenes of Oians Poems: and he, in the evening before I left Edinburgh (viz. October 13), invited us to drink tea at his houe, where he produced a tudent, a native of the Highlands, who recited everal paages, or veres, in Eare (ome of which he afterwards ung to me) as what he had heard in his own country; and I perfectly remember, that when he interpreted the veres to me, ome of them appeared to contain part of the decription of Fingals chariot. Dr Ferguon alo gave me, in his own hand-writing, ome pecimens of Eare poetry in the original. Dr. Blair afterwards deired me to mention the recital I had heard, in the next edition of the Reliques of Ancient Poetry; and, in compliance with his requet, I gave a hort account of what had paed, in a note to the firt volume of my econd edition, 1767 (p. xlv.) Some years after, on dicuing this ubject with a very judicious friend, a native of Scotland alo, who knew much more of the grounds of the Eare poetry than I did, he made it credible to me, that there might be ome deception in the cae, and advied me to uppres the paage in quetion; which I did, soon after, in my third edition, in 1775. But as I never believed Dr Blair to have been concious of any deception in what paed between the tudent and me, o the ame may have been the cae with Dr. Ferguon alo, as he now appears o entirely to have forgot the whole tranaction. 
II. MINUTEs of the LIFE and CHARACTER of joSEPH BLACK, M. D. Addressed to the Royal Society of Edinburgh.

HE merits of studious men are to be estimated by the aids they have given to the advancement of science, or the literary monuments they have left with posterity; but if the public be gratified by their labours in these respects, readers are generally willing also to be told, who and whence they were.

Joseph BLACK, the person to whom these minutes relate, successively Professor in the Universities of Glasgow and of Edinburgh, Member of this Society, and of other royal and public institutions in Europe; having made important discoveries, and having laid the foundations of many others, towards erecting a fabric of science, which has fince been raised to a considerable height; and having been himself distinguished for modesty and felicity of manners, as well as corretness of understanding, and ingenuity of research,-will, it is hoped, be thought worthy of notice on these accounts. He was born on the banks of the Garrone, in France, in the year 1728. His parents were Irish and Scots. His father, John BLAck, a native of Belfast in Ireland, was settled in the wine-trade at Bourdeaux. His mother was a daughter of Rob ERT Gordon, of the family of Halhead in Aberdeenshire, who was likewise settled in the same trade, and at the same place, and in consequence of his success, was enabled to purchase, with additions, the estate of his elder brother, brother, greatly encumbered by the debts of those who had possessed it for some generations preceding. The mother of Joseph BLAck, and the mother of JAMEs Russel, late Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh, were fis. ters; and the mother of ADAM FERGU so N, Professor of Moral Philosophy, was their aunt; a circumstance which was the origin, though not the cement, of a friendship subsisting between them through life. WHILE Mr BLAck, the father, lived at Bourdeaux, the great MonTESQUIEU, being President of the Parliament or Court of Justice in that province, honoured Mr BLACK with a friendship and intimacy, of which his descendants, to this hour, are justly proud. They preserve letters, or scraps of correspondence, that passed between the President Mos TESQUIEU and their ancestor, as they would titles of honour descending in their race. On a paper wrapped round a bundle of such letters, the following note is found in the handwriting of Joseph BLACK. My fa ther was honoured with President MonTEsquieu's friendship, on account of his good chara&ter and virtues. He had no ambition to be very rich ; but was chearful and contented, benevolent and liberal-minded. He was industrious and prudent in business, of the stritest probity and honour, very temperate and regular in his manner of life. He and my mother, who was equally domestic, educated thirteen of their children, eight sons and five daughters, who all grew up to men and women, and were settled in different places. My mother taught her children to read English, there being no school for that purpose at Bourdeaux. So much may suffice for an account of Jos EPH BLAck's parentage. No words, added to those used by his son, to delineate the father's character, can improve it; and nothing more is wanting, to account for the regard with which he was honoured by the President Most Esqs. IEU. This illustrious personage, together with a great fimplicity of heart in himself, had a glowing sense of modest merit in others, and a partiality also for the manners and institutions of the British nations, which he thought fingularly happy, and in respect of which, he willingly listened to any important details. On being made acquainted with BLAcks intention of leaving Bourdeaux, he wrote to him a letter, in which, with other expressions of kindness, are the following: I cannot be reconciled to the thoughts of your leaving  Bourdeaux. I lose the most agreeable pleasure I had, that of  seeing you often, and forgetting myself with you .

A FEw years before Mr BLAck retired from business, his son jos EP H, in the year 1740, being about twelve years of age, was sent home in order to have the education of a British subjet; and having, for some years, gone to school at Belfast, or its neighbourhood, was sent to continue his education at Glasgow College, where he passed through the ordinary course of preparation for any of the learned professions to which he might devote himself; and upon his father's requiring him to make a choice, he took to medicine, as agreeable to the habit of physical studies which he had already acquired.

IN entering on this pursuit, he became connected with the celebrated WILLIAM CULLEN, M. D. then Professor of Medicine at Glasgow, and was distinguished through life by this ingenious man with an uncommon degree of friendship and confidence, which he did not fail to acknowledge and to return. In continuing the same studies afterwards at Edinburgh, he, as well as ADAM FERGuson, lived with their relation JAMEs Russel, whose fingular corretness, and precision of thought, in various branches of science, could not fail to be of use to all who approached him.

Before Joseph BLAck offered himself a candidate for a de gree in medicine, he had already made his discovery of Fixed Air ; that is to say, of an elastic fluid, which being fixed in calcareous and alkaline substances, is dispelled from them in their calcination by fire, or effervescence with acids, leaving a refi. duum, which, in the absence of this air with which it had been combined, becomes caustic; a quality which it retains until the air of which it was deprived is again restored. Pure chalk, or pure calcareous matter of any form, in this experiment, loses about two-fifths of its weight, or, more accurately, forty-one parts in the hundred. Here, accordingly, is a ready way of as. saying limestone or marl, to ascertain its purity or its value, to the husbandman in particular, who would employ it to improve his soil.

THE air obtained in this experiment has its peculiar qualities. Besides that of being fixable in stone, it is heavier than common air, its specific gravity being nearly double. Flame is extinguished, and animals are suffocated in it equally as in water. By this discovery, notwithstanding the ingenious and copious observa. tions of Dr HALEs and others, on the subject of what were called Fatitious Airs, it was reserved for BLAck to give a spur and a new diretion to the researches of science.

FRoM this beginning, great progress has been made in distinguishing varieties of elastic fluid, and in ascertaining the compofition of the atmosphere itself. Chemistry was become a favou. rite study in France, as it had long been in Germany, and the report of a new species of air was every where received with avi. dity. The experiments of BLAck were repeated, and the infe. rences confirmed by ingenious men both at home and abroad; though by some in Germany the result was at first contested, and a controversy arose, in which it does not appear that BLACK took any part, nor does any doubt now remain of the fact, as stated by him, or of the inferences he drew from it *.

AN elastic fluid, indeed, of the same qualities, has been since obtained from various sources; from vinous fermentation, from the earth itself, laid open in grottos or fissures, from mineral springs, from the breathing of animals, and from the combustion of charcoal. This air is found to have the properties of an acid; and the French chemists, being led by their experiments to consider it as produced by the union of the principle of charcoal with vital air, have laid afide the appellation of Fixed Air, and have substituted that of Carbonic Acid Gas in its stead.

IF the researches to which the observation of fixed air gave occasion, had terminated here, the accession to science, though important, had been comparatively small. The composition of the atmosphere, the distintion of vital and mephitic air, the effects of respiration, and the conjetural theories of combustion and animal heat, might have remained unknown. HERE, however, no mean progress has been made, and names too numerous to be recited in such minutes as these, will, on account of their part in these studies, go down, with well-merited lustre, to future ages. Nations may hereafter contend for the honour of such discoveries as were made by Lavoisi ER, PRIESTLEY and others", not merely of fingle or insulated facts, but of a magnificent order existing in nature, for the continuance of vegetation and animal life. Even France and England, though - - - - - O 2 , , , rich

* To LAvoisier we owe the discovery, that atmospheric air is not homogeneous, but composed of nearly three parts of azot, which is not of any effect in respiration, otherwise than as it dilutes the remaining fourth part, or the vital air, which, without being so diluted, would be too intense either for the purpose of animal respiration or of common fire. - To Priestley we owe the discovery, that the well known corruption or waste of vital air, in the burning of fuel, or the respiration of animals, is repaired in the vegetation of plants. IF in science there might be any choice of truths, I would willingly hope that the decomposition of water may be found a mistake.

rich in the treasures of science, and each having much to boast of its own, may, in the future, as in times past, be jealous of what is gained by its neighbour; it is pleasant, however, to ob. serve, that the individuals chiefly concerned were untainted with such illiberal passions. LAvoisier, in sending to BLAck a copy of his experiments on respiration, tells him: It is but just you should be one of the first to receive information of the progress made in a career which you yourself had opened,  and in which (he says) all of us here confider ourselves as  your disciples *. To this BLAck replied, with a just admi. ration of what the French chemists were doing, and, as might be expected from his modesty, without reference to any merit of his own. - NEARLY about the same time that Black made the discovery of fixed air, his mind was already at work on the phenomena of latent heat. Among his papers are found some note-books, in which he had inserted observations and queries, medical, chemi. cal, and miscellaneous, accompanied with particular references or allusions to times and circumstances, which serve to fix dates within certain limits at least. In one book, the notes appear to have been written while he was a student at Edinburgh, or candidate for his degree, in the year 1756; at which time he made or published his discovery of fixed air. In this book are con. tained conjetures and queries relating to the cold produced in the liquefaction of salt and snow, and in general in the solution of salts in water. Seeming to have the dotrine of latent heat in his view, Is it not, he says, in one place, owing to this that all bodies, in becoming fluid, have occasion for more

Does not the heat produced in the slacking of quicklime, arise  from the sudden fixing a part of this fluid (water) into a solid  state : Is not this the case in the setting of gypsum ? In the same way he accounts for the intense cold produced by ice and nitrous acid, applies the principle again to all saline solutions, and ascribes the slow granulation of salt to the re-appearance of heat. Is not ice, he says, crystallized water and does it not al ways feel cold, because it melts on our handling it? This is  similar to the solution of salt in water. These notes, from circumstances intermixed, appear to have been written as early as 1756. In a following note-book, which, from circumstances also, does not appear to be of a later date than the year 1757, there are several queries, of the same nature with those above mentioned, particularly with respect to the curious observation of FAHREN HEIT, that water, if not disturbed, will cool below 32 degrees without freezing, but the moment it is disturbed, it raises the thermometer to 32 degrees, and freezes. Is not this, he says, the heat that is unnecessary to ice " In the same note-book conjetures are carried still farther, and applied to the prodution of vapour. A way is mentioned to estimate the quantity of heat which is employed and disappears in the formation of vapour, and cannot afterwards be discovered by the thermometer. Place a phial, he says, with water, closecorked in a stove; open it suddenly, and see how much of it  is converted into vapour, while the water comes down to the boiling point. Observations to the same effect are continued through fix small note-books; in different places of which, it is observed, that animal heat originates in the lungs, and that heat always accompanies the prodution of fixed air. FROM these notes, it appears, that the experiments in which BLAck evinced his dotrine of latent heat to the satisfaction of his pupils, were not made at random, or without previous apprehension of the fact, as it appeared in the ordinary course of na-ture or chemical phenomena. Heat, he observed, is in na. ture the principle of fluidity and evaporation, though, in pro ducing these effects, it is latent in respect to the thermometer,  or any sensation of ours; and as matter, otherwise quiescent,  becomes voluble and volatile in liquid and in vapour, heat may  be considered in nature as the great principle of chemical  movement and of life. If it pass through vacuity as well as  through body, as it certainly does in its communication from  the sun to the planets, we must confider it not as an accident  in bodies, but as a separate and specific existence, not less so  than light or electric matter *; and though agreeing with  these in some of its effects, in its nature possibly different from  either. But such was BLACK's caution not to outrun the course of actual evidence, that he declined any discussion of the question, relating to the absolute nature of this magnificent power in the system of nature. My reading in chemistry does not enable me to say, how far the dotrine of latent heat is, in these precise terms at least, admitted as a principle in the received theories of combustion and animal heat; but, to my limited apprehension, it appears to be the only solid foundation of any theory that proceeds upon the supposed decomposition of ignifying or vital air, manifesting a light and heat previously latent in such air. We can have no direct proof of latent heat in the atmosphere, or permanently elastic fluids, and it is from analogy only that we assume it to exist in such fluids. The maxim of NEWToN, indeed, may be applied here, that what is uniformly observed in any department of nature, as far as our experience reaches, may be safely deemed general within such department; and the heat which we find disappear in liquefaction and evaporation, we may safely assume as existing also, though in a latent state, in every fluid of a fimilar form. Even BLACK admitted, that in the atmosphere, under all the manifest changes of its temperature, there may be, and ture appear

* It is no doubt a mighty increment in science, to have found such powerful fubstances operating, as the writer of these minutes apprehends, without gravitation, inertia, or impenetrability, the great bases and columns of the mechanical philosophy.

probably is, a very great measure of latent heat. Such were the scientific discoveries of BLAck, when residing as a student at Glasgow or at Edinburgh, at least before his nomination to a professorship at either place. When his friend Dr CULLEN was removed from Glasgow to Edinburgh, BLAck was appointed to succeed as Professor of Medicine, at the former place; and following his example as leturer on Chemistry also, was, from this time forward, more employed in detailing particulars already known, for the information of his pupils, than in

pursuing any series of investigation for himself. IN entering upon this task, it became matter of course to define the science, and even in this our Professor gave a specimen of his charater, and the modesty of his pretenfions, in a matter formerly enveloped in mystery, and the affectation of magical power. - The science of nature, indeed, is interesting in all its branches, whether they rise into the heavens, or fink into the bowels of the earth. We are placed in a busy scene, and have our safety and accommodations at stake, in the midst of operations and changes that greatly affect them. The principles that operate in our system are the objets of our science, and when known, become the instruments of our art, towards procuring what it has pleased Providence to make the conditions of our preservation and well-being. In respect to these principles, science becomes an accession of skill to every manufacturer, and to every labourer of the soil, as it is to the contemplative an opening into the interior springs, which are employed in the prodution of so much beauty and order in the system of nature around us; and this is the rank of importance, which, without the pretensions of - - alchemy, alchemy, or the mysteries of supernatural power, the chemistmight assume to his studies. But, in these, BLAck still saw no more than research and inquiry, far short of complete science or comprehensive system, and he characterized the study on which he was to enter, by the use of its principal instruments, Mixture and Heat. If discoveries have fince raised it to a higher rank among the branches of natural science, he himself has contributed his share in the progress it has made. He had published his disco. very of fixed air, in a pamphlet, about the time that he obtained his degree in medicine; but that of latent heat was never otherwise published than as a part of his academical course. His pupils, indeed, being numerous, and from different parts of the new, as well as the old world, made his dotrine sufficiently known ". AFTER a few years employed by CULLEN in the first profes. sion to which he was appointed at Edinburgh, he was removed to a different branch of the medical school; and BLAck, as before, being called to succeed him, was, on the 17th of April 1766, admitted Professor of Chemistry at Edinburgh. His talent for communication being noway inferior to that which he possessed for observation and inference, his manner of acquitting himself in his new situation gave additional lustre to the schools of science, and rendered him one of the principal ornaments of the Univerfity, in which he continued, for about thirty years, to teach the different branches of chemistry, with a reputation always increasing. His style was chara&terized by the most elegant simplicity. His address in performing experiments was remarkable, - - and

* The writer of this article has little more than heard of chemistry as a branch of general science, and fondly embraced any doctrine as it seemed to connect with the system of nature; but farther, his own studies have been so different, that he would not, if he could, charge his mind with any of its practical details; and he pleads the reader's indulgence, if, under this defect in treating of Black, he hastens to subjoin a description of the man to so imperfect an account of his science.

and in the impression he made, subjets perplexed or intricate became perspicuous and clear of superfluous or questionable matter. To the last, and under symptoms of declining health, his mind gave proofs of strength undiminished. In speaking, his voice, though low, had an articulation which made him be distintly heard through every corner of a spacious hall, crowded with some hundreds of his pupils : and the simplicity of his expression, if not eloquence, had, to those who listened for information, something more engaging and powerful than any ornament of speech could produce. . . . Av ERSE to hypothesis or vain conjeture, his science was a just comprehension of facts, and might be adopted by any artist who consulted him, with as much safety as he relied on any praice he himself had experienced. His time and attention being devoted to the communications which his pupils had a right to expet from him, very much limited his pratice as a physician. But where he was called or could attend, his manner was singularly acceptable. Without flattery, or uncommon pretensions to fkill, he won the confidence of his patients, and, with unaffected concern for their benefit, was often successful in mitigating their sufferings, if not in removing their complaints. He was, in short, a physician of great repute, in a place where the chara&er of a physician implies no common degree of liberality, propriety, and dignity of manners, as well as learning and skill. Never being anxious to bring himself forward into public view, little may remain with posterity to distinguish him as an author, unless his executors should think proper to publish the notes from which he used to prelet, and which, notwithstanding the subsequent progress of science, may still be of use to the student, as a most solid foundation on which to proceed in his studies. ... - o, . . . . . . " : ". AMong the few things published by himself in his own time, we may reckon his Thesis or inaugural essay, De Acido a Cibis VoI. V.-P. III. P orto, orto, et de Magnesia Alba:Experiments on Magnesia, Quicklime, and other Alkaline Substances, printed between the years 1754 and 1756:Observations on the Effect boiling has upon Water, in making it freeze more readily, inserted in the sixty-fifth volume of the Transations of the Royal Society of London, for the year 1774: Analysis of the Waters of some Hot Springs in Iceland, made at the request of his friend Mr STANLEY, who brought the specimen for his inspection; inserted in the third volume of the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh:Two Letters, one published in the year 1784, by Professor CRELL, in the tenth volume of his Colle&tions; the other addressed to Monsieur LAvoisi ER, and published in the Annales de Chimie. WITH these notes of our Author's professional distintion, readers will not expect any tale of adventures or remarkable events, which the lives of studious persons seldom afford; and we must conclude with a few lines of charater, such as those who are placed in like circumstances may understand as spoken of themselves, and for their advantage. . . . . . . . His aspect was comely, his manner unaffected and plain, and as he never had any thing about him for oftentation, he was at all times precisely what the occasion required, and nothing more. Much as he was engaged in the details of his public station, and chemical exhibitions, his chamber, never was lumbered with books, specimens of natural history, or the apparatus of experiments; nor did any one ever see him hurried at one time to re. cover any matter which had been improperly missed at a former. Every thing being done in its proper time and place, he ever seemed to have leisure in store, and he was ready to receive his friend or acquaintance, and take his part with complacence, in any conversation that occurred. No one ever, with more ease to himself, refrained from professional discussions of any sort, or, in mixed company, more willingly left the subjet of conversation - a wo tC) to be chosen by others. Many years member of a society  composed of men of the highest rank, of Judges, lawyers and military men, as well as citizens and professed men of letters; he kept his place with propriety, and in this group never betrayed any awkward peculiarity of his education or calling. His more intimate associates and friends, besides those of his own profesfion Culle N and Mon Ro, were JAMES WAT r, now of Birmingham, an engineer of the first order, whether ancient or modern, and who has happily united, in the grounds of his art, chemical as well as mechanical science; Mr GEDDEs of the Glass-works at Leith, an eminent manufacturer, who well knew the value of his friend's suggestions. Such intimates as these could scarcely allow BLAck to relax from the toils of his professional studies. But he had others, for whom his profession had no charm, and whose attachment to him, as to one another, arose from the experience of ingenuity and candour, rather than the identity of {tudies, or agreement of opinions. Such were DAVID HUME, Esq; Dr ADAM SMITH, John Hom E, ALEXANDER CARLY LE; and John CLERK of Elden, of whom the last, without having ever been at sea, instructed the navy itself in naval tatics. At the head of either list, however, in respect to BLAck's habits of intimacy, ought, perhaps, to have been placed JAMES HUTron, who made up in physical speculation all that was wanting in any of the others. It may be difficult to say, whether the chara&ters of Black and Hutton, so often mentioned together, were most to be remarked for resemblance or contrast. Both profound in physical science, and rigid adherents to fact, in exclusion of hy. pothesis or vain conjeture. Both of consummate humanity and candour. BLAck was serious, but not morose; Hutton play. ful, but not petulant. The one never cracked a joke, the other never uttered a sarcasm. BLAck was always on solid ground, and of him it might be said, Nil molitar inept. HUTTon, whether for pleasantry or serious refle&tion, could be in the air, speculate beyond the laws of nature, and treat the common notion of body, with its magnitude and figure, as a mistake. In these speculations BLAck never took any part, farther than to be diverted with any play of fancy, or refinement of thought, which, he well knew, in the case of his friend HuTToN, did not preclude the use of corret and sober reason when the subject required it, or was within its cognisance. The researches of HUTTON were unremitted, and his reference to the order and arrangement of this, which he called a Living World, was judicious and happy. Unreal as corporeal subjets were in his apprehension, he established a lucrative manufacture, on principles of chemistry, and was for many years of his life keenly employed in the practice of agriculture. To this he was led by becoming a proprietor of land on the death of his father, when he hastened to Norfolk, where he had formerly lived with a farmer, to observe the husbandry of that country. There he purchased a plough, hired a ploughman, and brought both on the post-chaise with him to Berwickshire. The neighbours were diverted with this assortment of company and baggage, and no less with the attempt which followed, to plough with a pair of horses withOut out a driver. This joke, however, has become serious, and is now

* This society formed itself, about the year 1770, upon a principle of zeal for the Militia, and a convition that there could be no lasting security for the freedom and independence of these islands, but in the valour and patriotism of an armed people. It became known, by some whimsical accident, by the name of the Poker Club.

* He, too, had carried his studies so far as to obtain a degree in medicine; but an attempt to consult or fee him would have been met with a laugh, or some ludicrous fancy, to turn off the subject. to .

the general practice from one end of Scotland to the other *. IN returning to BLACK from this enumeration of his intimate friends, serving, perhaps, to disclose his chara&ter no less than any other circumstance relating to him, we but hasten to the conclusion of a life no less distinguished by corretness and propriety of condut, than by ingenious reasoning, and scientific research. Fully entitled to the appellation of Frugit, that seemingly cant expression, of which the old Romans were so fond, that they used it to denote the foundation, or the summary of all the virtues, he carried into his private affairs the same order and good conduct which he employed in his professional duties; and he reaped, through life, the benefit of his attention to this particular, in the ease of his circumstances, and in the power it gave him, on occasion, to assist a friend, or contribute to the attainment of any public convenience. From those, indeed, who can mistake remissness or improvident waste for generosity, BLACK may have incurred the imputation of penury. But the proofs of this charge, if ever it were brought, in his case were not to be distinguished from the effects of sound reason and good sense. No one ever struck the proper medium more exatly than he did. His expences were regulated, but nowise fordid, or unbecoming his station. His house was spacious; and his table, at which he never imroperly declined any company, was elegant and plentiful, rather above than below his condition. His contributions for public purposes were liberal, and his purse was always open to assist a friend. Much of his practice as a physician arose from his previous connection with the patient as a friend ; and he was as assiduous where he would not accept, or where he could not expect a fee, as in the most

lucrative part of his profession. His own constitution never was robust; and every cold he caught, or any approach to repletion, affected his breast so much as to occasion a spitting of blood. This he guarded against, by restriting himself to a moderate or abstemious diet. As his infirmities increased with age, he met them with a proportional attention and care, regulating his food and exercise by the measure of his strength; and thus preventing the access of disease from abroad, he enjoyed a health which was feeble, but uninterrupted, and a mind undisturbed in the calm and chearful use of his faculties. A life so prolonged had the advantage of present ease, and the prospect, when the just period should arrive, of a calm dissolution, This accordingly followed, on the 26th of November 1799, and in the seventy-first year of his age, without any convulsion, shock, agitation or stupor, to announce or retard the approaches of death. Being at table, with his usual fare, some bread, a few prunes, and a measured quantity of milk diluted with water; and having the cup in his hand when the last stroke of his pulse was to be given, he appeared to have set it down on his knees, which were joined together, and in this action expired, without spilling a drop, -as if an experiment had been purposely made, to evince the facility with which he departed. So ended a life which had passed in the most corret application of reason and good sense to all the objets of pursuit which Providence had prescribed in his lot. His effects, when looked into, shewed how much he had profited by the order and just arrangement he had ever maintained in his affairs; amounting almost to double of what any one thought his income or his frugality could have enabled him to acquire. The whole was disposed of by will, without specifying any sum, in a neat and satisfactory manner. Being divided into ten thousand shares, it was parcelled to a numerous list of relations, in shares, in numbers, or frations of shares, according to the degree in which they were proper objets of his care or solicitude. THIs account of Joseph BLACK, however inadequate to the merit of its subjet, is inscribed to the President and Members. of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 