Analysis of pneumatics and moral philosophy. For the use of students in the College of Edinburgh 
cS a PART L Of HUMAN NATURE.
CHAPTER I. The Hi/iory of tihe SPECIES.
I. AN KIND have some qualities itn common with the other animals; some that diftinguill them; and others by which they arc themselves diverfiied.
2. Like the other animals, they are generated and nourithed, they h:ave their period of life, and are fuhject to difiblution.
3-
Half the numbers that are born die, .IccoIrding to some observations, before the seventh ycar is expired ; according to others, before the third.
Long life conlifts of between seventy andi one hundred years 
It appears fiom the annual register ofdctths, where the numbers of people arc known, that one of thirty-two dies in cach year.
The intfncy of man, or his fRate of dependence on the parent, continues longer, and his i:;flindts are more fillliblc than they are in the young of any other fpccies.
When adult, he supplies many apparent defets frolll invention.
llis ingenuity enables himl to ful)filt in a variety of (ituations amn clilates.
Ite i a;n animal of pr'" ; aflbci.iting '.,nd politic.l ; and has a fupir)iority o'er evccr utlihr liicies.
Ue is qualitied to difciolu'fc, and.
Co1n1-
Ito ] conimunicates his meaning by a variety of fixced :.nd rblitrary signs.
lie diitinguifhes charatters by epithets of praise or blame. He loves or hates, he admires or contemns.
The species separates into bands and companies; but the individual, leldom from choice, is found to fubilt alone.
Varieties in human nature are either such as diitinguill diiierent races of men, different ages of the fame race, or individuals of the fame race and age.
Races are difltilguified by their seatures, ft;:ture, CcImpl1ciun, dii)Uitions, andi f!cultics.
They ;irc rte(hlcil)le to fix: Tlic Eluriipc 7, ti/iw , :2,iic(l, t/it t 9 ri-titr, tI/c l h liti;z 1te Al/ t:Iro') and t/ec ^iijc ricn i .
* Some dlivcmfitics of tlhe race ;p; to be eoliincL~cd wihll situatuioIn and cliLteic.


Different ages of the fame race are diflinguifhed by the unequal possession of commercial, literary, and political arts.
Ages are said to be savage, barbarous, or polithed.
During the first, men live on terms of equality, without property or government.
During the second, they are ditlinguilled by inequalities of birth and fortune, associate in tribes, and follow their leaders.
During the third, they find additional grounds of diitinction, in a divcrfity of education, profellion, and manner of life. They are governed by nwagiItrates, hereditary or elective, under the diredtion of laws and ettablilled forms.
6. Individuals of the fame race are diftinguilhed by a difference of asped, capacity, disposition, and force.
These varieties qualify members of the fame society for different tiations, and render subordination confiitent with natural equality.
7. Every slate in which man can employ his talents, and follow his difpofitions, is a state of nature.

CHAP. II. Of the Hif/oly of the INDIVIDUAL.
SECTION I. Of the UNDERSTANDING. -T IIE Individual is conscious of his 
personal identity, in the performance of many funtions, either merely animal, intellectu:l, or mixed.
Consciousness is a principal attribute of mind ; and is that by which it may be Iaid to cxiit for itself.
Merely animal functions are those in which bodily organs and mere animal powers are exerted ; as, dli:cltiuoi, circulation, &'c.
IntelleCtual fiin(tions are such as cannot be referred to any bo)lilv organ ; as thought, juJldeincllt, andl tcfire.

Mixed funclions are the proceedings of mindl referred to bodily organs ; as, fen!clion, and appetite.
2. The mixed or intellecial fundtions of this alcive being, however otherwise dilinguillied, terminate in either of two ends ; the discovery of Lrutb, or the attainment of good.
Truth is the relation of our belief or opinion to the reality of things.
Good is a quality of sentiment, and can exiit only in a feiitient nature.
Truth is the obljct of underitanding. Good is the obiett of will.
tndcr-flianling; i lcluedcs obfcrvati on, nieil v. ill,,tilltit)ll, rt''angc lllt andl i ,rcligllt.
(l>l'r :.,' i,,n is ttl.t proceeding of the liId I \\' hi(ch we\ collect ladts.

 Fads relate to the existing qualities and operations of different natures.
Obfervatiori terminates inl history, or the knowledge of particulars in detail.
Iliftory is eithcr dcfcriptivc or narrativ e.
Dcfcriptive history is tlhc detail of co-cxiitcnt circunmftances and qu. li tics.
Narrative hiiitory is tlh detail of lucceflve events.
\Ve arc determined by a law of of;; nature to believe facts to whicih e c ourselves are witneflns, or to w\licl wve have the credible tettiinuly of others.
4Memory is that proceediing of mind in vwhich tiOljcets palt are r(.illcdl.
Its operations are either tal'itl ,,r intentional.
Mcmory is caflil wlhen oljc'ts fllggest each other in fomne order tihe' h ,Id, inldellpndc nt of choice or ilntention.

 Memory is intentional when the mind from design recollects any object.
S. imagination is tle stating objects as present under a sense of their absence, or as real under a sense of tleir being fidtitious.
l)efign, invcntion, description, andl plifion, or desire, depend on imagination.
6. Arrangemen t is the disposing of f.its agreealbly to the connection or relation they have in nature.
The princip.l articles of relation are tholc of fimilitutle, contiguity, caule anil cftlct.
l;'ro the rel.tion of rimilitude, objccts in defcriptiee history arc clali('d into gi'uera andtl /fecis.
]'ronl tliht of contiguity of tinle or l;,:,c tlLy ;sare ranged in narration.

 From that of cause and effect they are connected in theory.
Theory is the arrangement of feparate appearances under fmne commion principle.
Syttem is the combination of theories for mutual illulir-.tion and fuipport.
Science conlifts in just theory and fyittcm.
7. Foresight is the faculty of conjel.turilg \whatt is to followv fronm Lh p.it or thle I',rcint.
It requires penetration and figaciry; plelltiration to c )lnrcienid tle (i,'(illt;lilces (of ally p.irticUtlia c ill, ai.! sagacity to iperceive \\l ilt is likltto ftllow fronm tholte circuiftailc's.
I'c'nect~ ti; n ;nl a .lnii;ci ty are tlis I'L:Ida.tionl of art and Ikiil.

SEC T. II. Of the WV I L L. T i E will includes Sentiment, Ilclination, an l Volition.
I. Sentiment is the perception and the cnijo)mcnt of Good, or the perceptcion andl the fufelering of Ill.
The object of Sentiment is that to which it is referred as to its (,ufie.
'I bus Il rovocation is the object of An:l;r, and D;nger of Fear. bjec-s lare siid to be gond or evi! on account oi their connection with Sentiniient.
Ihis connection is inl a Iret mcaliiCre ',i' it l::I'rv.
(: ce perlon is calm 1111unci' .a p';ii ,;t ilio by \\hich ;iother is . !","'Ced ; i.s l':,rl',l_ s in I;;':i::' 'v; \\ 'l jcl :',.t.)l 'Lr . tc:: i~i., I.
 There are foul kinds of enjoyment or furlcring; viz.
i. Sensations of Pleasure or Pain. 2. Approbation or Dillike. 3. AffeCion or Hatred. 4. Exercise or Languor. The irfit pertains to our Animal and Sensitive beiii;.
The otlhers to our Intelledtual and Adive nature.
Sentations are pleasant or painful apart fIrom our knowledge of their cause ; as in the cafe of flavours, odours, c.
Juitlgen;enits of approbation or diflike are plcalint or painful fioml a klInco)letldg and dlifceirnicnit of their ,lcjcl; as in difliiguihil g what is lturtitiil or ldcfoIrnld, girc'at or ine.an.
A.:lc ion i' pICleatinit iby the dclidil: L ,)! )',r\s lio'rol' tile \ cli;i('c or g)ool (o ,i (;l[.i.; o~as in irienljflil) and Love.
l.;t(rcd is the rcvcrfc. l2'.,clrciles ;rc l.-cllint or Iaiifiil, in : :;:'1.1 dilI' tofitionll 
'.
lnclination is a disposition of our nature to at.
Every inclination may be confidered, either in refpeEl to itself, to its end, or to its objedt.
In rcfpeat to itself, Inclination is of three kinds.
i. A propenlity; 2. A desire; or, 3. A mixture of both.
A Propensity is an origin.l or acquired difpictionl of our nature, op':rating inepl' ilt:;n: *i'i' lfi.:ion or dcltin.
D)ciive is tle i;ntlcniona.l aC of the minil, dir-ecle. by the apprehenlion of a fin 'oleid good.
Natu re andl halbit give propensities; info-i;-mation or fancy lmay excite dcfire.
Propentities, a.ftcr experience of their gratification, part:ikc in the n:lure of Dcfire; and lDeiircs, by haLit, partake in the nature of !'i-openlitics.
The fuljedt of Inclination is the cnd or fiplpofcd good to which it refter;
;Is,
as, when we delire Animal Enjoyments, Intelledtual Talents, or MIoral zualities.
The object of Inclination is tile person to whose enjoyment tlhe supposed good is referred ; as in the cafe of advantages desired for ourselves or others.
In this refpeL't inclinations are felfifl or benevolent.
The mint is differently affedled by pafTion as the fubjct of inclination is differently situated.
Paflions are of four principal kinds : Joy and Grief; Hope and Fc;!r. A good obtained is matter ns Joy ; miffed, is a fubjdct of Grit f. A tfa ourable prof)ect is the fuundtltion of Hope ; the reverie is the tounllation of Fear.
Pallion is greltly divcrfileed in the cale of diflerent fubjedts andl objcts.
Tlhe joy or holpe of the inteiefted and fclfifli tend to Insolence or Vanity; his grief andn fear to Dl)jcetion and 
Cowardice ;
 Cowardice; and in cafe of competition with his fellowv-creatures, to Envy, Malice, and Jealousy.
The joy and hope of the benevolent are candid and jufit; his grief or fear are mixed with satisfaCtion, or lose their effect in the ardour of his principal disposition.
A right te of the tinderfl/anding, and good intentions, being always equally in our reach, Moral Qualities may be ftldied without any variety of passion. But they who commit themselves to the diredtion of casual opinions are subjed to a variety of passion on this subject. Their joys and hopes are Self-approbation and Confidence; their griefs and fears are Shame, lndig,ation, and Renlorfe. Volition is the determination of the mind to follow an Inclination.
\'olitin founded on fentilent and inclination conflitiutes an Action.
Every 
Every Action has a motive. Every Voluntary Adion is siee. Every Free Acion is an indication of'character.
It is a privilege of tnle mind to contemplate itself; to chufe among its inclinations and sentiments; to suppress what is evil, and cultivate what is good.
C II A P. III. GENERAL INFERENCES.
I. AI'ACITY and parts refer to the Underflinding ; ardour ;ind lforce to the hlart ; both united conllitutc a natuir:l 1 ilperinroity o(f cliaracter.
Vclemcnt inclin ltions are the foiuce of activity iand fte.atincts ; but extrelme piaflion of hope or fiar,l j ,y or rlicf, interrupt or nmilguide our conduct.
t 24 1
2. The properties of mind have no analogy to those of matter.
They present exiltences of a different and opposite nature.
Divisibility is implied in every conception of matter:
Indivisibility in every sense mind has of itself.
What are called faculties of mind accordingly are not distinct parts of a complicated nature, but separate names given to different a&s of the fame being.
3Annihilation is unknown in the order of nature; and mind, not being fulbjcct to a dilfflution of parts, is phyfically immortal.
PART
PART II. Of the BEING and ATTRIBUTES
of GOD.
CHAP. I. Of ite E.xJ-cnce of C 0 D. tW' E believe thle cxilicnce of mind,,
as we do that of mlatter, in 'colnfcquence of certain appearances wvith which that belief is conne.'tej in the frame of our nture.
To form an a rgument in proof of the cxiftence'ot miind, is to colle't such appearances.
'Ihe apip c'ralnces, lhen knlo',vn or obli.'rvci., !I-re ; \.iys connlected l vith \ bel]if.
TieLo acti)lns anll. c, ,Iilut of ilcrt lnlalke l:ni,\n their intcntiions an 1 chai.icters.
The orderl' n 1 I |1I)(iccc.!'1 ;t Ii: t'urc make known the exiittence a :1Ii attriiI1'tcs of God.

C II A P. II. Of the A2ttributes and Goveirnm2?zent 
o(' GOD. T IIF l attributes of God( may be ce:-
pre'cd in the terms, Power, \\ if.d!ou, Goodness, .anl Jufticc.
Iy liis power 1ll ciTects arc produced ; by his hiifon, is ;goodhnef;, and his justice, tlcy arc infaliibly direcCtld to thc bcft ends.
T'le belief of the e.iftence of G(.d is foiIndcd on tlhe al pparc.n l;l of provillence, ;1nd implies the belief of l',; I)V c'cm;illcnlt.
As the Mrtaterial \\'old is governled by t1he iitc;rv\ntion of pihf1i;Ll infltuncllt.s, to \\hidcli we give tile 1 ::lnles of C'rniI'ita.l'.' ,, C.i,I;i.ni, EI,/llcity, &c. 'The lnticlletut.ll \VWlorl is governc d by Ii(or;1 ind occ'nents , feniltini.s of p;c.:furc' Ir,;( l):' in. "i d;I ;cintc s , ?l'-i-(Patis ; : o(r A.iiikc, ;C*'.czluiius l\ ('1'c r olf hatred.
 C II A P. III. G, iNERA.L I N 1: R F.N CE'S.
I. M4T A N bciln iicilcled to admirle to 
lovc ;iln oJbey proper o1jects, t foill \\hs tlit -t'li'_ionl ii i.tltur;il.
Tiic cz:p!'cli,):is of i'cligion arie si i.cl or .ib! trary.
Its fixed exprefiions are tllofe adtions Iwhich concur \with the prosidcence fit God iln promotilng the good of his crc ;tures.
Its arlitrary expreifions are the ti('fercnt cerellonics, and inllitution i; oblfervances, by lwhich like (lillt C:: , of venlration may be exprelicd i;i i;fCClret a,,'cs or coluntries.
Men arc chlarged only \\wiit the care ( C.I lliutilg * h it is gocld, i;lit ol di n! \ l iL.it is ri;,lut.
Evcentl ;,ire rcf.' vv,.1 to, Gy t !.
The beneficence and the juft;cc of God appearing in the order of his preient government, lead us to believe a future slate of rewards und punish-ments.
MORAL
,M 0 R A L P H-1 I L 0 S 0 P H-Y..
1 iNTR O D U C T I ON. M OR AL P~H ILOS OPHsY ti*CdtS O1
Good and icvil.
Any gencral exptcsion of ls iti.('JOt1 is 'i ldwV Ill Iitv 1 L1
cCn] liti,)11 alld A\;d .iV1(Jri. I~l~'xCo;11si1ls of t\v()
*~1Ii* iis'ti-ls~A~;to tile 1nuni '1nd1 Vlt scc()11(l L) 11i'~ ( \tIC ni COlldfl o. ii) or~( to therelatislil anki dtlutis 0t Inco Ill mi i jilL,.
C P A Ri'
PART I. Of the MIND and HAPPINESS of 
MAN.
C A P. I. Of P L E A SU R E. GO OOD, relatively to the hunian 
nmind, is expressed in a variety of termS ; filch as, PleJafire, Virtue,
Plicalure is good, physically confidered, vithout any reference to its kinil, lelilctre(, (1r coIwparative importance.
Tlic f;llohwing are physical laws of our naiure, rclative to pleasure and Fpaiin.
C 3x ]
I. The use of things filutniry and requifite to ani.mal prefervati on, is :,leasant; what is pernicious, is paiilful.
2. The sense of any perfetlion is pleasant ; of any defed, is painful.
3AffcTion is pleasant ; Iatred is painful.
4. Hope and Joy :,rc pleafintt; Grief and Fear a;rc I.inful. But these npaffins, grl.ftd l ( lilll i( , or l;aricd, p;art;lke greatly ill tie nature of the dilpolitii l froni \vllichI tlice arifC.
5-.
3 ;2 J 5. Exercise of thc mind or body is pic&ian11t.
6. Ilabit, in sonie instances, can changie the fourcc of our pleasures or pains.
C 1I A P. IL, Of' V1 R T U F.
1. IRTULR iF B 10od, conlldercd as sliej cxccllcnce ol nan's nll~l u'C , mi.hat 11cnr huni tile Objcct (oi Cftccii .i11iI of p~C
JM'avi is by wlit urC tbe mcnicr (of a C.ommnIIIIty. Ilis l\c: o tliLit C\)illnIlullity ndcrikiel-s hilli a good mcii t\iheclr of it) and1, iiltltlcS~ hil t.
\'ViltulC is that.(th!.t u ot ' s,
s which fits the individual to procure thi good of mankind.
The requisites to virtue are, Difpolition, Skill, Application, and Force.
lence Virtue has been divided into four branches, corresponding to the number of these requisites; viz.
Juflice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude. Jultice is a disposition of the mind favourable to the rights and welfare of mankind.
Prudence is the skill and f1igacity wvith which men chufe their ends, and the proper means to obtain them.
Temperance is the power to abilain from the pursuit of enjoyments that rccal from the more important engagemeents of human life.
Fortitudte is the powvcr to withfland opposition, dilliculty, and danger.
2. Virtue is apprlovedl of from a principle of regard to mankind ; or from 
;i'
 an orioginal disposition of our naturc, leadin;g us to place our excellence ini qu.,lifications proper to a social and active being.
This principle Ils, by nIC of fpetu;ition, been differently nam;el, and (liilercntly classed, \iwli tlic proceedings iftLhe iuniierfitaildling-, or with tnlofc of tle lic.irt. In common language ijL is termed R'iIJb;,) or Cor/iilr.ce.
C H A P. iT. Of H} A P PI N E S S. H A PPINSS, whet lier dle noiinaated 
by tle names of PlcrJitre, or of Firtue, is to every sentient being Iis ftalc of. lealt luficring and greateftt enjoy1 ient.
Of nIccclins thle lft is to 1): chci( ll; :and of ilncolmpa:tible picaflre, tie greactef:.
Continutal fear is a greater pain tlh;i 
airV*
 Any misfortune. Courage therefore is a principal requiiite to happiness.
The plealiures of sense arc mean and tranficnt, compared to those of assection an(i of conduct.
It is happincfs to be fi-re from fear an;d diflitft, f rom envy and jcaloulv; to entlertaill Lli bcft aflec'tions, Ilumian;ity, 'ricndii(hip, and Love; that is, to he cni;ecd iln thi pur 1uit otf tle best uIjcoCt, tlle ;(co)0 Of Ilnnkini.
The exccllenc of n1;:I), 1;is g1.C.; cf 'li'tfure, al.[l his lx!lp)i cC'Il, are tlhe itlllic.
'Ile clioice of n,.'ncs, f li,)',vcvcr little a'pparent ctflct in l)hi);ihy, !eads l:oicti:iLes to t!e mlolft iniportnt t o1,i(rc(cnclc.e 
The feels tlit exprc'fld lh:iplpic>l; l .1.'' thle nalne fit' iL', i l'ji-', \\ c e led t. pre !'''1 eca :;iniiill L cn .11'. I1111CI, .111(1 11cttll.
'I hely \( hocalprclcld it b1 the n:,illmc (,of i.tc,:, rcs. il'ed ;acKivt\ , C(toira0;c, ;1dl the clishCr Cl)jo) nli'.l of t le 
TlIe 
The enjoyments of the voluptuous terminate in sensuality, because attention to mere pleasure, if not defeated by temper, precludes admiration, asfedtion, and e:ertion of mind.
Sensuality terminates in languor and sloth.
W\here pleasures of the minl and the heart are molf sensibly felt, the external nairks of enjoyment are, Activity, Beneiicence, and Courage.
PA R T II. Of the laws of Morality relative-
ly to EXTERNAL CONDITIONS and CONDUCT.
GENERAL DIVISION.' XT ERNAL condition and condue, E have a reference to individuals, or ro colledive bodies.
The condition and conduct of iindividuals are the fiihsjets of Ethics.
The condition and condudt of colledtive bodies are the fubje(ts of Politics.
C I1 A P. I. Of E T H I C S. TlyI c s consist of two parts; Cafutiffry, and Jurifprudcic. .
D SEC'r.
 SE CT. I. Of CASUISTRY.
1. C.ASUISTRY treats of the stations, :nanners, and duties of men.
2. Under the head of station are included fortune and rank.
Fortune i.mplies property; and resers to the unequal measure of things, tending to animal enjoyment and fafetv.
The ules of fortune are subsistence ..nd bcneticence. Unequal fortune mlay be eqtally well or ill employed ; and is connected with happiness or milcry!, to lar as it gives octalion to conlducl, and is the fubijedl of op*inion ,1ttltl fi.ncy.
a:iik is the station of the individual relatively to other men.
A rank is constituted by fortune, hrirtlh and chalrater.
Vortune 
Fortune derives rank from tlc opinion anid dependence of others.
Birth derives rank fron the luctre of anceltors.
C!i;radter is the grounid of eflimation, and may raise ur link men to tlhe rardk in whic they are qualificd to at.
Good conJluit anid happinels are not peculiar to any itation.
3' Manners are the external exprcffiol of a charadter that fuiblits in the mind ;and the heart.
Like other cxternal signs of difipolition and lleaninlg, mnlanners have cithlcr an arbitrary or a natural connection with the diliofition fignitieLl.
Manners of tihc lh-lt kinl dlepend mer-ely onl ctltolm ; 1andl luc'tuatc, like language, -or any other arbitrary iiititution.
Mlanners of tlie ficonll kindl ;I-e such ajIpearances .1id CondItllc ils mlen1I f CC'rtain ldilfpolitions lnatiurally aflllIc.
1) 2 Man--
 Manners founded in nature are trmetimes varied by cuftolm, insomuch that different nations or ages require a different aspec, carriage, and conduct, in expression of the fame disposition.
A condluc tending to the good of mankind is invariably right, indepefdent of opinion or cultom.
E.ven in cafe of arbitrary manners, we are bound, when the good of mankind will permit, to observe those of our country, as we 1ieak its language, or wear its dress.
4* Duties may be confidered as terminating either in the person adting, and are decent or proper; or as having influence on others, and are beneficent or innocent.
Decency of conduct is its agreeablencfs to tlhe opinion of others.
Propriety of condudt is its ifitablencfs to our nature, ilation, and for-
n1-
Innocelice is the confiflency of our colndut wxith the welfare of others.
Beneficence is its tendency to promote that welfare.
The eitablilhment of general rules relating to duties is a principal obiect of cafuiltry. But the belt directorl' in human life is the difpoiition from which thole duties proceed.
SECT. II. Of JURISPRUDENCE.
1. JURISPRUDENCE treats of tilc conduct of men in its reference to the rights of others.
it conilits of two parts. The firfl: rcl.tcs to the imaiinner in whvich the rights of men are conltituted.
The fccond, to the ,llanlcr iln \vlicli tlofe rights may be vindicated.
The apprehension of right is foun.led in thc delirL: of every iclilitive being o) prlferve anJ to defend li liilft.
 The rights of men are conffituted either in the person or in things, and are said to be personal or real.
Personal rights include safety, freedonm, and the use of talents.
Real rights include commnonty, poffeflion, property, and service.
Rights are conftitutcdt by the original appointment of nature, or the subsequent proceedings of len ; and are original or adventitious.
Safety, freedom, the use of talents, ofifion, a comonty,ncomon are original rights.
Property and service are adventitious.
.5' Property is an exclusive right to the life of tilings.
Of tlings, some are not fuljedls of I1pro(perty ; others pertain to communlities ; and others to individuals.
4. Service is a right to the aid and attendance of others.
S. Adventitious rights arise from contradt, occupancy, labour, or forfeiture.
Contracts are constituted by promise and acceptance.
Contratts are binding, because to raise and to frufirate an expcecationl is an injury.
They do not bind in flivour of a party that has failed on his part, or in cale of a condition tlhat has not taken place.
They are rendered void by the exceptions of force, frauld, or inijuflice.
Occupancy confits in the prior and continued ule of a fubljet.
1-olfeiture refers to a right acquired in reparation of a damage t'uftaineld.
6. Propelrt y y lbe ;ac(llire(d by occulpancy and labour. It nl,,v be transferred by conltralc or ftorfeitirc.
Tlec will of a dtccc;!led Inlorri( tor does not convey a right of property.
A
A right to service is acquired by contract or forlfeture.
No right to service can amount to property in the person of the servant : slavery therefore has no foundation in juitice.
7. The rights of 'en may be maintained by persuasion, lliatageml, or f.,rce.
Parties may acd either as principals or auxiliaries in maint.iining a right.
Stratagem iand force are la\ ful: jfl, \\ here parties have not Itipulared, as in civil society, to submit their diflerences.
2dly, \\ here an aid ft ipulated cannot be obtained.
3d/y, \VWler c mlilder mletliods actually have tfiled, or are not likely to succeed.
8. The condition in which parties are 
1rdl uccd 
reduced to the use of firatagem and force, is the slate of war.
The laws of wrar are, I. A wrong apprehended may be prevented by stratagem or force.
2. An aflTult may he repelled. 3. A damage sustained gives a right to reparation.
4. Reparation is in justice proportioned to the damage luftained.
CHAP. I. Of Po LI T I C S. GENERAL DIVISION. P OLITrcs treat of nations and col-
leO'ive bodies. A nation is any company or society of mlen acting l!y concert, or under a colmmon direction.
The united force and direction of numbers is termed ite State.
States 
States may be confidered with a view to their resources, or to their form.
The first is the fubjedt of public ccconomly.
The second, of government.
SE C T. I. Of PUBLIC OECONO.MY.
I. PUB LC OEcoNOnrY refers to national wealth and revenue.
Nat;,ns are rich by pofrelfing in abundance the me:ins of fubfittcnce, or what may be exchanged for such means.
Riches depend on the possession of lanls, materials, indultry, skill, and numbers of people.
2. Nations acquire land or territory by cnnlquelt, casual coalitions, or colonies.
3. They discover materials by continued observation and trials.
4. They become indultrious by a haibit g!;astcd on the lense of utility and lAlferv.
5. They beconie skilful by continued ;)pl)licatioi, , and by 1fubdividingi arts and pirofellions.
Commnerc beeing the excliihane of comimodities, is neceli-ry to tlie fuLbdii,vision ol arts.
Colmmnercc consists of barter, or of puchIlfe alnd ftilc.
l'urcliafe and file requires a Ilmode of valu;ation, and the ulcs of money.
Monlley is a commiodity of uLi ivcl'.-ll demand,li taken in exclange for ;any other cuilnlodity.
1Money 
Money in coin is this commodity divided into parts of a fixed quantity, and received in tale on the faith of a stamp applied by the public.
The most convenient commodities for the purposes of coin are the precious metals.
Bills are obligations to pay a specified value in money.
Commerce may redound to the profit of all parties concerned, by enabling each to improve his peculiar material, or to purlue his peculiar art.
That party gains most by commerce who receives the more useful commodity, and who, to carry on his trade, is employed in the more healthy and least corrupting occupations.
6. Nations become populous in proportion to the means of I'tlliitence they *oter and secure to their people.
7.
W\calth in the pofTnfiion of individuals is a national or public refourcc.
That' part of tlic wcaltl of indi;iduals which is exadctd flor national p1ruposes is the public revenue.
Revenue imav be proportioned to the numbers, wcalth, alnd frugality, aof a people. It is levied by taxe;.
.xc's arc ofl our kil .I. Cipf)itatlio: l(,'']i :t, Ct/iO;]',;, ':!m Ex.cif.
C(,pitation is a tax imlporofc o:n evcry illdiidLIul, and falls equally on the poo' ;]iidl the rich.
Afl'flincnts are l)roportionedll to the {Lu)l:)oc'd (tlock in 1,lind, lionly, or g'oods.
Cultomls are a tax oln ,,)ils ia E'\CAlC is a tax o)n Cofi. 11|t llin. (,lt)ilnis mn ' 1'j ,} l.'v' .'.. , i \ * reCt or to lilulil . ,i"h..'i'' :'.

 Lxcife lias a tendency to limit confumption, and affects either the quantity or the quality of goods consumed.
8. National force is proportioned to the rcfources, discipline, and charadter of a peoplc.
SEC T. II. Of GOVERNMENT.
I. GOVERNMENT is founded on subordination.
Suhrdi.lini;ltion is the relation in h\\hich nicn actillg is a bdtly are placed to each ,'tiicr 
It is eitiler caloiil or iniutcllional.
2.
 Casual subordination is the mere dilf tribution of rank, founded on Fortune, Character, and Birth.
3. Institutional subordination is the acuual diftiibution of power.
Pover is any part of the force of thei state, committed to tle directioln o; certain person;, frl the p2rformnII;IIcc ol some public function.
Persons iiitrufied with public fillctions arc termed Ii Tani//rateis.
\Vhocvcr is inlllrtlcd to p'ertoll, or to delegate every Iflilltiil of tlhc il;atc, is thle loverci?'l , or1 u li )ric I:lagi 'rate.
1lulil c ltllc iilIIs ;irc t t, tl e'c J ilils. Ii, ///i/ti/l , y , ii/jilici io, ;111.d .\C (c:LCcill:ition is the c'lprlcnll ll (' of til' v ill ols tle (l.t,, or tlhe flitlure tliul'clinll ol its mI'lC ebers.

Laws are either adopted fiom cuflom, or enaded by statute.
Thicy refer either to the mode of libo dtination, to civil rightos, or to the fuipprlliion of crimes; ald are said to be "o/iticil, Ci'iti, or C-ri;a.u:d.
Political 1 \s define the rel.tive righits of Inagiitrate and itubject.
Civil laws define the relative rilhts of private palrties.
Criminal laws direct the proceedings of the magiltrate in fupprefling crimes.
5. Jurifldilion is the interpretation of tlhe will of tile itate, and its application to particular cafes.
6. Execution is the actial application of the public force, to defend the Ift;te, or give e!eccL to its laws.
Execution, relatively to the first object, Iliould be dircdted by the I;:x of 
lnations ;
nations; relatively to the second, by the municipal law of the country.
7. The result of wife legilation, jurifdliction, and execution, is Public Liberty.
Liberty is the security of rights. A contcituLion is lai.i to be free, whlI-n its f)ornls are callculL.ted to prcfcrv the rights ojf the fibjecI.
Subjets ;re' lIid to be r-ec, when tlhey actually enjoy thole Irg:its.
8. The form of government is confliturted ly the nmalner in wL ,.-il tin foverI'-i;iity is excicfibd, by ;'inc, ! ! FIleCt ni.i l)crs, or' b.; tic \'c l1;)ily.
I'll' title ol a Ju\\ . t1 to) ', !c is Itounlcd cithl ill c . t, O)r iln ..ltt rigil \vhiLch li al p-ti ..vc ( i c) ,,ood to the utlullOt exiteni t: LIteir powe\r.
9. Governments are either Simple or Mixed.
Simple governments are those under which sovereignty is exercised by or in the name of some single power.
They are of three kinds; Republic, Monarchy, and Dfplotfiin.
In republics the sovereign power is exercised by numbers.
IJ/, By the collective body, as in (emocrl -y. Icre men ac't on m;xims of equality, and the flute is fluiported by the diiintcrcitl.d /.cal of its men bers.
2/6'y, 13V a pai-ticular order, or f1 tlccf numlber, as in arif(ocralcy: Men are (diiinguiillcid into t\wo cl;Ale's, ;:nd tile fiitce is Itlpporrted by tile tte;l.linclf andt ilni'l'r;lion ol)t the Luplpiur order.
!<,nricl y is tlhat in w lili cha linl.e pcrl l;,n c':clcitcs tlie l ,vcrc-i:lny :(.acc!iiig to lixt laws and inlfitulion:;.
hiere is a continuted g1i adtiom (l !a lks; and the itate is fuiplortcd ly 
t!,c 
 the regard of individuals for the maxims and honours of their ltation.
Defpotifin is that in which a single person governs by force, wvithout any law or limitation. SubjeCts are held to be equal, except so far as the sovereign is pleased to diftinguilh them by his temporary will. The slate is supported by the fear of punifllment.
10. Mixed governments are those in which the sovereignty is exercised in parts by a plurality of collateral powers, as King, Nobles, and People.
Men are fcparated into different orders andl clales ; and the Itate is (u)pported by the balance of oppolite interefts and principles.
F I N I S.
