OF PERFECTION AND HAPPINESS 

When different Terms have Place in Language it may be Supposed that they stand for different or at least the same thing under different Aspects.
Happiness refers to Ease or enjoyment. Perfection to Excellence or matter of Estimation & merit.
So far they may coincide in the same thing under different Aspects, and as they are  severally Supreme Objects of desire it is consonant to the order of Nature to suppo them perfectly consistent if not one & the same thing.
Happiness is appropriate to Sensitive if not mly to intelligent B.
Perfection is a kind of Figure applyed even to inanimate or merely material Forms when they bear the marks of Intelligen design or are Subservient to any valuable purpose of Intelligent .
Thus a Building is perfect when it exhibits an Admira Plan and Sufficient Workmanship, but in both it is the excellence of mind that appears in the construction of the work.
Mind or Intelligenc is perfect or imperfect in itself: but mere Corporeal Forms as they cary indications of perfect or imperfect Intelligence.
Happiness in Created Being is the State of highest Enjoyment and least Suffering applied to Being in its whole exte. 
Present Enjoyment that bring an over-ballance of Suffering here after are not happiness & Sufferings that bring an over-ballance of Enjoyment are not misery.
 These observations have no reference to that Happiness which is Eternal and umixed. But in the mixed State of Created progressive Being are highly important.
To the Happy Man The past is matter of agreeable recollection not of regret.
The present is not matter of Suffering but of Satisfaction & Joy.
The future is not matter of Fear but Confidence & Hope.
When past umerit Suffering as well as Innocence and Beneficence are ma of agreeable recollection. Insomuch that is happy to have been excellent  deserving or Perfect in the past.
In the present not Animal pleasu without measure or distinction:
but Health & its preservatives or functions are at once the preferable Enjoyments as well as perfection of animal Life.
Exemption from Malice or Fear in every Form or degree & the Contrary Sentiment of Benevolence & Fortitude. The occupations of a Well employed mind constitute the state of best enjoyment, least Suffering and greate Perfection or Merit.
Conscious Safety is the great constituent of  Happiness respecting the Future; But he who owes all to his own Resolution and determined mind is therefore Safe.
These are at once the Perfections of Human Nature its highest and most Secure enjoyments.
Thus the votaries of Pleasure Virtue Elevation and Happiness although They Appear to divert and diverge for a time actually converge and meet in a point at Least. 
And the Creator in laying a Scheme of Progression for man towards the Perfection of his Intellectual  Being has at the Same time projected his Happiness As the end of Creation.
The Animal System is beautyfully formd in respect to man in particular.
Besides the organization of his Body, his Instincts and Sensations bear the marks of Divine Wisdom and obvious even to himself. They tend to his preservation & wellbeing but not so unerring as the Instincts and Sensations of the Other Animals do in respect to them. Man having more Intelligence  is left to his own Government. His Happiness or Misery is in part deriv’d from this Source: but not in the degree in which he enjoys or suffers as an animal: but in the degree in which he acquits himself properly of his charge as an Intellectual and Moral Agent.
The Wise & courageous does  sink under animal sufferings nor forget himself in the midst of Animal enjoyments. His happiness requires that he should be superior to either and his Perfection is evidently placed upon a higher Scale: The Contemplation The Affections The occupations of a Powerful and  Intelligent Being. The animal instints and pleasures direct or allure him to the Animal Funons of Life & Safety.
Pursued beyond this purpose they tend to disgust or disease.
Pain has a Similar correspondence with respect to the ills to be removed from animal Life.
Happiness or Misery depends on the good or ill us of a life that is preserved in the result of its Instincts or Senses; Mind is enlargd and gratifyed in its discoveries & Contemplations. The Order of Nature as it is displayed in the Ends and means  of Eternal Wisdom is Supremely gratifying as matter of contemplation merely as well as a pledge of Benefice in that Power on whom we depend for Existence. 
Benevolent and Candid affections constitute the Specific perfection & Felicity of designing and Intelligent Natures in all respects the reverse of Malice, Envy or Jealousy.
The human mind being in its progress is yet incapable of uninterrupted Enjoyment: but ingenuous & beneficent occupation is the most continued Satisfaction  of which it is Susceptible.
From these considerations also we repeat our conclusion.
That the perfection and happi of mankind  same. 0
A mere Animal may have all the happiness of which he is susceptible in a continued exemption from pain & in a succession of pleasing sensations:
But an Intelligent Being to be happy must be conscious of his State how constituted & how secured. With him it is a principal consideration what he himself is not merely what he feels. If he  knows himself to be mean or unworthy the Sense of pleasure sickens & gives way to self abasement Shame or Remorse.
A series of pleasures that would Suspend all the faculties of the mind would change Man into a Brute & terminate in misery.
Such a State with a seeming indifference to Right or Wrong Honour or dishonour appears to be projected in the term of Indiscriminate Pleasure for the Chief good or Ultima Object or pursuit. When however in descending to particulars the term is limited to pleasure Safe & Worthy of the Mind The Votaries of Pleasure seem to differ from  of Virtue only in Words. And if Words were of no Consequence, Such Sectaries would not differ at all. But Words are often Ambiguous untill they are explained, and few take the trouble to explain them & give way to their first impressions.
In the Judgement of Hercules, Virtu that is to say Worthy Attainment of Wisdom & Goodness Temperance Constancy & Fortitude Are figured on the Summit of a  Hill where real pleasure is also placed:
but there are such pleasures at the bottom that the Person who deliberates below is in danger of remaining where he is instead of attempting the Ascent to come at what he may with less trouble.
Της δ’αρετης ιδροσα a man must Sweat to have the pleasure of Virtue.
But sloth assumes the Aspect of Relaxation & Ease.
Observe then the mixed Scene of human . The more frequent occasions which are given to Active exertion than to passive Enjoyment the Sufferings  and inconveniences which are to be avoided and confess that even in those Instances and even more than in any Other the Goodness of God towards Man is conspicuous.
In Many Cases indeed present Enjoyment or Ease is Sacrificed to future Attainment And the Pupil of Nature like the School boy on his form labours that he may lay the foundation of manly attainments & become qualified for his part in human Life.
If Labour & pain are not to be endured for the  Sake of mental or intellectual accomplishments why does the tender Parent instead of sending his Child where he may be indulged where he may be pampered with Sweets sends him into Confinement & Restraint where under the lash of a Demagogue he is forced to forgo his Pleasures or look for them only after having finished his task. 
Few Parents are so Supine as to shrink from policy in the treatment of their Children yet the Analogous Policy of Nature is admitted as an objection  to the Doctrine of Divine Goodness or Wisdom and The happiness of the Creature we are sometimes told is not the End of Creation.
But it is manifest even to human Reason that there can be no end but the diffusion of Good to the Energies of Eternal Power unchangeably Perfect & Happy. 
And the present mixed Scheme of human Life as it Suits our best conception of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author: So it bears the Aspect of a Scheme but now  begun & likely to continue indefinitely.
The progress from Infancy to Age is sum of where Men in general are destined to make in this Life if a Few exhibit much greater Attainments than Manhood alone implys their Example but shows that the human Capacity is far from being exhausted in the present Scene.
This Nature in its lowest Specimens may yet extricate itself And in the highest may have made out a step towards somewhat higher. And the sudden break in  a progress so fairly begun & yet so far short of the point to which it is directed tho’ in any scheme defect in the presumption that the break is merely Apparent & but a transition from one period to another or more in which the Scheme of progression will be continued to its consummation or end.
In thus sounding the depths of Futurity we no doubt may soon get beyond the length of our Life  but in a Being  whom The maker has Manifested himself in the order of his works who can look so far beyond his own position as to measure the very Globe on the Surface of which he is but an attom number the Planets of which this Globe is but one delineate their Courses round a fountain of Light & of heat so essential to the Living worlds arround him himself so abundant and So great as far to exceed in dimension the sum of all the Planets that  perform their movements in orbits prescribed and as held by a line at distances which they vary but within limits which they can neither contract to exceed: a Being to whose imagination every fixed Star is a Sun And The Galaxy but the faint gleam of numberless Suns planted in that direction through infinite Space & made Sensible by a tinge of united light tho not individually perceived. In such a Being The  future may be thrown open to conjecture as the present is to his Investigation and measurement.
To the Herd which looks not beyond the Field on  they pasture the duration of Being may not exceed that of the frame which their organs Serve to compose but to a Being whose field of Contemplation is the universe itself The Tenure of Existence may extend like that of the Universe itself. While he rests every hope or conjecture On The Assumed Justice Wisdom & Goodness of Almighty God he cannot Err or mistake the present Course  it becomes old.
The very darkness of Futurity is to him an intimation that his bussiness is now before him and can receive no direction from a futurity of which his information is yet so imperfect.
To be happy now he must be Wise Intrepid Benevolent & Temperate.
And till his Essence change from Intelligence to some other form these are the Constituents of Happiness of Excellence Perfection and Beauty. The Period of Being is not his own.  To be in the next impending moment is as much at the Will of his Maker As the first Act of Respiration that took possession of the life he was to lead on his dismission from the Parents Womb.
If when this Respiration ceases he be worthy of Admission to an higher Scene if his Nature be Susceptible of farther Existence he may hope & rejoice in the prospect: but if it cannot be who can repine that the order of nature is observed in his case as well as in that of every other Being.
 If a voluntary Sacrifice were required to the order of such a System who that perceives that order could be reluctant in performing it.
Or what can be a more real occasion of Joy on any Event than to know that it comes from the destination of Supreme Wisdom Goodness & Almighty Power.
Under Such Government it is joyous to live & it is a Triumph to Die.

II. WHAT MAY BE AFFIRMED OR APPREHENDED OF THE SUPREME CREATIVE BEING 

1st That he Acts from Design & means to obtain an End.
This the Organic Form of Nascent Being to begin continue and preserve itself is irresistible Evidence.
2d As this order of things bears the Stamp of Intelligence: are there not other Characters on the Face of Created things that lead to the apprehension of Corresponding attributes in the Creative Powers?
Does the Indefinite Variety of Created Being argue a diversity & Multiplicity of Creative Powers? 
Or is this apprehension Sufficiently Checked & the Identity of the Creative Power throughout the Whole sufficiently evinced by the Identity of multiplied Forms and by the Analogy presented in things the most different.
If so is Diversification to be apprehended as a primary Object or End of Creative Design.
In our minds no end appears worthy of Creative design but Happiness and this the most Perfect of which Created Nature is susceptible and this would exclude Variety as a primary object. For Perfect Happiness though it may be realized in multiplied Instances must be a repetition of the same Identical Form and this Form  Consciousness  or Intellectual Power in the high measure to which Creation is competent.
To perfect Happiness mere Enjoyment even Conscious Enjoyment does not appear sufficient. Consciousness of Power also to be and to remain in possession appears Necessary to Consummate Happiness.
The Supreme Being is of himself & by his own Power Supremely Perfect & happy.
Created Perfection & happiness requires as much of this security as can be infused into Created Being.
He must apprehend a Cause of that Existence of which he is conscious and therefore depending for Continuance upon that Cause: but while he exists he may be Conscious of having distinguished And preferred the Good of which he is possessed & therefor may be conscious of it as his own and as secure as the will to chuse the Good in preference to Evil. A Security which if the Choice is exempt from Error never can be shaken.
Man cannot be the Conscious Author of his own Existence. But conscious of this Existence he may be the Conscious Author of what he acquires by Experience Observation and the diligent use of his Faculties.
 He may be conscious of having entertained and of having discoverd & corrected an Error of having found how delightful it is to know and comprehend the Works of God to live with his fellow Creatures in habits or affections of Good Will & Candour he may be conscious of a Will fixed in the Choice of Happiness because he has discern’d it.
May nothing then open our Eyes and give sight of the final Cause in that Progressive Form of Being assigned to man and from continued by continued by Analogy every other living form  this terrestrial Scene.
And is not Progression the most perfect Form of  Created Being is susceptible. Tho to us who measure all by Time seemingly late & tardy in Attainments yet to the Eternal Now simultaneous & at once Compleat. In every passing  deriving Excellence & Beauty from its Destiny if not from what it is.
So much is implyed in the Character of free Agency in the Blame which accompanys miscariage And in the merit which is acknowledged  in worthy attainments and just performances and in the relaxation of mere Instinct by which Animals are precisely Conducted. There is no climate to which he is exclusively attached No Species of Food whether Animal or Vegetable Substance of which he is not free to Avail himself. He is a trader in all commodities And an Artist in the Use of all Materials. Nature has presented the occasions And opportunitys of Action of Inquiry research & discovery but left him to find his Way & take his Measures.
The Scene is in every department wonderfully fitted to him. The steddy form of Nature and its invariable Laws assuring the observer of what he may expect & rely on in every Instance.
The means by which Events may be obtained The Indefinite Variety of Still Material of Organised Nature Furnishing Subject of Contemplation Comparison Analogy & Variety so well Suited as provision for the Nascent search  Imagination and Arrangement constituting method & Comprehension in  this first Period extending Knowledge.
The Indefinite Variety of Created Being seems to exhibit Variety at first Sight as a Primary Object of Creative Power. But as Variety merely as such does not constitute Happiness it cannot be supposed in itself an ultimate or primary end of Creation. But as Being without Intelligence or Life is merely subservient to the Living & Intelligent we may look for the final Cause of Variety among the rest in this Subserviency to the use of mind.
Aristotle had great merit in tracing the mode of human knowledge to the Form & Distribution of things in which he is concerned as designing and Active Power. In this Capacity his Bussiness with Individuals: But his Knowledge of Order Classes Genera and Species prepares him to encounter the Already known to him all to any peculiarity or accidents which it behoves him to Observe.
And as I apprehend that material or mere passive Being have no other Value than as they are Subservient to the Being and Progress of Mind I think  this variety displayed to man is not itself an Ultimate End of Creative Power or Invention but a mere School of Intelligen and mental Exercise to Man to whose beginning  Progress this Scene is Subservient: and in this point of View the Final Cause of the Systematick Variety of Things is discernible by us in the same manner as the Final Cause is discovered in the Construction of the Eye & Ear or the distribution of the Joints & Muscles. 
If the System of Terrestrial Nature be thus Accommodated to favour & Urge the progressive Nature of Man What shall we say of that which is to him the most important of Arrangements relating to him That he has not every where to tread among his Inferior of in a still greater Department of his affairs to cooperate or Contend with his Equals. This indeed is the Scene in which if not his greatest honours are won his progressive Nature receives the greatest impulse.
How Earth came to be  peopled The People cannot tell: For the first man knew less than the last who has Parish Record for his Birth.
The Earth is now a System what it was before its Parts assembled who can tell. Man begins an Infant on his Parents Breast and here for him the System terminates. He has no wish to widen it But the Family press arround he is himself but one but much concerned for all. The Neighbours too The Town the State itself become concerns of his. Tis well if he overlooks farther. The stranger may move his Wonder or his Pity. But thus Humanity begins to bud beyond the seedling leaf. This living scene may not be too much for him to grasp in its Prospective order. Perhaps he may hereafter be entrustd with the Conduct of a Planet. When master of that Jack a Solar System might not be too much. The Zodiac in the sequel with all the Spheres of Night are but his Path to that Great scene the Universe And this but leads him to  behold the Source of Being in respect of which all he had seen is but slight Emanation or a taper lost to Vision in the Blaze of Day.
It is common to man with the other Orders of Being in this Scene of his Nascent Existence to make Part in a System to the End or object of which his Powers & Energies contribute but it is peculiar to him in this Terrestrial System to be conscious of his Part to Embrace it with a Willing mind & even to carry his Views beyond it to a Source of Order & Beneficence to the Extent of which he can apprehend no bounds or limits. So much is implyd in that Distinction peculiar to man That while Other Animals perceive their Lot in Being he alone attempts to trace from whence it comes.
In this direction his efforts may be Feeble & of small success. But Ignorance perceived is the beginning of Knowledge and the Collision of Errors may point to the Truth and the progress of Knowledge extending far beyond the limits of a Present or any Actual scene may correspond to the Infinity of its objects.
May we not thus  consider the first Germ of Region in the human Soul as a pledge of its duration beyond the Limits assigned to mere Animal Life?

III. OF HISTORY AND ITS APPROPRIATE STILE 

Literature serves to record Speech and address it to the World at Large.
Its Uses are Information or Exercise of Mind & Enjoyment. And from these uses are derived the Disstinctions of Literary Compositions & their value.
On the Principle of Information are Formed History Descriptive or Narrative Theory or Science and Method or Practice of Art.
On the Principle of mental Exercise & Enjoyment are formed all works of Poetry or Invention whether in verse or Prose.
There are works which professedly operate on both these Principles,
Such as Moral Dissertation in Single Discourse or Dialogue & Rhetorical Harangue for Perswasion or Pathos. But this mixed or compound  Form of Speech will be best understood after the other two are separately considered.
Of Informative Discourse History is the Primary Form. Descriptive History is the Statement of Coexistent Particulars as in the Description of Minerals Plants & Animals.
Narrative History is the statement in detail of successive Events as in the origin Progress & termination of Past Transactions.
Descriptive History extends The Field of Knowledge which personal Observation opened.
Narrative History extends indefinitely the field of Experience and Teaches to Anticipate or conjecture the Event of Transactions from their origin and progress.
For this purpose the past should be recorded with the most Rigorous regard to Reality. So that nothing of Moment be overlooked nothing false be inserted or nothing Idle or impertinent tho true be retained.
We may thus conceive the object of Narrative History  to be the detail of what has actually past: so that the Reader may be as nearly as possible in the Condition of an Intelligent Eye & Ear witness of what has passed & be made to know all that he could have perceived understood seen or heard if he had been present & let into every passage as it opened in the course of the transaction.
This however is to be understood of circumstances material to the origin progress & Event of the Transaction. In this chiefly the parts or Capacity of the Historian is tried. If he fail in it be his talent for composition other wise what they may his work is impertinent and worse than useless because it missleads the mind of his Reader.
In all Literary compositions there is admitted an Effort of the author to exhibit  & distinguish himself.
Tis needless here to observe how this may be done in works of Imagination or mental Exercise and Enjoyment without affecting the Essential Qualities of the Work.
In works of information the case is different. The Author is distinguished in some measure by concealing himself. The Essence of his Work is the display of its Subject. This is to stand forward on every occasion and in this to the discerning Reader the Person and merit of the Author is most Apparent or Conspicuous.
This merit however is not the most obvious to the Reader in general & therefore not the most Aimed at by Authors in general. They endeavour to exhibit themselves in the brilliancy of their Language their Sentiments Reflection Penetration and Judgement. So that a Reader who commits himself to the guidance  of his Author comes off with a deep impression of his Abilities and his Party his opinions or Judgements but scarcely any memory of the Subject farther than as it served to furnish matter to the Author’s Genius and ability.
This is the most dangerous abuse of which pretended compositions are susceptible because it may impose upon Readers capable of real Information when presented to them: but intercepts it by presenting somewhat plausible but Illusive in its stead.
This Effect is obtained in part by the brilliancy of figurative expression.
Metaphor & Rhetorical Turns and accomplished Periods in which the Subject is rather alluded to as matter of the authors Estimation than as matter of Information to the Reader. The Information  indeed if any is thought to be of mean & Vulgar Consideration Compared to the Blaze of Genius Dissplayed by the Author. He foresees the Event from the very beginning.
He distinguishes the Wisdom of every Action that is to succeed. The folly of every attempt or Enterprise that is to miscarry. The Actors are in his hands he extols or decries at Pleasure. He states himself as Master of the show And with the Trumpet in his hands consigns to Fame or Infamy Persons to whom he is himself no way comparable in Ranks of Estimation or Power. 
History we say is instructive but we do not Specify the respect in which it is properly & peculiarly so.
It is a narrative of past transactions, and by informing us of what has been in particular instances tends to reveal the actual course of things in which  we are engaged and which we may lay our account with in the future as in the past, and so to become prudent in guarding against one event and in taking measures to obtain another.
Is this all? Does it not also instruck us in the Disstinction of Virtue & Vice and lead us by examples to Embrace the one and avoid the other.
If it be allowed that example instrucks, such instruction is not peculiar to History. It may be obtained in Poetry, Novel and Fable of any sort in which the Good is contrasted with the bad & lights chosen the most effectual to conduct the Reader’s choice and if the approbation or reprobation of the Author is of moment this may be obtaind no less & more properly in moral Dissertion and Estimate of manners.
Altho this is not the specific Object of History yet as it is confessed to be of great moment, it is not to be neglected even in History so far as it may be  obtained without marring its Effect in what is peculiar to it & what is not to be obtained in any other Branch of Literature.
Here no doubt some caution is required. It is known that the Zeal of Party may warp the Narrative of History and so may Zeal of any kind: but that Zeal which is peculiar to History. The Zeal of correct & genuine statement of Fact That truth and Reality in comparison to which nothing else is of any Value in History.
To Instruck by Example is a plausible object: but to corrupt by Example is no less to be dreaded than the other is to be hoped. If the example of Cato is powerful with some that of Caesar is no less so with others. And as the Examples of fashiona Vice are as frequent as those of Virtue Example we may doubt is of Ambiguous Tendency whether in relation of the past or exhibition of present manners. On this Account even  History has been reprobated by some Moralists who think that Knowledge should be sacrificed to Virtue and men kept in Ignorance rather than expose them to the Seduction of Vice.
Here is not the place to discuss this Question: But the Object of History it must be confessed is a fair statement of the passed And this it is probable on the whole will be favourable to the choice of what is best in human Life call it what you will Wisdom and Virtue or folly & vice. 
A Man is not qualified to make a choice unless he knows both sides of a Question And the object of nature does not seem to terminate in that sort of Virtue which consists in the Ignorance of anything else.
When the Historian states a Fact it is not always necessary he should either applaud or condemn, if he state it fully & fairly: it is but an ill compliment to his reader to suppose he must be told also what to think of it. 
In this however Historians seem to place their merit and display their Eloquence which is indeed more conspicuous in Satire or Panegyric than in mere Statement of Fact And language or Stile not so much in the use of simple and appropriate terms. As in metaphor that Amplify or extenuate the matter according as the Author is himself Affected & would Affect his Readers.
This however is certainly an Abuse in History. Metaphors amuse the Imagination by presenting analogies novel & Surprising or any way pleasing in their Effect. But in matter of Information  are either of no Effect or are apt to mislead. To be of any Effect the Reader ought to know both the Subject from which the metaphor is Borrowed & that to which it is transferred. When a ship  is said to plow the Waters the metaphor will mislead a mere Ploughman. Or if a Plough is said to sail over its Field it will no less mislead a mere Seaman. To a person who is acquainted with both the Analogy so far as it takes place is amusing but contains no information And is therefore very improper where information is the Object. 
In this we may be supposed to exclude from History not only an officious display of Sentiment, but even all the ornaments of Speech which consist not merely in propriety of Expression and Perspicuity but in figure Metaphor & Picturesque Language. What do we leave him then by which to please his Reader or merit the distinction of literary Excellence. Must Livy strip himself of his Eloquence to write like a mere Journalist or Recorder of events.
 To Estimate the merits of History We must distinguish the genuine State & Course of things from all the Colouring and decorations they may receive from the Partial Favour or dislike of the Eloquent.
The first is of the greatest consequence as constituting Information of what Men are have been and may be again. The Colours of Rhetoric laid upon a Subject tend to inform us of an Authors talents compared to the Other or actual Course of human Affairs surely of very little importance. An Authors opinion may Mislead & is of little Authority compared to Nature & reality itself the object of History.
If an Author is ambitious of Praise he must be contented with that which pertains to the work in which he is engaged.
He must not expect the Praise of Eloquence in a work which Eloquence would Marr & disfigure or rather if it be Eloquence to treat of every Subject in the best manner he must  be powerful in that Eloquence which appropriate to History. Proper terms that neither amplify nor extenuate stating every Circumstance of moment to the origin Progress or result of the transaction he would relate suffering nothing idle to intrude or nothing of moment to be omitted so that the Intelligent Reader may have no question or explanation to Ask. If an Author could appreciate the Value of this Praise, he would Prefer it to any other or at least while  professed History would he covet the Praise of Figurative amplification or diminution.
Livy is justly placed in the first Class of writers or Artist bent on the decoration not the mere exact Delineation of their Subject but he ought to have entitled his word the Panegyric not the History of the Romans.
The Romans from the first were accomplished Statesmen. Their opponents Barbarians they were always in the Right their Ennemies in the wrong Submission to them  was Reason & Justice opposition mere folly or Caprice. When an Ennemy decline fighting it was Cowardice when the Romans protracted the War It was Ability and Good Conduct. Every Roman spoke like an orator & has a speech composed for him in the most Accomplished Form. 
Even in this perhaps it may  thought there is Merit, That merit which Consts in Partiality to our Country. This however is best shown in Actions & scarcely can be admitted in professed narration of Truth for the Information of mankind. It is not the ground on which Livy deserves to be Commended.
His Eloquence is invaluable to those who think this the highest Talent which man can Arrive. In him it is so abundant as to Cloy and Fatigue his Readers and tho this may be called a redundance of Ornament it is certainly an Error or defect in writing. That he was a man of Probity and a  free Spirit appears in the genrre of his narrations. Tho a relative in the family of Livia there are expressions or fragments of his lost History remaining in which he breaths a Republican and Extols the Majesty of Cato in Particular above all his contemporarys:
The loss of so great a Part of his voluminous & almost miraculous Performance is irreparable.
With all gloss many Particulars of the greatest importance now unknown must have been learned from him. But whoever aims at the Praise of History must not Copy from him or think that the Eloquence of History Poetry or Novel or Pleading Pathetic or Perswasion are the same. The Historians may give Delight & excite Emotion of Every kind: but it is the Effect of his subject not of his manner unless Simplicity & propriety of terms be accounted Rhetoric which indeed in all works of mere  Information it certainly is and of the best kind and of the most powerful in Poetry as well as pleading and Attempts to persuade.
It is certainly requisite in History to Study the most proper interesting Satisfactory forms of Narration. The Reader should no doubt be prepared for every Successive step he is to make not by Anticipating Events but by such previous lights as enable him to comprehend what passes. Though in order to fix his attention it is the Charm of Narration to keep him in suspense to the last. There are Narratives in which the Authors Vanity and ostentation of Foresight knowing before he begins to write what was the Event leads him to talk of measures with an Affectation of penetration little short of an Absolute prediction of what is to happen. And the Reader is left to admire & enjoy the author’s depth & forsight in lieu of that Suspense and Gratification which a Well Conducted Narrative affords! But as I believe both Author & Reader are dissappointed.
An Ingenuous Author will be desirous to make the best  moral Impressions on his Reader no less than Supply the requisite communication of Political And Military Transaction.
This however is to be done not so much by expression of the Authors own Sentiment as by the Features or indications of Characters Intentions and Effects as bring the Rights & wrongs the Merits Benefits or Sufferings of Person into view & strike the reader with Sentiments of Esteem Admiration & Love or contempt & Hatred towards the guilty Actor or Congratulation & joy towards the meritorious & Innocent or Commiseration & Sympathy with the Innocent. In this Tacitus is a Powerful Master of his Readers Heart. In his Stile in general he resembles more the Painters who work by repeatd masterly stroke that touch the leading points of Character than by full and finished expression of every Part. Voltair has somewhere called him a Bel Esprit Malin Because he has touched the points that sting his Reader with Hatred or Contempt of Certain Emperors & the Tools of their Odious Government. But to have Spared Tiberius or Nero could not be quoted as an Evidence of Love to Mankind.
An Able Historian may no doubt Benefit his Reader by giving his opinion in terms direct & in his own Person but this is not the Specific of Historical Instruction And the Author is under the strictest obligation not to Substitute opinion of any particular for the proper Statement of such Particular nor to suffer his opinion to byass him in the Detail of his Narration.
These Faults turn Pretended History into mere Dissertation & partial Argumentation which may have its own merit but not the merit of History.
Perfection in History is no more to be expected in human Life than Perfection in any department of human Art.
If it be the Perfection of History to place its Readers in the  Condition of Persons present to every Transaction so far as to every Circumstance of moment respecting the origin progress & result of such transaction, it is evident that no one is qualified to execute such a wrong without he himself was present Observant Intelligent Impartiall & perspicuous in communicating what he knows. Statesmen & Warriours actually Employed are the most likely to be so accomplished but even they labour under certain dissadvantages.
They are of a Side & may not be impartial. There  circumstances which time alone brings into & of which they may not have been apprised tho’ material to the origin & progress of Affairs.
As the Person who is to record a transaction should know & distinguish what  important in each. It follows that Statesmen are the fittest to record matters of State and warriours to record operations of War. Yet even they are apt to fail in the Informations required to the general Reader. Professional Men are apt to pass in Silence all matters of Course as too well known to require being mentioned which nevertheless are required to the  Information of General Readers.
Caesar no where mentions the depth of his line in Battle and but once this Circumstance in the dissposition of his Ennemys saying that Pompeys line at Pharsalia was ten Deep in the Files though his own to equalize his Front must have been much less & must have varried on different occasions as the extent of Front to be presented required. This however now is a desidertum in the Military department of Roman History.
For these Reasons perhaps not the Person present & Concerned nor the Professional Man: but a Person observant of human affairs Intelligent & impartial collecting from the memoirs of those who were present from the Skillful & intelligent in their respective Professions what is peculiarly important in each account of the informations required to the general Reader & collecting his own informations at Periods when all important Materials have come into public View & before any of them have been lost are upon the whole best  qualified to compose informations of past to future Ages.
In all works of Information whether History of Science The Language required is simple naming the Subject and its attributes in proper terms without any aim on the part of the Author to display his Talent for any other Embellishment of Stile or Composition. What should we think of a Waiter who being called on for a Glass of Water in stead of bringing it should set himself to Gesticulate & cut capers to exhibit the Graces of his Person or who should bring it with the Air of a Dancer handing the Lady in a Minuet. The most accomplished Master of all the Graces so performing the duty of a waiter tho he might be admird on any other occasion would be laughed at on this. The accomplished master indeed is so far Master of his Art as to be as tenacious of simplicity on some occasions as he might be of Art & Concerted Grace on any other.
 Among the Ornaments of Stile Metaphor is the most frequent.
In this Figure of Speech terms appropriate to one Subject are transferred to another And this practice is so much in Favour with some Speakers or Writers that they treat of every subject not in its appropriate terms but in terms appropriate to some other Subject. Mind is treated of in Terms appropriate to Matter & Mechanism and in return matter & Mechanism receive the Appellations of mental affection & Will. The mind receives & retains impressions of weight & Forces Bodies have their affections of Gravitation Cohaesion or aversion & repulsion. This in the progress of Language was often an aid to expression and what was a convenience at first is still retained as an ornament.
When the orator would Amplify a Subject he borrows the Language of one that is  greater. When he would lessen or depreciate a Subject he takes Reverse. Pericles Thundered in the Assemblies at Athens. Thersites Schreched in the Assembly of Grecian Chiefs. Even when neither of these Ends is in View we are delighted with the Analogy of subjects that mutually throw light upon one Another and Metaphors that point out such Analogies are pleasant. They become so frequent in use sometimes as not to be distinguished from proper terms. They are as well understood in their Application to the Subject to which they are borrow as on those from which they are derivd. Impression on Mind is as well understood as impression on Wax altho the meanings are as different as mind & Body. They tend to confound our Notions of things & make the Theorist think he can explain the  Phaenomena of one Subject by the Substitution of another.
Types & Pictures are made to explain knowledge or the Apprehension of Things. This is another abuse of Analogy & Metaphor to be avoided in Speculation on Theory of any sort otherwise than as mere illustration or play of Fancy.
Metaphors have their place in Rhetorical Compositions on account of their Rhetorical Effects of Elevating or depressing its Subjects.
But in History would on this Account be reckoned a deceit altogether contrary to the very Essence of History itself. History is truth & its Effect is neither Elevation nor depression.
Metaphor as expression or means of Information in History is of very doubtful Effect. If both the subject from which the Metaphor is taken & that to which it is applied are known to the Reader the Metaphor may illustrate and please: But if either is unknown it can only mislead by Suggesting Identity in place of unknown Analogy. When a Countryman who never saw a Ship on her Way is told that she Ploughs the Waters. He is apt to conceive a Team or draught a Furrow broke up Land raised on Edge or turned over. What else is to plough. The information to a Seaman who never saw a Plough would be equally imperfect or deceitful to any Person who never saw either Plough or Ship it would be altogether meaningless or Blank.
In every Point of View the metaphoric Stile is altogether improper in History.
According to Swift’s definition of a Good Stile Proper words in proper Places History may excell in Stile no less than any other denomination of Writing or Composition.
Its perfection is truth compleat & well Selected Detail. The preceeding a preparation for the understanding of What is to follow but the future not to be anticipated without Necessity. The  matter to be so stated as to have its proper Effect on the Readers mind without any express prescription from the Author of what he should think or feel. It is not necessary that the Author should be forever out of sight or never address the Reader in his own Person But the less Frequent occasions of this sort occur the more near to the Perfection of History.
Authors are Sometimes to be known by their Stile through all the variety of Subjects of which they treat and on all occasions. This however is rather the symptom of a Rotine or habit acquired than of Genuine Power to acquit themselves as the occasion requires.
Genuine Intelligence & Sensibility is equally prepared for every Subject of which it has the proper Cognizance. As the name of every Subject is different so are the expressions in which it is to be unfolded. As the mind is differently affected by various subjects and on Various Occasions so is the very Tone of a speaker or the Stile of a Writer And it is no praise to a speaker or  writer to say that he is the same on all Subjects and on all occasions.
That he talks of the small in the same Tone with the Great or that he is always Elevated & solemn or always depressed & familiar.
It should probably be said of a powerful speaker or Writer that he ascends or Descends with his Subject Simple or Figurative according as he employed to inform or Agitate his Audience or his Readers. Always Simple in History sometimes even in pleading a Cause: but when he would carry a Point or make an impression proportionally Armed with all the weapons of Rhetorick or declamation. Such a Person is not to be known his Stile otherwise than as the Powerful is known by the effect of his performances.

IV. OF STATESMEN AND WARRIOURS 

As the Soul or Intelligent Principle in Mans Nature presides amidst the Sensations Perceptions opinions and affections as Elements constituent of his Form & mode of Existence: So there are Individual men fit to preside in the assemblage of Numbers however diversifyd in Condition disposition or Power. These are termed Statesmen and Warriors.
The number amid whom they preside consist of Persons of whom each can do and does for himself what is Essential to his own being & State.
 The Statesman presides among Citizens. The Warrior among Soldiers.
The Citizen subsists by Labour opinion consent or Law.
The Soldier is the Bearer of Force which he may Employ when just & necessary.
Their functions are intimately Connected being to Act on the same Materials and with the Same Instruments tho to different Ends. 
The statesman is to act with men at Peace. The Warrior with Men at War.
The first is defective if he neglect the resources of War. The other if he is not provided for the Reverse yet their peculiar Functions may be separately considered.
The first preserves to men & with the assistance the order of Pacific Society.
The other  would prepare Men for the Use of Force such as may repell or redress contingent Wrongs.
Both require the Knowledge of Human Nature its dispositions and means of working upon it to protect & encourage what is Right to restrain or discourage what is wrong.
To omit for the present any further consideration of State affairs.
The Warrior being to conduct Men in the use of Arms through danger & hardship to Victory over their Enemies must cultivate skill and habit in the use of Arms and the forms of array or Tactics requird to enable numbers to act successfully together.
For these Ends Maual Excercise and order whether of Movement or Rest are required.
By excercise and discipline Armies may be presented under the most formidable appearance of Energie & Force.
But such presentments being made without Any circumstance of Danger or hardship do not contain any Assurance of fitness for Service against a resisting Enemy.
To have such assurance it is not Sufficient that men know their place & handle their Arms well. A certain Vigour of mind consisting of Intrepidity competence And Ardour to meet or Steddiness to resist an Enemy are the great & Essential Requisites.
It is not sufficient that these should be found in officers or commanders they are required in every Rank.
 It is the Bussiness of a General to Review his Battalions. The Cloathing the Fierce Cokked hat the Steddy Rank The Arms well handled Signalize The Corps and do honour to the officers. Armies so composed merit the Confidence of Generals and are fit to Awe an Enemy.
Let the ground be well chosen on which to receive an Enemy or movements well devised with which to frustrate any Advantage an Enemy endeavours to avail himself. Let officers be men of Honour.
This & no more is requisite to qualify An Army & its Leader for the Service to be performed on  every Topic of that Theme. The Reasoning Soldier is prepard to give opinion and account for most Events in War.
He has considered how to give a Corps its proper Discipline and Aspect.
But how to Inspire an officer Jealousy of Honour And how to Spread Stedely Vigour and Ardent Courage through his Ranks is not a common Problem in conversations on this subject. The Subject is discussed in every point but this the most important of all. Tis vain to choose a Post if men will not defend it or to plan an Attack if men will not perform it. What will make the Rank & File retain its post  unmovd or Scar an Enemy with impetuous Force?
Armies are not always Equal in these Respects and the Superiour has a great Advantage may Act on the offensive and even Shun his Enemy on equal Ground. The Inferior is put on the defensive & must not hazard Action without some favourable Circumstance or Signal Advantage. Such were the Campaigns of Julius Caesar in all his wars. And such the Campaigns of Napoleon on the modern Continent of Europe. For the confidence of their troops those  Warriors no doubt were much indebted To their first and Continued Successs. And it is no doubt on this Account as well on every other Account An Object of Importance to the Warrior to set out successfully. For this purpose he may expose himself & seek for opportunitys to show his Men their Enemies Back though otherwise of little moment and when his Repution is fixed Danger may be left to others. His troops will be pleased that he is Safe. In this respect however success which Implys ability does but continue its Effects And it may appear nugatory to tell an officer to beat  his Enemy that he may continue Still to Vanquish him yet the point deserves our Notice when Armies flushed with Victory are to be opposed.
Men enured to Success Advance to An Enemy with a Confidence which is often Sufficient to Obtain the Victory.
Men are individually distinguished by unequal measures of Fortitude & personal Vigour: but of this either in respect to its origin or Effect. The Discipline of Armys does not treat having to do chiefly with those measures of Fortitude which may be made to pervade at once numerous Bodies of Men and inspire the Rank and File of an Army to the Lowest Condition.
This is  sometimes the Effect of National Estimation well or ill founded on truth. It is needless to observe that genuine Patriotism is a Powerful motive to Valour in its Cause And it Scarcely can fail to operate where the community is an honour and Protection to its members as it is in free Constitutions of Government where no rank is depressed so low as not to feel its participation in the General Wellfare. 
Hence the Valour of Freemen Armed in defence of their Country is akin to that of the Parent in defence of her Young The Effect of an Ardent affection approaching to Enthusiasm which stifles the Sense of Difficulty or danger. This Principle which is so powerful  in Free States may be further cultivated by Proper Application to promote its Effect on the minds of Military men. The Spartans And Even the Romans were eminently Distinguished in the use of this Policy. The Whole Discipline of Sparta was directed to inspire The Reality not the appearance of Fortitude and military Valour And it was the more Successful in the Reality that it checked the Ostentation. The Romans to promote the general Tendency of their Policy to this effect had a Multiplicity of Specific Honours to be bestowd on particular Acts of Valour & Military Merit Such as saving a fellow Citizen overawing an Enemy in single combat Being the first to scale an Enemies Wall &c &c  And these honorary Rewards being attainable by the Legionary Soldier as well as the Officer pervaded the Ranks and formed a Mass of owerpowering and irresistable strength. 
National Estimation is a known Principle of Valour. Hence the Superiority of a Greek to an Asiatic and of one Nation to another in many well known Instances.
This Principle is often mere ill-formed Prejudice and absurd but should not be eradicated nor in any degree rashly discouraged. It is well to concur in it & even to express the Confidence it tends to inspire.
It is a merit in the Warriour whatever advantage he may have from the Character Reputation of prejudice of his country to devise every means of improving it or Supplying its defect in the form & construction of his Ranks in the course of Preferments and in the distribution of honours occasional .
In States where the Civil Distinction of Ranks is extream and Indelible as in most Nations of Europe. The same extream distinction is Observed in the Army. The officer is Noble & he only is intitled to preferment. The Low Born is a mass of Vulgar important only by their Number & implicit obedience. There is nothing to inspire them with Zeal for the object on which they are employd there are no hopes of advancement in distinguishing themselves. Enurd to Privation & Hardship they witness the superior Accommodation of their officers. In this Description there is a Signal source of  Inferiority to others in which contrary Circumstances take place where the Condition of a Soldier is nearer that of his Offi where they not only partake in the same dangers but in the same privations and hardships. Where the Low may hope to rise by his Merit & Where Nothing is dreaded so much as disgrace. In the Roman Legion the Pay of a Centurion was but double that of a Legionary Soldier and in great straits or difficulties they lived Pell mell together. 
The French Revolution has enabled the Warrior to procure all these advantages in the Form of his Army. And he studies to improve them by Artificial Means.
He can promote the private Soldier if  he deserve it through every Rank to the highest. He has devised a gradation of Honours under the Title of a Legion by which he has a Reward prepard for every indual in his Rank & which serves as a Badge of his Title to farther Preferments. That his Army conducted by himself should prevail in the contest with that of other Nations in the Continent of Europe is not to be wondered at.
That the Event is different in his Contest with Britons whether by sea or Land is owing more to the Spirit of a Free Nation than to any Superiority of Discipline or concerted Policy of those to whom the Department of War is entrusted.
 It had been observd in a company of which I had the honour to be one That the Vigour of mind which breathed in the Ranks or the means of improving seldom or never made a part in the Subject of discussion in the Conversations of Military Men. That it is nevertheless one of the most important considerations in the Form or Conduct of Armies. That by which Greeks prevailed in their contest with Persians. Caesar with his Antagonists and Napoleon in his Wars in the Continent of Europe.
Whoever has the upper hand in this particular may dispense with Numbers & keep his Enemy on the defensive & unwilling to hazard Engagement without some manifest advantage & therefore ever  ready to give way when the Ground is to be disputed on equal terms.
Men are carefully taught to handle their Arms and move in their Ranks:
why not also to receive an Enemy who attacks with Steddiness or rush upon him with Ardour & Confidence of Valour.
The national Character the Love of a Leader & Confidence in his conduct with Zeal for a Cause are principal Constituents in this mighty Advantage. But whatever it be defects may be supplied and the case improved.
Promotion laid open to all who distinguish themselves in the Ranks Military honours for Singular Services, The Valour & example of officers who Suffer or act nearly on a level  with the Ranks they command are expedients that may be resorted to by able Warriours in Every Instance however wanting in Nation. 
All Measures of this sort may be thought Superfluous in the Constitution of British Armies already Superior to every Enemy in the Vigour & National Spirit of their Ranks. If so let it be rewarded and honoured and everything be done to confirm & perpetuate so great a National Blessing & Security.
It appears to me that Something may be done for the Rank and File including the non Commissioned Officers. For the Battalion: and for the General officers, tending to confirm the Spirit  of Inferiour, draw into the superior order more of the National Genius And enlarge the field from amidst which Government may choose to be employed in the Conduct of Particular services.
The Road to Preferment from the Rank of Private to that of commissiond officer is very much obstructed in most nations of Europe by the supposed indelible Distinction of birth And tho’ less so in Brittain than any where else except Revolutionary France is still considerably so by the difference of manners & Education So that it is difficult to raise a Man from the Rank & File into the Society of Commissioned Officer. This tho difficult is not to be  entirely set aside.
It is of Consequence that it should be known in the Rank that distinguish merit will raise the Soldier to any height in his Profession and for this purpose the opportunity of Promotion should be seized as often as proper Instances of occur. The inconvenience is a trifle & the good consequence to the Service incalculable.
But in whatever degree this practice may take place a certain gradation of preferment may be introduced from the Rank of Private up to that of Quarter master and Adjutant to which the objection is Proposed Desire of Promotion is the ruling Passion of mere Military Men. This if they have no Other motive is sufficient to  Conduct them through all the Forms and difficulties of their Profession And is an incitement to great Actions. And this Prospect should not be shut against them in any Case whatever.
In regular Battalions it may be presented even in the lowest Rank without extending so far as to carry the Private at once into the Line of Commissioned Officers. A Line of Preferment may be drawn from the mere Centinel through a number of successive steps sufficient to present the Soldier with a prospect of bettering himself by Sobriety order & regular Conduct if not by brilliant Action and thus engage him in his duty by a Motive far superior  to the fear of Punishment or the Actual Infliction of those degrading Punishments which tend to dispirit any class of men that feel themselves exposed to them. 
There may be a Step of Preferment to the mere Recruit from the Rear to the Front Rank From the Battalion to the Flank Companies From the mere Centinel to the Corporal thence to the Sergeant, To the Sergeant Major To the Ajutant or Quartermaster &c. These steps may be marked by a small increase of Pay & some visible badge of Dress. This may require in the Military Establishment a small Addition of Expense but the advantage of trust would be cheaply purchased.
 The Neglect of Officers to cultivate the Spirit And respect the Character of Men under their command as well the show of their Ranks at a Review is part of that Pride which Gentlemen Indulge in comparing themselves with the mass of the People. Officers are furnished in Europe from the Noblesse or Gentlemen who derived Indelible Priviledge from their Birth. 
These were considered as the Soul & Spirit of Armies. The line of Battle was Supposed a mere mass to be torpid or Active as they should incline.
In this State the Revolution found the Armies of France in particular & when open war  made for the line to emerge from this state of Relation between officers & Men it soon Appeard that Noblesse was an empty Name and the great Body of men with Arms in their hands & Conscious of their own importance Subverted the Monarchy and laid it with all its priviledged orders in the Dust. Men raised their Rank on a presumption or Experience of merit Living & Suffering with their men in all times of Privation hardship or danger. And men from the Ranks looking up for preferment due to their Action have trampled on all the former Military Establishments of the Continent of Europe & make a General knowing how to conduct them, Ascend from a State of Europe to the unprecedented Dominion of Nations formerly Supposed invincible and not to be shaken by  any attack to be feared from abroad.
The Pride of a Genuine Warrior rests on the spirit and Vigour of those he has the honour to command and on the Ardour with which they join with him in every hardship Privation & Danger to which the Service may be exposed. But if in this we would moderate the distinction between officers & Men it should be by bettering that of the men not by lowering or impairing the Condition of Officers.
In all that has been Said however no more than one Department in the Service of Armies has been touched That of the Instrument which is to be employed in War. The hand of an artist who is to employ that Instrument yet remains to be Considered.
In the Ancient times of Greece & Italy The Departments of  State & War to the Manifest Advantage of those employed in them were generally United. The Statesmen cannot be ignorant of war without great inconvenience nor the Warrior of all Matters of State. They are each equally concerned to know mankind to know what men can do & how they may be made to do it.
The Statesman in some degree is paramount & must judge the occasions of War and Consequences of War. Short of this he is no more than a Clerk in office & a Bable in Council. The Warriour as at Rome may occasi only change his Gown for the Sagum but without knowing how to graft his Services on those of the State is a mere prize fighter & Bully, whose only  form of proceeding is mere Violence or Force. 
These Departments are nevertheless for the most part, distinguished in Modern Europe. And the Consequence that the accomplishments severally fitting for Departments are Supposed to consist in some trivial or even Mechanical practices separately required in one or the other. Writing & Speaking are the Qualities of Statesmen.
The forms of Parade & Review those of the Warrior. An Officer who has been drilled & drilling all his Life is a reputed Master of his Trade. A
Tongue in debate and hand for the Pen in office is a man of Bussiness in the State. That knowledge and Respect for Mankind which ability & Wisdom & which lead the Multitude of men in the Council or the Field are  seldom to be found or sought for in the account of either. Hence it is that Nations are so much at the mercy of such whenever they are found united.
We sometimes boast the Superiority of modern to Ancient times in Science. But all we are entitled to say is that we have applied to different Branches of Study. The Greeks & Romans applied to that Branch which concerned them most. Men manners the Forms of State and the Conduct of men whether in Peace or in war. We have ransacked nature the Earth & the Heavens for Geographical Physical and Astronomical Science. Man himself is forgotten or considered only as a Party in Trade and a Dealer in Manufactures & Money. I  doubt we shall never be able to unite the Sagacity of a Spartan in the Field with the Skill of a Chymist in his laboratory. But if this be too much people who are at leisure may learn to compare & distinguish such Characters.
Under every high name transmitted in the History of Italy we have at once a Statesman and a Warriour. 
The function  War may have been for youth that of the State for Mature Age. But the genius & Accomplishments were not to be distinguished. At Rome in particular even this difference was not attended to.
The Civil Magistrate & Military Commander was chosen a the same time and in the same Person. In consequence of this union of Characters all the Genus of the People was directed into these Channel and the publick might look for both in every Person who aspired to distinction and publick Honours.
Where these departments are separated the case is otherwise according as either prevails the Genus of the People is drawn into that Channel and Mutilated Statesmen or Mutilated Warriours is all that the state can produce.
The State as including all is no doubt to be preferred to the Army which is but a part. And if the Honours are as they ought to be at the disposal of the former The State may be at a loss to find any person worthy of great military trust.
When the principal Honours of the State are as in Great Britain made the Prize of civil or Political Merits  Genius is directed chiefly into this Channel And men come into publick View with the Single Talent of Speech-making as Sufficient to ensure their Fortunes.
In Families of Rank The quick are destined for Parliament The Slow will do for the Army. By the Influence of this apprehension a choice is made already prejudical to the Military Department & by limiting from high Military command to those who have been bred to the Service and passed through all the Steps of Preferment The choice of Military commanders comes to be limited to Persons already far advanced in Life and who in the Detail of Battalion forms have lost all Sense of what is necessary to meet an Enemy of Genius and in the of Genius in the Fields where address & enterprise are required instead of show and the Forms of Parade.
 It were therefore a real Improvent of the Military Establishment in such case if any thing could be done to direct the Genius of the Country more into that department And to extend the List from which the sovereign may Select those most worthy of high Military Trust.
The first may be done by holding out to the Ambitions at an Early Period of Life the prospect of great & honourable distinction in this Line and prospect may result in some degree by the Course which may be taken to widen the Circle from which Commanders may be Selected.
At present when the King is to nominate a Staff for any Military Province or Enterprise He is limited in his Choice to those who have the Rank of General officers in direct Subordination to the Chief & in  Gradation to one another. To loossen the fetters which The King by his Commission has imposed on himself: may all such Commissions of Rank be withheld untill it shall appear what assortment of Abilities may be requird for the Particular Services in View. And the King appoints a Court of Oyer & Terminer for Tryals in a particular Case so he may nominate a Staff with determinate Ranks for that particular Province or Service only And beyond such Particular occasion there should be no permanent Rank of Generals.
In the meantime as every Battalion Regiment or Corps is an occasion of permanent Service there must be a Suitable gradation of Ranks from the Subaltern up to the Colonel or Commandant.
 But when he is to Employ two or more Regiments together he makes his generals for the occasion from any part of his Military List.
How is then is this Military List to be made up and of whom is it to consist? I answer That as none could be chosen to command at Rome That is to be a Magistrate who had not Served ten years in the Legions, So none should be placed on the Military List in Britain till after he had served ten years in a Regiment, in order to be acquainted with its Forms & Details. 
But as this advantage may be gained in any Rank as Volunteer or Subaltern a Person of high Views in the Service may Serve his Time in any such Rank without competing with his fellow Soldiers  for Emolument or Battalion Rank.
What is to become then of those who have rose gradually to the Rank of Colonels of Regiments. I answer They may as at present retain the Emoluments of Colonels And being on the General List may be appointed as at present to the Government of Fortified distant settlements or put upon Staff for stationary or Occasional service as The King shall appoint And as the mere Rank of General at present brings no Emolument: the only change proposed in the condition is that they shall not bear the Title of General or Marechal untill it brings proportion & Profit along with it.
This is my project and I flatter myself that it would bring many Persons of Genius and high Views on the Military List who are now excluded from it.

VI. OF HAPPINESS AND MERIT 

Are these different Objects or The same Object in different points of View?
To many they are different objects. But when well understood they are the same And ought not to be distinguished under different points of view.
In vulgar language it is not uncommon to say That a Person is not so happy as he deserves to be or that he is more so than he deserves. Such language implys a distinction of the enjoyments which constitute Happiness and the Qualities which constitute Merit And tends to sett human Nature in a State of Warfare & Contention with itself. For who can be indifferent to Happiness or who can be happy if he is oppressed with a Sense of deserving to be otherwise?
Of this Warfare indeed in human Nature there are Strong Features or Appearances. Enjoyment is what Men desire and Suffering is what  they avoid. The reverse however is not uncommon. Enjoyments are in some Instances of so mean degree as to imply meanness in the Person Addicted to them and the converse is true of Sufferings. Ne quid Nimis seems on many occasions to sett the Judgement at War with Enjoyment or Appetite.
This Species of War however is but one  the difficulties which Nature has laid in our Way to exercise that Faculty of Reason which we are born to inherit which Waxes in being exerted and acquires Power in being obliged to employ it.
Experience is Information and The Habit of Action an Accession of Power. Folly under the disguise of Enjoyment cannot mislead nor Wisdom under the appearance of Suffering deter. And the War of Competition among the Objects of attachment or pursuit may end. But this which in thinking is but a Single Step may be the work of Ages in the progress of Sensitive mind. Here Experience must be repeated before it gains the Ascendant of opinion. Even after one false conception is Exploded another may  Succeed and thus mistakes may be repeated before truth alone is left to occupy the mind. Habit keeps possession even after mistakes are acknowledged. And time indefinite may be required  run the Course of Successive Practice and the habits which may occupy the mind and yet it should appear that Periods unlimited & unconfined Reality Truth & Wisdom must prevail And occupy an Empire of the Soul of whose Right there can be no detection by which it can be overthrown or no preferable Habit or Practice to Supplant the best of which the title to be preferred is experience already obtained  what it is compared with every Other choice of mind.
What may be the Issue or result of indefinite Progression even to created mind is probably too much for us to Anticipate. Philosophers of old supposed it to be an Assumption into the Essence of God from which it emerged: But whatever may be  result of a Progress at once to Perfection & to Happiness we cannot doubt that those Ends may not only meet:
but are in  reality the same. They are alike the Objects of a Wise Ambition which if the ends were separate tho consistent might be frustrated in the attainment of one or the Other.
This in fact happens under the mistaken apprehension of Men in this Period of Animal Life.
Men are thought to be happy in consequence of events or in possessing the gifts of Fortune: but frequently to have merit in despising those Gifts.
Even those who would reason themselves into a different opinion are seldom fully Successful in the attempt. It is nevertheless a piteous State of the Mind When we rail at the World when Merit as we express it is not rewarded with Fortune. But none are more disposed to adopt this complaint than those who affect the greatest Zeal for morality. They would be thought Zealous for Merit but are possibly no more than Envious of Fortune. The Subject is of all others the most important and just conception of it the most valuable attainment of human Reason in its Preparation for higher advances in the Scale of Intelligent  Being.
We may in some degree indulge our hopes of immortality in proportion as we are qualified now to perceive the Superiority of mental Attainments to all the conditions of mere Animal Life.
The Horse probably prefers nothing to the Riches of his Pasture & that Swiftness of his foot. But Man while he enjoys the Accommodations of Animal Life Adores the Wisdom & Goodness with which they are Supplied. He inhabits a Corner but his Thoughts extend to the Universe of Space & the Eternity of Duration. These are among the Stamina by which he is qualified and on which he may continue to build the hopes of a Future & indefinite Progression.
In short: when all the sources of Folly are exhausted; unless Intelligence itself be not suppressed; Wisdom must Succeed & take the firmer hold that no Imposture remains untried.
Even here or in this period of Intellectual Progression it were Idle to make choice of Prosperity in preference to adversity for neither is at our Option And we must take our Part in either as it comes. In prosperity Temperance Frugality & the use of what Fortune Supplys without being absorbed in attention to it or affecting to despise it is at once a Constituent of Happiness & Merit. In Adversity Fortitude whether active or passive as occasion requires is precisely in the same predicament as the real Constituent of Happiness & Merit.
What is Benevolence? Surely The most undeniable proof of a mind in itself agreeably affected and Estimable or acceptable to others. Thus uniting the Supreme Characters of Happiness & Merit As its reverse or Malice unites those of Wretchedness and detestation.
Benevolence unitd with Wisdom and Almighty Power are the attributes of God: or in other Words the Supreme Felicity & Perfection of Intelligent being.
The Wisdom of Man but enables him to distinguish between Good Evil without Mistake in the detail of Choice or in the means of carrying it into Effect.
 This Character as in respect to Happiness it carries with it every pursuit the Assurance of Safety Gratification & Success it is the Specific Excellence of Intellectual Nature and as such highly Esteemed or Constituent of Merit.
Fortitude also or the Power under to encounter difficulties. Threats or adverse Events so Appropriate to the Lot of Man is at once the Measure his Force or Power & best antidote to unavoidable Suffering. And is Surely as much required to support him in his own Esteem as in that of others.
Happiness Therefore & Merit are Perfection  mind & Character are but different Names for the same Condition. Whence is it then that men so often hate those who they think happy And pity or lament those who they think meritorious? Surely because they mistake both those Characters.
Such we cannot doubt is the Result when we would  infer what is best for mankind in the form or condition of their Being: Or in Other Words when we would Specify what is to them Constituent of Happiness And Merit. In these terms we would express the Ultimate Objects of living or Intelligent Nature That for which Life itself is of any value either of Estimation or Enjoyment. And yet these terms are so loosely employed that their meaning seems scarcely to admit of a Serious Consideration. A Person is said to be happy as often as he finds anything to please himself and to have merit as often as he does anything to please Others. And in this use of words The Coxcomb is happy And the Impostor has Merit. When we awake from these mistakes and call the Coxcomb a Fool & the Impostor a Knave Still Happiness is one thing and Merit another. A Person  may have merit in what he has done but be happy or unhappy in his Circumstances And a person is Sometimes Said to be happy tho’ he is insensible of it.
If we would correct these follies it seems necessary to begin with an attempt to fix the object in View under the Terms we employ. And by way of Postulatum require that Happiness Should Stand for the most Perfect State of Enjoyment And merit for the sum of most Estimable Qualities. And with general precaution we would discend to Particulars: The Identity of Happiness & Merit as in the preceeding Argument may be fully Established.
After all & notwithstanding the Identity of matter alluded to in the Terms Happiness & Merit: There is a distinctive Propriety in the  use of these Terms corresponding to the different respects in which the Subject is considered. Wisdom Benevolence Fortitude and Temperance considered in Respect to Enjoyment is properly termed Happiness or the State of greatest Enjoyment & least suffering. In respect to the Excellence of Character or the Esteem in which they are held by others  are properly distinguishd in the Appellation of Merit: But Happy at once and Meritorious is he whose Selfish or care of his own Wellfare or Happiness has merit in the View of those who are proper Judges of Merit & whose Vanity or desire of Applause leads him only to Affect what is really Constituent of Happiness to himself.
On these Conditions we shall blame the Selfish nor despise the Vain. The one will  be attentive to himself: but the Quality of which is most tenacious to himself is benevolence to others And Virtue tho’ supposed to be dissinterested by those who mistake their own Interest is nevertheless the Interest of Man or his most valuable & secure Possession. Selfishness in Vulgar Estimation because it is Supposed to exclude its best & most valuable Personal Concern And Benevolence is supposed to be of no Value to the owner because it is a Concern for the Wellfare of others or the order of Beings susceptible of Happiness.
The missapplication of Words is a mistake of things And mistake. The Permanence of ill Habits of thinking & Acting the Slow acquisition of New habits which in their Turn are perhaps to  be removed by slow Alteration or Change untill every Mistake or ill habit has been tryed is that which makes the Progress of Mans Intellectual Germ to Wisdom So Slow & so little in Appearance Advanced in the Periods through which we see it carried:
but which in its Attainments will be the More Secure & to the mind which has made the Attainments more his own.

VII. DISTINCTION OF VALUE AND ITS SOURCE IN EXISTENCE

1st Distinction Good & Evil. Where neither is applicable Existence is altogether Indifferent.
2d Distinction. Happiness and Misery. Happiness is the possession of Good Misery the accumulation of Evil. The Sentient & Conscious alone are Susceptable of Happiness or Misery. The Intelligent most of all.
3d Distinction Mind & matter. All Existence of Happiness or Misery come under the appellation of Mind. All other existence is Matter.
Matter has no Value But in its Relation to Mind. If there be an Eternal Principle of Existence in Creative Power It must be a Principle of Selection choosing that which is made in contradistinction to what is Otherwise. But there is no ground of Selection but Good & Evil Happiness or Misery or tendency whether near or remote to one or the other.
It follows that mind alone  or what is related to mind can Present object to induce the Exertions of Intelligent & Selective Creatures. And that Existence is limited to mind & the matter any fitted to form an Allotment for mind as a Scene or Material of Action & of Art & Accommodation and all matter exists but for the Sake of Mind. 
For this all Suns & Planets be their numbers & Magnitude what they may are Valuable only in their Relation to Mind As the Work of Eternal Mind And the Lot of those for whom they are Created.
This Planet Earth in all its Constituent Parts its Still its Organised & Living orders its permanent and Active & Variable Forms Its Laws and their Phenomena whether of Mechanics in Chymistry Vegetation Animal Life or Intelligence is the Lot of Man Intelligent Conscious or active Whenever such Planets exist it is Natural to Suppose  Analogous Relation of Mind & Matter; And in the Solar System man in some degree partakes with Other minds And by a Stretch of Conjecture also with all minds of which universe itself is the allotment.
Of the Good or Evil to be apprehended in the Creative mind His works alone are indications. Contingencies may come from Other minds Creation from Him alone. In this He is revealed and nother Mind but his. Language Spoken or Written may bear the meanings of Men Creation alone the meaning of Almighty God.
Here his meaning is to be collected from the Lot & as all is made for man his Lot alone can furnish Information of the Creators Will & meaning.
In the prosecution of an  Argument in which we are to question the fitness of a Person to his place or of the place to him: it appears proper first to Characterise The Person His Form dispositions And Powers. Next the circumstances provided for his Accommodation and gratification or promotion towards the End or destination of his Existence.
In this or in the first Aspect of Nature throughout Indefinite Variety is a Primary Feature. It meets the Observer in every Compartment In the assemblage of Still materials that compose the Globe. In all the Forms organised or participant in any Species of Life whether Vegetative or Sensitive acting by Will As in the Animal forms of being. Of the Latter Class Man himself appears at first no more than a Variety distinguished from the general train of animals by Circumstances & by no means to his Advantage.
Born to an Infancy more weak, &  dependent & of longer Continuance than that of the young in many other Upon the Tardy Appearance of his Instincts or Native propensities he appears no way better directed than Other Species on the contrary in this part of his Nature he appears less correct or guarded against dangerous abuse than any Other Animal persisting frequently to mislead into hurtful Excesses of which the other Animals are by Nature incapable. With these Appearances to his dissadvantage he opens the Career of a Progressive Being Agreeably to the General Character of Creation in all its organised or living Forms known to us. In every The Analogy of Birth Infancy Puerility youth manhood & Age are exhibited throughout and these are the Stages through which this Singular Animal is known to Pass. And if he is observed to set out with some dissadvantages in what is termed his Infancy: he proceeds in a manner  different from the Other Animals And tho at first less correct yet soon appearing likely to carry him through a Range of Attainment & Action far Superior to theirs.
With less precise direction to a Specific Object he is qualified to Observe to conceive and chuse An Object for himself. He acts accordingly from Opinion rather than Instinct. And as opinion may vary Indefinitely and thousands may be wrong for one that  hence Mistake Error Caprice and Folly are more frequent in these first Periods of his History than Wisdom or a just Apprehension of things. In Mistake or Error having Occasion to experience its falsehood he cannot persist for ever.
From the indefinite Variety incident to opinion or habits of thinking we derive the varieties by which Men differ from one Another. And the same Man differs from himself at different times.
The Apprehensions of certain distinctions under the Titles of Good & Evil of Excellence or Perfection &  Defect of Right & Wrong as well as Pleasure & Pain obtained or incurred in the Gratification or dissappoint of Propensities or in the quality of Mere Sensations as Particulars happen to be ranged under these Titles they are coveted or Shuned and the Actor is not only Spontaneous but likewise Conscious knows what he does & for what Reason.
In this he is said to be intelligent & accountable for his Actions. Of the Past he is conscious of the Future he projects intends & Contrives. His Powers are Derived from the great Source of Existence & of Power but his Exertions & Attainments are his own & in this alone probably consists any Analogy to that Personality & Intelligence of which the order of Nature gives a Perception in the Being of its Self Existing Author.
If the Consciousness of what he had done of what he had attained or lost were wanting in the human Mind he must be degraded from the Rank of Intelligent Being & have  no Germ from  to originate a Progression towards the Completion of those attainments of Which the Germ of Intelligence is susceptible. As he now is We see only the outset of a Progress of which the Issue is probably hid beyond the Limits of his Animal Life. As an Animal he waxes in Stature & Muscular Power As intelligent he waxes in Knowledge Sagacity Judgement Invention & Contrivance for his Purpose.
His Faculties like those of the Living & Active in most Instances do not waste but Wax in their Exertions. As the human mind is essentially Active Certain Modes of Activity constitute its most Perfect and Happiest State The Contemplation of Nature The Discovery of its Physical Laws & the Comprehension of its interesting Phaenomena Benevolence & its Exertions in the System of Intelligent Beings. Wisdom, with its unerring Selection of Good in every Instance Fortitude with its Exemption from Fear or Distrust and Jealousy the Surmounting of Difficulties and passage through Dangers are the Supreme  Enjoyments of this Active or Ambitious Being. In this Form we may conceive him to be advancing towards what is at once the Felicity and Perfection of his Nature however lowness may apprehend the yet actual attainments of the Species.
Under the Titles of Happiness & Perfection or Excellence The Nascent mind yet ignorant of all begins with applying those names to some Contingent Circumstances such as catch the unexperienced Attention whether Sensation Fortune or Estimation. They engage in the pursuit of Such Objects practise the Arts or become dependent on the Aids by which they hope to procure them. Ambition or the desire of Elevation or Perfection is certainly among the Strongest or the most powerful  the human Breast.
When we consider the Sacrifices of Ease Pleasure & Safety which are made or the Labour Suffering & Dangers incurred in the pursuits of Glory mistaken for Excellence & Elevation of Character we may be tempted to Suppose that the Love of  Perfection from which its Misapplication originate is in reality the most powerful of any Principle in its Sway over the Actions and dispositions of the human Mind And is Sufficient to Suspend the Consideration of even of Happiness without which Intelligence Itself has no favourable disstinction and Existence to Curse. But when we consider also the Obstructions given to this Aspiring dissposition of mind by Indolence or the Allurements of degrading of frivolous Pleasure more frequent than not so Conspicuous as the Aberrations of Vain Glory & supposed Exaltation of Character the Counter Effects. Effects of mistaken Pleasure may appear no less Powerful than those of its opposite And the two contending Divinities under the Judgement of Hercules will appear Equally realized in human life as in the Celebrated Apologue of Prodicus. 
The one seems Negligent of Happiness & the Other of  Estimation or Dignity the first and highest Object of Consideration among the Pretensions of human Nature. Happiness and Exaltation of Character are thus too often considered as Varieties in the Pursuits of Men and even at Variance with one Another and this Error is perhaps the most important that occurs to be Corrected towards the Advancement of this progressive Intelligence with which man is endowed.
The great Disstinction of Intelligent Being and by it is a fit Subject of Creative Power is That it is susceptible of a Gradual Advancement in a Direction towards the Measure of Created Excellence & Felicity. To Suppose that these are in their Nature, either inconsistent or even distinct and separable is an Absurdity & contradiction in the Very Nature of Intelligent Being.
We conceive the Almighty to be Supremely Happy because He is Supremely Perfect.  His Wisdom & Goodness Are at once the Security the Possession And the Emanation of Excellence & Felicity in their Several Gradations to all that Exist. What Quality in Human Nature could be denominated Happy if it were withal contemptible or Odious or what could be esteemed or Respected if withal the Possion of it were Misery. Perfection of Nature And Happiness are in fact different Denominations of the same thing thought of only under different Aspects. The One of its Enjoyment, the Other of its Estimation & place in the Gradations of Being. And to Arrive at this Point of discernment and the habits of Wisdom resulting from it is the Summit of that Eminence to which Man is directed And which he is enabled after all Aberrations by the Experience and Exercise of his Intellectual Faculties of which the occasion at least begins to be furnished in his Present Scene & which is probable farther continued in the Subsequent Scenes.
The Present Scene it has been Said is projected for the Advancement of Man in his Intellectual Progress and  We proceed to verify that Observation by a reference to the Particulars from which it may  Collected.
As such in their order we may recur to some particulars that have been mentioned as apparent defects in the Animal of Man compared to that of other Species in the Animal Kingdom. Of this kind are the Low & the prolonged State of Infancy The Naked The unarmed and the comparatively feeble State of the Species in its Contest with Other Animals too weak for Battle and too Slow to Escape by flight And more scantily Supplied with the very necessaries of Life than most of the Animal Tribes being obliged to Labour & Toil for what his associates in this living Order find spontaneously produced on the Earths Surface.
In all these particulars however The fact is that man has more than full compensation for all those dissadvantages under which he seems to be placed. The Comparative defects of Infancy are more than Compensated by the Superior faculty & tender  Care of the Intelligent Parent whose instinctive Propensity to watch over her Ofspring is but the Germ of a Social Affection destined to operate for Ages through all the Gradations of Kindred into a principle of Union & Cooperation for common Support & Safety. What the Parent can do for her Child he need not  be qualified to do for himself. And in this we read what is frequent in the System of Nature The manifest Signs of Intention and of a Reason for what  done or ommitted not Supply in one Form what is otherwise provided for in a Superiour manner or degree. The Compensation however we are not to Consider as the Sole End of Creative Economy. If this were all the method pursued with Other Animals were perhaps the most direct & the best.
But the case is here altered And Nature has to provide not merely for Subsistence And Accommodation of an animal: but for the exertion and Exercise of Faculties destined to Spring from a sense of  necessity & want. The Beast of the Field in fully Supplied without any device or Invention of his own. Man to find an Equivalent for the Fur of the Quadruped His pasture in the Field his Lodgement in the Cave or Cover of the Wood is obliged to become a Manufacturer a Builder & a Husbandman.
Tho qualified to Subsist alike in any Climat he no where finds in any Situation or from Any Soil Spontaneous Subsistence fit to Subsist the Species in any Numbers without Culture Labour & Industry of their own. Tho Qualified to feed on great Variety whether Animal or Vegetable The Species of Plant which supply him with his best or almost necessary  are to be carefully Cultivated or will Cease to grow and the Soil is ever to be prepard for them by eradica Weeds or the ever renewed Growth of Noxious or unprofitable Herbage that force their way Spontaneously and choak the Vegetation of those that Supply the  Necessities. The Limited or Scanty measure in which those Necessities are provided for The Method of Labour and Skill by which they are Obtained Suggest the Necessity of Securing the Surplus of the present for future Use And Persons conscious of having obtaind them by the Use of their own Faculties Suggest & Support the Claims of Property and this Right is gradually extended to every Subject that may be fairly occupied & Secured for future as well as present occasion.
Hence the Foundation & mighty Superstructure of Law & Social Policy To define the Solemn and interesting Distinction of Justice of Right & Wrong & to direct their applications to cases of indefinite Variety And such Intricacy as require the exercise of Judgements which is not to be acquired without Study or professional Labour exempt from any other care or pursuit.
Under the Titles of Necessaries Accommodations or Luxurys the Subjects of Property are  multiplied indefinitely and are unequally distributed as to introduce the distinction of Rich & Poor so that one is [in a] condition to buy the Labour of another & that other is necessitated to sell his own Subordination ensues & from the Variety of Surplus or Want of different Persons Climate Arts & Possessions Commerce or the Exchange of Commodities ensue. The means of Conveyance the Medium of Trafic or Exchange form such a System of Policy Oeconomy and it would have been impossible to forrsee that it should Arise from the mere defect of Food Raiment & Lodging under which Man compard to the other animals is made to Labour. And like the Science of Law itself constitute a Subject of profound Study as well as Intricate practice.
Has Nature in all this no other object than that of Supplying Man with Food Clothing & Lodging. If so the Model of mere animal Life as exhibited in the fowls  of the Air & Beasts of the Field is greatly preferable.
But this is not the Sole nor the Principal Object of Nature in this Case.
There is a Germ of Intelligence to be made to Spring up and Advance through a Gradual progress to indefinite hights of Elevation and Power. A
progress of which we probably see but a part in the present Scene & Order of things.
The Necessity of procuring Subsistence &c. leads to Mental Pursuits with which it does not appear to have any affinity. The Laws of Nature must be Studyd in order to discover how we may Influence Nature to our Purpose. The first lights of Knowledge show the way to More & What Curiosity to penetrate every Cloud that spreads in the Way. Contemplation & Science become Necessaries of Life to many And the first principle of Want which Caused the Germ of Intelligence to Spring is comparatively overlooked &  forgotten.
As in Hunting Health is acquird without being the immediate object proposed So in this Train of affairs. The Earth is ransacked much knowledge acquired Arts introduced & Faculties improved merely to accumulate wealth while the mind continues or becomes inattentive to itself or attainments are valued chiefly for their Utility in Trade. A good man is understood merely to be Solvent or to have that by which the Law may force him to fullfil his engagements even if he should be unwilling to do so.
The Moralist may therefore not be inclined not very highly to value the Progress so made in the Mental or Intelligent Nature of Man.
Man thus committed to the circumstances of his Lot for direction in the line he is to follow in the Progress of his Intelligent Being has been likened to Clay in the Hands of a Potter by whom materials tho the same received different Forms and are at the discretion of the Artist destined to Honour or disshonour. But the Emblem so far fails in its application to him. That being  himself the Artist the Form he at any time bears is that which he has himself voluntarily Assumed and no longer retains than Circumstances seem to require. Whatever may be the Effect of Physical Causes his Passions and Affections are occupied chiefly by the Occasions which result from his Relation to Other Men And the Society in which he is placed is in reality the Principal part of that Lot the Propensity & fitness of which to forward the Progress of his moral and intelligent Being we are now considering.
Men form themselves into Society and the Society reacts upon its members to an Effect that contributes more than any other Circumstance to the Form which its members Assume and the Rank they bear in the System of Created Intelligence or the Approach to that which is at once the Perfection and Happiness united in the final Result of this progressive Nature Progress of which our Condition enables us to perceive this Specimen tho but in part & within the limits of a Short Period  but representative. We may guess of what is going on throughout the System of the Universe where the Multiplication of Intelligent Being its Progress & The fitness of Scenery for its indefinite Advancement is the Object Worthy of that Power whose Felicity & Perfection is in Itself and in all its Energies Eternal and Unalterable. Such Are Ideas to which we indulge our Apprehension Under the Notion That Wisdom & Goodness are the Sole Ends of Creation in all the Stages of Existence or reality: Is it so here or does The History of Man confirm it? Is human Society a School of Wisdom & Goodness, and is the tenour of mixed & precarious life announce the prospect or completion of a happy Nature? If indeed its tendency is such and final result however distant we have a right to consider this as its Character however short of the End that part which falls under our Observation may be. The Series of Events may be various & Long but Time has no bounds to terminate The progress before its  arrival at the Point to which it is directed. Created Intelligence begins in Ignorance but Knowledge proceeds by Observation & may accumulate without End. Mistake is corrected by Experience & if Still succeeded by Error may by Experience still receive its Correction and no opinion on the Result be left But that of Truth at last to be entertaind. It is thus that Intelligence if it continue to Exist must continue to advance or to Perfect itself.
If we should be disposed to Under value the ordinary attainments of men & think them below the just Pretensions of Intelligent Nature Such as Sense of the Condition from which we have to emerge is the reverse of a Symptom that man is destined not to surmount this Level: it even Evinces a Stimulus to Efforts of a better Effect. The Courier is urged in his Speed no less by the fear of being distanced than by the Ardour with which he pants for the Goal.
In human Society, there is yet more powerful incitements to Active Exertion more Signal occasions  of calling every human Faculty into in the Cooperations or opposition of Parties or even Individuals more to be learned from mutual communications & the records of ages and the disscussion of Legal National & Political Concern than could have resulted from the whole Physical System in which this Being involved.
In this Principal School of the Intelligent Facultys man is not only and Advancement in the Powers of deliberation Judgment & Execution but has also presented to his View and Choice distinctions that Apply to his own Personal Character & Form tho’ not so Obvious to his reflection as they are in the Visible & interesting Examples which are presented and felt by lively Experience in human Life. There he may Compare the Attainments to which he ought to Aspire in the Examples of Aurelius Titus & Trajan with others which ought to shun in the wretched Debasements of Heliogabalus Commodus & Nero. He is no longer limited to the Attainments of Faculty in mere exercise of occasional Pursuits. The Supreme and Primary End of all pursuit is laid open to him in the Good of which his own Nature is Susceptible or in guarding Against The Evil to which it is exposed. In his own mind he has the Conscious Experience Esteem Affection & Confidence the great source of Serenity Peace & Enjoyment Contrastd with the opposite Evils Jealousy Envy Malice & Fear and Dependence of mind not on its Resolution and Condition but on chance or Contingent Event.
This being the Character of Man and his Allottment of Place & Circumstance as an Actor in the Scenes that are opend before him we cannot doubt The Object of his Maker respecting to be gradual Form of Progression in the line of ‘his’ Intelligent Being towards the Perfection or Happiness to which he is destined.
This Law of Progression is agreeable to the Course in every Instance of living or organized Form within our Observation and in this of Created Intelligence it appears  to be the Essential or Necessary Form of Existence. That it is the Special Destination of Man cannot be doubted from many original & Charistick Provisions Qualifing to Avail himself of it & improve his Advantages.
Interested as he is by the wants and Necessities of Animal Nature to controul or regulate & obtain Effects to his Purpose. The Powers with which Nature has furnished And the Form in what Nature is Subjected to his Controul furnish a Striking  of Design deliberate provision for his Accommodation. Not impowered to Create he can only Place Conjoin & Mix Matters and Materials Together. Nature at the same time acting by fixed Laws & exhibiting Effects different in different circumstances and therefore under Contrivance of the Confessedly productive effects such as his occasion requires. The Law of Gravitation by which every thing loose must descend to the Ground with his direction the Plummit & Center of Arches enables to fabricks of heavy Materials to indefinite heights The more Solid and Firm the more they press to the Ground whether in the Wall the Column or the Archs, Affections of Attractions & Repulsion in different Instances are his Powers of Command Mixtures change or improve the Composition of Substances to his Purpose Motion & Heat are occasionally employed in his Service And indefinitely vary their Effects to his Pleasure. The Soil undergoes the most important change for him And Plants & Animals of every kind are in his Power to be propagated or extirpated at his Pleasure. In the order of Nature every Plant has its Seed And every Seed in Proper Soil Springs up into its Plant. We naturally suppose that this order must have had a beginning & the Creative Power must have been adequate to produce either Plant or Seed and must we conceive be so adequate for ever where Woods are wanted The Creative Power we cannot Doubt may have Cloathed every mountain with full grown Trees. Why this slow method of rearing from the Seed? To accommodate we may say Intelligent Man This favourite Tennant of the Earth who observing The Law of Propagation Established in Nature can by conforming himself to it & with a Small  of Seed in his hand can have a Forrest where he  chuses & in a little time transplant Forrests of America to Europe or the Converse And by Analogous Process command every Species of Corn or Fruit and every  of his Flock or his Herds. Who can doubt that man was intended to be a Husbandman & Proprietor  the Earth.
While the Powers of man as entrusted with a Controul over the Physical System for his own Supply and accommodation are provided for in the very Laws and apparently fixed Condition of things His Dominion projected over the Forms of his own Species and the operations which take place on himself As the Material on which they work is also provided for in particulars Significant of Design & Goodness on the part of his Maker. His Instinctive Formation into Groups & Societies of Indefinite Extent at once give rise to an Artist of Power and a Subject in continual need of his care or attention. Such is the Political Scene exhibited throughout the Various Devisions & their Respective Forms throughout the Political World constituted by the human Race. The Combinations  of Numbers that take place in States and Political Compartments may Oblige us to look back on the relations Subsisting in detail among Individuals forming their connections and The Influences & Ties by which they are enabled to Act in such Bodies.
Mere Intelligence implys no more than that every such Form of Existence is Conscious of itself & its Continued Identity throughout the Period of its existence. In Society Separate Persons so Constituted are supposed to be mutually apprised of their Respective minds and Conditions and every Individual has a part to act respecting what passes in the thoughts and Intentions of another as an Evidence that Society is Intentional & projected for the Human Species in a much higher form than that of the mere herding animals.
Among the Animals Language is the gift of Nature to Man Alone. The use of Language tho specific to man does not appear to result from any Signal advance of the Intellectual faculties. It is almost the earliest of his Specific acquisitions.  The Horse the moment he drops on the Ground betakes him to Walk and turns on his Dam to grope for the Dug: but man after months and even years are passed has Language before he can change his Place & has learned to Speak while  is yet but attempting to walk.
His looks & Gestures are by Nature Significant and mediately understood And  this foundation the Species has founded a Multiplicity of Arbitrary Signs consisting chiefly of Articulate Sounds varied indefinitely in every Separate Hord or Assemblage of Men: But agreeing the origins of Speech by which they are pronounced the organ of hearing through which they press to be interpreted It may appear Strange a Subject so Common and familiar at all noticed: but it is neverless of all Natural Phenomena the most remarkable & important and being without question Instinctive the most powerful Evidence of a Design in Nature & preparative of all the Effects that result from human society to forward the Progress of mans Intellectual Existence.
Hence all the Effects of  communication Information Instruction and the very Existence of Consent deliberation or Council and the very Fabric of Society itself in all its parts. When we thus find the Great resulting from what is comparatively Small there can be no doubt of the Design And that the Less has been meditating for the Sake of the Greater.
Without dwelling any longer then on what  Evident The Advantages which the Progressive Nature of Man derives from the Scene in which his Germ of Intelligence is made to Spring and to Wax in what we must End  inclined to call this first Stage of its progress. We may ask from what Topick we are to tell the Character of that Power which has laid the foundation of this order of things in which we partake.
Are we to consider every Instance of Misfortune or Pain strewed over the Lot of Man as exceptions derogating from the general Evidence of benevolent so manifest in the order of Nature or in the Construction of Living and organised Existence? This were surely very erroneous as in the  distribution of Pleasure and Pain throughout the Animal Kingdom if not the Intellectual Pain is an Evidence or Effect of Beneficent Design no less than Pleasure. As Pleasure for the most part invites to what is Salutary or required for Preservation Pain deters from what is adverse or hurtful,
equally evincing in every Case That the Design is beneficent & Wise.
If this Law is not so Strictly observed in the case of man as in that of the other animals It is undoubtedly because man is more left to his own Government And place is given to the Exercise of those Faculties And of that Freedom which form the Distinction of Intelligent Being. In this Race it is a Saying of great Authority that he who spareth the Rod Hateth the Child and the Parent in chusing a School for his offspring does not pitch upon that in which they will be most pampered with Sweet and exempted from Labour but where they will be kept to their Exercises and advanced in those attainments which Constitute merit & Felicity of their Characters. Adversity is known to be the Reformer of Pride Usurpation & Vanity and a Life of Frequent Tryal in Difficulty  Danger & Hardship The best school for Ability Fortitude and Wisdom. It is even probable if not certain that such is a life of more Enjoyment or Satisfaction than what is commonly Supposed a Life of more Ease or Leisure from Business or those Active Engagements which are said to be Trouble. The French Ennuis is known to be Worse than And that to avoid any sort of occupation is preferred And the Sense of Mankind on this Subject may be Collected from the Nature of Amusements or Sports they devise to occupy their time with Pleasure. In these we ever have a portion of Difficulty Danger And Contest to be Sustained or Avoided.
In contending for an Exemption from pain or trouble as the condition in which the Evidence of Divine goodness  Wisdom can be admitted The Atheist Mistakes the Nature of Man his Choice and the Real object of Creation in respect to him which can be no other than that of opening  for him a Way by which he may Arrive at the Specific Excellence And Felicity of his Nature The Way of Observation Experience & continued Progression. The form in which Creation Proceeds in every Instance known to us is analogous to this And is Beneficial & Wisely provided in the mixed Scene of Prosperity & Adversity through which Life is destined to pass. In a continued  of Ease or pleasure unremitted the faculties of mind must have Languished or have been totally Suppressed.
Agreeably to the general Tenet That mere matter is of no value apart from its Relation to mind as a Material of art & accommodation We may venture to assume that Terrestrial Sphere is made for man as its sole Intelligent Possessor. For him it is presented so the Suns Influence with a Surface of Land & Water Justly proportioned to one Another with an atmosphere to bear the Evaporation of water to the Land Inequalities of Hill & Dale on which to return the surplus of Water again to the Sea with Vegetation Animal Life & Physical Law presenting An Order Variety Analogy and Mutual Subservience fitted to supply the animal Exigencies of Man & mutual subservience fitted to supply the Animal Exogenus of man and  awake his mind to observation comprehension and the Perception of Wisdom of Ends & Mean giving a Place to his own Exertions & furnishing mean for his success with a Continual for the use & Advancement of his Faculties.
In this view of the Terrestrial System to which our observation of Nature is in a great measure limited & reduced as we conceive it to have as the Parts of which it is composed That is of Man in his destination to Emerge from a mere Germ of Intelligence wrapt up in an Animal into the Order of Superiour Natures whose Happiness consists in Wisdom & Goodness in the one Part and on the Other a Physical & moral Arrangement made for his Reception and affording the proper Exercise and Scope of his Powers for the Progress & attainment of their End. And This Statement not as a Part But the whole Creation relative to him we are to pronounce on the Character of that Design which is Apparent & Obvious to our search. On this Ground the Argument must rest. If the mixed Scene of Human Life is well adjusted to a Nature requiring Action for  his Advancement to that point at which his perfection & happiness are placed then is the Scheme Beneficently And Wisely laid. If otherwise we must remain at least in doubt on the Subject.
But here also Is God, And the Storms which in moments of Superficial thinking may incline us to Doubt Proclaim Him more loudly than does any provision that is made for Indulgence or Safety in the lower Forms of Life.

VIII. OF THE COMPARTIVE FORMS OF BEING 

The material World being such as we perceive it from afar as well near Indefinitely Various & Great: what are we to think of the Intellectual or World of minds?
Mere Corporeal Substance however Great is Still & Lifeless in itself destit of Value: but as it is Subservient to the Cause of living Natures or of Mind That is: as it is cause of Sensation and The Object of Perception as it may be organised & become the aliment of Life the Material of Art. The Object of Contemplation of Ratiocination. The medium of Expression or Communication from mind to mind And above all from God to his Observant Creatures. In any or in all of these Respects This Terrestrial  is fitted to the Lot of Man A Scene in which he may enjoy The Supply of all his Wants & the exercise of all his Powers so destined to expand themselves & make him Lord of all this Stage on which he treads.
Even here however when the World of Intelligence begins to show itself in man. The merely material Scene is apt to preoccupy our thoughts or fix them on the Spacious Dwelling instead of the Inhabitant for whose accommodation Solely they are built.
If thus the Scale of Estimation be disturbed on Earth where the human Soul is so perspicuous; no wonder we are Ravished with the magnitude and order of a firmament now discovered by the Sagacity of Men to present many such worlds as we inhabit while the Essence of a Superiour Form of Being for whose use such magnitude of Scenery is made has yet if at all but faintly or by conjecture dawned upon our Sight.
To a general observer the first Aspect of Nature is Indefinite Variety with continued analogy through Forms unlike Mere Matter whether Fixed or Fluid Hard or Soft Ductile or Friable has Gravitation throughout with affinities that coagulate in kinds into Mass. Even the atmosphere whose component Atoms repel one Another is collected by Gravity into the form of a Globe.
On this Ground we may erect some Rule for Conjecture when existence only is known but its form to be guessed. From the  Magnitude &c of Planets They were guessed to be Worlds like this Earth and from their Motions This Earth was guessed to be a Planet like them. Of this there is now no doubt but when we would go farther and guess they are inhabited we must admit the probability of great Variety as well as Analogy in the Forms of Existence in Comparison with that we experience.
It is thus that, without rejecting the Characteristick diversity of Forms in Nature we apprehend in every Planet by which our Sun is Surrounded a living World Analogous to that of which we ourselves make a Part on this terrestrial Sphere. And in every fixed Star a Sun like our own environed also with Planets revolving in Orbits such as we have learned with so much accuracy in all their Anomaly Vibrations and mutual disturbances. Nor do we find a limit to this Assumption of Worlds not to be limited merely by our defect of Sight which does not extend beyond a mere Corner of Universal  existence that has no bounds but those of Number & Space if to such there be any limits.
So great so numerous are the forms of material Existence to what effect or for what purpose?
This Question forever occurs on our observation of Nature And where it cannot be solved we are slow of belief in the Fact so manifest commonly is the end in all forms or operations of Nature.
Mere Body is perceived by mind & is the cause of Sensation to Sensitive Beings. It becomes by mere means a medium of communication or intercourse in a plurality of minds. It is matter of accommodation for Sensitive Beings. It is an Object of Search and of Study it is a Material of Art & Subject of Property and in all these or other Respects constituent of a Scene for the Occupation and Action of Mind. Although therefore in itself it is neither Good nor Evil Susceptible neither of  Happiness nor Misery yet in Relation to mind it has a place in Existence and a Call for all the Varieties of Consistence Magnitude & Figure which it is found to possess or exhibit.
Is the Universe of Body then formd for the sake of mind alone? 
To us there appears no Other End or Purpose for which it is made. If so great the Corporeal Department of Nature What are we to think of the Mental for whose Sake those departments are so formd and dispersed throughout the immensity of Space.
Upon these grounds we Shrink not from the Thought that follows nor dread to apprehend an Universe of minds proportioned to the mighty Scenery of unnumbered Worlds prepared for their reception And may be tempted even to think that Worlds of matter are but Sensations and Perceptions in the Midst of which the Living Spirit dwells.
To us indeed the World of minds is notifyed in man his conscious Reason or Intelligence & Will. His Works declare it in absence of that  Workman. The Cultivated the Choice Plantation The humble Cottage The Village Tenements the Gaudy Mansion the Gorgeous Palace & the Solemn Temple even in their Ruins evince where he has been and in their preservation pronounce him Still remaining in his Place. Yet far beyond what he performs or can attempt Nature bears the marks of Workmanship which at a Single Step leads up the uninstructed Mind of Man to God. The Essence and the Source of Being unaware how many intermediate Forms of mind may intervene beneath the Highest .
In the human Race we may observe the Germ of Intelligence Spring from the Soil of mere Animal life. In the Multitude it is little more than the use or the Practise of Art for Subsistence & accommodation. Even in the Distinguished it is little more than the Trick of a Mischievous Boy as in Alexander or Caesar to set one part of the Species against another. Yet in others in Cato  Epictetus & Aurelius we are taught how happy the Human Soul may become or in Copernicus & Newton how far its Views may reach. If in the many we are apprised of the tardy Progress of Mind In others we are forbid to despair and encouraged to look forward to future Scenes of Being for the continuance & Accomplishment of a Progress of  the outset & the Capacity are now to be seen.
If the Source of Nascent Intelligence be perennial and the Swarms continue to multiply thoug no more than in this Instance of accumulating Numbers The Universe of minds we may Conceive to keep Pace with the extent of a Material Creation prepared for its Reception. How much more must every thought be led to repose on the Magnificence of Being where the Material Scene however Great is fully provided with Actors. That we may  perceive the vanity to number in this Instance be it remembered That the Human Species of any one Generation has been reckoned at one thousand millions; if but one hundred Generations are supposed to have passed one hundred Thousand millions of Souls have already flown from Terrestrial Source And if every Planet in the Solar System has been equally productive The Sum will amount to Seven hundred thousand Millions.
And if every fixed Star supposed to be two thousand is but the Sign Post of a System Similar to ours let imagination try to accompany in thought the Thousands Millions of Millions which figures may in Vain be used to express And let the vanquished Conception acknowledge that the Material World however great is Still Subordinate  and even upon such data as the Material World itself can Supply must Shrink in Magnitude as well as in Estimation before the World of living and Conscious Existence whose Essence is Power and Destination Felicity.
In such Forms there is proper Object for Creative omnipotence And for the Sake of this there may be reason why mere matter in any or all its Forms should be Allowed to exist.
Our knowledge does not extend to the Origin of things. The Changes exhibited around us are no more than Sensations or Mixtures. Yet even in this Conjecture is not prohibited if we do not mistake it for knowledge nor entertain it in contradiction to what we do know or what we are still more likely to suffer allow ourselves to be misled by Metaphor or the transfer of Words from one Subject  another.
Thus some Philosophers of Old adventured to say that the human Soul was a Spark emitted from the eternal Source of  Intelligence and after some Periods of Progression returns into the Source again.
We cannot indeed be too proud of our Origin nor entertain too Noble an object of Hope if it Stimulate just Efforts of Ambition of which the most feeble Effects may be better than None.
When the Aspiring mind recalls the Millions of Millions and hundred thousands of Millions of Millions with whom he may now have to contend for distinction he may possibly shrink in Despair. But if he judge aright the Object of a just Ambition is not comparative but of an Absolute Value.
That in which the Value of Existence itself consists is the Capacity of Happiness and the Happy Mind is of the highest Value whatever be the number that partakes in the same Distinction.
If you perform what in the present moment what you are called upon to do with Benignity Diligence and Resolution you are happy. 
To this it may be Subjoined that the Multitude of Competitors in the same pursuit will not impede: but promote the Success.

IX . REPUTED PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION 

These Pleasures are distinguished from Sensation as resulting from Conception or Apprehension of an Agreeable Object & therefore a Characteristic Lot of mind or Intelligence.
The Objects of Conception from which These Pleasures result are Said to be Novelty Beauty & Grandeur.
Beauty is conceived for the most part in Visible Forms and in the loose application of Terms is applied to any Form of which the sight or Remembrance is agreeable whether from mere Sensation as in a Single Tint of Colour or Note in Music or from any association of Agreeable circumstance which may be merely Accidental like the Association of Joy with the place in which Glad Tidings were Received or the association of Rank with the Dress in Fashion an Association frequently Shifting and as often varying the Forms of Beauty in manners & Dress. This application of the Term is a mere abuse if Beauty is to be considered as  fixed distinction in Nature.
The only fixed Distinction I  can find in mere Corporeal Form is a Material of Art or a production of Art or in some way an accommodation to mind in its capacity of Felicity or Excellence. Beyond the Range of Being so Qualified or its appurtenances There is neither Good nor Evil Excellence or Defect. Infinite Space Replete with Diamond and Gold or Nectar and Ambrosia would be of no more Value than Sand Stone or Mud.
Mind of itself is Happy or Wretchd And a source of Happiness or Misery to Collateral Beings or Minds as Far as far I repeat there is no other form of Existence distinguishable as either Good or Evil.
What then is the distinction of Excellence in Mind? It is the discernment And the Power of Commanding what is Good Omniscience And Omnipotence.
The Possession & the Communication of Happiness or the Emanation of such qualities in some Finite Degree.
This in the Eternal is Perfection Infinite in the Created Being is Excellence And Merit and felicity.
If there is not any Distinction  of Good or Evil in any other form of Being but in that of Mind alone whence is it that we Ascribe Beauty to mere corporeal Form Whence the Beauty of the Sun & Planets of the Land and Sea of the Atmosphere, of the Plant that covers of the Ground of the Forest And Woods of their living Stock of the Organised Forms in so many Instances of Men and all the forms they produce for the Accommodation?
The Specimens referred to will I doubt not Suggest the Answer. These are the Works in part of feeble Man: but more Conspicuously of Supreme Beneficence  Power.
Beauty then in mere Corporeal Forms is the Evidence there given of Wisdom Goodness & Power.
If this be the genuine account of Beauty as exhibited in material Forms it is justly entitled a Pleasure of imagination for the Effect is admiration or Esteem Sentiments highly agreeable of ever meeting the conception or Imagination of Goodness & Wisdom however presented to the feeling Mind  And however disjoined from any other concomitant recommendation whatever.
Here then we may ask has Novelty or Grandeur the same title to be reckoned among these Pleasures.
Novelty or Greatness whether in measure or degree it is said draw crowds of Spectators & fix the Attention by what charm if not by the Pleasure with which they are beheld or contemplated.
But does not pain fix the attention perhaps still more than Pleasure and do not crowds assemble to behold sights of Horror as well as Pleasure Executions Dissasters Murders Tortures which with the Vulgar are principal allurements of Tragic Muse and all they require in return for expense of Money and Time at the Theater.
Hence indeed it is  concluded that Sights of Distress are pleasant And that a Person who looking from the  on a Ship that is perishing at Sea Enjoys himself in his own Safety. The Assumption of Pleasures in such cases and thus explanation of it is founded in the general Principle so well known to be false: That there must be pleasure wherever there are crouds of Attentive & gaping Spectators.
Things new & Strange bring People together from Curiosity to know what they are and when the passion of Curiosity is gratifyed there is pleasure which comes when Novelty no longer exists. The Figure of a man with the Head of a Toad would draw Crowds of Spectators but with an Effect we may believe the Reverse of Pleasure which even the gratification of Curiosity would not Appease.
Things that surprise come with Augmented Effect which abates with familiarity or  continued Acquaintance whether Pleasant or Painful.
Beauty unexpected is enhanced by Surprise: but repeated looses much of its Effect.
Unexpected ugliness is the more shocking for being New and there cannot be a more convincing Proof that Novelty as such is not productive of Pleasure.
This Title therefore is surely to be dismissed from the Enumeration of the Pleasures of Imagination notwithstanding the Authority of Addison and Akenside to the Contrary. These Gentlemen present no other Effect of Novelty but that of Surprise which if pleasant in some instances is equally painful in Others. And the Affectation of Novelty which their Doctrine has encouraged among the Votaries of Distinction & Eminence has opened a Road by which the meanest Capacity may hope to succeed with the world.
For what more easy than to produce what never entered before into  the mind of any Rational Creature. Those who would benefit Mankind in the Practice of any Art Whether of Information or Convenience should endeavour to improve the known Resources of human Nature of which for the most part the most Notorious are sometimes the most neglected as well as the most important: but these Are left to the dull & incapable because men of Genius must have something new and must distinguish themselves by demolishing the Fabrick of Human Wisdom rather than by Cultivating The Strength of a Burden of which every one Knows the importance.
Newton made new dis in the Heavens for he traced the Power of Gravitation. Thither Socrates & Zeno made discoveries of human Nature to itself yet the Doctrines  Kepler Copernicus and Newton are better known than those of Socrates or Zeno. The multitude are still gaping for something new without knowing that the Cultivation of Genuine Wisdom is one  the newest  things that mankind ever found.
Mr Bourke in his Treatise on the Beautiful and Sublime for the latter requires greatness still in Measure or Degree and in the Painful and horrid may be Sublime as well as the Pleasant or Agreeable And in illustration cites the Sublime of an enormous Stench. On this Principle however mere Grandeur or great is improper reckoned among the Pleasures of Imagination. If a great Beauty is the cause of Great Pleasure & Great Deformity must be the Reverse. Mere Greatness indeed like Novelty may excite curiosity & this may be gratifyed. The crouds that Assemble to behold it may be disgusted or terrifyd as much or as well as pleased And we must never forget that attention is fixed by Pain as well  Pleasure And we may account for the Crouds that repair to Sights of Distress without supposing them pleasant.
Compassion or pity tho constituent of Pain or Suffering as we express it for a Felow Creature is very different from the Suffering of Anger Fear Resentment or hatred. It is even acknowledged to be in its Nature Agreeable or to reconcile the mind to its State of Suffering  and reject any means of relief but that of the Party for whom we Suffer. This may account in Part for the Charms of Tragedy. And joined with the Charms of Fortitude Magnanimity And the Sympathies of Love and of which The Tragick Muse above all others avail herself render her Exhibitions the occasion of most real Enjoyment altho to account for the Crowded assemblage at her Theater Pain alone would be Sufficient and even the prospect of pleasure unnecessary. Women & Children croud to every application of Torture altho they know that Pain alone is  be expected. Setting aside the Beauties of Poetic Stile in his Tragedy of Oedipus, What other Charm has Sophocles employd to bind an Audience to that Tyrant of the Athenean stage.

X . COGNITUTEM WITH THE OF WISDOM 

Metaphysics set out with Existence itself & so from Universal to Generals would come at las to Individuals or particulars of which the proper discernment & Choice is the Essence of Wisdom.
In every Conjuncture the Subjects in view are particular & must be particularly known to be properly treated.
Wisdom therefore begins with particulars but mixing comprehension with Practice perceives the concourse of many under general Names And learns to talk of many under a few General Names.
This is termed Generasation and is the distinction of Science when compared with common sense.
The boast of Science is to investigate the Law that prevails in the Course of things and to trace singulars to the Law from which they are derived.
This is Satisfactory it is a Form of Advance or promotion of which Human Intelligence is Susceptible and is accordingly a deduction in which its progress is carried ard on.
If Generalisation is thus successfull & Correct it is no  doubt perfective of that Nature to which it is appropriate.
But to render happy in its Course as well as in the termination or End some incidental Errors Mistakes should be carefully avoided.
Of these I shall at present point out only one by which under the pretence of Generalisation we affect to confound matters together in the separation or disstinction of which the happiness and consequently the Wisdom of Mankind is much more concerned than it can be in any Supposed assemblage or Combination.
In every such case it is wise to distinguish  and maybe at least Dangerous to Assemble.
For example of this sort we may trace Man’s Happiness & Misery to the most opposite things in Nature to one common denomination of a Condition of Sensitive or Conscious Being.
It is even sometimes material to Consider them in this point of View when there is any danger of Considering or mistaking some Collateral Circumstance as Constituent of the thing itself.
Another Instance is when Happiness is traced up to the General Term Pleasure And this made the general denominatio  of all that is Good to be Selected agreeably to the Taste and Actuall Experience of the Person to be gratifyed for whatever other Rule can be admitted in the choice of Pleasure What is food to one we say is poison to Another and so Taste seems.
After having in this term of Pleasure levelld all matters of choice we may endeavour to distinguish the act licit or Illicit dignifyd or mean but we shal never perhaps be able to repair the breach made in the Wall of Separation between them. After having admitted under the general Term of Pleasure the  Intoxication of the Drunkard with the Consciousness of Integrity Beneficence & Magnanimity of the Wise. The Scratching of the Itch or Conceited folly of the Vain with tranquillity of Health or the Serenity of the Candid or Innocent.
One of the first Inferences to be drawn is that pleasures are to be Estimated by their Measure & no their Nature or Quality.
To those who enumerate Pleasures in order to ascertain the measure of Good in the Form or condition of any Living or  Conscious Being it must be admitted as a self evident Maxim that nothing is Good but in proportion as it is matter of Enjoyment now or hereafter.
That Happiness to be perfect must be a State of the greatest Enjoyment and least Suffering of which the Being is question is Susceptible.
And supposing Existence indefinite The Future is to be admitted to consideration as well as the present. That the Future may indeed overballance the present.
Upon these grounds it seems to be admitted That in Estimating The Good or Evil  in any particular Case or matter of deliberation The measure or degree of pleasure or Pain now or hereafter alone is to be Considered.
That all Supposed distinctions of any Other distinction of Right or Wrong of Perfection or defect of high or low honourable or Vile & Mean are to be rejected as vulgar impositions or Words without meaning. That the Praise bestowed on Suffering Fortitude without any prospect of Retribution is the Praise of Folly and fitted only to mislead the Vainglorious.
That in short is the Object of Wisdom in every case to Estimate the present & the Future so as to do what upon the Whole may or  does amount to the greatest sum of pleasure and least Pain. 
If this be a difficult Task from inabily to Estimate perhaps untryed or unforeseen Pleasure or Pain: it is nevertheless the Sole Directory of which human Understanding is Susceptible And to say that it is either limited or difficult is no more than to own That in the mind of Man the attainments of Wisdom are limited and in their application difficult.
This indeed must be acknowledged on every Supposition and it is not so wonderful in cases of Prudential Concern to see Men in doubt &  indecision & irresolution as on the contrary to see them prompt & determind almost in any Case whatever having so much to look for in future prospects as well as present Condition or matter of actual discernment.
Upon the least pretensions to Wisdom human Action could scarcely proceed, And nothing Short of temerity Ignorance & presumption could bring human Council to a full & ultimate Decision.
What we see to the contrary must occasion some pause and a return to the premises from which it is supposd that there is no immediate principle of decision in  the human mind besides the measure or degree of Pleasure without regard to any Other distinction whatever.
It is no doubt true that in every Act of the human Will there is some propensity to be gratified And as Gratification is but another name for Pleasure, this in every Instance is to be pronounced the Object of Will in every instance. But are Propensities in every Instance independent of one Another. May it not be the Object of one Propensity to decline that to which another inclines. Love or hatred may incline to Action Indolence may incline to repose And the Scale may  preponderate only by the Surplus of its Weight.
In short may there not be propensities whose Object or tendency it is to regulate and controul The tendency of some Others As Modesty or Shame controuls the Intercourse of the Sexes and regulates or forbids it in time and Place Excess in all the Animal Appetites is restrained by a propensity to moderation and the preservation of Reason which excuses tend to dissorder or Suppress.
And when it was Said of a Sow wallowing in the Mire That Tastes must not be questiond This was not true of human Nature for such tastes are continually censured as degrading and Vile and without any consideration of the Comparative Strength of Propensities one is condemned as degrading The Other as becoming our Nature So that the Voluptuary cannot plead for lust to his Excesses by the Consideration of an equality of Consideration due to all the Actual propensities for it is the province of Some to controul the Others And if both are to be indulged some one is to be limited or contrould The desire of Spirituous Liquours by the Love of sobriety. /
 In this manner The Human Resolution is not without a Guide that is ever Prompt and ready to decide on the first Presentment of many an Important Question. And Justice or Injustice Honour or dishonour decide without Hesitation without entering into Calculation of Consequence or future effects.
Nor is this censured as Temerity & presumption by those who have studied most intensely what is constituent of most Enjoyment & least Suffering in human Nature. If you perform with Benignity & Diligence what in the present moment you are called upon to do, Says Antoninus: you will be Happy.
 The Foundation for These Reflections has been laid in a question of mere Arrangement or Generalisation; but in a department of Nature where the Detriment of misnomer & oversight in particular difference is greater than any extension of Views or Comprehension can repair.
The substitution of Pleasure & Pain for Good & Evil seems to clear the Way to a discernment of Particulars: but in the application endangers the oversight of differences the most important in this application of Words.
Marcus Aurelius & Epictetus were no less men of Pleasure than Sardanapalus or Heliogabalus. And Men  are taught to indulge in Pleasure without being told of What Sort. If Good is Nothing but Pleasure let every one choose for himself he who is pleased cannot be in the Wrong.
This was the Mistake which made almost the sole difference between The Philosophy of Socrates & Aristippus of Zeno & Epicurus And men undervalue the difference by supposing it to Consist in Words Alone: but Words are so Connected with their meaning that in using the one we cannot stand clear of the other. The Pleasure of Epicurus led to retirement & Ease without any Cares of Family or of State. 
 The Virtue of Aurelius led him to perform with benignity & Diligence what in the present moment he was called upon to do whether in the Cares of Family or of Empire. And yet he too was pleasd in a higher measure or degree than the Votary of a different Philosophy whose outset was a professed pursuit of Pleasure but the names of Pleasure & of Virtue lead the first steps into different Ways And opposite directions.

XI. OF THE CATEGORIES OR CONSTITUENTS OF DISCOURSE AND FABRIC OF THOUGHT

In reciting those of Aristotle I think we mistake in translating ουσια into Substance.
Every thing Substantial in our conception has dimension and occupies place.
Ουσια is a Being or thing & in the list of Categories is properly Translatd. 
A Subject and the other Categories maybe its Quality its Quantity its Number its Relations its Action or Passion, its Time & Place.
These to me seem to compleat the whole nothing enters into any statement or discourse that may not be comprehended in one or Other of These Nine and hence the Parts of Speech are the noun Subjective or Adjective The Verb and the Date, &c.
What was the Quality &c of one Discourse may be the Subject of another.
And Quality or Power may exist without Dimension & may be itself the Thing ousia or Subject Qualifyd or impowered.  The Primary order of Being is Power absolute & unlimited Like Space & Time immeasureable unlimited unplaced undated And can have no beginning and no End. Tis Cause not Effect. Tis one. If we should conceive a Number they must be at one & can have no difference.
The Secondary Form of Being is Power derivd Specific & limited. Its Possible & real Varieties are Indefinite. Tis both effect & Cause.
If it be progressive as beginning Intelligence is. It may advance Indefinitely & tend to be at one with the Primary form of Being, but never Reach it.
The Third or last order of Being is Effect not Power or Cause.
This order of Being is the Material and Scenery of Power.
Man is a Power Intelligent combined with Animal Life &c.
The Power Intelligent may be considered in two Separate points of View.
1 That of a Power Cognitive.
2 That of a Power Selective.
 So viewed it may  divided into two capital Branches of Science.
Logic and Ethic.
Logic is the History & Conduct of the Power Cognitive.
Ethic is the History & Conduct of the Power Selective.
The first recounts the sources of Knowledge The Evidence of Truth of Generalisation and Arrangement of Physical Law comprehension & Order,
And Concludes with the Canons of Investigation and Argument or Syllogism.
It is of much Consequence in the pursuits of Science to Anticipate our End in just definitions. If I were beginning my Studies I would take above definitions of Logic & think I could not go wrong or mistake my Way.
Dr Reid should help me in one part. Lord Bacon And the Naturalists in a Second and Aristotle in the last.
This Branch of Science however important as it is but the Avenue to a Mansion in  which The Intelligent Being is to fix his Habitation and his Throne: To Command his Perfections & his Enjoyment. To correct his Defects and avoid his Sufferings.
Such is the End of the Power Selective whose the History and Conduct is to man in a Special degree the Knowledge of himself & his Way to Improvement felicity & Safety.
Armed with this Definition I think that no source of Enjoyment or Suffering should Escape my Notice. Perfection & defects should be justly Estimated. Enjoyments that mislead should be detected & Sufferings that promote to conduct to Superior Enjoyment should be Acknowledged & chearfully endured. And that Institution & manners in human Life could be justly Estimated and turned to Advantage. I should then not only know but be master of myself & Arbiter of all my Fortunes. I am now four & five alass how much time I have lost. 
 Of Language.
This even in the Dialect Tone Accent & Gesture of Rude Nation has attaind to a Power beyond what is gained in any other department of human Life. Yet being the Creature of Practice & the Slave of Custom, it fails the Philosopher when he would open the Sources of Elevation & felicity to Mankind beyond the limits of ordinary thought. If he employ words uncommon or new, he is not understood. If he employ words that are common, they are so spoilt & contaminated in Vulgar use that the effect  to common readers is far short of his Object.
The Term Pleasure with which a Philosopher of some note would express the Enjoyment of a Peaceful & liberal mind, was understood by the Vulgar to mean eating & drinking or other animal gratifications.
The Term Virtue which another would employ to express the attainments of Magnanimity in Goodness Wisdom & Fortitude is mistaken by the ordinary Reader for Some habits of Moderation or decency in common Life & external practice.
Good either in its Abstract or Applicate Sense which he would employ to designate the supreme object of Choice in  every Instace is multiplied in every Carriers Waggon & in every dealers Store house. It is to be had in every Market. And money is the great procurer of all Goods to those who want them & the great Reward of Industry to those who Supply them to Mankind.
If the Philosopher in search of a term in which to express the great Principle of Progression and incitement of a Mind that Aspires to Excellence and perfection in every Work or Attainment of the Mind And if he should employ the term Ambition in this Sense he will be understood to speak of Vanity or the desire of Fame of Promotion or Power.
 If he employ the term Honour to mark the dignifyed Sentiment of Integrity and Justice he will be understood to mean a certain Punctilious requisition of the forms in which Gentlemen are Supposed to treat one another.
If he speak of Religion or the Elevation of the human Soul to the Conception of God & the order of his Works he will be understood to Speak of Arbitrary Institutions of arbitrary Rites the observation of Days and distinguishing Forms of Speech which in the distinction of Sects are term Doctrines & indispensable Articles of Faith.
The Philosopher may possibly do better for his Reader in employing misterious &  figurative expressions that sett the Ingenuous a thinking what he means and by that means employ him to find out a just meaning for himself than he would by aiming at Simple direct and Appropriate terms which fine persons understand in any other than Vulgar & mean acceptation.
If any one pass the first Words of Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix Rapport qui derive de la Nature des Choses with any thought it probable he will not learn much from that Author.
These are figurative And mysterious terms in the  interpretation of which every Reader may please himself and profit more in the attempt than he could by any communications in more appropriate terms.
If any one attempt to Illustrate any general Notice by example or particular Reference This author would turn away with disgust. Comment peut-on dire tout sans un Mortel Ennui. 
To this Ennui however We must Submit in addressing the Publick,
whilst the mere incitements of thought in The Few are left as the prov of Genius to Superior minds.
To which the world is most indebted is a question which I shall not attempt  to decide.
In most branches of science there is little to be gained by attempting perspicuity even to the ignorant. And the profit of every reader is proportioned to the thought he employs rather than the information he receives, and if a reader is to emerge from the study of Aurelius or Epictetus a partner in the felicity which they describe, he must owe it to himself however he may be disposed to ascribe it to them.

XII. OF THE DISTINCTIONS WHICH MANKIND EXPERIENCE OR APPREHEND IN THE NATURE OF THINGS TO DIRECT THEM IN WHAT THEY PURSUE OR AVOID 

These Distinctions may be comprised in general Titles of which the first & most comprehensive are Good & Evil And in Specifying the Constituents of Each of these general Titles we may reckon under that of Good Pleasure Excellence or Dignity Rectitude or Virtue. With their opposites Pain defect or meanness Vice or Guilt. 
In general the  distinction of Good & Evil is apprehended in whatever we desire or shun And it differs in common use from the distinction of Happiness & Misery in respect to the Aspect under which the Subject is considered.
Good refers to the Thing as it is supposd to be in itself.
Happiness refers to the Enjoyment of it. A Quality is Good But the Person who enjoys it is happy.
In the careless use of Terms a man is said to be happy in being Gratifyd tho in a matter perhaps in the result destructive or Hurtful.
In Science we would Ascertain What is on the Whole most beneficial & safe or productive of  most Enjoyment & least Suffering. A man is said to Enjoy when he is conscious of any agreeable to him & to suffer on the Contrary when he incurs or is Conscious of any thing Dissagreeable to him.
In descending from these first & most general titles of Good & Evil Happiness & Misery to their Particular applications. The first is Pleasure & Pain.
Here the use of Language is loose careless & ambiguous. At one time Pleasure is but another Name for Enjoyment of what is agreeable without any regard to its Species or result.  And in this sense it cannot be denyed that the object of every Pursuit is Pleasure & Pleasure itself the Measure of Happiness.
But in Language no less common Pleasure is contradistinguished to Bussiness and the Man of Pleasure is Distinguishd from the Man of Bussiness and the Man of Virtue. While it is confessed that Bussiness is often Pleasant and Virtuous Habits always so.
To account for this seeming contradiction we may observe that Enjoyments are very justly distinguishd into transient  and permanent Hurtful & Safe Dignifyed & Mean As well as intense And Slight.
The Person who is carryd off by every immediate call of Pleasure without sufficient Regard to these distinctions is said to be a man of Pleasure for mere pleasure as such is supposed to be his only Guide.
Another attends to these distinctions & Selects the Best tho on the first appearance rather a Pain or a Privation than a Pleasure Such as the affairs which constitute  Bussiness. And the Habits of Beneficence Frugality & Temperance which Constitute Virtue. 
In the promiscuous & indistinguishing use of the Term Pleasure Epictetus was no less a Man of Pleasure than Aristippus and Marcus Aurelius than Heliogabalus. 
If however the Votaries of Pleasure are so different in their Characters It is certainly a great Error to Slur over the distinction of Enjoyments by always affecting the use of one Common Name for all leaving the  party concerned at the hazard of putting up with the first that presents itself tho the least Eligible or worst. This Error the Epicureans Committed and many of them fell a Prey to mere Animal or Brutal Enjoyments.
Men of Bussiness reject Pleasure for Profit And the Virtuous reject it in the discharge of Their Duty or in the Pursuits of Friendship Publick Spirit And Proprieties of Manner.
This it may be said is no more than preferring one Pleasure to another & rejecting the nearest Pleasure for one supposed greater in Prospect.
 Thus returning to the Play of Words And directly in the face of the distinction commonly made between Men of Bussiness and Men of Pleasure And the Fact that is so familiar. That Some to Bussiness some to pleasure sake &c.
It is sometimes however stated with an Air of Superiour penetration And Discovery that every pursuit has Pleasure for its Object And the wise man must try all before he can decide And as there are Pleasures of  Malice as well as of Benevolence. The Instinctive Preference of moral Esteem is no more than a Taste for which or against which there is no ground of Preference but a fair Comparison of the Pleasure it Brings with that it rejects. And the maxim that Tastes are not to be disputed. 
It is impossible to derive any Advantage from this Practice of Confounding under one General  denomination of Pleasure things so different as the Object of The high minded with the mean The Object of the Liberal with that of the Miser The Object of a Friend with that of an Enemy or of the Benevolent in general with that of the Malicious.
The Magnanimous no doubt would be Satisfied as well as the Mean or pusillanimous. But the Satisfaction of the one leads to great Energy and advancement of Intellectual Power The other to its Degradation  or Suppression.
Heliogabalus no doubt woud be Satisfied or pleasd no less than Marcus Aurelius: But Heliogabalus would be satisfied to domineer among Cooks Buffoons and Prostitutes to have his Stomach replete his Head intoxicated And his Members laid in Sloth & Stupor.
Marcus severe to himself but lenient and mild to others would not be satisfied without an effort to resemble the most high in Goodness & Justice And employ in his Station all the energies of Intelligence & Wisdom.
Does it contribute in any degree to the ends of Science to Slur over this difference of Character by the application to both of one Common appellation of Pursuits of Pleasure?
And the course of human Nature from the progress of Intelligent Being to its Stop or retrogradation unless we admit that independent of Weight in the Scale of Pleasure the Distinction of Right & Wrong of Perfection & Defect are allowed to cast the Pleasure.
We are told and it is probably true that an infallible Rule of human Conduct would be to Do what upon the Whole would Ensure the highest measure  Enjoyment & least Suffering.  But Nature does not enable us to carry our View so far into the results of Consequences of any present action to Supply this defect. We are competent to discern on the face of Every transaction what is Right or Wrong And in this we have the Security of Nature itself that Good upon the Whole will result from what we do from this paramount & overruling Consideration.
Good & Evil are peculiarly incident to Sentient and Intellectual Power.
In any other Order of Being if any such there  be there is no such Distinction & with it the distinction of Happiness & Misery Perfection & defect is peculiar to them also.
The merely Sentient may be preferred to the Rank of Intelligence & the merely Intelligent to the Wise & Good. We do not know of any Excellence in Kind Superiour to this vested with adequate Power & Effect. This Therefore is at once the Perfection and the happiness. The Supreme Object of Creative Will and Proceeding in the case of man tho apparently with much Deviation from the direct Road of what is Right to correction and attainment which is founded on the experience of Partial Evil as well as Good.
Such is the School of Wisdom and of Goodness also in Man is destined to be as befits Intelligent Power in himself the Source of Advancement Excellence & Felicity.
The Power is given by the Author of his Being but the Attainment is learned or Acquired not given.
The Object of moral Study & Science is to  treat of the distinction on which we are of the Effects of each And of the best and Secure on which  can proceed.
The Distinction of Profit and Loss refers chiefly to the increase or diminution of Stock or Possession. If any one were to Act solely on this Disstinction he would of Course be Sordid illiberal & unconscionable in his Disposition & in every Act of his Life. But as the means of Self Preservation come under this Title it must be admitted for part in  the deliberations of every Wise or Prudent man.
The means of Subsistence being Necessary to Life they are of the same Value as Life itself that is to say may be the occasion either of happiness or Misery. In the Proper Use they are occasions or materials of Prudence Justice and Beneficence of Art Diligence Frugality & good Conduct in many respects Constituent of Wisdom Goodness & Independence The very Essence of human Perfection & Felicity. But in the  abuse they may be the occasion & materials of eve opposite Evil Folly Injustice Intemperance Dissease Prodigality Beggary and Slavish Dependence. The Prayer of the Wise therefore is not for Profit but for the proper use of what he has.
The distinction of Right & Wrong relates to the dispositions intentions And actions of Men.
With the Conscientious it is never forgotten & directs if not Their Ends in every pursuit at least the means by which to Obtain . The Result is integrity Probity & Candour. The consciousness of Innocence Purity exemption from Blame Remorse Shame Fear and every degrading & torturing Passion.
Prosperity And Adversity are akin to profit & Loss depending for their Value on the proper use which is another name for Virtue.
Prosperity abused is Pride Vanity and Insolence the Worst of Vices In its proper use may be the Occasion of many Virtues.
The Mean Spirited Sink under  Adversity and are degraded. The Strenuous contend with it & surmount it. To Men in general it is a School of Fellow feeling of Charity of Considerate Caution in Judging of Others.
Perfection & Defect. They who act chiefly on this Disstinctions tend to Magnitude in every Pursuit In vices or where they mistake the Application of Excellence they everywhere tend to Excess Pride or Contempt of Others Extravagance in Shew Emulation Ambition of Rank and Fame &c.
When  Excellence is well Understood the Highminded Excel in Modesty Benevolence Candour As well as Magnanimity.
Upon the Whole there is nothing unalterably Good But Wisdom and Benevolence. Even Power itself may be abused and is no where absolutely Safe: but where the Goodness & wisdom are also Eternal And Infinite.


XIII. OF CAUSE AND EFFECT/ ENDS AND MEANS/ORDER COMBINATION AND/ DESIGN 

The first Element of Importance in Existence or Being is Power. Without Power Existence is Altogether Indifferent if real.
Power is known only by its Exertion and this in many cases only by its result.
Power in Exertion is termed a Cause. The Result of its Exertion is termed an Effect.
Causality or Power exerted consists in means Effect is the result of means.
To know the Existence of such Relation as Cause and Effect is to perceive the Exertion and tendency of Power together with Means accomplishing the Result.
These Elements are matter of  of pure Intelligence and may be exemplified in Every Mathematical Problem as in the first of Euclid while we describe an Equilaral Triangle on a given Base We are conscious of the Power of the means & of the intended Result or Effect. Here then our knowledge and we proceed in action and in contemplation with this known Relation of Cause & Effect in our Thoughts. Will is exerted and Muscular motion Succeeds we are conscious of the Will of Intention to move and in that intention the relation of the Cause to the Effect is anticipated before the Result Ensues. Here we doubt not the Causality altho The means are unknown. In command or communications of Will to other Persons The Will Intention and Effect and to a certain  The Causality or means are also known as when a person depending on Another for his Preservation or Welfare conforms to his Will. When in the System of Nature things come presented together & when this  Fact alone is Observed the Elements required to constitute the Relation of Cause & Effect are wanting and no Such Relation would be apprehended. When two or more persons appear or pass one after another in the Street from this Circumstance it never occurs to any one that they are Cause & Effect. Spring follows Winter and so on in the Succession of Seasons but no one conceives them as Cause & Effect. Nor can it be Supposed that mere Contiguity would Suggest to a Person previously unapprised of this Relation would have ever Suggested it. Yet it has been alledged that the Contiguity of things in the course of Nature is the only Source of this apprehension but as in the case of mere Physical Events the means or Causality is unknown they contend the Apprehension is altogether imaginary & void of Reality.
It is Strange that Men of speculation should overlook their own Modes  Existence to search for the Origins of their conceptions in Sources less known or where the presentment of Relation is much less perfect or Compleat  Being Apprised of Power and its exertion in ourselves & of Ends or Intentions and means with their Results & Effects. We are ready to apprehend the same relations existing in Cases when any Appearance may lead to such associations; but this we seldom do on account of mere Contiguity without some Other Circumstance such as we previously Apprehend to be necessary in the Relation of Cause & Effect.
Having experienced the reality of this relation in our own intentional active exertions and their results we are qualified in our Intelligence to pursue the fact to Consequences & improve upon Experience. The cause we say must be adequate to the effect they must be inseparable and keep pace in Just Proportion. Each must be known prior to their alledged connection & upon these maxim not founded in Experience but inferred from the Nature of Things Modern Science has advanced to its present attainments.
Nay we say more. That what is necessary must always have been & never can be Otherwise And that whatever  has or has had a beginning must have a previous Cause. This is not learned from Experience for many and the greatest part of Events are not preceded by Causes known to us but we admit that  must have had their Causes and that those causes must have been preceded by others and so on Indefinitely. Yet if we attempt to figure a past Eternity of such Succession Intelligence revolts And we say that there must have been a first Self Existent otherwise that nothing could have been. It would be Absurd to say that this is learned from Experience And it has the most powerful of all Evidence viz. that it cannot be doubted.
From the first Cause all is derived Even those causes whose Effects are perceived by us And the System of Nature consists of a Series of Causes and their  or in Other Words of Means and Ends.
As we are Conscious of Powers & Intentions The Effect intended is termed the End. Mere Events tho considered as Effects do not necessarily appear as Ends that is as  Effects intended except where The Cause is known or conceived to be Mind or Intelligent Power.
In the acquisition of Knowledge The first Steps are Consciousness and Perception. The following may be termed Inference including even Testimony. Where Cause & Effect are Known the Existence of either is inferred from the Other. From the Effect most Commonly we infer the Cause as from the Appearance of Smoked sooty Walls & Remnants of Chared Wood we infer the Action of Combustion or Fire. This may have been intended & destruction the End, But the mere Effect does not lead to any such Apprehension. Intending Power or Intelligence is a Power to obtain or to communicate Happiness it will not admit of Suffering but in the defect of Power to remove it. This is Evil The contrary is Good. The Specific End of Intelligence then is Good adverse to Evil. Whatever Evidence may be that a Mind is Misguided to intend Evil It is only when Good is apparent that the interposition of Mind or  Intention can be inferred from the mere Effect. Goodness of Effect however is in a considerable degree evidence of Choice or Intention in the Cause. If to this be joined a combination of means appearing to have no other connection than their joint cooperation in producing a Good Effect The Evidence of mind or Intention is as compleat As Reality in the case presented could have furnished. The Case is an actual presentment of Ends & Means the results of Intention Design Invention choice Contrivance and Power of Intelligence.
The System of Nature then consisting not merely of Cause & Effect but of Ends & means bears in every Department The Indications of Intelligence of Wisdom & Goodness in the first Cause.
The completion of this Topic must be left to the Physiologist and Natural Historian in treating of organised Matter in Plants & Animals & the Mechanical System of the Earth and the Heavens but there is no one so blind as not to see the footsteps of Intelligence in the tracts nearest to himself.
As Small Specimens of Art obtain the Praise of Ingenuity & skill amongst  men; This Mighty Frame & Order of Nature must carry to the Mind of every observation the Evidence not merely of Design & beneficent Intention but of a Power so directed And in Measure Magnificent beyond the possible reach of any such conception as ours. Such we would express is the first Cause Necessarily & Essentially Existent of Course Eternal unlimited to place Infinite or Compleat in every Perfection which being Necessary cannot have Degrees or Limits.
Even under this Power the Cause of all The Order of Nature seems to be conducted in a Succession of Events of which Nature appears to contain The Causes in itself. The Seasons keep pace with apparent movements of the Sun. Forrests Spring up from the apparent Effects of Moisture & Heat and so furth in Numberless Instances.
How are we to Conceive this Matter In the use of means or what we call secondary Causes Necessary to the Almighty.
Could not that Power  which gave Being to the means accomplish the End without any mean?
This question it is not possible to answer in the Negative And to obtain some Consistency of Thought on the Subject we must follow where it leads.
The Eternal is Intelligent and the order of being to be multiplied by his Power is of this Class. Still or lifeless matter is made for them not for itself.
It is but a provision for fancy Imagination And communication And Art.
They are made for themselves and coming into Existence with a Power to be happy must owe the Event to themselves to what they learn to what they attain & to what they become. What is chiefly wanting to them is a Scene on which to perform their part & on which to acquire and exert their Strength.
On this Scene they have their Ends And to these means are requisite.
If the Almighty were to operate merely by Acts of Will without the intervention of Secondary means The Intelligent Creature would have no resources but that of  Prayer to the Almighty for Interposition in Obtaining the end or purpose in View. If he wanted a Tree he must pray to have it full grown in his land and if Prayer is the only Support to his faculties on this Earth.
The order of Nature made up of parts as it is indefinitely Various is still in a high degree analogous in the Assortment Frame & Conduct of each well fitted accommodated & placed in a Course Salutary To each & mutually subservient or Consistent. In the Mineral & unorganised parts there is an assortment of Materials for the Support Subsistence and occupation of the Living & Active or Organised of the inferiour Class. In the living Sensitive And Intelligent The Organisation however Various is Still Systematic & Compleat Still fitted to the Element & Manner of Life. In the course things Salutary to the Individual preservative & to the Species in the Succession of Generations renovating and continual: yet in all this so exquisitely Contrived and so kindly conducted including the Condition and Fortunes of Man with that of other animals there is occasional Interruption of order defect Misfortune & distress. To him the soil is frequently Barren or infested with Weeds The Season inclement & what he is tempted to use for Food poisonous or hurtful. His accommodations are to be found like that of other Animals in the course of things but Nature Appears to do less for him than for most of the other Animals And to have her work in some degree defective for him to Supply.
But is not this the very Circumstance which fits the Scene in a peculiar degree for him? In lieu of a provision without defect She has given him a Power to devise and provide for himself. But is not this unnecessarily harsh Why not save him the Suffering of so much labour and toil? Because occupation is to him a principal Source of Enjoyment. Because his Specific happiness is in prospect in the termination of that Progress of Intelligence and Wisdom in which he is engaged And his present felicity is to be measured by the fitness of the Course he runs to his arrival at that termination.
The Scene is fitted to him in a peculiar degree by calling forth the exercise of faculties that profit by exertion and Habit by affording occasions of research And experience that extend his information and correct his Errors And the circumstances that promote this progress and contribute to these are perhaps in nothing more Eminent  than in this That the Author of Nature though himself omnipotent acts in Every Department by the Intervention of Secondary Causes. Which his Intelligent Creatures destined for Active Life may Observe And Availing themselves of these Secondary Causes are enabled to a certain degree to Controul or direct the course of Nature itself. By the use of Menstrua they can dissolve Salts & Minerals By the use of Seeds they can propagate Plants change the productions of Nature or cover the Barren Hills with Wood & remove the Wild Beast to make Way for profitable Herds & Flocks.
The Secondary Cause is an Instrument in the hand of Man by which to effect his Purpose in many Instances and the Materials strewed on the Earth or hid in its bosom are Subjects of his Art And the usefulness of the Cause And the Material is a continual Spur to research and Inquiry in his way to accessions of Science & Intelligence. Is there not here enough to Silence Atheistical Cavils that would represent the Wise & beneficent Arrangement of a Scene so well fitted to promote the Progress in which it is  the felicity of Man to advance or an Argument  the Goodness of his Maker. Is it not rather a Striking Instance of that Goodness and Wisdom which the Atheists would bring to refute.
As man is the principal object on this Terrestrial Scene Beautiful as it is in every other Department The Test of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author is to be collected from the Arrangements of Nature relating to him. In him Life originates in mere Embryo as in the Case of other Animals. But at his birth more dependent than the young of any other Species Long unable to do any thing for himself how is  then provided. His Food is prepared and ready to Spring from the Breast of his Parent And what is Still more Important an affection is inspired into the Mind of that Parent which no trouble no disgust no toil can bar in the most tender and unremitted care of his Safety & Supply of every thing necessary to his Wellbeing.
He is weak an can do nothing but every is done for him by the Society of Intelligent beings amongst whom he is born. The Germ of Intelligence in him springs up and expands by degree for a certain Period more Aided by what is done for him than by any thing done by himself.
The time however must come in which he is to be an Actor and exhibit the Carreer of Life  which  is born. How is he then treated: With every Appearance of Neglect & Severity. The Scene so benign to every Other Animal is harsh to him. Wants of every kind assail him in his attempt to supply them inconvenience difficulty & Danger are encountered at every Step. 
Has Nature that was so kind to him in his Infancy now deserted him & turned her Love into hatred? No! The Milk that was made to Spring up in the breast of the Parent to nourish an animal Frame is now changed into occasions of Thought of Invention of Ingenuity And of Action to Nourish not an Animal Frame but the Faculties and Virtues of an Intelligent Mind and to give its direction to a Progress which continues for ever after the occasions of an Animal may cease to Exist. In Manhood the mixed scenes of Human Life The Difficulties to be surmounted The Sufferings to be endured The Dangers to be braved And the advantages to be gained by Labour & Ingenuity are Necessary to the Intelligent Being as the Supplys of Subsistence and accomodation are to the Animals.
What does he gain then in this Life. Individuals & whole Races of men no doubt gain unequally. The Man indeed is every where Superiour to the Infant And this may be all that is required in the present Scene to prepare for the Future and if more be required that Future may be destined only for those who deserve it. The Idea of Merit and Demerit is coeval with Intelligence. This Form of Being is formed for itself. It is a Power to be happy if it learn and resolve to become so. Other Beings are made what they are. This Being is furnished with Power to find what he is good for in himself.
 As happiness or Misery may result from the Good or ill use of this Power so may even existence itself may Continue or cease as the Specific constituents of Life are by such Agents cultivated or Suffer to decay. The man who leads no more than the Life of an Animal may be expected to die as mere Animals And future scenes of Existence be prepard only for those who bear the faculties & Virtues of Intelligent Being in a State to pursue their further Careers.
However this be Progression is the Lot of Man And beyond any other terrestrial form of Being Characteristic of his Species Continued at times from Age to Age through many generations. And that what is thus done may be again repeated. There is a Vicissitude and fluctuation of Events corresponding to the Varieties which Nature exhibits in the Coexistent description of organized & living Forms.
Here then we pause to Estimate our Lot and avail ourselves of our Condition. What is it thus to know That to be  gaining Wisdom Benevolence and Love of Order is to be gaining Happiness That these are the Principles on which the Universe is formed and Nature is made to run its Course Still holding out to the Intelligent Those blessed Fruits of Excellence to which he may Aspire. What if it should be Error. It were happy to be so deceived And if Mind like the mere Organization of Separable parts should cease and be no more Tis sweet to Meditate of Order now And to those who cease to be no dissappointment can ensue.
But now to Speak in more humble terms yet not so ill Suited to a Son of Earth. To know of God and of His Government what simple unaffected Reason may collect from Fact and fair Appearances is to Man An Estate more precious than Fortune can bestow. In the Inheritance of Man of which Fortune cannot impair which brings him admiration confidence and Safety And the Centinel in Garrison or on Board of ship Still calls aloud that all is Well. Among the greatest Crimes that poor deluded Man Commits is the Attempt to rob a Neighbour of his fair Possession. Here the Criminal has nought to gain, nor can any Motive but Wanton Levity or the affectation of Superiority to other men. The attempt indeed to disprove the Existence of Order or the Evidence of Wisdom & Goodness in Nature is Criminal and a Cruel offence the less pardonable that it is committed without any probable Motive such as tempt the Indigent to steal or the Violent to break the Peace. And upon the Principle of Defence or compulsory Law the People are no doubt entitled to measures of Safety in the use of forcible Restraints & the application of Penal Law: But in this Instance we find an Occasion clearly to distinguish the Policy of Penal Jurisdiction from the Interpretation of Injury & Wrong.
The Law is Strict and Peremptory That the Injurious may be restrained by Force. But when & how to punish is a question not of Strict Laws but of Expedience & prudential Concern and it will probably appear in the case of Atheism or Attempt to violate  the Peace of Mind which rests on the Confidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness is an Instance on which The Penal Law must be Silent and the offence Left to the Chastisement of the general Indignation and Horror with which it is commonly received.
Religion Source of powerful Energies and best assurance of Mans high Rank in Nature is like the Happiness to which it leads Subject  Mistake and great abuse.
The Priesthoods Usurpation The degrading Fears of mean Superstition The Antipathy of different Sects the Zealots Fury and the Court which Baseness would pay to Heaven by vengeance on its Reputed Ennemies of God who cannot have an Ennemy in Being are Evils to be dreaded from its abuse And render human Judicature the least unfit for Tryal of Atheism or impiety. In Questions on this Subject no discretion can be safely left to Judge or jury and the definition of the overt Acts to which Conviction may be Attacked is Singularly difficult. Experience Shows that Courts established for such Tryal degenerate into mere Inquisition adopting Forms that prove  a Snare to Innocence and are only then Supposed Successful when they multiply Victims to the fury of Zealots and the Usurping Arrogance and Interest of Priests. Such are the Evils which would attend the Prosecution of Atheism itself as a Crime and object of Penal Law.
The most real Evils would be incurred to meet a Shadow which can scarcely have a Being or Effect beyond the folly whence it flows. Let the owner take its fruits. In society it canot prevail: for its Effect would be to overthrow Society and Order. What order can Exist with Man if in the Universe itself there is no Order and Natures Laws are but desultory Facts without Design or Wisdom to ensure their Permanence.
Corolary.
From the Reflections and Argument terminated as above it may appear to the Satisfaction of fair Raison: That Objections brought to invalidate the Evidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness operating the Frame of Nature are in Reality the most Convincing Proofs of that Truth.
The admirable mechanism of the Earth & Heavens with the Organisation of living Forms are acknowledged but the conclusion that mind alone can be the Cause we are told is too hasty. It is possible  there may be in Existence a principle of order different from Mind or Intelligence fully adequate to this Effect And the Ends being obtained not by Will but by the Intervention of Physical means is a presumption of the reality of such.
If the Order where most acknowledged and admired proceeded from mind and a beneficent choice of the end. It would have failed precisely in the Departments most interesting to Mind And in the distribution of Enjoyments and Suffering the only matter in  Goodness or Wisdom Can be Brought to the Test.
Here might follow a long & piteous account of the Sufferings to which animals are exposed. The Neglect of Man in articles in which other animals are carefully provided for. Naked Feeble & unarmd too weak for Battle with many of his rivals on Earth too  for Flight. The Soil tho fertile to the Cow & the Stag is barren to him overrun by poisonous or unprofitable Weeds. He is to himself the worst Enemy by his Errors dissorders and folly bringing upon himself all the Evils to which he is exposed in mind or body &c. &c. Yet we are told the World is made for him & bears evidence of the Wisdom & Goodness of his Maker.
 The lot of man it is confessed is deficient in things in which Other animals are more fully are fully provided by Nature. But his frame & destination are also different. Tho’ an animal he is endowed with a Germ of Intelligence destined to know himself & his Place in Nature Qualified to Observe to remember to comprehend to Obtain Dominions to exercise it in every Department of Mechanism Vegetation and Animal Life to distinguish what is Excellent in Existence to Aim at it and in his Sphere to Obtain to be himself that Good thing which he chuses to possess to be in short the Artificer of his own Condition & Character by the Information he Obtains be the Exercise of his faculties by the Experience and Correction of his errors & ultimate choice of What is Good. Thither his Intelligent Being tends and the Fin is not better fitted to the Water or the Wing to the Air, than Mans Principle of Intelligence to the Diversifyed & Mixed Nature of the Scene in what he is placed. The exercise so necessary to the Advancement of his Faculties  continully furnished by the wants he is left to supply  for himself the Inconveniences he is left to remove the difficulties he has to overcome the Dangers to Brave And the Advantages tho within his reach are nevertheless to be won by diligence & Strenuous Effort.
From these considerations it appears that the Appointment of a Scene for Mans Active and progressive Nature mixed or presenting defects to be supplied Good to be Obtained and Ills to be avoided is no less an Evidence of Goodness in the Design and Order of Nature than the Organisation exhibited in Living Natures And the Accomodations provided for each. And we have in this mixed Scene of Nature an Evidence of Goodness & Intelligent Power not an Objection to invalidate the Proof on which it is founded.
And in this The Final Cause or Object of Nature in this Terrestrial Scene being the Progress and Advancement of Human Intelligence. The Work would remain incompleat unless man to whom the occasions of Action are thus provided were not likewise supplied with Power or means so to influence or direct the Course of Nature as the Exigencies of his Case may to him seem to require.
 On the Question relating to  operation of Intellectual Power in Nature it is alledged that Events are seen to result from Physical Causes that do not admit the immediate interposition of mere Will or Design. If the Earth is Covered with Plants or crouded with animals or Men They are propagated from Seeds nourished by Warmth & Moisture Subsisted by food and preserved by Successive Generation. If the Principle of Existence be Intelligent & Conscious of Omnipotence why not Act in every Instance by his Will without the intervention of means which to him cannot be necessary? It is true Omnipotence excludes the necessity of Means in Obtaining its End. But the accommodation of Created Intelligences for whose sake all Creation is effected requires that Events in which they are to interpose should proceed from Means or as they are termed Secondary Causes which the Intelligent may Observe and Employ to its own purpose.
Hence the Incitement to the Study of Science and hence all the foundations of Art. Minerals have their Solvents. Events are varyd Indefinitely by Mixture of Fluids. Prometheus is said to have Stolen the Fire from Heaven And Ceres to have furnished the husbandman with his Seed and all the Fables of old are but forms in which to express the Design & Wisdom of Eternal Power with the Means of that Dominion he is destined to excercise for his own accommodation and the Advancement of his Intelligent Being. And here again the Evasion offered to Elude our Conclusion of Design in Nature serves strongly to fix and confirm it.
Lawyers admit that a Case is strong when it is Supported even by the Evidence which the antagonist adduces against. Such is the Case of Design & Wisdom manifest in the order of Nature And they who Contend that this order may have a Cause different from Mind must confess That the Cause may be Mind or Intelligence And of these equal supposed Possibilities The most probable is to be admitted without any doubt derived from a Mere possibility of the matter being otherwise.
Why should he hesitate to Believe That the Eternal Being is Supreme in that order of Being with the Reality of which alone we are acquainted.


XIV. OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION WITH ITS ACTUAL AND STILL IMPENDING CONSEQUENCES IN EUROPE 

There perhaps never was a monarchy more favourably Situated than France in Respect to Limits Climate & Neighbourhood. Sufficient in itself yet open to every Supply its Neighbours could give in Merchandise Science or Literature.
Whatever be the Causes which distinguish one Race of Men from another, The French exhibited their effects in a very high degree. The Thoughtless were lively and Gay. The Thoughtful were inventive and even profound with a prevalent propensity to Vanity or Ambition over all.
Whoever led the Fashion whether The Court or The City and in whatever it consisted whether Dress manner or opinion Fashion still carried the Multitude along as Wind carries the Dust in Summer and the leaves in Autumn.
 Birth was the great distinction sanctioned by Legal Priviledge as well as Custom & Manners. Birth required no Aids of Character or personal Accomplishments to raise the possessor above the mass of the People however Accomplished.
The King tho accounted the Fountain of Honour and tho in the Practice of conferring Letters of Nobless yet with little Effect. How Absurd says the Presiden Haynault to pretend by Letters to make the ofspring of Parents unknown to come of Parents known as far back as any record or memory of Ages remain: for such is the Definition of Nobless Titles Renown or Rank of Service even the Crown itself might give Lustre but not Nobless. And there were Families in France who affected Superiority to the Royal Family itself in this Respect.
This Distinction gave its Cast to the manners of the  People & its Genius to the Government itself. The King himself could not advance or receive the Low-Born without giving Offence which was too much for him to encounter. What Horror it was said to see such Persons brought forward.
Men of doubtful Birth were Sometimes Necessary for their Talents: but tho in the highest Offices of State & vested with all the Patronage of the Crown yet thought themselves honoured by Notice from the Slightest Coxcomb of a Noble man & honourd even by Acceptance of their Services And sometimes had recourse to fabricated Briefs of Noblesse from Abroad where their Names had never been heard of.
The French Nobless though not equally Jealous of Forreigns in the Forreign Troops of their Service would not  allow any low born French man to hold any Rank in the National Troops of France to hold any rank above that of a Corporal or Sergeant And in this they placed their Security That the French Army would be always of their Side. 
There were Circumstances that reconciled the Government to this State of Things. Nobless of Fortune took Regiment & held them at a great Expence from a Species of Vanity. They kept a Table for the Officers who accordingly Served upon very small Pay. The Privates were Scarcely above Beggary And the National Troops of France were kept  a Smaller Expence than those of any other Nation in Europe. A French Soldier was thought to be disgraced by the touch of money or a money Reward for any Service whatever.
This precaution of the Noblesse to exclude the Low Born from any Rank or Command in the Army as a Security for themselves had as is not uncommon An Effect contrary to what was intended.
The distinction itself had a tendency to corrupt one order by making them secure of their Eminence on the foot of Birth alone & to animate the Other with Ambition to compensate their dissadvantage.
The Noblesse had sensibly declined and an admiration of Wit & Literature gave the People in general an open to consideration. The Philosophy in fashion was Atheism & Anarchy.  Nature there were not any Ends or Means but things were so because they could not be otherwise. In Society the Sovereignty was vested in the whole not in a Part: And This misterious Sovereign who never c Act precluded the Right of every pretender to Power.
The Court as usual intent upon Pleasure only was become Weak & Profligate beyond any other part of the Community. A great Revenue being let to Farmers who Oppressed the People & fed the Court with money enabled them to Anticipate the Revenue  and expend the Income of Years in Advance. Imbecillities & difficulties were felt in every Department. The King was advised to throw himself upon the Generosity of His People to call the Assembly of the States or a representation of all the different orders Nobles Clergy And People or Commons. The form of their meeting was in great measure at the Discretion of the King. It was not fixed whether three Estates were to meet in one Assembly or in three separate Assembly but the Representatives of the Commons in number equalled the other two And they of Course insisted on the formation of a Single Assembly. Being by far the Strongest both within Doors and without they prevailed & proceeded to execute a Tyranny more bloody & terrible than any that is known in the history of Mankind. The King was thought to be Secure at the head of his Army but alass the Army consisted of Noblesse Officers. The Rank &  File were low born who were now taught to consider their exclusion from preferment as Injurious & who were told by the National Assembly that their pay would be augmented & their Wrongs redressed.
They left or drove awa their Noblesse officers & every where joined the Popular Party.
There was none more bussy in the mobs at Paris than those who bore the Uniform of the Kings Guard.
It used to be a Standing reproach to the English in France that they cut off the Head of their King. This Example was become matter of Emulation and carried into Effect.
All Europe Stood aghast at this enormous Scene & not knowing how fruitless or dangerous it is to meddle with a People that is roused to any great act of Revolution in the prospect of some glorious change in favour of the People. In such Paroxisms they operate with irresistible Effect wherever they move in a Body: but left to themselves they generally break into Divisions & waste their Strength against one Another. This was too profound a Secret for German Heads. The King of Prussia protested against the Dissorders that prevailed in France passed the Rhine & Advanced into Champagne to repress them. His Invasion united the Jarring Spirits of Revolutionary France. His Stop & his subsequent Retreat excited Contempt & taught those whom he attempted to frighten to despise such Ennemies as he was. They saw how expedient it was for them to have Wars abroad. They formed Armies they took officers from the Ranks & from the lowest Station wherever genius or Ability could be found. Their neighbours taking men as they happend to be in the Way were unfit to compete with this Sudden Spring up of Genius without restraint from former Institutions and the meanest Soldier in the Ranks felt the Revolution & relyd on preferment if he could but distinguish himself.
Dumurier led them to  Victory in two or three Instances And when fortune turned against him on the Side of the Revolution he proposed to dispose of his Army & join the Austrians in Restoring the King: but even he did not understand what had happened or that the Army were Sensible of what they had gained by having preferment laid open to all Ranks and Spurned the Idea of a King And his Noblesse pretending to monopolize all preferments and Honours. The people were now Sovereign & the Army belonged to the People. When Dumurier met a Column on the March and Asked by whose Orders they Moved. He was Answered by the Question What are you & was fain to leap a Ditch to get out of Their Way & was followed by a Volley of Shot which he escaped to meditate on the effects of a Revolution which he hoped to Conduct. 
 It now became manifest that the National Troops of France were Sensible of their Share in the projected Revolution And had lost that Zeal for Royalty with which they were Supposed to be Animated more than any other Troops in Europe.
Of their concern  the Revolution they had been early admonished by a Resolution passed  the National Assembly that the Pay of the National Troops should be Augmented And the Uniform of the Kings Guard was seen to mix in the riotous mobs in the Streets of Paris, that Huzza’d for Liberty & the Subversion of Monarchy. It was given out that the Continuance of these dissorders & the Sitting of the popular Assembly were owing to the forbearance of the King who abhorred the Shedding of Blood and declined the Offer that  made of dissolving the Assembly by Force.
It was however well known at Court that this was no longer matter of choice. The Noblesse officers driven from Quarters by Some of  the Regiments or deserted there by Others were repairing to Court in numbers to declare their Willingness & inability to Serve His Majesty any longer. In this the Revolution consisted or by this alone it was effected. If the Army had adhered to the King the popular Assembly would have been dismissed And a Military Government had been Established in the House of Bourbon Innocent indeed Compared to that which has since taken place in the House of Buonaparte.
Neighbouring Nations reproved the proceedings of France And the Rulers of France knew it was their interest to be at War with all the World.
They sent Armies in every direction made Conquests & extended their frontier on every Side without regard to former possession or Right. Savoy Lombardy the Banks of the Rhine & the Low Countries were occupyed as Appendages of France. The Long Boasted Ballance of Power  was sett at Nought. 
The French Arms were becomeing irresistible: For when troops in the Ordinary State of men quiescent & no way Affected  what was passing could resist a Multitude roused by expectation of a rising Sun of Glory to their Country & unlimited Elevation to preferments & honours excited in the breast of every Individual & conducted by Leaders who had gained their Stations by the sole proof or Appearance of Genius & Superior Ability.
Their first successes qualified & prepared them for more. Even defeats did not damp or disspirit them. They returned to the Charge Again & Again untill Fortune turned in their favours And then by one effectual Effort they repaired or recovered what the Misfortunes of a Campaign or even of preceding Years seemed to have lost. A General discomfited in Egypt returned to take the whole conduct of  France upon himself and that State of Things Sollicited Peace with his Neighbours.
But the Powers to whom he applied had not yet taken into Consideration the Effects of a National Spirit roused to uncommon exertion by revolutionary prospects of Elevation & Glory. They had not yet considerd that a Moment of dejection if it take place in Such a Party is the fittest moment possible for Negotiation with an Ennemy of this Description. They rejected the Overtures of Negotiation with expressions of Contempt for the Party from whom they came And forced that Party already too well known for Superiour Ability to make trial of that Force with which he was entrusted & at a Single Blow to recover what whole unsuccessful Campaigns had Lost & to resume at once that formidable Aspect by which Europe had been so  much allarmed.
This Allarm was serious & well founded. The Great Nations of Europe Great Britain Austria & Russia con together And entered into League to oppose it. Each saw its own Safety at Stake and the Power of France ready to effect their Ruin. With this they could not be too deeply impressed. They were mistaken as to the means of counteracting it.
France is become dangerous. This was true: But the Inference that followed let us make War upon her was inconsiderate and false. Or The way to make successful War on Such a Power an Irish Blunderer Observed is to be at peace with her.
The Times were not yet passed in which the French Nation if left to themselves might not have broke to pieces gone to War among themselves & saved their Neighbours the trouble of reducing their too formidable greatness: But the sound of Allarm from Abroad was in reality an admonition to Suspend this dissensions and Waste their dangerous powers on the Frontier.
The Assembling of Armies from Austria & Russia at one time & that of Russia and Prussia at another time operated merely as so many Calls on the Military Leader of France so Superiour to every one that was likely to be opposed to him to come and possess himself of Germany & Poland quite to the Frontiers of Russia. Of these another Battle might possibly have given him possession & left no one to dispute his Empire from the Attlantick to the American Straits to the North of Kamchatka. 
It may be Asked then what are Nations to do in the neighbourhood of such a Power? Certainly not to provoke a War because his Force preponderates & ensures  him Success. If attacked the weak must defend himself for the most unequal chances of War may be preferable to Concessions, that amount to Subjugation or lead to that extreme at the discretion of the person to whom they are made.
Confederacy is no doubt the first resource of numbers against an overbearing Power which no one can Singly resist; and if they are so stupid or untractable as to act more from former Jealousies than from any Sense of common Interest; The case is desperate & they must Singly or Successively perish.
At one time the Prussians with a Secret Joy Saw the Austrians reduced & the Austrians in their turn enjoyed the down fall of Prussia And the Conqueror Whatever advantage he took of either Still left Silesia the Subject of their jealousies still as he found it. 
 And what could be expected from Parties who having Rights or Properties of their own to mantain accepted as a Gift from the Robber one the unoffending Republick and Territory of Venice. The Other a like gift of Hanover and then provoked a War with the Donor because he presumed to intrigue for confederacy with some of the Powers in their Neighbourhood.
Great Britain from her insular Situation & Naval defences may long sett the Powers of the Continent at defiance. And untill it please God to Inspire some mind with faculties fit to Contend for the Independence of Continental Nations it were vain to rely on any Confederacy to be formed of Such Parties. They must be sensible that if the Ruler of France were as powerful at Sea as he is by Land, No state or Province  could be safe from California to Japan And yet under Awe of this power they now cooperate with him in the Reduction of this Island Although they must know that whatever indulgence they now enjoy is owing merely to the limit which this Island yet setts to his Empire And that if it ever should be compleat their Properties & Persons will be at his discretion.Altho they obey him in shutting their Ports against the English he knows their dissaffection & heart and every where Stations troops of his own to ensure the effect.
The Partizans of Buonaparte say he has given peace to the continent of Europe. What Peace Subjugation! and Arraign the British Councils for refusing Peace. The meaning is obvious and it is Evident that any Peace tending to reduce the defences of Britain either at Sea or by Land would be ruinous not only  to her but to every Nation wh the Mandates of this European Sovereign could reach. His Vessels might be met with on the Ocean fetching his Contributions at once from Mexico & Japan.
What a Triumph for France may not some Vainglorious Frenchman say?
Such a Triumph as the Reduction and Spoil of distant Provinces were to Italy; The means of pampering corrupting & Alluring its rulers to every enormity of profligacy Cruelty & Vice most oppressive tremendous & ruinous to those who  nearest at hand & most immediately Subject to its hatred or Caprice. They were not the Heads of Daerans or Armenians which Nero wished to have sett upon neck to be struck off at a Blow: but those of the Romans inhabiting the Seven hills of Rome. And Tiberius whose Jealousy did not extend to the Provinces never ceased with his Informers and  Spies never ceased to Avenge the miseries of his own Mind on the most respectable Citizens of Rome & when remote from them on the very Instruments of his Vile & execrable Pleasures at Caprae. 
Is there then on the Continent of Europe or most Especially in France a Person so stupid as to wish for more Power in the Hands that already have so much.

XV. OF THE SEPARATION OF DEPARTMENTS PROFESSIONS AND TASKS RESULTING FROM THE PROGRESS OF ARTS IN SOCIETY 

Every man in the outset of Arts must do all for himself find at once his Subsistence his Shelter & his Rayment.
How much his State has been improved by the recourse of different Men to different employments and the Mutual Exchange or Commerce of their several productions need not be stated.
Every accommodation will be more Compleat & every Supply more plentyful as this Expedient advances its height: but like every thing else in human Life it has its limits.
A Pin we are told furnishes a separate Task to no less than twenty different Workmen & the implement is better & more cheaply furnished than it could be by fewer Workmen. Yet there are limits to this separation of Labour. The pointing  of a Pin may be compleated by one Person to divide that Task and pass it from one to another for the completion of it would be loss of time & risk of defect in the work by the attempt to join effects not justly fitted to one another.
Similar limits might be pointed  in the performance of every Mechanical Task. And even if we should admit that the improvement of Workmanship might be advanced indefinitely by this means: yet there are other considerations to make us pause in the pursuit of it. The comparative importance of the improvement gained gradually diminishes And ceases at last to be of sufficient value to compensate the trouble of farther Arrangement. Parts ceased to be equally well performd by separate hands as they would by the same hand. In Masonry for instance suppose the Stone to be placed by one Person and the Mortar placed by another The work probably would be inferiour to that which one tradesman  could produce: besides that they would probably interfere & interrupt one Another.
There is still a farther consideration of Consequence in this bussiness.
This Separation of Tasks is intended for the better Performance of each & for the Benefit of Mankind in general. If it should ever mar the performance or become prejudicial to human Nature; in either Case no doubt it ought to be stopped.
If in Painting for Instance The different Shades Lights & Colours were to  laid by different hands the work it is probable might Suffer And the Artists Fancy impaired by his being restrained from the Scope of his Conception which subsists not in parts but in the Unity of a Whole.
The Work of man may be important: but the Artist himself is still more so. It is true no doubt that altho Society is intended for the Good of its Members; yet the individual on Occasion must be sacrificed to the Whole.
Amidst the Departments of Bussiness and Profession there is great inequality of Effect in the Cultivation of Intellectual Faculty & Moral Habits and Some are of so mean a tendency in these Respects as to be matter of general Regret yet to be necessary for the general Accommodation And it may be difficult to fix the extent to which this may be endured & where it must be absolutely stopped. It may with confidence be said that Slavery is a point to which it should never Extend And yet there are voluntary Stations and occupations in human Society more debasing than Slavery necessarily or even Generally is. All we can say is that the less that there is of this Sort the better, And that Subordination however valuable is too dearly bought by the debasement of any order or Class of the  People.
There is a Principle of Subordination in the difference of Natural Talents in the distribution of Property Power & Dependence. 
The Poor must labour in order to subsist. The Rich may hire the Labour of Others but still find occasion on which to labour for themselves.
There is nothing debasing in either Condition but the Vices to which both are Obnoxious Envy & Rapacity on the part of The Poor Arrogance & Licentiousness on the part of the Rich. 
These Vices are found in the extremes & in all the intermediate orders of a People. The worst possible condition in which man can be conceived is that in which all Labour were precluded or in which all Power is vested in one and all Dependence imposed upon another. The nearest approach to this Condition is that of Master & Slave  however constituted whether as a Civil relation of Proprietor & Property or Sovereign & Subject.
Of These The Political Servitude is debasing in the greatest de & to the greatest Extent. The Courtiers of Tiberius or Nero even the Senators of Neros time were debased to a degree far beyond that of the Slave to an Ordinary Master.
Such abuses however it may be said are not necessary and unavoidable in the Subdivision of Labour or the Subordination of Ranks. Here indeed it is necessary that the human faculties should be unequally cultivated in proportion as the task assigned to each tends to exercise And improve them. In a Person whose task is a mere movement of the hand or the Foot as is The Case in the distribution of Labour which is made in some branches of manufacture may be supposed to remain in some measure of Torpor while that of a Master who directs the Whole or that of an Artist who has many things to combine  many Incidents to guard against and a choice to be made amidst a Variety of Expedients which different occasions require is still in the very state which Nature has devised for her Intelligent order of Being tending at once to exercise and Cultivate their faculties.
The Subdivision of Tasks tends in some Instances to mar the effects of this Destination & to improve them in Others. The mind of a Tradesman in many Instances is less practised in thought than that of a Savage While in more liberal Stations of Life the mind Profits by exemption from Inferiour Cares & Anxieties & the effect of more extensive Views And the more Arduous combinations of Thought.
Men are carryed along in the Progress of Establishments and of Arts as Vessels afloat in the Water are carryed along by the Torrents to which it is Subject. And it is uncertain how far information respecting the direction of their  movements may enable them in any degree to change that direction or modify the result.
Men certainly Act from opinion as well as Instinct or Habit and Correct opinion is desireable in itself whatever be the measure of its Influence in the general Affairs of Men.
It has been Observed that by the Separation of Tasks & Professions The work is improved and Obtained at a Smaller Cost. The Artist also is sometimes improved in his designation of Intelligence & Manhood: But if neither is always the Case; it is no doubt of Moment to distinguish the Instances in which the Separation of Arts & Profession is unfavourable in the Result whether in respect to the Character of the Artist or the Value of his Work.
In the Mass of the People it is not required of a Tradesman that he be knowing in any Branch but his own nor does any collateral Skill enable him the better to execute his peculiar Work  except where different works proceed upon some Common Principle of Science.
For those who are termed Gentlemen or persons dissengaged from peculiar pursuits or applications there is no peculiarity of Skill required. Of them it is requird that they be Happy That is to say Wise Benevolent Courageous and Temperate and the less they possess any habit to the exclusion of Others equally valuable so much the Better.
In Actual Profession or Publick Station the Case is different. Scholars & Men of Science And publick Functionaries of any denomination have their Tasks Assigned them and must devote themselves in a peculiar manner to some Particular Branch. It is so in mere Science as well as in the learned Professions of Medicine or Law.
To Obtain what may be Obtaind in any Branch of Science it is necessary that it be made the Object of peculiar Study: but yet to know one Branch & nothing more is to be a Tradesman not a  Scholar. The Sciences are more  less connected and give mutual lights to one Another. To possess them all is to know the Order of Nature And the Person whose knowledge is limited to a particular Branch must know even that the less Perfectly that he is ignorant of its place & connection in the general Order of Nature. To be a Man of Science on the best model thus it does not exclude all separate & peculiar Pursuits but requires a Liberal extensive view to the Nature & importance of Collateral Studies. It is thus the Scholar may Avoid that narrow and illiberal Contempt which Professional Men sometimes entertain for every Branch of Study but their own. The Mechanic or the Chymist despises the Moralist & is equally treated in his Turn. The mere Lawyer & the mere Doctor of Medicine are but ungracious members of Society. And but lame practitioners even in what they profess from a defect  in those habits which are required in the concourse of men.
In mere Manual operations The Man is sometimes sacrificed to his Trade an separate parts are assigned to different Workmen who have to perform a Simple movement of the hand or the foot to save necessity of Thought or of time in changing Tools or of thought in passing from one Step to Another. It is Evident however That the Principle of Subdivision which is so Successful in Manufacture cannot be applied with the Same advantage in those operations where Man himself with all his Faculties is required in every Step as well as in the result or Combination of the Whole.
In the Bussiness of State and of War there are no doubt parts that Approach to mere Mechanism And in these the Statesman & the Warriour like the Master in a Counting House may have his Tools or his  workmen to whom the principle of Subdivision Applys & in respect to which The Profession of a Statesman and Warriour are materially different.
The Statesman must have his Clerks & Separate Boards of Commission in Matters of Laws & Revenue The Warriour must have his Tacticians & Leaders of Division from the Smallest of a Platoon to the greatest of a Column Line or Wing of an Army. He too must have his Clerks, his Commissaries & his Providers of every requisite to an Army. But the greatest Error that can be committed in the affairs of Men is to Suppose that the Genius or Art of a Statesman or Warriour terminates in the possession or Combination of such Mechanical parts together.
The Statesman or Warriour must be so far Master of those mechanical parts as to  know when they are well or ill performed by those to whom they are entrusted: but his own part is that of a Man fit to lead among Men on whom men will rely for Preservation or Success in all their Undertakings. Penetration & Strength of Mind Wisdom & Courage Goodness or Benevolence that Encourage a Friend Rapidity & Force that Strike Terror into an Ennemy are at once his Tools & his Arts. The Statesman must be Skillful to know how every Measure will affect every order of the People.
How the most dependent may be made to feel Secure in his right how the most powerful may be made to feel the restraints of Justice humanity & Good Order. In these respects the Warriour too is a Statesman And must practise all the Art & Wisdom of Peace in his own Line or  encampment that he may be the more terrible in the View of his Ennemy. Of this Art Socrates expressed himself like a Master no less than in Any Other department of Moral or Civil Wisdom. Of Military Tactics he said nothing Can be done without order or form: but a Warriour must be more than a Tactician He must be Cautious & Rash a Thief & a Thiefcatcher Cruel & humane Penurious & Prodigal Cautious & Rash.
His Tools or Weapons Are Men & he must know them, how to excite & how to restrain them what can be expected from them & what not & when required how they can be roused to do all that men will or Can Do.
The Departments of State Political Civil & Military in well Regulated Establishments are on account of the Mechanical details in which they differ generally Separated But in the Heads under whom those details are conducted  proceed on the Same grounds of Knowledge & of Power.
The knowledge of Men & the Power it gives is the Essence of Ability in either Department And that Strength of mind which gives an Ascendant over Men is equally required in both.
The Mechanical details in which those departments differ tho necessary are comparatively of small importance: because they may be learned & practised by persons of Vulgar capacity And ought never to be mistaken for the test or constituent of Ability in the Heads of either Department. Men of either Department are apt to be jelous of the other One or the Other may have the Ascendant under different Establishments. And whether the Statesman is to choose the Warriour or The Warriour to choose the Statesman It is evident that the Elector ought to be acquainted in either Case with the  merit on which his choice is to proceed. The Statesman ought to be acquainted with the Professional peculiarities of a Soldier that he may not Mistake them for the whole grounds of his choice or Sufficient to Justify if he commit the publick Safety to  incompetent. A Statesman or Minister who errd in this particular has been known to say. The military is not my Department. I had recourse to the Profession for a Person long Practised & Established in it he is responsible & not I for the Consequences. The mere Military Despot on the contrary may make as ill a choice of those he employs in the Civil or Political Depart: And it is Evident that in any well Established Community The Qualities of Either department should be so well combined that neither could plead a ruinous Ignorance. 
A Person ignorant of War  and its Forms is as unfit to be  Statesman as a Person unacquainted with Variable Winds & Storms is to be a mariner.
And to say that a Statesman know nothing of War or a Warriour knows nothing of The State is to detract equally from the Merit or Ability.
In the Roman Commonwealth, in many respects the Model of Felicity to Nations, The Departments of State & of War were not only Strictly Allied & known to each other but for the most  actually filled & Conducted by the same Person. All the Distinction they made between the first Magistrate & the Commander in Chief of their Armies was that he was Magistrate within the Walls of Rome & the other outside of those Walls. He acted from his Office in either & in both these Capacities. The mere forms of either were such as the meanest Could learn and never intercepted the View of his Country or his Own in the choice of Persons to whom they might entrust their Affairs. Whether in the Roman Magistrates Gown or the Sagum of the Legionary Soldier.
This Union of Departments was early provided for in the very first Elements of the Roman Constitution. It was provided that every Citizen should State himself as part of his Countrys Strength & to qualify him for any Civil or Political advance by having actually Served a Certain Term in the Wars of his Country. 
Altho The Talent for Affairs of State in general and War in particular is the same or founded in the Same knowledge of Men and Ascendant of the mind yet the exercises & the habits of Body they require Are different. Warriours have been distinguished in Youth or early Life. Statesmen profit more by experience And the deliberation of Maturity and Age.
As Military Tactics and manual Exercise are within the competence of Children they ought not to be neglected amidst the Rudiments of Education  in early Life. So that what every one knows or possesses could not be mistaken for the Criterion of great Ability or fitness for the highest & most important functions of human Life As the Habits of a Clerk in Office or a drill Serjeant on the Parade are made to pass for the qualifications of Statesmen or leaders & commanders of Men in the Field.
Nothing is supposed more important than Education. And the world & Abounds with Institutions or Establishments for that purpose yet Government is Seldom attentive to what is taught in those Institutions And even in these Later ages of great Experience few things except reading writing & Arithmetic that can be of use in after Life are taught either at School or College. The Gramar of Dead Languages The Mythology which served as the foundation of Antient Poetry Even the prosody or fabric of Verse or Metre are crammed down the Throats of high & Low of Futur Tradesmen Merchants Senators And Soldiers Rank & File Citizens And Drovers and little with any one except the habit of being obliged in Childhood to regard what Others inculcate And which indeed however little it may seem is indeed very great And actually the most important attainment of Such Schools as we have provided for the Education of the Coming Age.
The occasions & the manners of Human Society are transient And Successive. The Institutions of one Age to accommodate Ages that follow at any considerable interval are to be changed or modifyed And no Age can with advantage Legislate unalterably for the Ages that follow. 
On this Account a late writer of Eminence on the Wealth and Other Concerns of Nations places Education on the same foot with Trade and Other concerns most Safely entrusted to the Par concerned & reprobates fixed Institutions  or Intervention of Government. From this general Rule however he excepts every Case in which Defence or publick Safety is at Stake And of Course should except Education so far as the publick Safety is concerned. A Committee of Parliament or Other publick authority might no doubt with great Advantage be interposed to report from Age to Age what Regulations might be requird in Publick Schools to prepare the rising Generation for that part which necessity might impose on every Individual for the safety of his Country. He who cannot defend himself is not a Man & he who cannot take part in the defence of his Country is not a Citizen nor worthy of the Protection which the Laws of  Country bestow. Other cares may be delegated & become matter of Separate Profession  to a part of the People: but to set Valour apart as the Characteristic of a few were to change Virtue & happiness itself as a Matter of Profession & Study peculiar to a devision of the Community. For furnish Shoes or erect Palaces may be the Object of Separate Professions but to be man is the equal concern of all And the want of Courage degrades him no less than the want of Understanding or Truth.
Men are Wise to Avail themselves of every Advantage which the Subdivision of Arts and the Separation of Employments can give: but where this expedient is noxious to the Genius & Character of man it is Wisdom to check or restrain it. 
Let the Statesman be Ashamed to own he is no Warriour And the Warriour to own he is no Statesman. Under these confessions the one is a mere Clerk in Office The other a mere prize  fighter & a Bully. 


XVI. OF THE FREEDOM OF WIT AND HUMOUR AND THEIR VALUE AS A TEST OF RECTITUDE AND TRUTH 

The Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to man, have been comprised under Three general Titles.
1. The Law of Self-preservation.
2. The Law of Society or Congregation.
3. The Law of Estimation.
The 1st comprehends many or most of the Animal Instincts & propensities with the love of Ease & Safety &c.
The Second comprehend together with some Animal Instincts The preference of Company to Solitude Sympathy Benevolence Love Friendship Justice And Good Repute.
The third comprehends all the Phaenomena of Esteem or Contempt whether well or ill founded & terminating  in Vice or Virtue. Such as Vanity and Pride Integrity Magnanimity & Elevation of Mind. Well directed it is the Principle of Magnanimity & Just Ambition. Ill directed it is the principle of Arrogance Pride Vanity & erroneous Ambition.
In either way it is one of the Strongest or most powerful Principles in human Nature.
In respect to Character or Dignity it is Approbation or Admiration or the Contrary Reprobation or Contempt in all their Phases & Phaenomena.
Among the Phaenomena of reprobation may be reckoned Ridicule or Laughter.
To dissapprove or to be displeased as to Approve is to be pleasd.
These different Affections admit of indefinite Gradations.
In exception to the general Rule Ridicule or Laughter though excited by defect is not disspleasure: but is in a  peculiar Manner respecting Others joyous & Acceptable And appears to derogate from the Beneficent Character of Nature founded in the tendency of Evil or defect to give Pain and of Good or Excellence to give pleasure hereby exciting a Will to Avoid the one and Aim at the Other.
This Law indeed even with Respect to the Ridiculous holds in the concern which every Man takes in his own Character. Laughter is pleasing but no one likes to be laughed at. The Buffoon who makes him ridiculous expects to be Esteemd for his Art in doing so.
The Follies and defects of mankind are so numerous & Frequent that if each were matter of Hatred or serious Indignation; human life would be a Scene of Melancholy Anguish and despair Such as the Parent feels for the Defects of his Children or the Coxcomb feels for the dissappointments of his Vanity.
It appears therefore  among the Final Causes Suggested of the Beneficent kind that while every one hates to be laughed at in his own Person And is therefore directed to shun the Ridiculous yet many of the defects and errors so frequent in human Life may be matter of Animadversion & Censure without casting the Gloom of Melancholy or Severe displeasure over so many of the Scenes of Society & Intercourse as might furnish occasion to serious discontent.
Meanwhile it is well known That Nature does not admit of Ridicule or Laughter in every Case of Reprobation. And it were of Consequence to distinguish the province of Serious Indignation from that  Ridicule Laughter or merriment.
This disstinction like many others is Obvious in the extreme but Slight & difficult in some of the intermediat Occasions that in certain degree admit either of Ridicule or serious Reprobation.
 Malice we may assume is ever matter of Serious Reprobation not of Ridicule. Timidity is Sometimes the one & sometimes the Other. So is dullness of Fancy & insensibility of Heart Irascibility & Tameness, &c. &c.
Reprobation is the lot of Crime and Depravity.
Ridicule is the Lot of Imbecility & Defect.
Just Reprobation is the Test of one.
Just Ridicule is the Test of the other.
But Actual Reprobation or Actual Laughter may be erroneous and misslead & is not without inquiry to be received as a Test of Demerit or of Defect.
The Rhetorician by his Figures of Speech can lay the Colours of Depravity on the Innocent. Or the Colours of Defect & Ridicule on the Respectable & the Just. The Powers of Epithet and Metaphor to these effects are well known. The Epithet of Divus Julius made a  Saint or Sanctified a Bloody Adventurer in search of Power.
The designation of Contented Cuckold was meant to throw contempt on Marcus Aurelius & in some minds may have its Effects.
An imaginary Personage with nothing of Socrates but the Name brought Ridicule or dissrespect on that Person who has in fact remained the admiration of Ages.
Tho Ridicule always implies some supposed Defect. The imputation of it is no more a Test of Truth or Reality than the Imputation of a Crime is a test of Guilt.
Ridicule is most commonly the Effect of incongruity or some kind of odd Combination. Some feature of meanness with Pride or Vanity, a Dish Clout pinned to the Tail of a Person otherwise finely dressed. It is possible therefore to clap such Additions on Respectable Subjects & to raise  a Laugh.
The Lord Mayor of London on Horse is an Object of Respect but so mounted & eating Custard on Horseback on his way to the Conventicle is Ridiculous.
Lord Shaftesbury contends for the Freedom of Wit & Humour And in whatever Sense his words are understood it must be granted. For in all human Establishment if Wise & Just Crimes alone are restraind Every Innocent Act of the mind is free And it is in proportion to this degree of Freedom that minds can enjoy themselves or make any Valuable attainment Under Restraint. The Genius is Suppressed as Lamps in a Box are soon extinguished: But Wit & Humour may incur the Guilt of a Crimes & Crimes in every shape must be restrained. The Danger or Safety of this Policy depends intirely on the Character of the Tribunal before which such Crimes are tryed. Neither  the ordinary Magistrate nor the Priest is Safely intrusted with this Branch of Judicature.
The Culprit has a right to be tryed by his own fellow Citizens who are equally interested in the Safety of his Innocence or the punishment of his Guilt.
But in the Terms Wit & Humour The Noble Author does not seem to mean Ridicule but rather what is commonly termed Good Humour or Exemption from Acrimony or personal Animosity too common in Controversy or Theological Disputes. He himself indeed seldom attempts Ridicule properly so called or when he does so should be Sensible that the Ridicule employs against Certain Controversy under Analogy of Foot Ball as it is just in some Sectarian Contests might be unjust if applied to matter of Serious debate in National Councils or in Pleadings before a Tribunal of Justice.
Ridicule like any other Rhetorical Figure may be employed in any Cause.
The Art itself like any other Power compard to its opposite weakness or defect is Good but to be loved must be employed for beneficial not mischievous purposes. And even so employed is not The Test either of Truth or of Justice.
Notwithstanding the general Rule that Crimes of every Form are to be restrained it is well understood in the Policy of Free Nations, that it is less dangerous to overlook matters actually Criminal than to Unsheath the Sword of the Magistrate in every Case to repress them. Every thing human has its defects or Abuses And the Abuses of Power are more tremenduous than those of the despicable & unauthorised delinquent. Summum Jus therefore may be Summa Injuria when to correct the smallest dissorders an Open is made for much  greater.
There is therefore no Article in the Criminal Code more to be Guarded than the Law of Libel.
It may perhaps be safely Admitted that altho Calumny is punished mere Ridicule may be overlooked. There are Evils in Society which Ridicule alone can Suppress such as Solemn impostures under grave pretences of Religion or Wisdom or Science. And even where merit itself is unjustly attacked with this Weapon it is difficult to Ascertain the dammage of being laughed at before a Tribunal of Justice.
As it is difficult to form any general Rule in this matter or to be secure of its safe Application if formed The Trial by Jury is perhaps the best expedient that has been devised against the Evils whether of Criminality or Penality that may be incurred in this Matter.

XVII. WAKING DREAMS 

Something now Exists, says Dr Samuel Clerk. Therfore Something must have existed Eternally That is necessarily. But whatever exists necessarily must be boundless in its way as Space & time are Boundless. For how can supplyable limit or defect be necessary. Of this I can offer no proof: but in my thought it is insusceptible of Doubt as my own Existence. 
This Existence however & much more is contingent & Nascent, the Creation of Antecedent Power.
 In Creation there is a manifest display of Ends & Means. Or in other words the Creating Power as meaning or is Intelligent.
From what Power Else could come this Germ of Intelligence in me but from an Intelligent Source or Cause.
If the Necessity of Existence amounts to boundless Existence in Eternal Perfection The Necessary Being must have been of the highest order Supremely Excellent Supremely happy Omnipotent Wise & Good: for short of this Existence would be subordinate Contingent & Perisable.
As it appears absurd to Suppose that dead materials could engender Living Intelligence it appears so  no less to suppose that mere Intelligence could call up solid matter out of Nothing. 
All this Perception of Material World is a mode of my intellectual Being And the Universe itself consists of Eternal mind and the Germs of Nascent Intelligence the ofspring of Will & Eternal Intelligent Power.
The Perceptions of which I am conscious from abroad have their cause distinct from me. As those which I mean to give around me have their Cause in me. As I mean what I do so what is done to me of the same kind is meant also.  Part comes from Other Beings like myself. But the greater part from Being infinitely Superiour And Mere Perceptions or perceptibles are the means of communication between Created Minds & the Revelation of eternal Intelligence & Creative mind.
They are in the Society of men not only the means of communication:
but The Occasion of Action the materials of Art the exercise & improvement of progressive intelligence tending to fit & Qualify it for Other & more elevated Scenes of Being where other perceptions & means of communications will be made to succeed to these.
If the Existence  of Mind is Eternally necessary it must be boundless in Number as well  Perfection. But infinite number of mind infinitely Perfect must be at one. The same Consciousness the same Will the same meaning if ther were any difference one or other must be imperfect,
which is absurd. If the Germs of Nascent Intelligence Advance indefinitely & approach to infinitely they tend to what they possibly never can reach to be at one with God.
And if this were Possible the Eternal mind is continually Emitting its Germs And these continually returning to be at one with himself although this be too high for Belief what can be too high, for the wish of Intelligence or the Aspiring Progression of a Nature that must forever have an Aim Superiour to its actual attainments.
Such dreams are but a Stretch of the human faculties beyond their limits:
but it were pleasant even awake to think that all existence is mind Eternal & Perfect; or Nascent & progressive the only Subject of Excellence or defect of Beauty or deformity of Happiness or Misery. All Other Subjects or Names are its Modes or Relations important in being accommodated to its operations  the Materials of its Arts the expressions of its meanings & the Substratum on which are impressed the Vestiges of its Wisdom Goodness & Power. These are the distinctions of a Supposed Material World branched into Millions of Suns and Planets in voluble or quiescent order as the exigencies of mind require. To created minds revealing the Majesty of God,
and furnishing the medium of Communication with one Another.
On this Globe called Earth Invention and its Aim Variety for ever seem to Reign but Order is the more Conspicuous that parts appear to Slight it and hasten to accumulate a Chaos of discordant Parts: yet all is Harmony and the fit Conjunction of an Active and a Passive Scene.
What Mind is here Besides the Eternal God and the Created Mind of man we know not. The Work bespeaks its Author and in part even to Man its End.
The board is spread for him and coverd with a fare that is fit to nourish him. See but the infant born today  feeble but to breath in Air & utter Cries for Aid. But how kindly is the Scene prepared for his reception. The breast is made to teem with Milk. And under the Names of Parent Servants are engagd to minister in all his wants & Comforts with a Zeal & Assiduity which neither Wealth nor power could ever purchase or command.
Is he therefore nursed through Infancy to be abandoned at the Age of Man? So he is apt to think before the light of Science dawn upon his Mind.
 The Parent on whose breast he hung is forced away. Why is not the Woods and Fields to which he Seems Consigned prepared to yield him Rayment Food and Shelter: Why is he turned out naked to the Storm. Why are the Fields & woods so barren & fit to yield him nought but penury & Toil?
Is this the Lot to which the pampered Infant was preserved. And thus the Seeming favourite of Nature abandoned to himself. Why is the milk that fed his infant Organs now withheld. Why is want difficulty and Danger provided by the same beneficient Power  which Ministered so Kindly to his early wants. What has that Power bestowd upon him now in lieu of former favours. 
Those very wants difficulties & Dangers of which he now Complains. To the Active is requird A Scene of Action. To the Intelligent a Labyrinth or maze where Science Triumphs and where Contemplation Soars.
For the feeble Infant all is done but for the adult all is left to be done by himself and his very life prolonged by labours.
 The Ruling Passions of Men are Interest Dignity & Pleasure. Out of these in various measures they propose to effect their Happiness.
Interest consists Chiefly in matters of Property or Concerns of Animal Life.
Dignity consists in matters of Estimation. Such as Rank however constituted. Merit Personal Excellence And Beauty.
Pleasure consists in agreeable Sensations Occupations & Prospects & requiring exemption from Pain.
The best effect of Interest is  Frugality. Industry and Ingenious Art.
Its Evils are Covetousness Avarice & Rapin.
The best effects of Dignity are Integrity and Magnamity. Its worst effects are Pride Contemptuousness Vanity and Ambition or Lust of Power.
The best Effects of Pleasure are its Allurement to what is Salutary in Diet Excercise and amicable Society.
Its worst Effects are Effeminacy Debauchery and Prodigality.
Among those who have reasoned on the Subject  of Happiness some have recommended the good Effects of Pleasure. 
Others the Good Effects of Elevation or Dignity. That is Integrity & Magnanimity.
Interest was admitted by all in its best effects to be commensurate to the Value of animal Life And Frugality in Particular to be a Guardian of Virtue as well as Security & independence.
The Worst of Pleasure as a general appellation of Good, is to endanger Selection to lay open the mind to every present Allurement. And preclude Deliberation  where it is of all other Departments of conduct the most wanted.
Hence a Supposed life of Pleasure is for the most part Idle inconsiderate frivolous & debauched.
Happiness Pleasure & Merit are in the apprehension of most men Separate Names for different things.
But as they are objects of the most ardent Passions of Men Nature cannot be ultimately so inconsistent with itself. As to engage men in equal passion for inconsistent things. The presumption then is that when these objects are well understood they will meet like converging Rays of Light in a Focus the same to all.
The Happiness & Perfection of Intelligent Being are one and the same point.
Hence it is that in the order of things the Progress of Intelligence is provided for as the progress to Happiness.
Man in infancy has every thing provided for him in Manhood must provide for himself & Subsist by the Sweat of his brow. All his Faculties are called furth in Exertion and thereby improved. The  mistakes are corrected by experience And in the End Intellectual Power & Felicity are compl.
Why is not all Nature so formed at once?
Ask the Eternal Principle of Existence why he prefers Variety to Sameness.
Why in all living Natures He prefers Progressive to Stationary Forms.
He is the Creator of all: but the Intelligent to Obtain their distinctive Value must be in part at least the formers or Authors of what themselves become. This in the feeble line  of Created Being is that Image of the Maker which Man is said to bear.
He is like Clay in the hands of the Potter but that Potter is in part no other than himself. 
Look then from this point of View on the Scene of human things. The Germ of Intelligence by which man is distinguishd The occasion by which it brought into Excercise and into the Train of improvement.
Observe the Laws which give at once Stability to the Scene And furnish him with a handle by which to lay hold of it and influence events  his Purpose.
The Law of  Nature informs him what he must lay his Account within the undisturbed Course of things or in known conjunctions And what he may Obtain for his own purpose by modelling the Conjuncture in which the Law is to Operate.
The Law  Gravitation that would bring every Weight to the Ground is made in building by plummet is made to give Stability & firmness to Walls & Towers of Indefinite height.
Will man complain that this or any Other Law of Nature is never Suspended even to prevent harm from its Effects. It is a Sufficient Answer to say that if the Law were ever suspended it never Could be trusted at all. 
If Plants were not raised from their Seed Man would have no Power in the Fields & to obtain a Plantation could only Pray to the Almighty to favour him with one to his mind.
Observe then how man is fitted to his place & his place to him. 
On this point hangs the Order of his Planet. And tho Planets be multiplyd to Infinity, they can reveal no more than this.


XVIII. OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH WE ACT IN HUMAN LIFE 

Of these the shun is called Evil. 
Equivalent terms are common to every Language. They may be well or ill Applied And the Object may be real or mistaken.
The Accumulation of real Good is Happiness of real Evil is misery.
This disstinction therefore is the first or  most important Object of inquiry in human Life. Actions of men are regulated by what they would shun as by what they would Obtain. And in applying the great disstinction of Good & Evil they take different courses And act upon disstinctions seemingly different from one Another.
Of these the number & variety may be indefinite; but we may endeavour to comprehend them under a few heads.
1. The  disstinction of Pleasure & Pain.
2. The disstinction of Profit & Loss.
3.d The disstinction of Ri an Wrong.
4. The disstinction of Excellence & defect.
Under one or Other of these disstinctions the whole may be comprehended.
Even the first is sometimes supposed to comprehend the Whole.
In all our desires or Aversions Gratification is pleasant  And this pleasure is the Object in all And the contrary is the Pain we would Shun in all.
But this would be to take away all difference of pursuit or Character and to make Epitetus no less a Voluptuary than Heliogabalus or Sardanapalus. 
The disstinctions which  mad in every Language are matters of Experience & like the Land mark pointed out from time immemorial are of use in directing ours without recourse in every particular case to the  Observations on which they were founded.
Pleasure in Common Language is no longer the Object of all. 
opposed to Bussiness to Duty & to Honour And the person who acts chiefly on the disstinction of pleasure And pains is of a very different Character from the person who acts on the disstinction of Profit & Loss Right & Wrong &c.
Immediate pleasure attracts him immediate Pain repels him.
This is the Charcter of Childhood even of Youth.
 If continued it would exclude all Patience or Fortitude And as many of the greatest Blessings present themselves under an Aspect of Labour and Pleasure would lead to many of the greatest Mistakes.
It has frequently led to Sensuality Effeminacy And Prodigality.
The disstinction of Profit & Loss is that on which the Trades Professional Acts. It forms the Motive of Interest or what is vulgarly called Selfishness  and is the Parent of Avarice.
The disstinction of Right & Wrong is found generally in all the Characters dispositions And Actions of Men.
At the moment we are Conscious of an End or Purpose we are Conscience of its Innocence or Guilt.
When we recollect such a Purpose attempted or carryed into Effect we are Seized with a Conscience of Merit or Demerit Remorse Shame &c.
Hence the operation  of Intelligence is termed Conscience & figuratively moral Sense or Sense of Right & W.
Men Sometimes Act because it is Right to do  or becase it would be wrong to omit But in many Instances also it serves only to modify the course of Action on the disstinctions of Pleasure and Pain of Profit & Loss.
On the first of these disstinctions it is Moderation & Temp On the other it is Justice Integrity Liberality & Char.
The disstinction of Excellence & Defect applys to all those Considerations on which men are entitled to Esteem or to  contempt. There is not a commonly Stated or more Powerful  in its effects. It gives Subordination to every Society And lurks or flames in the mind of every Individual. No distinction can be more real than the Superiority of Intelligence and its Specific Accomplishments of Wisdom & Goodness to the opposite defects of Folly & Wickedness yet a distinction so commonly entertained as this of Estimation  and Rank is likely to be as commonly mistaken or missapplied. No one can be altogether indifferent to personal Qualities yet how Seldom do they bear man against Riches Birth even equipage & Dress.
This disstinction if the occasion of Mananimity And just Elevation of Mind to some is the occasion of Vanity & Contemptuous Pride to Others It is indeed the Source of great Action, but in Meaner Minds the Source of  Emulation Envy & Detraction. None Supports the Mind through difficulty danger & Suffering but none Supports Error & Mistake more Obstinately against better information or Correction.
Hence it is that Fashion prevails over reason & every consideration of Use or Convenience.
Although we have thus Stated these distinctions Apart and Asignd them their Votaries Separately, yet there is probably no person  so devoted to any one as to be indifferent to any Other. The Miser tho’ chiefly intent on profit and loss is not only Sensible to Pleasure & Pain but has also some points of estimation on which he values himself. Men differ in most Instances in respect to the degree in which they attend to one of these distinctions more than the Others. And this degree appears also in the degree to which their Characters Are Affected by their Partiality.
 Characters are affected by it.
The distinctive Votary of Pleasure & Pain of Right &  of Profit & loss of Excellence and defect bear a suitable Aspect in their Manners & incline to the habits whether Good or ill to which the Basis of Action on which they stand inclines them. Hence it is that among the Vices Sensuality Superstition Avarice & Pride have more hold of some. And among the Virtues Integrity Industry Economy &  Magnanimity have a preferable hold of Others.
As man is thus presented with various distinctions & is destined to Suffer as well as to enjoy: His Happiness, tho’ perhaps leading to a Single point at Last ________ Concourse with God: in his way to it can be no Other than the State of most Enjoyment & least Suffering of which he is Susceptible. This is at once his Excellence His prosperity or as we term it his Virtue.
In respect to Animal Pleasure it is Temperance.  In Respect to his mind it is Wisdom Goodness & Power of thought exempted from Spleen Fear Malice or any torturing Passion.
In his Relations around him It is order or beneficent Ends pursued with Apposite Means.
In respect to the Whole it is Confidence in the Order of Nature or in Other Words in the Wisdom & Goodness of God.
In the pursuit of Happiness Man must sometimes forgo present Enjoyment or incur present Suffering.
The Account to be ballanced is  long & intricate comprehending all Effects and future Consequences far exceeding the reach of his comprehension or View.
To remedy or in Some degree to supply this defect has the Creator given a discernment of Right & Wrong. With this Power in every case  need not look beyond the Case in which we are to act & if we do right have no occasion to fear the Consequences.
Here indeed we may mistake & Conscience itself may fail. But as the Mariner to keep his intended Course has only to guard the Compass from disturbances So the moralist has only to Study the disstinction of Right  wrong to be assumed in the choice he ought to make on all occasions.
In this lys the distinction between Epicurus And Zeno. Do said the first what upon the whole is most pleasant and least painful. A good if we were competent to apply it. Do said the Other what God has enabled  to discern as Right. He has made this Power umpire in every Case & Censorial inspector in every Act of Will that it might interfere and Govern in all. 

XIX . OF THE CATEGORIES 

Aristotle in his ambitiously comprehensive arrangements of Being has referred the Whole to ten Heads called Categories or Meanings and Matter of Statement of which The first or ουσια is unfortunately translated into our Language by the term Substance & is made to mean what is not only real but substantial and in this Sense  mathematical Point tho a meaning with Place Relations &c is not a Substance.
The Meaning of Categories with this Correction may be stated in our Language under  Terms Subject or Thing Quality  Quantity,
Number Relation Power Action Passion Time & Place. 
It is pleasing thus to conceive all Being as Meaning or Matter of Statement to Mind And in Fact as all things flow from Design or Mental Purpose So they are essentially Relative to mind for any distinction of Good or Evil Excellence or defect applicable to them. A Planetary System we say is Magnificently Beautifull. The Pearl The Ruby & the Diamond are the Ornament of Scepters & of Crowns. But Suns & Planets are the Ornaments of Scepters & of Crowns, but Suns & Planets composed of Diamond or Pearl were but Dross without the mind that formed & beholds them.
The Material Universe itself is but the Emanation of  Omniscience & Almighty Power. And its fairest Corner but  Department for the Nursery & exercise of Nascent or Created Minds. Without Intelligence there would be neither Good nor Evil Excellence or Defect. Count if you Can the Myriads of human being that every moment  sends into Life. For them the Sun is made to Shine & for them this diversifyed Scene is opened that each may Act & lose or Acquire for himself & as he loses or Acquires Intelligence the essence of Being proceed for Ever or Sink into the Pit of Nonentity from which he Sprang.
The Soul of Man we say is  immortal. It is not essentially So. It arose from Mortality & from Death previously Eternal had Life & thought bestowed. These in Essence are but a Power to Ascend among Being. If it does not Ascend it will Sink among Beings & even forfeit its Power.
Why has the Almighty proposed this Alternative.
That there might be like him a Power however a Power tho in a remote degree Self forming to Wisdom & Goodness. Upon this Plan Socrates is gone up to Eternity & his Murderers Sunk again into Dust.
 Give Scope to Thought.
It must have a Subject.
The Subject may have its Qualities Its Quantity Its Number Its Relations Its Actions Its Passions Its Time & Place and so Forth. Such are the Categories of Aristotle. The first or ουσια Being or Subject We Translate into Substance without  considering how much that Term in our Vulgar use of it is apt to Mislead. Substance in our imagination has dimension and place and however airy or Vapid occupies Space.
Ουσια is a mere Being or Subject tho no more than a Mathematical Point a Thought or Affection. It is therefore mere Entity or Abstraction of Being.
From this most General or Universal Term of Entity or Subject The first Step towards Specification Is Power: and we may venture to say That  all Being is Power.
Corporeal Being is the Power of Resistance to Change.
The Change it resists is that of Place or disposition of Parts. That is from Rest to Motion from Union to Separation of Parts Change of Velocity Change of Direction & so forth.
In the Exercise of this Power of Resistance The following Laws are Observed.
Body remains in its State of Rest or uniform Motion till some Force is impressed.
The Change is proportioned  to the Force impressed.
In the Application of Force Action and Reaction are equal & Contrary as much as the Force gains upon the Resistance it expends of itself.
Vegetation is a Power of Organisation And Assumption of Nourishment to growth & dimension. Animation is a Spontaneous Power joined to Sensation Perception & Choice or instinctive direction. All the Powers of Animation may accompany Intelligence.
Intelligence is a Power to know  to Compare to Deliberate to Judge and to determine resolve or Will.
It knows by Consciousness Sensation Perception or Experience And Testimony. The Powers of Intelligence constitute Personal Existence & Resposibility.
Persons are Many & may hold Communication or be known to one Another.
The Powers of Communication are Sensations & Perceptions.
These are Mental Appurtenances  and may have no other form of Existence: But as to every mind they come originally from Abroad They are Evidence of  external Existing Cause. And as they may be emitted in rturn are to different Persons means of Communication or Evidence of Coexisting Persons & their meanings.
In Knowledge nothing can be more certain than that which cannot be Doubted. 
Existence therefore is Certain And in the Form of some must have been Necessary  and Eternal. For we cannot doubt that have a beginning then must be a Cause & the Primary Cause have ever many must have been of itself for ever without a previous Cause. 
Power Eternal is God by Necessity unlimited And competent to every possible Effect.
From this Power all Existence Emanates or Exists in it.
The Meanings of Men Communicate to one Another  in Sensations and Perceptions bear intimation of Ends & Means of Intellectual Power And to Persons reciprocally a communication of Persons one with Another.
The Perception of Limbs & Organs of which Every Person has Cognisance in himself. And the Repetition Of Actions or expressions to which he himself is competent is the signal.
 Feeling sight Hearing Taste and Smell and the Perceptions to which they give occasion are matters in which the mind may be intirely Passive.
To the Person feeling &c. The Perception is in some Instances is that or the Perception of what he calls a Part or Members of himself As when with on hand he feels some other Part of his Body &c. or it is a feeling hearing or Sight coming from above and giving perception of Separate or Collateral Being.
Perceiving of Others what he perceives of himself & what he can give them like occasion to Perceive is Society Intercourse or Conversation.
The Communication So made may bear the Characters of Accident or design of Wisdom or Folly.
The Character of design counts of Ends & Means.
Of wisdom Important & beneficent Ends well concerted or effective means.
Ends such as Man conceives  and means such as he is known to Employ are the Evidence of Man to Man.
Ends more Vast And means above the reach of Man to employ are Evidence of Power Intelligent or Mental Superior to Man Perhaps of Power Eternal & Omnipo.
The Sensations which Men give & Take constitute the Society or Intercourse of Men.
The Sensation of Ends & Means above the Sphere of Man is the Communication or Revelation of God to his Intelligent Creatures.
 Suns & Planets Sea & Land Atmosphere Clouds Winds Rain Springs Running Stream Fertile Soil Woods Lawns Hills & Valley Flocks & Herds Artists Materials of Art uniform Laws of natural Production Occasions of Action to the Active & of Progression to the Progressive. The Power of Learning to be happy to the living or Sensitive Are the Language or Revelation of God to man.
His Being & Means are equally per in the part as in the Whole in that small &c.
 The first and greatest order of Being is that which Exists of itself. The Lowest order of Being is that which is made altogether what it is. Such we conceive to be matter or Body.
An Intermediate Order of Being. Having Power but committed to itself for the exercise of this Power And being of itself happy or Miserable Such is Created Intelligence.
As Power is the Essence of Being the Power  of Enjoyment & Perfection is peculiar to the living or Sentient Conscious & Intelligent Forms of Being.
Where Being is Necessary it is also Perfect In Will Omnipotent Therefore Happy unbounded in Wisdom & Goodness Eternal & Immense unlimited to Time or Place. It must be infinite in Number as well as Greatness or Perfection.
But the Infinitely Perfect however Numerous cannot be different without imperfection must Coincide in every Instance Whether of Conscious or Will and be therefore at one in all things the same and Unity of Being.
The Germs that Result from This Eternal Power Being endowe with conscious separate Existence Are not Powers to be perfect & Happy But the Power of Progression or Advancement in direction pointed to Perfection & Happiness.
The Line in which they proceed has no End. If it had an End it would place them  where it is impossible for them to Arrive that is At One with God.
Originating in Defect & with a Power of progression only there is no Measure of temporary aberration which they may not exhibit for the Experience of Evil as well as of Good tends to correct Error & constitute that Felicity which Consists in Choice. 
The Pupil of Wisdom may learn to be Wise And happy but must become so of himself  made so at the Power or Will of Another. In this if in any Sense it is said That Man is formd after the Image of God.
In this Image alone is the Criterion of Worth or Excellence to be found.
The Power to be happy or of Progress is that Alone which gives Value to being.
The Power of matter may be such as to form a Scene for the Action of Men  give occasion to thought and like furnish Materials to the Artist  and accommodations to the Restive and Contemplative excercise Inquiry to the Curious The means of Beneficence to the Charitable and of Communication & intercourse from Mind to Mind And from the Eternal to the Nascent & progressive Being he has formed.
But apart from the Subserviency of Such Scenery to mind Immensity replete with Diamonds And with Gold ever bespangled with innumerable Suns & Planetary Systems would be of no more value than  mere empty Space. What were the Diamond on which it Sparkles or the Sun himself without that little organ on  the Power of Vision is bestowed.
Admire as we may the Material System ’tis made for Mind alone And the Fairness and Magnificence of its form is but the Evidence it bears of that Eternal Goodness Wisdom & Power of which it is the Work. The Gift of Eternal Mind to  form an Equipage for those who are Travelling from Below toward the higher Scenes of Being.
It is true that the mere Sensation or Perception of what we call the Material World would have the Same Effect with that we call its reality. And indeed its reality in respect to us is no more than our perception of it the mere Appurtenance of Mind.
And as mind is the Eternal Mode of  Existence it is pleasant to think That there is yet no other nor ever be any Other.
Men who Speculate profoundly on the Essence of Matter incline to this opinion. And  the Slightest inqui into the Cause of our Sensation are inclined to entertain the same opinion respecting the Connection of Perception with its external Objects.
This Doctrine I embrace with fond Conviction.
 Who would not Gladly tell the Sun & all these Globes on which he Shines; Ye are my pleasure grounds & but the Steps on which my Mind Ascends to God. Even when above your Height I shall not cease to rise.
Blest be the Power that gives Eyes to see & thoughts to comprehend your Order So Significant of Might Benevolence & Wisdom.
This Doctrine is in the Department of mere Thought not of Art or of Action and no way affects the Conduct of life.
Common Sense is  the same whether a Person professes to act on the Distinction of his Perceptions or on the Disstinction of Things Perceived.
His perception is still the only Ground on which he can act and his Action will be the Same in avoiding the Perception of Suffering as in avoiding its Cause.
How Idle then is it to labour on Speculations that have no Consequence or Effect.
Tis true that in Practice The Theory of Corporeal Forms has no Effect But in  thought we may repeat its Effects are immense.
The first or Eternal Principle of Existence is Inteligence as appears from the Design & order of his Work but the Work itself is merely Spiritual Consisting of Mind & its Procession of Sensations perception and imagination or Thought.
To Die is the discontinuance of one System of Perceptions to enter upon Another: & mental Existence is still the same And its Power of Enjoyment the only distinction that gives value to Being. Without this Magnitude and Figure exist  in Vain & present no Reality to lead the will or the choice of Intelligence.
In thought there is no limit to Space Whether it be full or only give place to separate orbs of Matter is in itself Perfectly indifferent And of moment only as the one is Recipient of Order & is a Department of Wisdom Goodness & Power. The Other is nought but impenetrable non Existence and Death.
A Pause to Theory. Who can account for Existence? Who would ever believe its Reality if he could  disbelieve his own. But here it is; The difficulty is removed and other Beings to any extent may exist as well as mind.
The only Form of Being which I cannot doubt is mind & its appurtenances or Provisions of Sensations Perception and Thought.
This then is the Form of Being distinguished in the Superiour assurance of its Reality and I am Warranted in thinking it has prevailed from Eternity & will prevail forever.
It were perverse  to know this & yet to controvert the existence of Mind beyond the Organs of a human Body. 

XX . OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH IT IS THE LOT OF MAN TO DELIBERATE 

It is Characteristick of Living sentient and Intelligent Being to be susceptible of Good & Evil.
To be possessed of Good is Happyness. To incur Evil is Misery.
It is further Characteristic of Intelligent Being to be the artificer of his own Condition & to be vested with a choice in detail among particulars that may be referred to the general disstinctions of Good & Evil Happiness or Misery.
On these distinctions in general  there cannot be any deliberation.
But it is frequently doubtful to which of these heads a particular should be referred.
And under these most General distinctions others are comprised stating the Constituents of Good & Evil under different Aspects denominations under which men would descend to particulars: but have their expressions Still in comprehensive Terms. Such as Enjoyment & Suffering Excellence & Defect Beauty & Deformity Right & Wrong Virtue & Vice Prosperity & Adversity.
On distinctions so general as even these are there is no room for deliberation untill  they came to be applied to different Instances, or Men make their option or acquire their habits of being chiefly occupied by one or other of these disstinctions in preference to the others.
Some men in the choice of particulars are chiefly occupied by the distinctions of Pleasure & Pain Others by the distinction of Excellence & Defect Right & Wrong Profit and Loss. And on this diversity The Characters of men in a great measure depend.
The Votaries of Pleasure. Of Gain of Excellence Rectitude & Virtue exhibit  different Characters tho all of them would be happy and aim at what they conceive to be good.
When we have reduced the disstinction on which Men Act in detail to the general Heads of Profit & Loss Pleasure & Pain Excellence & Defect And class men accordingly into The Interested The Voluptuous, & the High minded Such is the present State of man that under each of these heads there is both Good & Evil.
The Interested may be Frugal & Industrious or rapacious & 
avaritious.
The Voluptuous may be Inoffensive & humain or Effeminate & Debauched.
The high minded may be Benevolent & Just or Contemptuous and Arrogant. So that when under any of these general Titles we have chosen our Class The great Task of human Wisdom Still remains to secure the Good & avoid the Evil incident to each.
This is Wisdom and Happiness or the Supreme Good consists in a proper Choice of particulars under each.
Frugality without avarice Innocence and  Complacency without Effeminacy or Debauchery. Benevolence and Justice themselves a bar to Contemptuous or Arrogance.
Philosophers in their different applications of the term Chief Good. For Pleasure Interest or Virtue & Excellence without Observing that each of these tho separately expressed & supposed different when happily pursued Actually terminate in one & the same point.
It is the Interest Pleasure & Excellence of a man to be Happy.
These are all supreme Objects of desire And Nature is not so inconsistent as  to expose the Intelligent Being in aiming at one to forgo the Other.
The Pleasure he ought to aim at is the most Agreeable & the most secure.
The state  highest Enjoyment & least Suffering.
Here is matter of Calculation for the most part easy & obvious in the result. Tho’ carried to the utmost or extending to the past present and Future is beyond the reach of  human Faculties. To cut Short in many Instances Nature has Affixed a mark and given a Byas to the preferable Pleasure.
The Right in contradistinction to the Wrong And Conscience the Supreme Arbiter & Byas of Nature in this distinction.
In following this Byas we sometimes appear to reject Pleasure and Rank but in Fact secure The highest Profit Pleasure & Elevation of Nature.
 The Question then among the Sects of Epicurus Zeno or Aristotle is not what is the Chief Good. For this by the Confession of all is Happiness: but by what name is it most safely designed in entering on the detail of Practice.
Conscience may mistake as well as Appetite or Interest: but not so frequently & its Gratifications are the preferable pleasures & gains of human life.
It appears then most Safe to Speak with the Stoics and go where Conscience and the Love of Virtue leads.  Virtue is supremely pleasant to those who profess it.
To Epicurus then we may say if this be the pleasure you mean as you tell us when you come to particulars it is why not Specify it at once & not leave us to contend with a Vague or general Term which every one will apply in his own way The Childish the Effeminate The Debauched all of them in a Way which you yourself will reject.
Virtue is candid Benevolent highminded Courageous & Temperate. You cannot  detract from it without impairing Enjoyment or the admission of suffer.
The uncandid repine at another Good.
Benevolence is pleasant. Indifference at best is blank and Malice is Suffering.
The low mind is drooping and mean.
The Coward trembles And the intemperate Suffers from disgust or dissease.
The interested and the Selfish are Supposed equivale terms and applied with dissapprobation  and disslike.
Why? Is it faulty to mind our own Concerns & be careful of ourselves?
No. The Author of  says not!
The first law of Nature to every living Creature is Preserve thyself. Whoever says Otherwise either Counteracts Nature or mistakes himself.
If I should limit the appellation of Self to this Animal life and the Appellation of Interest to its preservatives and Accomodations. Still even in this Sense the first Law of  Nature or Self preservation is not only blameless but the most continual & unremitted in its operation and Effects.
The Parent will expose himself & the Citizen on Occasion to preserve his Country: but these are great and occasional Efforts. The ordinary State of Nature is a Vigilance for personal Wellfare & Safety And on this the Author  Nature chiefly rests the preservation of his living Works.
But if the  Appellation of Self be not limited to mere Animal Life &c. but extend as it ought to every constituent of a rational or Intelligent Being to the mind its attainments Affections & Habits or what is best under these designations Wisdom Goodness & Fortitude. In this Acceptation of Self. The Virtuous alone are Selfish And Sefishness that Aspiring Ambition to resemble the Supreme God. Which in the Caesars of Julian is made the Characteristic of Marcus Aurelius And is actually the object  of that Work which we all the Meditations of Antoninus: but in the original is entitled The Consideration of His Own Affairs. 
To the Vulgar Selfishness is the love of personal Security & Money So little careful we are to fix the terms on which we rest the whole Estimate of human life. And whilst we require Virtue as indispensible  allow it to respect the good of Others More than our own And thus suffer a misnomer of Self to undermine the edifice  of Morality which we profess so great An Anxiety to raise.
The Praise of Virtue we are told is founded on its publick utility. 
Strange that a person distinguished for Candour Humanity Benevolence and Sobriety should forget how valuable these qualities were to himself.
The Fact is that in choosing his Friends & in acting for himself he made no mistake but in speculating on Virtue he thought of External Actions only altho when pushed in Argument he was forced to Admit that Moral Estimation was agreeable to the mind and to external actions only as expressive of mind.

XXI. OF THE INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM 

It is said that the Indian Philosophers of Old considered the multiplication of mind or Intelligence as the sole Object of Creation and mantained that the material Fabrick was altogether Subservient to this That it served merely to Manifest the Eternal mind to his Intelligent Creatures, and form to them the links of communication with one Another.
 It may no doubt be safely Assumed that is at least one Purpose for which the material System is formed: But it is in other Respects also well fitted as a Nursery to the Intelligent Being of Man. In him the Germ of Intelligence is to be evolved & enlarged by its proper exercise Observation and Experience.
Altho in Infancy he is amply provided for with little or no Effort of his own yet to his opening Faculties continual occasions of exertion are presented to him. With the Stimuli of Animal  Life he has its wants to be Supplyed advanages to be aimed as Difficulties to be removed Dangers to be encountered And Sufferings to be guarded against or Aswaged.
To his Active Nature the Active Scene is accommodated. And to his progressive Nature The Observation he is concerned to make the Lessons of Experience & the faculties acquird by Practice are fully & Specifically accommodated.
In this manner is the Creation of that Intelligence with which we are acquainted conducted and  carried on from Age to Age. The End is the multiplication & Advancement of Minds. The means are in part at least the occasions supplyed throughout the Intricacies difficulties allurements or allarms of a Material System.
But what is this Material System in the great Globe of this Earth merely Subservient to the living creatures scarcely perceptible on its Surface. Is the mighty Sun a Million of times its bulk placed merely for the use of a few such Nurseries of impalpable living Creatures? Yes! We may say, For mind altho it has no Bulk is that alone which is entitled to the distinction of Greatness of Excelence or Beauty. And the Material World if Commensurate to Space & immensity itself would have no value or Obtain any distinction but in its relation to mind alone. The Diamond has no brillancy but through the Visual Organ that conveys it to Mind & if Infinite Space were replete with such matter all would be darkness indifference & Death. Matter has no Value but in its relation to mind, As a material of art & means  of Beneficence. It has no Beauty but as it bears the Marks of Ingenuous  employd by Man or The Majesty of Eternal Wisdom & Goodness imprinted by that Almighty Power who alone is great.
Even to Man the material World is of no moment but as he perceives it.
Let the perception cease & the Universe of Matter is as Nothing: Be it the Will of God that his Perceptions return tho without any returning Matter; his condition is fully restored; And the Scene of life & intelligence is to him precisely the same as  upon the supposition of reality in the Object as well as in the perception of it.
Our sensations & Perceptions have their causes apart from us. We know not what they are but the Sensations & Perceptions are conditions of Mind And our own.
Earth Water & Air &c &c Are Names which we give to our Perceptions:
but Sensation Perception thought and Mental Affection are all that we have give them what names we please.
Of this their can be no doubt & it is possibly all that we are qualifyed to say respecting the Actual State of Existence: the  World around us. Men of Speculation may fancy what they please but a World of mental Sensation And Perception or a world of Separate Being perceived will be to us in respect to Conduct Society Religion and Science precisely the same.
Is the actual existence of Matter Necessary to give us the Knowledge of God & of one Another? For we draw the same Conclusion from our Perceptions that we would from matter perceived, and the fact is that we have no other premises on either Supposition from which to draw our conclusions.
Is it  respectful to Suppose that The Almighty has given us falacious Perceptions? We do not suppose it nor are our perceptions fallacious. They are indeed Mental not corporeal existences: but the most certain grounds on which we may rely in all our designs Selections and pursuits. My perception of Precipice or Fire does not deceive me for if I avoid them I am safe if I do not the Consequence may be Fatal: but the Admonition was true & beneficently Given.
I have sometimes found fault with  those who would explode the Existence of Matter because the question was altogether Nugatory & could have no consequence in the Conduct of Life. But there is equal  to find fault with those who contend for the Reality of matter this being equally void of any Consequence in the Conduct of Life.
In this no doubt the question is Nugatory & the Solution indifferent. But the mind independent of its perceptions from Abroad has a World of its own in which to range. Having the Knowledge of God & our fellow Creatures it is acceptable & congenial to suppose a Universe of Mind with Eternal Wisdom goodness & omnipotence at its head than so great a mass of lifeless materials as this perceptible world seems to imply.
It is justly thought absurd to Suppose that a Material Cause  produce Intelligence: but is it less so to suppose that thought or Intelligence could produce solid matter. It is difficult to conceive how mind & body as in the Case of Man can be united & mutually affected one with the Other. If our Sensations & perceptions be conceived merely as a  Mode of our Mental Existence and no more Every difficulty of this Sort will dissappear.
To be born is to be brought into a Scene of Specific Perceptions the means of Communication and the occasions of Action. To Die is to exchange the first System of perceptions for a Subsequent one And the Mind immortal receives with its advanced qualities new means of Communication And occasions of Superiour Exertion and Continual Progress.
These Considerations may incline us to adopt the Idea of a System purely Intellectual System  the Work And Province of Eternal Mind. And it is matter of Curiosity to Observe by what Steps men of Speculation have been led in different Instances to question the existence of matter in any other form than that of mental perception.
Some of those who have examined the Sources of information & the causes of belief have found the evidence of a material World deficient and accordingly withheld the Assent. Having Assumed that all our knowledge  of things must rest upon certain Ideas Types or Representations of them in our Minds and considering that Representations are no evidence of Facts they deny the existence of matter as being Supported on no other evidence than the Idea of it in our Minds.
Whatever we may think of this Conclusion the Process of supposed Reason on which it is founded is certainly incorrect. In their Haste to come at their Hypohesis of Ideas in the mind they overlook the most important part of the Fact in our Cognisance of the material World.
We do not first harbour Ideas or Representations  of a Material World and then proceed to take proofs of its Reality. We begin with perceiving it And form the best notion of it we can from continued Observation.
Perception is prior to Proof and the most convincing foundation upon which any proof of Fact can rely. We have seen the Earth & the Firmament & Cannot doubt their Existence as for the Types or Ideas you mention we do not perceive them & have no reason to believe their Existence & have no difficulty in thinking of the Sun & the Moon while they continue to pass over our head in the Sky. Our Observations in many cases may be hasty & superficial but when properly made are the best information we have to conduct us through hazards of the greatest amount.
Things may not be as we perceive them but your attemp to disprove them proceeds upon an assumption which we neither perceive nor otherwise know to exist.
Those who attend to the Facts perceived in the Phaenomenon of Body proceed more directly to a Solution of the Question relating to the existence of matter  extended and Solid. Body consists of parts. It is Subject to expansion & Contraction the parts then must approach or recede while they recede they cannot be in Contact. If they ever be in contact they cannot contract. But nobody is exempt from Expansion by heat or contraction by Cold.
Therefore no body is made up of parts in Absolute Contact. 
On this ground it is Concluded that Contact no where exists in Body that the parts or attoms of which it is Composed owe their cohesion or fixture to attraction in a certain state of Contiguity not of Contact.
 The fixture indeed a precise State if Continued, must require some power to counterballance the attraction & retain every part in its place Otherwise absolute contact would ensue And the Volubility of Living Nature would Cease.
This Catastrophe is Averted by an eminent theorist (Boscovich) who instead of parts or Attoms composing Body has recourse to Mathematical Points which having no dimension, never can touch. Attractions & Repulsions from & towards these points at different distances  ballance one Another so exactly as to Constitute limits of Bodies and by the different distances at which they Act form all the variety of Corporeal Substance with which we are acquainted.
If this theory were lyable to no Objection but that which lys against every mere Hypothesis it certainly should be rejected.
The Phaenomenon of Body is certainly in our apprehension Coeval or prior to any Law of Nature from which it can be explaind. Unless we recour to that first Law of All The Will of  Almighty God by which all minds exist and Obtain their conditions constituted in their own Nature or in other Natures with which they communicate. That the Condition of Man is effected in both ways cannot be doubted. He stands related to his Maker & to fellow Creatures of Intelligence like his own. The Link or Channel of Communication with either is the perception he receives & gives from the Stores of a Supposed Material System equally efficient to his purpose whether a System of communicable  Feelings or of things felt.
Whoever admires more the Intellectual than the Material System Will rejoice to think not only that there is  world Governed by Supreme Wisdom Goodness And Power: but that the World is actually no Other but the Eternal Essence of these Attributes for a Person from whose Invention & Will proceed new Germs of Intelligence destined through proper Stages to work their own Way in endless  Approach to the Summit of Perfection and Happiness.


XXII. OF THE SCIENCES OF WHICH THE SUBJECT IS MIND 

It is of great moment to know what we would be at in the pursuits of Science.
So prepared we are the better qualifyed to find our Way & to estimate our Attainments.
We are collecting the knowledge of Particulars from our Infancy upwards.
Their resemblancy or Sameness Their distinctions and Separations do not Escape us. They are arranged into Classes Kinds & Species and when any odd  one Appears we are Anxious to comprehend  in some kind or Species. And this in Natural History is what we call Comprehending or Understanding a Subject.
The Forms of Being are so far matter of Curiosity and the operations which take place with respect to them are so no less.
Motion Gravitation Cohesion take our Attention in mere matter.
Vegetation And fructification & propagation from Seed take our Attention in Plants.
Spontaneity Instinct Appetite & Action as well as Nutrition take our Attention in Animals.
Intelligence opinion Invention Design & Contrivance as well as Animal  Instinct take our attention in Men.
These we do or may Call the Kingdoms or Provinces of Nature.
The Facts in each are peculiar.
Matter or Corporeal Subjects exhibit what may be calld the mechanical Facts of moving Gravitating &c.
To these the Plant The Animal & The mind subjoin their peculiarities.
Operations or Facts no less than the mere forms of Being admit of being Arranged into kinds.
And when Facts of any Separate Kind are expressed in their most general Terms They are called Laws of Nature.
Thus is a Law of Nature that all  bodies Gravitate That all bodies continue in their state of motion or Rest untill some external Force is applied to change it.
Plants Spring from Seed take Root in the Soil Vegetate or Shoot Vertically in the Air in a direction opposite to that of their Weight &c &c.
Animals tho destined to derive Nutrition from the Soil are Set free from it carry their Roots wrapped up in their own Frame Change Place and seek Accommodations for themselves.
Man knows himself & seeks to preserve or improve his Condition.
These are general and Special Laws of Nature respecting the different orders of Being.
 They are collected from particular Facts or Specimens. Differing are set aside & what is common to many is Stated in a geral Rule.
When new appearances occur we are Anxious to know to what Rule they may be referred And this comprehension of Particulars is termed Theory of Science.
The first Gratification of mind is the perception of Fact.
The second Generalisation into Rules.
The Third comprehension or Theory of new or Singular Phaenomena.
Science has the merit of Classification in Common with Natural History:
but it has a further merit in being the History of what is done or Practicable  and the manner in which it may be practised. And on this account it is not only an accession of Knowledge but an accession of Power also.
The Method or Arrangement in Natural or descriptive History is in a certain degree Arbitrary & may be varyed to facilitate comprehension or Memory: but in Science it is fixed in Nature And cannot be varyd without frustrating the very Purpose for which it is instituted. Namely to Ascertain the Law by which he may proceed to Obtain a repetition of Certain Effects.
If he mistake or misstate the Law he is frustrated in all his attempts and instead of an  accession of Power betrays his weakness.
Such are the Physical Laws which in the order of Study are first investigated by induction from a Sufficient number of Specimens next applyd in Theory to explain seemingly anomalous appearances And in the end employed in practise to form Rules of Art, & give accessions of Power.
To Ascertain a Law it is Sufficient it be known as a Fact tho’ without any previous Cause from which to infer it. And wherever any Fact is thus proceed on as a Law its consequences not its antecedent cause is to be considered. In mechanics The Laws of motion & Gravitation are assumed And tho’ the Vibration of Pendulums is a Sequel of these Laws. Yet in the Science  of the Pendulum, Vibration is Assumed as a Law & from thence forward traced to its Consequences As a fixed measure proportioned to its length.
There are in all the Departments of Nature certain Ultimate facts to be Assumed as Laws within the respective Departments tho not communicable from one Department to another.
The Laws of Motion & Gravitation Are the most extensive throughout the Corporeal System but they do not account for Vegetation Animal Life or Intelligence. And in each of these departments the Laws or Ultimate Facts are peculiar And uncommunicable.
In every Attempt to pass the bounds of Separation & explain the Phaenomena of one Department on Principles taken from  a Different one The purpose of Science is frustrated no genuine accessions of knowledge much less of Power are gained. The Attempt to explain the Ascent of Sap in Vegetables by the Capillary attraction of their small ducts or Spungy Substances is altogether fruitless of any aid to Intelligence or Art. To Resolve the Spontaneity of Animals or the Intelligence of man into corpuscular combination or Form is still more preposterous And Absurd. 
As there are Facts whether Particular or General relating to Mind. It follows That in this Subject also we may Arrive at Laws of Nature and on them rest the Fabrick of Physical Science. Here we Are told  that the Sources and results of Information are extremely different from what they are in other Subjects! No doubt they are. But are not these differences Facts & if they be is not the knowledge of them a Science or history of Fact as in every Other Instance.
Here indeed the pursuits of Science have been perplexed in a peculiar degree. In part by the confusion of terms in Language And in part by confounding together the Provinces of Physical & moral Science of which the Latter refers in a peculiar manner or almost exclusively to the Department of Intellectual Nature. 
Here  not only enquire what is Fact apart from any Distinction of Choice. We inquire also what is eligible apart from any consideration of the degree in which it actually does or does not take place. Confounding any two such Questions together must be greatly Perplexing.
But apart from this difficulty which the Votaries of Science may overcome. The confusion of Terms metaphorical found in slight Analogies subsisting in subjects entirely different is a Source of perplexity. Slipping insensibly into use is yet more insurmountable by the most general even of Students & Votaries of Science.
Knowing tho’ very different from Drawing Painting or Modelling  is or may be expressed in the metaphorical Term of having a Picture image or model of its Subject And a Person who is Observing An remembering a Subject is said to be taking And retaining Impressions. And when we are familiar with These Expressions we are Confidently Asked what can thinking be else. It is true these are frequent or common names & expressions for thinking: but it is a Fact altogether different And a primary reform in Science would be to discard the Metaphors that mislead and betake to the proper terms which belong to the Subject without any illusive Analogy to anything else. Language has owed so  much to the liberal lending of Terms from Subjects of Perception to Subjects of Consciousness: that tho’
in the case of many the Origin of the Term is almos effaced yet few or none will be found that has not been borrowed in this manner.
Idea is a Metaphor borrowed from Visible Form to conception or mental Apprehension. It has been identifyed with Picture Image or Type And the Elements of Thought are Types or Images. And to possess the whole Science of Understand is to run the Change upon Types or images of Things.
The Physical Science of mind however if ever we possess it truly is a collection not of whimsical Analogies but of Facts such as they are in themselves. Such Facts relating to what may be called the Cognitive Department of Mind have now been Aimed at in the Statement of Science its origin And its Results. For altho Science may relate to forreign Nature yet it is itself the Indigenous product of Mind and in being stated Constitutes a Considerable part in the History & Science of Mind. It is indeed far from being the whole of its History & in respect to Human Nature in particular we may find a copious List of Facts or Physical  relating to what may be called the Active Nature of Man in contradiction to what has been called the Cognitive.

XXIII. OF GOOD AND EVIL PERFECTION AND DEFECT 

It is Good to be at Ease & fraught with what is agreeable.
It is evil to be uneasy or fraught with what is dissagreeable.
It is Perfection to be powerful in commanding and communicating what is Good & in Avoiding or preventing what is Evil.
It follows that Intelligent Conscious or living Natures alone are susceptible of Good or Evil. And Powerful Intelligence  alone is Susceptible of Perfection or Defect. These appellations are bestowed on Any mere Existence figuratively in proportion as they are Subservient to the use of Intelligent Bein or are the Materials of Art.
What is the Value of Bread? It is the Staff of Life of Gold. It is Ductile durable & lasting of the Diamond It shades a Lustre on the Eye. It being Rare like Gold it Serves to distinguish the Rich without this Relation to Mind & living Nature; Inanimate Matter tho the whole were Assembled would be but a Clod neither Good nor Evil Perfect or Defective.
Man therfore in this Scene of his Being is the principal monument or repository  of Good or Evil And The Author of the Splendid Scene. The Supremely Perfect  whom nothing can frustrate or resist in Commaning and Communicating what is good.
What is the Chief End of Man is the first Question of our Catechism.
And the Answer is also given To Glorify God & to enjoy Him forever. 
The Question may be supposed to refer either to the End for which Man is made or to the End which he ought to propose in all his actions. And it is probable that his Chief End will be one & the same in both these descriptions.
What is to glorify  God: but to repeat & Multiply those Operations of Wisdom & Goodness in which The Glory of God consists.
And what is it to enjoy him forever but to have in the Created Mind all the Possible participations of those God like Attributes.
In this Question And Answer therfor tho’ intended for Children;
The meaning is not only just: but Sublime to the utmost reach of human Language or thought.
In deriving our Reflections from the present State of man we must be contented to Abate this Lofty Tone and Sink into the Ordinary Notes of human Life And contemplate the Animal with his means of Subsistence and  accommodations; his Arts & their results his feeble Powers whether to command or to communicate his Species of Good. The Eagle may soar as high as the Power of Wing or Specifick Gravity. But he cannot remain aloft nor build his airy above the summit of his hindred Clifs. 
Nor can Man pretend to Shape a Course for him to run in Nature of which the direction is not already fixed in the steps however tardy of which the Track is already marked.
Whence does he now derive his share of Ease & his measure of Agreeable Existence. Whether must he fly from Evils to which he is exposed.
 This may lead us to the End with wh The Almighty formed him and wh he himself should have in View in his Pursuits or in his Estimate of Things.
In Health of Body and of mind or in the Absence of bodily dissorder of conscious of Folly or of Vice Existence itself is not only tranquil but in a very high degree Agreeable.
A Simple & Well directed Author has observed That all the Emotions and Exertions in which neither Fear nor Malice have a part are Agreeable.
Mind is an Active Power & mere Action is agreeable or what is called Amusing. What may it not be if the source from which it  Springs is also sweet or of the delightful kind. Such is the tender Affection with which The Parent tends his Child. The affectionate Companion joins his Friend or the Patriot glows with eager Zeal to save his Country.
Thither then must the Caitif fly to avoid the Evils to which he is exposed. He may blame the Scene arround for what he Suffers: but the Suffering is in himself. If not the dissorder which ill conduct has brought into his Frame. It is a gnawing Pain which Malice hatred envy Fear or Jealousy engenders Which Remorse or Shame or Self Abasement fosters.
 It is a Languor which want of Proper Occupation Constitutes, or Ignorance of what his faculties may well enable him to perceive. That worlds are formed in Wisdom and the end is Secured for ever by the Power which formed them. In Such a Scene no prospect is allarming and the thought of what is to come is pleasing to the well affected mind even in the resignation of a being supposed to be temporary & come to an End of its term.
Tis Pleasant to have seen & loved the Works of God. Let Others now succeed & do the Same. 
 Mere Life if in Health of Body & Soundness of mind is agreeable And the means of Subsistence & preservation are of proportional Value. They also furnish occupation & the intercourse of agreeable offices in human Life.
The Object or end of human Life we may venture to pronounce in general is to avoid what is dissagreeable and to Obtain the reverse or what is agreeable. This Rule cannot be controverted. But being an Active precept founded in the concern which every individual has in his own wellfare: it were dangerous to extend it beyond the Limits of his Power or so far to engage him in fruitless Pursuits & vain expectations. This would be to engage him in a course of Anxiety trouble and disappoint highly dissagreeble & inconsistent with enjoyment or peace of mind.
With Respect to his own Will or choice he is absolute Master of it. And it concerns him in every Instance to decide for what is just Innocent and Beneficent.
His inclinations or habits may be dissagreeable but if he is fully decided Against them Other habits will succeed. And he is in this manner empowered not only to choose what he shall do at any particular Instant; but also what he shall be at all times inclined to do.
It is in his Power to correct his Apprehensions of things by Observation and diligent enquiry.
 His contemplations and occupations of the Mind no one can restrain from Subjects the most agreeable to him The Order of Nature & the unceasing Energies of Almighty God.
It is in his Power to choose the proper Part in his Conduct respecting Men & human Affairs. And so far the Rule is Absolute with respect to him that he do nothing that is improper, or neglect anything that is proper to be done: But events are not is in his Power And whatever they be they are to him only circumstances that Constitute the conjuncture or Situation in which he is taken. His Part on every emergence is still the same to do what  wise proper and Just.  In doing so with a diligent & decided mind,
nothing will be wanting to his happiness.
His Fortune may occupy him & it is happy to conduct himself properly with respect to it. But the precise measure of it or the Events which Affect it do not preclude the continued Propriety of his Conduct. His Health is not in his Power but a proper attention to Diet and exercise is in his Power And here the Rule of Life terminates in respect to Health. He may be in Pain but in acting properly is as happy as in that circumstance he can be And this  all that his Nature & condition of Life admits. It is known that pain is sometimes required to the Welfare of Man and his happiness does not consist in  exemption from that Pain but in the endurance & propriety of Conduct under it. The happiness of a Patient in the Stone is Fortitude and a manly resolution not to Shrink from The operation required in such cases. Nature has not enabled Man to avoid every Pain but he is enabled to bear it And this is his happiness where pain is unavoidable.
In the School of Nature where Man is to Learn what is Good to be confirmed in his Choice & by exercises be advanced in the Vigure & Extent of his Faculties The check of Pain is as conducive to the End as the allurement or admonition of Pleasure. And in such a Scene we are sometimes told that Happiness is the highest  measure of enjoyment & least Suffering Present or to come. The Rule may be just in its general terms: but in the application difficult even beyond the Reach  Man for what is pleant now may be followed hereafter & beyond the reach of human foresight be followed by an Over ballance of Pain. Man however is qualified to distinguish Right & wrong & Strictly Admonished to embrace the one And Avoid the Other. And this in matters of Choice is a Substitute for Experience & fortifys the mind against future Contingies or the possible Consequences of a present Choice & is indeed the best security we can have against any future Condemnation or Blame. The Stoic therefore Said The chief or only Good is Virtue. Do on every occasion what  is just & you are Safe. The Epicurean Said All good is pleasure do what upon the whole is most pleasant And this is your Wisdom.
This Rule might not mislead if we were qualifyed to determine in every Instance what upon the whole is most pleasant. But to apply it with Safety we must consult what is innocent & Right for if we neglect this in Search of Pleasure Shame Contrition & remorse will apprise us of our Error.
Pleasure is an unlucky designation for the chief good. Pleasures are unequally agreeable & some to be shunned alltogether. It is sometimes stated in opposition to Bussiness or any serious Concern it precludes engagement in the cares of Family or of State. And  whole Sect with its founder appear to have been the Dupes of this mistake.  The Founder betook himself to a retir and Unactive Lif in a Garden with a few Friends And the Sect admitted among their maxims that a Wise man would decline the Cares of a Family. This may be prudent in Some Instances but in all would be ruinous to mankind. Their acknowledgement that the preferable Pleasures were those of Innocence Tranquillity & a virtuous life exempt from Excess or dissorder of any Sort did not compensate the License they seemed to give the unwary & which without any offence to the School Youth in Particular were inclined to take in Shrinking from Labour & in seizing for  Pleasure or Good the nearest at hand.
The followers of Zeno maintained it is not indifferent under what Auspices we sett out in Search of Happiness. The Standard of Rectitude & Virtue is erected by Nature and The Ingenuous flock to it through every appearance of Toil or Trouble & in the result arrive at the most real Enjoyments. The standard Pleasure convokes the Remiss & the Voluptuous. They aim at Enjoyment but on  Road in which it is not to be found & they find their mistake too late when they have not the Resolution to alter Their Courses.
The  followers of Zeno took an Early impression that Virtue meaning A Wise Benevolent Fearless or Intrepid Mind was not only the most Real but the only Good & in the Sequel of this Phraseology incurred the Paradoxes by which their School was distinguished. That Pain was no Evil & surely the Pains to be suffered in the ways of Virtue are not to be shunned as such.
Their maxims promised a Life of dauntless integrity not only when it might be preserved with ease & Safety: but where it was to be mantained through Labour and Danger.
In this Sect Cato & Marcus Aurelius found the Nursery of  Heroes & The School Of Godlike Benevolence as well as Fortitude & Strength of Mind.
The Sect in which they were formed continued for Ages under the vilest Abuses of Power & Military Government to the downfall of the Roman Empire; A haven of Law & Justice to which the oppressed might recur wherever the application of Law or Jurisprudence were permitted. It remains in fact a principal Ornament of Antient Times And a kind of Reproach to Ages who with all the Advantages of Religion and Science fall greatly Short in the Schools of Morality or in the Estimate of Good & Evil.
 Among the disstinction which operate in Sentiments Agreeable or the reverse may be numberd that of Perfection and Defect. The Sentiments vary in degrees of Intensity. From Approbation to Esteem Admiration Enthusiasm on the one hand And dissapprobation Contempt Detestation & Abhorrence on the other.
The distinction of Perfection & Defect takes place like Happiness & Misery in living or Intelligent forms of Being alone or is applied figuratively to Subjects in their Relation to Living And Intelligent Being. The artist is perfect or defective The material is fit or unfit to be employed in the Art.

What is the Excellence or Perfection of Intelligent Being? Wisdom,
Goodness and Power. Its Defects the Reverse Folly Malignity and Imbecility!
 Of this distinction we are Conscious and know it as a reality not merely like Perception as a Sensation of ours. And the Affection is agreeable in the Reverse in Contemplation as well as in Consciousness.
The Sentiment is such as Intelligent Being may Command for himself on the one hand or Avoid on the other as it depends on himself to be wise & Good & so far his Power is Compleat. Excellence may therefore be admitted into the Sum of happiness for which the Free Agent is accountable.
Whether Happiness & Perfection be one and the same seems to admit in the Case of Man of some doubt.
We sometimes lament the Worthy and Complain that the Good things of this Life are the share of the worthless.  Meantime the desire to Excell is one of the most powerful of the human Breast. It is the Principle of Ambition Emulation and Elevation of mind. Where the Ideas of Excellence are Correct it is the Principle of Integrity & Magnanimity when these Ideas are false as in the admiration of Riches And their Accompaniments it is the foundation of Pride Vanity & Envy or operates in injurious Contempt of other Men which Goodness would prevent if the Notion of Excellence had been Correct.
That a Principle so Powerful when properly directed should Act in Opposition to the happiness of the Actor, is very repugnant to the general Analogy of Nature where all things Contribute to the General Order and mutual Subserviency And two such Vehement Principles As the  desire of happiness & of Excellence when well understood can never be Supposed to jarr or Counter act each Other.
Experience however which is the proper Source of information in Such matters will Authorise us to Say that in the Case of Man loaded as he is with the Conditions of An Animal Nature, the Wise & the Good and the Self Commanding in all Animal Concern are at once the most happy & the most Excellent of Men. And the Almighty who has reserved to himself the disposal of all Events in the course of things has committed to his Intelligent Creatures the Form of their own Characters & with this the Rank they are to attain in the result of their Progress. Ordaining that the way to Happiness the end of their  Creation if they continue to pursue it should lead through Actions of Moral and Intellectual attainments of Wisdom Goodness and Power.

XXIV. OF THE 1ST LAW OF LIVING NATURE PRESERVE THYSELF 

In our Estimate of Men & Manners we frequently require a Virtue that is dissinterested & proscribe the Selfish under Epithets of ungenerous & Vile.
In this we seem to fly in the Face of Nature & make it a merit to counteract her Laws which entrust every Individual with the Care and Government of himself & his own Affairs. For this she has made him Master of his own Actions & for the preservation of all relys upon the vigilance of each in his own Cause.
There is in the Mind of the Worthy a principle of Benevolence and a Principle of Elevation or Magnanimity by which they are supposed to neglect themselves in their concern for Others & sacrifice their happiness to a Notion of Nobleness & Elevation of mind.
 In this account it Should seem that the moral Nature of Man is at Variance with the Physical and Man to be praiseworthy must Neglect himself and forgo his happiness: But nature is not inconsistent with herself, And Contradictions originate in the Abuse of Words not in the inconsistency of Things or Realities.
We certainly Missapply the Terms Interest and Self when we Suppose it a merit or a Duty to forgo them. When a Person limits the Appellation of Self to his Belly & four Quarters, Interest will be limited of Course to their appurtenances or accomodations. The Man that to be sober stints his Belly or the Charitable parts with his money is praised for Self denial & the preference of compassion to profit.
Is it therefore understood that a mans Sobriety is no Concern of his or his benevolent Affection is no part of  himself? We do not in reality in passing Judgment on Virtue proceed on these Suppositions And in Word at least require that Man to be Worthy of Praise should Sacrifice himself.
Such inconsistencies in Language Argue an Abuse of Words. And the first Step towards a just Apprehension or citation of things in our communications with one Another is to clear the meaning of Words. Every Individual is to himself what Nature has made him not a Body merely with senses And Appetites but a mind Also conscious of itself Conscious of its thoughts affections intentions and occupations Conscious of Right & Wrong of Excellence and Defect of Dignity & meanness. If health & the proper gratifications or Enjoyments of Sense and appetite be agreeable So also even in a higher degree is peace or tranquillity of Mind. Exemption from Fear & Malice in any of their Forms Jealousy Cowardice or pusillanimity. Envy & Revenge Exemption from Remorse Shame or degradation.
Exemption from Languor With the Possession of Benevolent & Agreeable Affections contemplations designs And Exertions.
What shall we say then of a Person who overlooks all these Appurtenances Interests & Concerns of his Mind to limit the Appellation of Self to his mere Animal Nature  Appurtenances. Only that he is grievously Mistaken and ill qualifyd to state in what Man is truly carefull or Negligent of himself.
The Blessed Aurelius has left us a Book which we Commonly entitle his Meditations but what he himself or those who Understood him best have entitled A Treatise of his own Concerns περι τα εαυτα. What are those Concerns? His opinions or Conceptions of things his affections Resolutions and actions. Would you be happy he says to himself; Do with Diligence Benignity And Resolution what you are Conscious the present moment or occasion requires, And you will be so. Now in this no one can stop or hinder you.
Was this man dissinterested or indifferent to Self? No! He was in the true Sense of Words the most Selfish & devoted to his own Interest which he would  forgo for the sake of any other person or thing whatever.
Was he therefore indifferent to the Concerns of his fellow Creatures? No!
for a principal Concern of his own was the affection which he bore to his fellow Creatures & the fruits of Beneficence which Spontaneously sprung from  his Heart. D the Modest & humble relinquish his own Elevation & Dignity in the respect which he pays to his fellow Creatures No? For in this chiefly he conceives his own Dignity to Consist that he is Candid Benevolent & respectful towards every one Else. The Proud & the Vain are Contemptuous for they rest Self Estimation on Grounds consistent with Contempt hatred & Cruelty. These are the truly disinterested & Negligent of themselves who neglect the Genuine Interests of Wisdom & Goodness which might be their own to build on Birth & Fortune or external matter which are no part of themselves and can never constitute any real worth or appurtenance of their Nature.
Hence the perplexity of our Language because felicity implies Goodness to Others we would have it to be no Interest of ourselves.

XXVI. OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY 

Liberty is a term of many different Significations.
Civil Liberty is the security of all Civil Rights. 
Political Liberty is the Form of Government proper to that Security.
Moral Liberty is the condition in which Men may judge and act for themselves without any limits but those of Innocence & Justice.
Physical Liberty is the conscious Faculty of Volition & Choice Essential to Voluntary Agents.
On this faculty is founded the consciousness of Merit & Demerit and the Just propriety of Rewards & Punishments.
So far the Evidence of Liberty is the same with that of our Existence. I.E.
Consciousness of our Being & the mode of our Being.
There is no  Evidence paramount to this by which our Liberty can be called into question.
We are told however that Volition or will like every other contingent Circumstance has its occasion and Cause. That in this Case as in every Case of Cause & Effect the Connection is necessary And as there is no Will without a motive. The Will is precisely what the motive has power to produce As motion is necessarily what the impulse or moving force is fit to produce.
It is a Primary & Necessary Truth that every Effect must have a Cause.
And the Effect unless prevented by some more powerful cause must necessarily Ensue.
This Maxim is true as every instance of Tautology is True because the term Effect is used to Signify what is produced by something else And the maxim when the Definition is  put for the Thing defined is no more than That what is produced by another thing is so produced.
But Existence is Eternal & can have had no Cause prior to itself. 
Contingent modes of Existence succeed one another & we know not by what link or chain whether necessary or otherwise.
We learn the Connection of Cause & Effect from the Experience of Intention & Will preceeding the Act that ensues. And the Connection so learned is presumed to take place whenever analogous or Similar Antecedents & Consequence are Observed not in every case of Succession But where the Consequent always ensues from the antecedent & is in the same proportion then we presume that there is something analogous to intention connecting the one with the  Other. Of Necessity in what we ourselves do or in any thing else we know nothing. We presume it however in the case of Impulse & Motion. And we took the notion of Cause & Effect from Intention & Execution. We return the Gift in the Figurative Motive: to the connection of Will & its Objects.
This  not the only case in which we are the Dupes of our Metaphorical or figurative Language. 
A Subject has made an impression on the mind. And from thence forward the memory or remaining knowledge of a Subject is an impression a Type Image or model. What can it be else we say And all the names of Perception Apprehension or memory are discarded or consigned to the Vulgar who do not know better or in what their thoughts consist.
 There is no will we say without a Motive Any more than there is Motion without impulse And the connection is equally necessary in Both.
But motive here is a figurative Term bringing with it the assumption of necessity when the cause of motion Implys; But dissmiss the Metaphor & recur to the Language appropriate to Mind & no such implication will be found.
There is no Will without an Object. Therefore the Mind has an object in determining itself.
The Conscious Process is that the mind Conceives an Object & after comparing different Objects makes its choice. If there be any Necessity Constraining it in every Instance there is no consciousness of such Necessity nor any Evidence of its Existence where  Consciousness is the only Evidence & so far paramount to every Other that every Other glimpse of Conjecture must disappear before it.
A Person  without any apparent Absurdity that a motive was irresible But his Object was entertaind by himself & he is accountable for having Entertained such an Object.
There is no Will or Choice but we may reverse at pleasure if we are willing to stand the consequences of such a Reversal.
This is all we can ever know  this important Subject. Every argument A Priori from the Necessity of cause taken from our consciousness of Intention & Execution or from any Collateral Topic of Divine Prescience is unfounded or inapplicable in this Case.

XXVII. OF THE THINGS THAT ARE OR MAY BE 

A late Author has said that Body is a Phænomenon & he would proceed to explain it on principles very different from what we perceive it to be in Magnitude & Figure.
If the province of Theory is to be extended so far why not some what Farther.
Existence is the great Phænomenon of all, and if Theory has no bounds let this also be explained.
The Principle to which we recur whether necessity or Chance may be an Existence or non Existence. If the last attempt is for absurd for of nothing nothing can come.
If the Principle we assume be an Existence it is the very Phænomenon to be explained, & here at least we must stop as we possibly should have done at the perception of Body & be contented with the Fact that Bodies are.
If the Theorist may question the existence of whatever he cannot explain, Let him tell the first Person he  meets. I dont know whence you are & therefore doubt you are not. 
If he succeed in this doubt let him try to doubt his own Existence of this he will find that the very doubt is Sufficient Evidence & that he cannot so much as suppose it possible he is mistaken in the consciousness of his own existence.
There then commences the Evidence of Being & unquestionable Reality.
Other Beings are perceived but in them the Evidence of reality is in some degree weakened.
The Perceiver may suppose & many have actually Supposed that perception is a mode of their own existence not an Evidence of any thing else.
But if this Doctrine be true it is not worth knowing because it is not attended by Any Consequence whatever. Whether Fire be a reality or a mere perception our conduct with respect to it is precisely the same up either Supposition.
The best way then is to talk as Nature has taught us  speak of what we perceive as realities. And knowing the Reality of Existence every one in his own can be ready to admit the possibility of Existence in any other form as well as our own.  As  Forms what are we to Suppose the most likely to be found in Being.
That Form of which we cannot doubt The Reality. Consciousness Thinking Purpose & Will &c &c or Figure and Magnitude which may possly be a mere perception or Mode of our Intellectual Being. 
It is Evident in this case that the Byas of Apprehension should be to consider every Being as Thinking till we knew the Contrary. And when a Stone Falls be ready to ask what it means.
The Contrary however is the more common. Our attention is so much occupied by our perceptions & these so interesting that it requir more than the mere presentation of an Object to make us apprehend a Person or intelligent Being in the Case.
When we find Bodies like our own with similar Action appearance of Purpose & application, we do not hesitate in conducting ourselves towards a Person who separate & in any thing different from ourselves is to  be met on a Supposition that he too has his purpose & his Will and is to be gratifyed or opposed as his design may be compatible with our own. Whether we believe Persons Superiour or inferiour in the measure of Intelligence we believe it real & Multiplied in numbers indefinite wherever the Symtoms of it are apprehended or perceived. Where we see House & Cultivated Fields we know the Country to be inhabited altho we do not See a Man.
Wherever we see usefull Purpose obtained by Means which have no other connection than their Subserviency to a common purpose: we do not Hesitate to say they are brought together by design & the Agency of Intelligence.
When Vegetation is brought about by the presence of Soil of Air of Light & Warmth of the Sun & Moisture from the Clouds acting upon Seeds of Plants all these viz. Earth & Air Sea Evaporated into Clouds wafting & shading their moisture over Land. Sun rising every morning & running his Course in the Heavens not otherwise conn than as they are combined to cover the Land with  Plants & render a Proper Residence for Animals and Men. We cannot hesitate in Saying that here is purpose & every Symptom of Benefice & of a Supreme & Masterly Intelligence: We are not limited to think it the Intelligence of Man but conceive it to be of an order much superior to his. 
All Nature is full of such Evidence & proof of intelligence we are apt to conceive it where probably we are far Short of the Design or are ill qualifyed to penetrate The Purpose. Notwithstanding of Such Errors & the possibility of many Such Mistakes yet the Genuine Byas of Intelligent Being here takes place & tho all the perceptions of Sense are mere Magnitude and Figure yet we here perceive Intelligence & are ever occupied in tracing the Ends and exemplifyed in Nature And are as confident of not being mistaken as in the consciousness of meaning in ourselves. Who ever doubted that the Eye was made to see The Ear to hear The Teeth to grind & the stomach to digest the Food & so of innumerable  Instances which tho various are Still Analogous and Argue in the Power Intelligent Invention Boundless continual Analogy & combination of Parts to a Beneficent or Salutary End.
A Late Philosopher has attempted to resolve Beauty into Uniformity amidst Variety. These however are Contradictions And his meaning would be better expressed in the Terms of Variety with Analogy which are consistent & in reality form the Character of Nature And its Beauty is no other than the symptoms of Intelligence Invention Wisdom & Goodness which bears in every part.
It were vain to go into Particulars where every Reader from his own observation might Suggest many more than our paper could contain. But man is the great Subject of Animadversion in this department of Thought where Intelligence in a certain Measure is familiarly known. And easily extended in our Apprehension to indefinitely Multiplied forms of Being in Nature but  And wherer it is Supreme or that to which the Invention of its Form & Condition in the State of Man is Ascribed As it furnishes many Symptoms of a Wise & Beneficent Design So it is in his Case alledged to furnish equal or perhaps more frequent Symptoms of Neglect or faulty arrangement.
From his Case therefore we are to derive the Proofs either of Wise & beneficent Design or of the Reverse And from his Case be ready to affirm or deny the Presence and Agency of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness in Nature.
The first and most Striking Feature of Nature to a General Observer perhaps is the indefinite variety of Forms exhibited in vegetable & Animal Kingdoms.
This circumstance may not affect the question relating to the Authors’
design whether marked by goodness or otherwise. If indeed in all this variety there is consistency order & mutual Subserviency besides what in the description of man would  be called inexhaustible Invention Supreme Ingenuity & wonderful workmanship. If to every Form there is an Apt Position and a wonderful fitness of the Form  the circumstances of the Case we must indeed infer not consummate Intelligence merely but consummate Order & goodness of Design.
In this variety tho partly Effected by unequal magnitude or dimension to a great extent, yet it does not appear that Magnitude implys any distinction of Estimation or Value. The Authors Work is as perfect in the microscopick Forms of being as in those of the greatest Extent as Perfect in the Gnat as in the Sun & his surrounding Planets.
This alone would lead to the assumption of mind and Will as the Principle of Existence & form.
To Mind & Will the small & the great are indifferent to itself occupying no Space there is no room required for its Attainments. The most extensive knowledge The most complicated  & various designs make no difference in this respect and Intelligence may be as perfect applyed to the organisation of a Gnat as to that of an Elephant or a Cyclops. This is the Character of a Workmanship in which dimension is indifferent And in respect to which mind the unextended seat of design Invention contrivance & knowledge of Affection & Purpose of Good & Evil of Happiness or Misery of Energy and Power of Excellence & defect of Beauty & Deformity is the source from which all things come & to accommodate which in occasions of Choice & exertion of Enjoyment & Action all things are. What is a mere inanimate Clod except it be the Material on which mind may work: untill it has received the force which mind may give it, & untill it may serve as the Conveyance of one Mind to another. A World Composed of Such Materials then we may infer  proceeds from Mind & is made for the sake of those minds to which it has had or be made to have some Relations.
Next to the Feature of indefinite Variety presented in the forms of Being.
The fabrication of all living & Organized Forms by seeds Nascent Germs & Progression through Various Stages to the Maturity or projecte attainment of each is an Obvious & Striking Feature in this diversifyed Multiplication of Being.
In this mere form of Progressive being there is perhaps nothing to affect the Question of Goodness in the Author except so far as every Germ has a proper Place for its origin and proper accommodation for its Progress & points to a Maturity of Benefit to the System And except so far as in the means by which it  be obtained & Cultivated it is fitted for the dominion of Intelligent Being for whose sake it is made.
If on this Globe man is the Intelligent Being for whose Residence & 
Dominion this scene of things is constructed. How Beneficent Design from this order of things proceeds. Man by observing the seed & the Germ from which Plants & Animals proceed the means of their advancement is enabled not only to eradicate or remove what is noxious but also to Substitute what is Serviceable or Beneficial to himself by Observing the Law of Nature in every department within his competence can procure for himself a repetition of every Salutary Effect to his own Purpose or the relief of his Necessities and in this is manifest The Goodness of his Maker relating to him.
In this Argument however it may be Observed that there is a latent defect & foundation for an Inference the reverse of that which we would draw from it. If the Supply of a want suggests Goodness in the Author of that Supply; does not the  existence of Such a want imply indifference or even Malevolence on the Part of that Being by whom it is suffered to take place. 
This Objection is apparently Subversive of every Argument in support of Religion or all the Evidence on which we erect our Faith in the Good of God. The Want disproves all that we would infer from the Supply.
Here however is the very Point at which we are enabled to seize the Clue by which to extricate ourselves from this admirable Fabrick of Contradictory Appearances.
On this Earth the Ascending Scale of Being terminates in Man. If he is ill formed or misplaced our Inference of Wisdom or Goodness in the Author will be deprived of its main Support. He is a Variety in a System of which variety is a prominent Feature. And his form originates in a Germ on which  he improves by degrees or waxs in Stature & Power.
In some things he Appears to be worse dealt with than most other Animals more feeble & longer detaind in Infancy defenceless and Naked: But in his progress shows himself of a Superior Cast Observant Intelligent Remembering Knowing Judgeing And Acting Ready to seize every means of Information or Communication & by a Multiplicity of Diversifyd Signs in Speech especially finding expression for all the varieties of his Perceptions inference imagination & affections.
He not only like the Other Animals selects & avails himself of what he finds for his purpose in Nature. But discerns also a combination of means for the Attainment of Beneficent Ends on which he grounds an Apprehension of Design and Deliberate Contrivance for the Preservation & Well Being of Natures susceptible of Good or Evil.
The Author is invisible but his operation is manifest. And this Native of the Earth soon learns to extend His Views to the Heavens. Becomes Acquainted with the Laws & forms of Nature traces them in thought through the most remote departments of observation and Thought to their Author in a Form of Intelligence & Power proportiond to the greatness of his Work & even Far Beyond what any Temporary or Created Work can ex.
He is thus  apprised of a Magnificence & Perfection which in Eternal Existence has no limits & which he assumes infinitely beyond his own Feeble apprehension. It is nevertheless a model on which he may form his Ambition or desire of surmounting Defects.
In stating what the Progressive Nature of Man may reach. We are not limited to the measure of vulgar Attainments or any Average of what the human upon the whole may have reached. Single examples are Sufficient to show what Human Nature may become in the result of happy Conduct or in the Continued progress which this Nature is yet destined to make.
There have been Men whose Ambition is said to have a Resemblance  of the Supreme Wisdom & Goodness of almighty God. And what is perhaps no less remarkable in views & Characters Apparently so presumptuous. Modesty itself was one of the Prominent Features. It could not indeed be Otherwise: For Vanity is the result of False or mistaken Notions of Worth & builds upon what others can be made to think rather than the Reality of any Good whatever And in this the Vain may arrive at a point from which he may look on his fellow Creatures Arround him: But he who would Form himself on the model of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness must in every moment be sensible how far he comes short. It is nevertheless the genuine Butt of his Progress if supposed to continue forever & through Multiplied Scenes of Being to  the progress he is destined to make.
What is this Perfection in which the Supremacy of Eternal Intelligence consists or in which the Progress of Nascent or created Intelligence may be conceived to point?
It is probably: but another Name for Happiness & Supreme Good. For in the Estimate of Things there is no Good without Happiness & of course no Subject. Estimation without mind or the Capacity of Happiness & the Enjoyment of what is Good. Even Man is happy only in the degree in which he supplys his defects and can Substitute just and Agreeable thoughts designs affections & exertions for the Reverse of what is of less value.
What has the Author  of Existence, then, done in qualifying man for a progress in Perfection and Goodness of Mind. He has in him laid the Foundation of Happiness together with that of Advancement towards Perfection & the Excellence of Intelligent which unites at once together with the discernment of what is Good the merit of Free choice & the Consciousness of security in the Good they have attaind as depending on themselves.
This indeed is a felicity in the highest degree realized in the Supreme Being alone & in the free agents he has made incident only in the degree in which their aim is directed towards him.
It is now of moment to inquire by what means the Germ of Intelligence in Man is Cultivated & brought forward in the ways of Wisdom and Goodness.
 This progress is realized in extending knowledge The fruit of observation & inquiry. In strength of Faculty the fruit of Exercise and Practice. In discernment of Good & Evil the Fruit of Experience. In happy & decided Choice the fruit of Caution & Deliberation. In Steadiness & Fortitude the fruit of Indifference to the temptations of folly or the threats of Fortune.
The Beneficence of the Author, then in devising a scene of Being for him is to be estimated from the degree in which his Observations & inquiries are prompted, This faculty excercised & his experiences confirmed into correct & unerring Judgment Resolution & persevering choice of what is Good.
In his progress he has to discover in what his good is to be found whether in himself or in the Circumstance of things around him. And in what that Good Consists if in Agreeable thoughts reflections or Contemplations resolutions designs Affections & Actions. If so the whole problem of Wisdom is Solved at once & he is master of the maxim ne te quaesiveris Extra And he may hold his Good in Security & without any dependence but upon That Power on whom Existence itself in every Form depends.
Such in general being the Form and destination of that Principle which constitutes the Germ of Mans Intellectual Being. The Place for him among the works of God evidently is where the Calls to observation and inquiry are common; Where Motives or incitements to action & improving Exertions are frequent  and Urgent. Where Objects & Events affect him with desire hope or fear, Where he is interested to know the Ends of Nature and the means by which Events may be obtained or prevented, A Regular & Orderly Scene in which the past may enable him to anticipate the Future & take measures to influence or direct the Event to his Purpose. Where the Laws of Nature interest more than any Singular Event, Where the love of Science is fostered & proceeds to Lay the foundation of Arts. A Scene in which every Faculty is likely to meet with occasions of Exercise. Advantages to be gained ills to be avoided or removed  difficulties to be surmounted attacks to be resisted & contests to be Sustained Objects of affection to be embraced or evil designs to be Counteracted. What else is the description of this Scene in which Man is placed and in which the Beneficence of Providence is conspicuous in that very mixture of reputed Good and Evil which Staggers the apprehension of Mankind respecting the Beneficent Purpose of God.
Will the tender Parent send his Child where he is to be pampered with Sweets, indulged in every freak or appetite allowed to wallow in sloth to decline every Effort & start from every difficulty or Appearance of Dangers?
No! But where he may be taught to restrain  his Appetites & consult his Reason & provide for Consequences. Where he may be taught to perform his Excercises even in the midst of Dangers and hardships where he may be kept to his studies to the neglect of his Pleasures & endureance of Severities.
These are the genuine Proofs of Parental affection in the treatment of Children & youth & corresponding to the order of Nature in disposing of Man in this earlyest Stage of his Intellectual Course, In which the Infant is to become a Man. The Savage to become a Citizen, In which society is to furnish manifold Departments for Government publick Order & National Safety. And where the greatest Proficiency of  the Individual or the Species in this stage of their Progress is possibly but a feeble Step in that Course which this intellectual Being is destined to run in future & diversifyed Scenes towards that supreme Felicity which none but the Eternal can Accomplish. Tho to the Being that would approach Shedding its Influence on the most remote or distant advance.
Here then we find the Evidence of Divine Goodness in those very features of Nature which The Atheist would paint as deformities or Indication of Positive Evil of impotence or Neglect in the Author. 
If even in these there  a Demonstration of Supreme Wisdom & Goodness Why need we dwell on this Sublime order of things in which the Perfection of God is manifest to every Observer.
 Beautiful are the works of God: but the most Beautiful are those on which the Intelligent maker has Stampt An Image of Himself or which he has admitted to a distant participation of that order of Being which is Conscious of itself and of that Good which it may Enjoy & Communicate. 
This order of Being is the original & Residence of Beauty Perfection or Estimation. Works that result from it & bear the Marks of its quality & rank in Nature are therefore Beautiful & mere mass of lifeless Materials have no rank or Estimation beyond that of being fit to receive The Print or Vestige of Intelligent mind or being Otherwise fit to give occasion to the Ingenuity of mind for whose sake they are  made.
Then Blessed oh Blessed forever be thou Eternal Essence of Wisdom & Goodness And be it done to me what The order of nature requires. And what I would fondly Anticipate if in the conjectures of feeble Reason there be not offence.
May I be right in the Conjecture; that in this Visible Scene of human Life, there is a Project of Nurture & Excercise to this Germ of Intelligence of which man is possessed. That as the Capacity of his Progress is indefinite other steps which we observe him make are but a Part in the Scheme of a Nature which is destind to endure for ever.
 The unequal Attainments of Men & the Defects which remain with the highest; seem to characterise a Part far short of what even our feeble Reason may look for in Scenes immediately to succeed those through which we are passing.
It is the merit of a School to prepare its Pupils for the Stations they are destined to fill. The most Successful proficients in the School of human Life arrive at their measure of Wisdom & Goodness when in many Instances at least The Animal Powers which are required to the Acting of a Vigorous Part begin the decline & when the most active Virtue must retire to the Shade & cease to be of any moment in the busy Scene of Life. Can we then restrain the conclusion that its part is assigned in some  future scenes to which the present is no more than a prelude.
When indeed we Consider the Scheme of Instruction most applicable to the bulk of men in his first grovelling stage of their Progress we must be sensible that The Scourge of Tiberius & Nero is more likely to succeed with them than the mild & shining examples and Admonitions of Titus Aurelius. They are more likely to Profit from the Evils of Vice than the blessings of humanity & Candour, they are apt to abuse or consider as a shelter to Vice. The Rable must be allowed to experience in full the Evils of that Intemperance which they call Pleasure And of that Brutal Force which in its success in Subduing the  Innocent they call Heroism; before they can Estimate that Wisdom & Greatness of Soul which in man is the Image of God.
In proportion as Individual Approach to this Measure they seem to be Sett aside as destined to a different Scene.
Amidst these Speculations are we permitted to inquire why the Power that has destined man to a certain Rank in the order of Intelligence has not in his Creative Might placed him at once on that Level without condemning  to pass through the Scenes which are acted in this Mortal Life.
Here it is probable that Silence would become us: But we are  free to inquire or conjecture and our steps  that course if conducted with Modesty & Candour cannot lead us astray to Any Evil Effect.
This Question which relates to the Form of Intelligence must remind us of the Distinction peculiar to that Order of Being The Intelligent when perfect is so in himself And Author of that Wisdom & Good which is his own. Such is the Eternal Majesty of God.
To be of any Rank in the Scale of Intelligent Being The worthy must have chosen to be what he is And the merit for which he is Estimated must be his own. It is in this if in Any Respect we are entitled to say that man is formed after the Image of God and hence it is  that he is placed with Propriety in the Garden of God abounding in all the Varieties of Fruit a Mere Capacity or Power of observation action & Choice. That the Merit of his Choice & the Measure of his Attainments may be his own. On this account The Progressive Form of Being so much the Predilection of Nature in every Modification of Life is peculiarly adapted to Intelligence: or derives from what is proper to Intelligence that Analogy which prevails throughout the System of Living Nature.
Part nd Of The Things that are or may be Sceptics are disposed to doubt what they cannot explain and Theorists are disposed to explain what they cannot deny some have explained or resolved mind & its operations into Vibrations and Vibratiuncles Others into irritations impressions Pictures or images of things furnished or produced from abroad. 
In return for so liberal a supply of matter from abroad to constitute a Mind within. Others would resolve the Phænomenon of Matter or Body into the mere effect of immaterial Powers of Attraction & repulsion operating from Mathematical Points and without either extension Solidity Magnitude or Figure giving occasion  to these perceptions of Sense in us but it is to be hoped that no one will suspend his belief either of mind or Body in expectation of Evidence to be derived from Such Explanations.
If Theory is thus to extend its Province beyond what is commonly thought to require explanation: let us remember that Existence itself is the most comprehensive Phænomenon of all And if we can explain the whole Universe of Science will be laid open before us.
Be our Principle what it may. Necessity, Chance or any Other yet namely origin of Things: It must be either existent or not existent. If the Latter it were absurd to Ascribe to it any Effect whatever. If it be an Existence it is the Very Phænomenon we propose to explain  and we have made no advance.
Here then we must be contented to know the Fact without being able to account for it.
It is indeed a Fact the least credible of any if it were possible to doubt of it. Every one knows it is impossible to doubt of it in his own Case & being admitted in one Case the great difficulty is removed & we are open to Evidence of its Reality in any Other Instance.
Our Perception of Other Being is not attended with any doubt of Reality.
But the Evidence declines. And the Sceptic can affect to consider his Perceptions as Modes of his own existence not the Evidence of any thing else.
 Happily for this discovery it is of no consequence whatever. I must shun my perception of Burning or of falling from a Precipice as much as I would the Reality of any such Accidents for I can as little survive the perception as I could the Reality And if the Realities would form a proper Scene of Action for me the Perceptions do no less.
If Scepticism should prevail in this Instance his Doctrine is unworthy of Notice as being of no Consequence whatever either Good or Bad. We must therefore be contented to Speak the Language of Nature on this Subject and name the things perceived instead of the Perception.
To us however the first known as well as the most assured model of Reality is that of which we are  Conscious; Altho’ perceptions intrude upon us afterwards with so powerful an Effect that we Consider their objects as the models of Reality & would resolve the mind itself into something that may be seen or felt. Although in the mean time The Power of seeing or feeling is certainly Prior & the most undeniable Existence of the two.
What is This Being of which we are conscious And of which the Evidence so far exceeds that of any other as to precludes even the Supposition or possibility of Mistake? It is a Power of Thinking and Acting Conscious of itself Percipient of Other things, prepared to choose among Ends to pursue & devise  means for the Attainment of them. Unequall to itself as it varys in the choice of Ends or the Efficacy of Means.
Such are Intelligent Powers and in the Case of Man are attached to the Organs of a Corporeal Frame.
There is no distinction in Nature more important than this of Power & Material on which Power may be employed.
As the World abounds in Materials so it does in Symptoms or Indications of Power.
Bodys are Powerful in Cohesion & Gravitation. Plants in Vegetation & Propagation of their kind. Animals are Spontaneous Detached from the Soil And Active to the purpose of their kind.
What mighty Power is this which actuates the Terraqueous System which has made the distribution of Land Water which has cased the Whole in Air which has prepared the Water to shed its Vapours in the Air, put the Air in motion to waft these Wapours over Land Varyed the Temperature of Air so as to Collect the Vapours with which it is charged into Clouds & by continued condensation to shade its moisture in Showers over Land.
This Agitation of the Voluble Elements which moulders & works the surface of the Earth into Soil which diversifies the Surface into Hill and Dale to give current to the Superfluous water to the sea & in its Course Supply wants of man & beast.
What mighty Power is That Plants The Sun at so fit a Distance from the Earth That opens in that Luminary an Inexhaustible  Source of Light & Heat to mature the Soil & Moisture of the Earth to fertility & Vegetation that covers the Land with nourishment for Man & Beast.
What mighty Power is this which giving to the Sun in magnitude Compared to this Earth the proportion of a Million to a Single Unit Nevertheless causes this Mighty Body to shed his light & heat in every hours quite round this Globe of Earth And in every period of twelve months to Visit the North & the South so as to give every Region of the Earth its turn of seasons for seed time & Harvest.
This first appearances Suggest a magnitude of Power which subsequent  discoveries Confirm. The Planetary System indeed far excells in Grandeur & Simplicity what the mind can figure to itself even from the rising or the setting Sun while his Glories Eclipse or seem to Surpass that of all Nature besides. This ponderous Mass of luminous & heating matter greatly exceeding in quantity the Sum of all the Planets occupies at rest or nearly so The Centre of a Sphere or World beset with Solid Globes at proper Distances that turn their sides alternally to receive his Rays & Genial warmth And so incline the Orbits in which they revolve arround him as to keep their distance and constitute the Variety of Seasons which we on this Earth experience.
What is this mighty Power whose worth is thus displayed.
If there be an End it was intended if there be means they were devised.
And Man small as he apparently is in this Scale of Magnitude has been enabled to look beyond the Vail of first appearances  perceive how Nature and recognize the end to which means other ways unconnected are made to combine their effects.
He sees in the great what he himself is enabled to  practise in the little.
Intelligence the first and only species or form of Existence with absolute and Unquestionable certainty known to him now again is Manifest in Scenes to which his limited Powers of Action cannot reach. If Intelligence is required to fabricate a Slipper for the human Foot. What was it that gave the Sun his Magnitude & Form his Place on Nature his power of Light & Warmth so well Suited to the Living World his Range & his Role Is Man to possess Intelligence & yet to doubt if such a Power exist in all the forms of being besides. If it does exist where but  in the Whole, where order is most conspicuous Invention most powerful Ends most Important or Salutary & Means most Effectual & Wise.
Is Man then to recognise himself in this mighty scene of things. What should he recognise in this best and grandest Scene of Things than that which is the best & the most Real of all he knows. He cannot act Otherwise without affectation or ev perverse effort to counteract the Natur proceeding of his Mind.
Mankind have stocked The Heaven with Gods conceived on some Approximation to the human  Form. This we must admit is far from being correct but like the bable or first notion of Infants is natural untill it be corrected.
The human Frame of Body is peculiar to an animal of this Earth.
Though attended with Intellectual power not inseparable from it.
It is found in Man but is not found where power Wisdom & Goodness are most Eminent where Sea combines with Land And Air with Water where the Sun contributes his Light & Heat to form a Living World of Plants animals Men. It is a Power that provides  at once for millions & Thousands of Millions of Men. It is great then in that proportion and in higher proportion higher in Scale of Being than Man. Man is but a part of its Work. And tho he flatters himself that he is formed after the Image of the most high All he can mean is that Intelligence of which a Germ is conferred on him is highest in the order of Be And that Indefinite Attainments on this Ground are accessible to him. The very highest of its Powers and Priviledges that of forming itself is not withheld from him. For  this he is left free to chuse his End & his Means that he may have at once the merit & the felicity of all he is enabled to become. Of this he is probably yet far short & cannot be too cautious in conceiving the Almighty on his own Model. 
When we indulge in conjectures to which we are led by the undoubted discoveries of Science. This mighty sun whose bulk exceeds our thoughts is but a Single Star whose nearness gives him an apparent Diameter of about half a Degree. The Smallest Star is a Sun as well as  he removed beyond the reach of optical Aids to magnifie him. Round Thousands of such Suns at once in sight of us there range a Group of Worlds like ours and if we could be placed beyond the bounds of all we see other Firmaments and Other Constellations would come in sight & Worlds would Multiply & number like the extent of Space would have no End. Then what is Man that he should be considered amid such Scenes of Greatness. In dimension the world that he inhabits is but a point and all that live upon it atoms. But Dimension is not the  Test of Excellence or Worth. What is it that unfolds the Schemes of boundless Power has traced his Laws from Earth to Heaven Perceives The order of these mighty Spheres And Ambitions of the Skill which leads them perceives the Maker in his Work & would walk with him throughout the wonders of this boundless worlds. Tis man that treats alike of Atoms and of Suns. And does not blindly tread the Ground on which he lives but sees the End for which himself & Other  things are made oer looks the passive Subject to adore the Maker.
In the Range of Skill & Power Dimension is of no Account And the Almighty Mind as powerful in the Organisation of a Gnat as in the scheme of World.
After all the Dreams of Imagination or Conjec nothing has yet appeared in this Created Scale Superiour to the mind of man. The Maker seems to have admitted him a kind of Partner in his Work. The Earth is fair wherever Plants or Animals abound: but where Man prevails another Scene appears. His foot Steps are the Plough mark & the  Cultivated Field The blooming Fruit and the ripening Harvest The Domestic and all his habitations from the humble cottage to the Towering City. If he is Well Our Argument concludes the Wisdom & the Goodness of his Author: If otherwise twere vain to build on mere conjecture or fancy a Wisd where we scarcely know the Fact.
Here is the test of what we are to think of Nature & its Author.
There is not per in the Aspect of this Terrestrial Oeconomy consigned to the Residence of Man a more Striking Feature than that of the Variety  exhibited through out the Detail of its Departments Animal Vegetable Mineral & Substance of Every Sort. And the Effect is surely Congenial to Man. If he is delighted with tasks of Arrangement & the Simplification of what Appears to be perplexed, Here is work for his genius and he has not neglected to seek for disstinction in this pursuit. Names the most Celebrated for Ingenuity have no high Merit than this of presenting the Catalogue of Nature under Titles at once Comprehensive and distinct. If these be the works of a Designing Power, This too we must Suppose to be designed.
That Power whose work is Universal & Consummate order does nothing in  Vain: nor does ther appear to be any end in this Terrestrial  more worthy  that of furnishing Exercise & the occasion of Improvement to the Intelligent mind of Man.
Here Also no doubt is Evidence to him of consummate Invention and amidst almost boundless Variety of Identity of the Power that has Acted & Acts throughout. The Variety is not more striking than the Analogy that is made to run through Parts unlike. From Identity in the specimens of the same Species. There is an approximation of features from Species to Species from Kind to Kind. And where differences continue to multiply there is still some foundation for union  and Classification in orders of general Denominations of Being.
The Analogy of Organisation of Nutrition & Vegetation runs from the Vegetable to the Animal. That of Generation and dissolution is common to both that even of the Sexes has been recently traced from one to the Other. 
If we should cease to Argue the Wisdom & Goodness of the Author from the Aptitude of this Order in Nature to accommodate the Genius & further the Progress of Man. Still The Individual in every Species exhibits a Frame an Accommodation in Place Element and supply Indicative of Design Wisdom & Goodness in the  Creating Power. If man like the Other Animals were blind or Insensible to the Ends of Creation in Other parts of the Work: In this of the Organisation of Plants & Animals The End for which every part is fitted could not have escaped him nor the Combind Functions of all in the composition of a whole compleated in itself & fitly related to the Scene in which it is placed. Who ever doubted that the Eye was to see and the Ear to Hear? or who ever with Study & continued Labour came to Understand The Function of these Organs ever doubted that Power who Constructed the Eye understood the Science of Optics & the Theory of Vision. Or  who ever in contemplating the anatomy of the External and Interiour Ear doubted that the Maker understood the Theory of sound And Elastic Vibrations. The Anatomy of every Animal consists in the specification of beneficent Ends and of Effectual means for the attainment of those Ends. And Comparative Anatomy pursued from Kind to Kind shows that Organisation is not matter of blind or undistinguishing Rotine: but where the Principle is the same The Execution and Application are still Varied to the Specifick with consummate skill & Goodness Man particularly is distinguished in his Organs sufficient to mark a being of Superior rank And  rank & Destination Os Homini Sublime dedit/ Caelumque Vicere Iussit/ et ad Sidera tollere Vultus. 
The poets sense tho’ dressed in terms that touch the Imagination rather than the Judgment is well founded in Nature. His Aspect announces Observation And thought And all his Organs fit Instruments of Art and Expression.
He is amply provided with Materials for every fabric & with every Substance required for his Subsistance and Accommodation. And the Scene in which he is placed is exquisitely fitted to such an Actor. In the midst of Order & a fixed constitution of things, he with proper attention be prepared  for the common Events of Life And the very Laws which ensure him of his State also enable him to modify it in many important Respects. The Weight of his materials assure him of the place at which he is to find them And that very weight which is a continual tendency to fall, enables him with Aid of the Climate to erect fabricks of masonry that last for Ages.
His Food his Raiment his Lodging is Amply provided for in the produce of his Fields his Herds And the Skilful direction of his Art Applied to the Materials which Nature has every where  furnished. The Laws of Propagation respecting Plants and Animals are such  enable him to choose what Animal he will rear & Domesticate, What plants or what Timber he will have to prevail in his Fields. The animals found useful in one Region are made to multiply in another.
The Harvest of China is repeated in The West And the woods of America are in small parcels of Seed transported to Europe. 
The limited duration of Life in Animals and Men. They fall we are told in hasty Succession as the leaves in Autumn And this is a Theme in Elegy  and of tender complaint in the Affairs. But it is the Circumstance which of all others is most effectual to fit this Scene for Mans dominion As the great Artificer & fabricator Of his own Attainments as an Embryo of Infantine Nursling of a Celestial Spirit on the Earth.
All the Kinds whether of Plants or Animals indeed are perishing but to be renewed in fresh and growing materials from Ages. And Reigning Man has not always to Contend with obdurate Subjects already formed to habits which he cannot change he finds on the Contrary in every Age a tender Race whom by wise And Salutary Institutions he can form to  his purpose. And if his flocks be small at the outset, he knows how they may be made to cover the Land with their numbers & occupy every Region with a Race whose habit are formed on the Spot. If his State or his City be Small he is enabled by Wise institutions to make it a great one And in Situations scarcely yet touched by Men rival the Establishments on which men heretofore have been most Successful And thus from new materials produce a Work for which former materials if they remained unfit by other manners & Obdurate Habits And so the Master is qualified for his  Work. And the Material is fitted to his hand. 
In all this however we may be told we admit of wants in Man and would Argue the Beneficence of his Maker from the manner in which his wants are Supplyed. But if the Supply Argue Beneficence what does the Want imply? Were it not better to have had no defect than to be patching up a blundering performance with Successive & precarious supplies & corrections? No doubt, but in this Case we may Apprehend that Creation itself is a continual Supply of Defects & the least defect is the greatest Perfection of which Created Being is Susceptible.
Man is of that order of Being who must choose for  himself And is in Essence a Self forming Power. Hence the continual disstinction of Praise and Blame with which he is treated. We pity his Misfortunes but we execrate his Depravity & despise his follies.
His Happiness & his Perfection are the Same The Agreeable state of a Mind well informed Correct well employed exempt from Malice or Fear in all their Vile or Piteous forms Benevolent Temperate Courageous & Just.
His information is the result of his own observation And mature reflection His Employment Benevolence Temperance Justice & Resolution are the Results of his Will  And his Habits the Result of Persevering Exertions:
Pleasure would often mislead him but a just Notion of Rectitude & Virtue is the leader to happiness and Safety from Evil.
To such a Being originating in Ignorance and faculties untried Attainments must be gradual And the experience of Error & Mistake a Principal Guide to Rectitude and Truth.
His faculties improve by Exertion And his Principal Ennemies Are inactivity & Sloth. 
To such a Being Wants no less than the manner of their Supply are Evidence of Goodness in the Author. For what Reason shall we suppose that the Almighty who  has distinguished Man with so many marks of a Destination Superior to that of any Other Animal has also marked with so many Circumstances of Apparent disadvantages and Defect.
Naked unarmed unprovided while the Other Animals find their Subsistence in every field the uncultivated Earth to him is barren & in no Climate or in any Soil yelds Spontaneously to him the Mere necessaries of Life. For what Reason is he encountered in every pursuit with Difficulty Danger & Actual Suffering. Is it from Neglect of him or a Principle of Malice towards him, asks the Tender but Judicious Parent from what Motive in placing his Child he shuns the haunts of Pampering Pleasures of Indolence and Sloth and prefers the Severities of Wise restraint And all the Labours of an Arduous Task that brings his Faculties into exertion and Confirms them in the Possession of a Strength of mind which they are made to employ. 
The miseries of human Life are the principal Theme of Complaint with those  would repell the Evidence of Goodness in the forms of Nature. This however is but one Instance of the Ignorance & Error with which we have to Strugle in our Way to that condition & those habits in which our happiness Consists & which in reality is the Natural Termination of that Discipline whi the Almighty has prepared for Man.
From his wants and apparent comparative defects originate those Arts which constitute & adorn the Prosperity of Nations & contribute so much to the order & comfort of human Life. The Ends to which they are directed are the means of Subsistence of accommodation & ornament interesting as Life itself of which they are the Support & decoration. They are the Media of intercourse the Subject of Trafic & the means of Beneficence, And in the Conduct of man with respect to them they are the Instruments or materials of the most Salutary Habits.
 If they are to be provided or secured; they are to the Individual the occasions of Industry & salutary Labour & Skill. If to be consumed they are the Subjects of Oeconomy Frugality & Temperance. They are communities the subject of Just Laws and in their distribution serve in part to mark those Subordinations that regulate the Forms of Society. They are indeed Subject to abuse. But an Abuse attended with immediate Sense of its Evil & therfore like experience in every instance of folly conducting in the result to Wisdom.
The proper conduct of men with respect to those matters of Interest is Prudence and a Principal constituent of  Happiness. The Event however of that Conduct is adverse as well as prosperous & never Secure to any precise Effect. The Person therefore who relys for Happiness on the Event is often dissapointed & never Secure. The mighty Power that Reigns in Nature by disposing of Events sometimes to the Wish of Man would encourage him to Activity & skill sometimes the Reverse would teach him that his Part in every case is to conduct himself properly & in every occasion to be what the occasion requires moderate in prosperity And in Adversity armed with Fortitude to act the Part which Circumstance requires.
Experience in the end may teach her Pupils that Happiness resides within and comes not from abroad but in the form of Warning not rely on what is placed beyond our reach. Events are various & contingent They the Circumstances in which the Man may Act a Happy Part, And fortunately for him can never shut the Doors of Fortitude moderation & propriety against him. It has been said to avail himself equally of These Virtues is beyond the Powers of Man: but who will Say that it were not happy for him to hold his Being by his Tenure. Or that he can too much extol the Wisdom & Goodness which in the conditions prescribed for humans has prepared the ground for Such a Superstructure beginning now  perhaps to terminate hereafter.
Among The Chosen circumstances in the present of Man Society itself is doubtless that most Nutritive of Good to him Whether in Cooperation or Opposition the principal Object and effectual spur to all his Energies. And if in the Argument this Circumstance be overlooked; ’tis because too Obvious to be mentioned where Novelties & hidden charms alone can please. If a Man could feel Benevolence without an Object; still it might  asked on whom he should bestow it. And if the Personage of Wisdom & Goodness were compleat in one where is the Scene on  which he could perform it? That Scene is Ministered to him. And nothing is withheld but that which would Subvert his Nature. Influence to constrain his Choice And the Gift of Virtues not his own. These no doubt the Almighty Could confer:
but it is not thus Intelligence acquires its Honours or confirms its Powers.
The Progress of mans Nature is Various or unequal but no where definite. He who has done most is but prepared for more And what we see is not a Limit but presages of some future Scenes ascending Steps upon the Scale of Being with ample Scope above for what man learnt below.
Socrates & Newton Zeno Epictetus The Slave & Marcus Aurelius The Emperor were distinguished Pupils in this School of Human Life And if ’tis wonderful that some should soar so high ’tis no less wonderful that others should remain so low as numbers do. But to have once beheld among the works of God the Vestiges of Wisdom & of Goodness removes the Effect of Mystery or the dread of Ill for ever.

XXVIII. OF NATURE AND ART

Nature is sometimes held forth as the Standard of Excellence in the works of Art, And of Felicity in the manners of Men. But in the Affectation of Paradox & profound Observation Nature is rejected as every where Rude & imperfect without Art.
Such Contradictions have their Source in the mere Ambiguity of words which we employ in different meanings without any warning to Others or sense of the difference.
Nature is sometimes put for some partial or Actual Aspect of things Apart from any Change to which they are Subject & which they may be destined to receive.
In this Acceptation Art is opposed to Nature as light to darkness or Motion to Rest.
But Art Also has its different meanings. It is sometimes  put for the Power of Ingenuity by which order is Obtained in the Construction of things, Sometimes for a concerted disguise which to deceive the observer or frustrate the Original purpose  things. Thus the Cook by his Art imposes one species of Food for Another. The Jocky imposes a lame Horse for a Sound one or a Gardiner mars the Effect of a Prospect by his rectilinear Plantations crouded arbours & Covered Walks.
Meantime we are the Dupes of Language & think we have made a discovery when we have changed the meaning in which we employ our words.
The Sense  which The Terms Art & Nature are Employed when The Critic tells us that Nature is the Standard of Excellence in the Works of Art or the Philosopher tells us that Nature is the standard of Felicity in the manners of Men is not Nature in any Partial View of its parts or their Actual  or Art  in any change it may produce whether for the better or the worse: but Existing things in the Progress & Attainments of which they are susceptible And of which the Specimens are Realized with or without the Interposition of human Ingenuity and Power which are in reality a part in the System of Nature, And by their Functions destind to contribute to the Author of beings gives things the Aspect which thy Bear.
In this Sense The Art Industry & Skill of Man has its place in Nature like the Vegetation of Plants The Blowing of Winds or the Current of Waters on the surface of the Earth.
The Landscape on Cultivated  owes its appearance to the Interposition of Man who instead of taking the Actual State of things for his Model is continually reversing the State in which he found them, Changing the woodland into Corn Field or covering the  bare Mountain with woods.
The Architect is causing the Stone to be removd from its quarry & is erecting Fabricks which without his Art would had no place in the System.
Yet these & many Other Arts must conform themselves to that Nature which they thus seem to Violate.
The Mechanic or the Engineer must consult the Laws of Nature in what he would per; if he neglect or Mistake them dissappoint dissaster or Ruin will ensue. He proceeds according to Nature to procure Some change in the Actual State of Things. Hence all the Arts of Agriculture Arch & Manufacture in which the Artist considers Nature not as an original to be copied or imitated: but as a Store of materials on which he is to operate  for his own Accommodation or safety.
Man however is a living Power & his energy does not terminate in the mere Supply of his Animal Necessities or Wants. Tho amply provided in these Respects; His Powers are still at Work to Observe to Contemplate & Comprehend the Appearances of things. The Result to him is agreeable or dissagreeable according as his Curiosity is gratifyd or frustrated & the Aspect of Things is matter of Enjoyment or Suffering. Order that is the Combination of fit means for the attainment of a beneficent  delights him: Dissorder or meaningless Assemblage of discordant or unconnected particulars disgust or distress him. His Affections of Love or Hatred of Confidence or Fear are the very essence of  Happiness or Misery Languor & inactivity is so painfull to him That he like Better to be Assailed with trouble and called upon to remove inconvenience than suffered to languish in the Absence of any object to bestir his Powers. When Real Occasions of Sentiment or Action are wanting or do not come up to the measure of his Interest or Concern he recurs to Invention & Fiction to recollection of the Past or Apprehension of The Future.
Hence the charms of History of Poetry & Painting. In these he not only proceeds on the Laws of His Nature: but the Effect is a Copy or Imitation of Nature in its Actual State. History & Portrait Painting are transcript or Copy of what Nature in some Instance has realized Poetry or Invention & fiction conveyed in  Language or in Figures upon Canvas are Imitations of Nature or Compositions formed upon the Plan of her Works & calculated to Supply the Intervals of Actual interesting Occasions & to raise the sentiments & Imaginations of Men above the Pitch of Real or Actual Life.
These therefore are properly termed imitative Arts. And tho permitted to raise their Objects above the common level yet never to quit the Path in which Nature is known to move or exhibit a Result which her original Stamina are not Qualifyed to reach. Achilles may be fabricated a greater Hero than has ever yet appeared in History: but not with power to control the Elements or to be what the human powers however  improved can never become.
Man the great Artist in this Terrestrial Sphere or lower department of Nature has in himself as well as in the world Arround him The Materials of an Art, by which in following up the line of his Progress he may arrive at Indefinite Perfection still proceeding on the Germ or first stamina of His Intellectual Being.
That Knowledge of which he was so Curious in Infancy Those schemes of Rectitude & Beauty which he admired those benevolent Affections which formd his purest Enjoyments That force of mind which raised him above the consideration of inconvenience or Danger & may be improved indefinitely both in measure & Correctness And to engage him in the Arts which Aim at this object nothing perhaps is required but  the just Apprehension of its Importance & the peculiarity of the Charge as committed to him within the reach of his Powers depending on his Will & rendering him accountable for the Result.
Here then is a peculiar Art of which the Object may be sought for in the Copy or Imitation of Nature May terminate in a repetition of what has been actually done or Attained or in the Conception of a Model to which Nature points: but is removed beyond the Actual Attainments of Men.
The most Excellent of Men have had their Defects and Defects are not proper Objects of Desire the best men are not in all Respects proper Subjects of Imitation.
Yet a Life Agreeable to Nature is the Recommendation of every Philosophical Scool And as it refers at one to the Powers which Nature has given & to the specific Attainments to which Nature points.
The Rule must without doubt except it Even in the Application be admitted as supreme & without exception in directing the Choice & the Pursuits of Men.
What is this Nature which the wise man is to consult and retain on all occasions? It is not the Temperature of Seasons the Vegetation of Spring or the Maturity of Autumn. It is perhaps somewhat Analogous to these but differing as the Subject to which it refers is different.
The Analogy in which they Agree may consist in the Corresponding beneficence of Ends & the relative fitness of means in each. These are Visibly realised in Nature & with  propriety presented as models of imitation to Intelligent Beings whose Nature it is to Act from Design to have an Object or End in every effect & to distinguish themselves by the good which they intend & the effectual means they employ for the Attain of those Ends.
So far it may be said in General Terms that Nature as in other Arts is the Model of Felicity and good conduct in human Life.
But there is a sense in which it may be said more particularly that Nature Suggests the Rule of Life for Man: not by Analogy or imitation: but by giving Effect to the Specific of his own Constitution.
These indeed do  not command him as the Laws of Motion & Gravitation command the Material World.
Whatever may be his propensity or Byas at any particular time His conduct is matter of choice in which he proceeds with unequal Degrees of Consideration & merits the opposite characters of Wisdom or Folly.
Of his Affections some are grateful or ungrateful in all their Exertions.
Benevolence in all its Forms is grately Malice & Fear in all their forms the Reverse. To his Active Nature mere exercise is pleasant but may be hightened by the Affection or occasion from which it takes place or marred and poisoned by Affection And occasions as in the Case of Malice Envy Fear & Jealousy.
 Here therefore Nature surely suggests that whatever Power he has over himself should be exerted in retaining & fostering Habits of the one Sort & Suppressing those of The others.
He is by Nature Conscious of this difference in the modes of His Existence but is also Conscious of a distinction by which the one is an Excellence or Perfection of his Nature. The other a Blemish or Defect Constituting to him Subjects of a Nature highly placed or the Reverse. Here also Nature has pointed out the Line of his Conduct. For we cannot Doubt that what is by Nature Agreeable has the Sanction  of Nature as an Object of Choice And to be happy is in other words to live as Nature directs And Happiness is the Standard of Estimation and Merit as well as Prosperity to Man.
So far the Life according to Nature which Wisdom Requires is no more a Copy of what men Commonly are than a Well Cultivated Field is a Copy of what is general in the Neighbouring Forest And Nature for the most part in things within the Reach of Man does not so much as to leave nothing for him to do.
 Hence it may be said of all his Mechanical accommodations that Nature has furnished the materials & entrusted the Art to him.


XXIX . THE DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF MORAL SCIENCE 

Some appearances in the History of Science would tempt us to believe that men are most Solicitous about what concerns them the least. They overlook the Earth to gaze at the heaven and neglect the present to Penetrate the past or the Future.
This appearance however is no more than the effect of Curiosity which fixes on what is Strange in preference to what is familiar however important.
The most pressing object of Curiosity is the Alarming if unknown: but among things familiar the most important has the perfect right to our habitual Attention And in fact whether well or ill understood has its place among the affairs of Men.
The Condition of every Individual is of the highest importance to himself. The manner of a Man in Society is of the greatest Importance to his associates. Hence the consideration of Character of Morality & the preferable disposition of habits of Action amongst men.
It is considered as the Preferable object of Rule & Instruction.
Persons willing to overlook it in themselves require it as a guard On the Actions of Others. Statesmen require it as Essential to the order of Society & a principal Engine of Government. Priests Require it as a Duty binding on Man to his Maker & do not fail to charge with Rules &  Observances such to the Interests of their own Order. It is by them termed Religion. And whilst the Social Moralist requires from his Neighbour an habitual preference of Justice & good Will to Others in preference of any Selfish Concern of his own. The Religious requires it as a Duty to God in preference to any Interest of Man And in both there is a Settled Byas of Nature which operates in secret against the Hearty Embrace of Morality; in the heart whilst every one calls for it aloud as the only  condition on which he can endure his Neighbour or on which a People can hope for the Protection of Heaven.
The Idea of Morality under both these Aspects tends to set Conscience at Variance with that Universal Principle of Self preservation on which Providence seems to rely for the safety & advancement of her Works.
Benevolence no doubt tends to make man the Safeguard & Keeper of his fellow Creature but its effects are occasional & are feeble compared to the Constant & unremitting Care which every one entertains for himself.
If Morality or  Religion then be so gretly desireable in human Life as we affect to believe we do wrong in representing them as considerations altogether dissinterested & Suppressive of Self-Love. It would almost seem that in doing so we meant to warn the Individual to beware of them as considerations that impose the neglect of himself.
Nature has in fact given to every Individual the Charge of himself. Here all his concerns are Centered & so far his Dominion extends & no farther.
And the selfish Moralist is well founded in saying that every Scheme of Morality is Illusive and Tyrannical that requires him to prefer the Wellfare of Others to his own. This  in Abstract & general Terms is undoubtedly true. But in proportion as a man is devoted to himself in the same Proportion he is deeply concerned to know how this self is constituted & in what its Welfare consists. The selfish in common Language are those who prefer their property their ease and their safety to every other consideration whatever. So much that while such Persons consider their property & circumstances as themselves: the vulgar Moralist concurs with them in that Apprehension but is so unreasonable as to require from them a preference of the welfare of Others to their own.
The Emperor Marcus Aurelius has left us a Book which contains what we call His Meditations but which was called by himself or by Others who understood him a Treatise of his own concerns (περι τα εαυτα)  He agreed with those who think a man is entrusted only with his own concerns and Answerable only for himself having no Power over any other Person or Thing. It is worthy of Notice however that to him this self with which he was so charge was neither His Property his Body his Food or his Rayment But his Mind His affection his Purposes and his Actions And so Constituted he would not forego the Tranquillity of a mind Conscious of innocence & Goodness his Good will to Mankind his diligence in Action his Fortitude & Resolution His Temperance & moderation for the Concern of any other Person whatever. If a Rival attempted to supplant him in the Empire in this he would not allarm for himself.  This was not the self which he was determind to support against every Assailant Moralists statesmen & Priests the Founders of States and of Religion considered Morality as matter of obligation & of Duty. Long as the World had existed before the Age of Socrates no one considered morality as the best condition not only of society but of The Individual or the Moral Agent himself. 
From the Conversation of this Simple Athenian Citizen there resulted Enquiry into the chief Good of man. Which was variously expressed by different persons.
This question in whichever terms it be solved is doubtless the first in point of importance to man and when we consider how seldom it has been seriously discussed we are tempted to rd our Doubt whether The Professors of Philosophy and are not most apt to be occupied with what concerns them the least. Although in this & in other instances; the important being familiar gives way to what is strange & Remote.
The Existing Forms of Being are mind That is conscious of itself that acts enjoys or Suffers and the Lifeless matter composing the Scene on which mind is placed. The distinction of Good & Evil with that of Enjoyment & Suffering is relative to mind alone. Matter in all its variations unperceived unfelt & unestimated is merely indifferent and in the Universe is provided in Subservience to mind. And yet Philosophers except in an Age or two overlooked the mind & its condition to gaze on the Material World & its appearances  when strange or uncommon. In such Subject and the inquiries they suggest mankind no doubt is deeply concerned.
The Laws of Nature in the material World in what may be called The Province or district of Man carry an immediate reference to him as an Actor in the Scene they Constitute. Without an Order of things so Established, he could not move a step in the Scene with Safety or Success & without certain knowledge of these Laws profound & accurate. His Power or the limits of his Art would be extremely Narrow. And when we consider the Art or Powers he has Established on the Laws of Mechanism or Motion on the Laws of Optics of Heat & mixture in the Laws of Vegetation & Animal Life  we are justifyed in rating the value of Science as it relates to the Material World very high. They not only enable the Student to advance in the way of his Accommodation & Safety: but lead him also to the most Important Apprehension of that Wisdom & Goodness from which they are derived. But to reap any Benefit from Science so happily formed & Accomplished he must enter with peculiar  on the study of himself.
His Capacities of Enjoyment his exposure to Suffering And among the Objects which present themselves to his choice what is that which he is most concerned to command & secure.
And untill he has made up his mind on this point he may reckon his Science on every Subject comparatively as of little avail. We are ever forming  some purpose engaged in some pursuit in which we are lyable to mistake Miscarriage Dissappointment, Calamity or distress. And in the case of a Being so situated & exposed it is evident that whatever concerns the Nature & Character of his different Objects is of the greatest importance.
It has been Observed and indeed is Evident that good & Evil whatever be their Cause subsist in Living Conscious or Sentient natures alone.
It is to the mind then we are to look for the good constituent of its Happiness & there we are to beware of the Evils constituent of its misery. The Apprehension of Things are Satisfactory & Agreeable or the Reverse Affections are joyous or painful And occupation of mind may be diversifyd in the extremes of alacrity & Joy or  Tortures. The Good then we Are to aim at is that of a Mind well condition well employd a mind whose Apprehensions & Contemplations & Affections are pleasant, to whom the Affections of Benevolence & Good will are habitual exempt from Fear and Malice in all their forms of distrust Jealousy Envy Hatred or Revenge to which Existence itself is A Mode of Alacrity tranquillity & Peace. So the wise conceives himself & in maintaining such a State of his Being is not dissinterested but Selfish in the best sense & in the highest degree.
He does not consider this as a Duty imposed upon him by the command of a Superior nor as a sacrifice made  the wellfare of Others or the Neglect of his own. He considers  it as the health of his mind in the preservation of which he no more considers the World as Obliged to him than they are Obliged for his preserving the health of his Body & the proper use of the Supply which Nature has destined for his use.
Such is the view in which sound reason will consider the Distinction of Virtue & the object of a Selfishness decided and well understood: but if we err in the Apprehension of Self our Morality will return into the Channel from which Socrates Plato & Zeno endeavoured to rescue it a Channel in which it ran counter to the Interest of the Actor & was a Sacrifice of Self to the wellfare of other men. The Virtuous indeed has but little Power in the Concerns of  others: but in doing what he can on a principle of Beneficence & Justice he places his own most Essential & principal Concern.
Thus Virtue which in its perfect Measure is an exemption from all the Sufferings of Fear or Malice & the exercise of every Agreeable Affection or thought, is the happiness of those who possess is naturally useful to those who are within reach of its Influence. And on this Account or in this point of View Utility is sometimes Assigned as the Test or measure of its Value. 
But in itself & to those who possess it it is happiness or it has nothing to attack them. Self Preservation is the primary Law of Nature & cannot be disspensed with in Any Instance. Even the Generous & the Be who expose their property & their Lives are Justified  in doing so because their Generosity and Valure are of more value to them than Life or Property.
As Virtue is Happiness So Happiness is the highest Term of Praise. As Happiness to every Person is the primary object of Self Preservation or the highest concern to himself: in the choice of Virtue or a perfect The Law of Nature whether Self Preservation Society or Estimation combine their Effects. And in the Combined Result of all when well understood, we may recognize the Object of Eternal Wisdom and Power in respect to Man, The Progress for which he is qualifyd towards the Attainment of a Perfect mind which if he could reach it would reunite him to that Perfect Intelligence from which the Germ of his Nature has Sprung as the Rays of Light are emitted from The  Sun.
If Existence as we must Suppose be necessary it seems to follow that every Germ must tend to the Perfection of Being And Perfect Being must be infinite in Number as well as Greatness & Might; But in the Order of Absolute perfection there cannot be more than one. If in plurality there were Separation & difference one or other must be imperfect or defective.
Perfection then is a Point in which those who arrive at it must be at One.
The same mind in the same moment & in every Respect but one mind. And in this may be realized the Mystery of Unity in Plurality of Being And the Necessity which is infinite & Boundless in its Effects yet terminates in one & the Progression of Created or Nascent Intelligence, Altho it never can Arrive at Separate Perfection may  terminate in being at one with the Mind that is Perfect & removes every Defect from the Beings that Approach it.
In all this we my possibly without Blame indulge in the Exercise or Play of Thought. Happy if in Nothing we foster pernicious Error or avocation from the Real Business of human Life.
Some such Indulgence of Thought may have taken place in the mind of Zeno When he Apprehended the Human Mind as a Spark from the Eternal Intelligence Destined at its Separation from the Body to return to the great Mass of Intelligence As the Body is returned to the great Mass of Earth & Matter or as the moisture evaporated from the Sea return to the Ocean again in Springs Rivulets & Rivers.

XXX . OF THE LAWS OF NATURE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ACTIVE MAN 

From a fair Induction of Particulars in the history of men The following Results may be assumed as Laws of Nature.
1st The Law of Self Preservation resulting from various propensities to what is Salutary or Repugnance to the Reverse.
2nd The Law of Society resulting from the Propensities by which Man is Gregarious or Political.
3d The Law of Progression resulting from those Propensities by which is led to advance or aim at Perfection in his work or Attainments. 
Of These Laws The Reality cannot be doubted, Nor are they known in any other Form than that Facts, or Mode of  Existence constituent of Mans Natures not deriveable from any other Source than the Will of his Maker.
If there be any Phænomenon in Human Nature apparently Anomalous. 
The Regular Object of Science is either to trace such Phænomenon to some Acknowledged Law or to find the Terms in which the Fact may be Assumed as a Law separate from any that is previously Known.
To the Law of Self Preservation may be traced all the Vital functions whether Animal or Intellectual.
To the 2d or Law of Society may be referred All the Instincts of Gregarious Animal.
The Sexual Propensities The Family Propensities of Parent & Child.
Consanguinity Councourse or Dislike of Solitude aptitude to lead or to follow  in the Troups or Multitude of Men. Benevolence & Personal Attachment Even Vanity the Love of Praise & Celebrity among Men.
To the 3d or the Law of Progression may be referred all the Instinctive distinctions of Excellence & Defect of Right & Wrong of Elevation or meanness of Honour & disshonour.
If Moral Approbation or Dissapprobation be stated as a Phænomenon to be explained.
So far as its Objects are the constituents of human Excellence or human Defect it is Evidently Comprehend in the Law of Progression or Estimation by which Man is directed in the way of his advancement or the improvement of his Nature.
When the Objects of Approbation or Censure are not of this Sort  but matters altogether indifferent or the Reverse of what they are accounted to be we must refer them to some casual association of Superstition or Fashion.
For the Law of Estimation or Progression in General there is nothing  nature better known from which to derive it And the only Account to be given of it is that in the Record of Facts relating to our Existence this is known as one And may be enterd as Follows:
The mind is Conscious of its Being and the Modes of its Being in Thought Apprehension & Will.
It is Conscious of a Distinction in the Forms or Attainments or incidents. Of its some that lead to Honour others to disshonour Right or Wrong.
Consciousness of the first is agreeable constituent of  Joy & Peace of mind. The Consciousness of the Other is painful or accompanied with Shame Remorse or horror.
And this Censorial Act of the Mind in rating itself or its Action is by way of Eminence among the functions of its Conscious Being is in common Language termed Conscience & figuratively The Lamp of God in the Soul of Man. 
Men who would willingly dispense with its Influence on their own Conduct give it full scope in the Consideration of what they would require from others.
The great Object of human desire or Ambition is happiness. And the Choice in every particular Instance should be that which upon the whole is constituent of most enjoyment & least Suffering whether in the present or the Future. This to most men is a Matter of Deliberation extending beyond their powers of Estimation or Conjecture & for this reason they abandon themselves for the most to some present impulse.
In this Exigence the distinction of Right & Wrong is of the highest importance. It gives a present impulse & is Secure of the Future so that if a person is in doubt what upon the whole is constituent of most Enjoyment & least suffering Let him consult his Conscience & he is safe.
The Laws of  Nature in this Department as in Material world combine or ballance & Counteract forming various Conjunctures & exhibiting various Effects As the Laws of Gravitation Cohesion or tenacity combine or counter one another in the Construction of the pendulum And the Bulb instead of a Vertical Descent which its Gravitation would exhibit is made to Vibrate in a Curve.
The Law of Self Preser is still in Act whilst the occasion on which other Law are in force is Wanting. The Laws of Society and Estimation are more Subject to intermission: but on Occasion modify or suspend the Other. Men will expose themselves in behalf of a Friend or their Country The Parent whether  Male or Female is ever ready to interpose for the Child And they who would desert their Friend or their Country are faithfu to their ofspring.
The high mined neglect of their Ease or Safety when their honour is at stake And Moral Charact take their Denomination from the prevalent Law of their Nature.
The Miser will not forgo his Property the faithful his Friend nor the Heroe his honour for any other consideration.
In each the Effect may be erroneous & culpable as well as correct & happy.
The Miser is Seldom reasonable or Correct. The Faithful seldom Errs.
The Heroe is sometimes vain glorious contemptuous or Proud when he happens to mistake the ground on which he rests his Elevation or greatness.
Julius Caesar had the Faculties of a Superiour Being: but a Vulgar Notion of Greatness, Was accordingly  at times a Coxcomb or a Tyrant. 
The Dramatick Poet has occasion to study the Laws of Nature and Skilfully in the Conduct of every Character abide by that which he has Supposed to be uppermost in each & is then most admired when he makes the Peculiar appear even when least expected.
The Miser in Moliere kindly prescribes to his Favourite for a Cold: but it is a large & liberal draught of Cold Water.

XXXI. OF THE INTELLECTUAL OR CONSCIOUS POWERS CONCEPTIVE COGNITIVE AND SPONTANEOUS 

1st Of the Power Cognitive, And The Sources of Knowledge.
The Power conceptive may act with or without reference to any external Object.
The Power Cognitive is that by which the mind Obtains Knowledge of Realities.
The Sources of Knowledge are fixed or Necessary. Perceptive and Conjectural.
With respect to the fixed or necessary Sources. The mind has only to exist or to think in order to know.
The existence of mind & conscious of itself & modes of Existence are one.
To Think of certain Subjects and to know necessary truths are one.
To every Individual the first Truth is that of his own Existence: Of this he cannot doubt but may conceive it not have been & not to continue.
 The next perhaps in the orde of Succession is the existence of a World in some of its parts.
The source of this Knowledge is perceptive he perceives things to exist:
but can conceive them not to be. 
The third in succession proceed upon the Former & is the Arrangement of Things under the Titles of particular Facts or Phaenomena General Rules or Laws of Nature And Theory.
Here the Source of Know is Conjectural And consists of Observation Research & inference ever lyable to be questioned confirmed or exploded.
2d Part. To every Individual Existence is unquestionable and in its Source is so far necessary or fixed: But there are Truths necessary in a different Sense from This either absolute as the Existence of Space & time which can neither have beginning nor End. 
Things Existing by such Absolute Necessity are infinite in their Being that is to say time is Eternity And Space is Immensity.
 Other Existences or Truths are necessary hypothecally or upon certain Facts or Assumptions of Facts.
If there be a Triangle or Space contained by three right Lines the following  necessary Truths:
Any two of the sides are greater than the Third. The sum of the three Angles will be neither greater nor less but precisely Equal to two right Angles.
If any two of the Sides be equal two of the Angles also will be equal.
If one Angle be a right Angle The Square of one Side will be equal to the sum of the Squares of the Other two &c &c. 
And so on in every Branch of the Mathematicks.
Part 3d If there be any Contingent Existence There must have been a power to produce it. Of this no one ever doubted or desired any Evidence.
To think of it is to be conscious of its Necessity.
The Succession of Powers And Productions or cause & Effect cannot be Eternal. There  must have been a Power underived or which had nothing Prior to itself. And This Power like Eternity & Immensity must exist in the necessity of its own Nature And like them must be infinite in the Form it bears.
What is necessary in itself cannot be circumscribed by time or Place.
And must be through all & to every Extent what it is by Necessity.
Part 4. It remains to Observe: whether in the Forms of fixed necessary Apprehension there be any Datum from which to conceive the Form of this Primary & necessary Existence.
The Data of Ends & means in the Combinations of Contingent Being Like the construction of a Triangle & its consequences necessarily imply design & concert in the Cause or producing Power.
To suppose a Triangle is to Assume the Equality of its Three Angles to two Right Angles And to suppose ends & Means is to Assume Design in the Author of Nature.
It remains to inquire whether the Assumption be  Necessary.
With respect to the Power Cognitive it has been stated That the grounds of assent are Necessary or Conjectural.
The Necessary are Absolute as in the case of Space & Time together  the Metaphysical & Mathematical Axioms.
Conditional as in the Mathematical Theorems & in the Abstract relation of Contingent Events to a producing Power.
There is yet a third Species of Necessity which may be called Instinctive or modification of our Existence.
Instincts we know influence the Will: but as the Will is free. The Effects of an Instinct may be suspended indefinitely.
But the Assent being necessary where the Grounds are sufficient It is so particularly where an Instinct directs.
All our knowledge of Nature beyond our own existence and Ideal Forms being instinctive perception is derived from this Source.
Matter of Instinctive necessity may not only be conceived not  to be but may be questioned & scrutinised upon other ground of Evidence.
So is the case with our perceptions of Sense. A skillfull Artist can give the perception of An Orrange upon a flat Surface or in a Model of rounded Materials: but the beholder may question it by the touch: and if this does not discover the truth, it may be tryed by the smell & the Taste or after all by the Test of Metaphysical Analogy as a Mode of our Existence not an Evidence of any thing else.
Under this Inquest however The Assent is still necessary & uninterrupted. While the Sceptic is disputing the reality of things perceived. The Approach of a venomous Insect will Scar or the Cry of Fire will put  to Flight. He questions the Reality but the Instinctive necessity of Assent remains.
It is so also where Nature presents a Combination of Ends and Means.
Our Perceptions in this Class as in every other one are  limited & various in their measures of Cogency.
There are many Phænomena in which we perceive no End and look for no means.
But where we ourselves are conscious of Ends and would gladly devise And employ means as in our enjoyments our preservation & well being: the Nature of an End or Object is well Understood. And when we find adequate means not our devising employed to Obtain & Secure them the perception of Means in Nature is also Instinctive & Necessary. When a number of circumstances Simultaneous or successive without any Other connection than that of their common tendency to a Salutary purpose are Observed in numberless Instances who can suspend or withhold the perception of an End & means & with these the perception of meaning & Design.
In the animal Kingdom  There is a distinction of Sex A Mutual Attraction & concourse. Generations Perish but a Provision is made for Succession. A Germ is formed & circumstances concur to its advancement.
As the time of its appearance in Life approachs A Secretion of Milk is commenced & effected in a proper organ of the Parents frame. A tender Affection is inspired into the Parents Breast. And when the Foetus Appears all things connected or unconnected are already prepared for his reception & he is a ready member of A Society already prepared to receive him. Does any one or can any one that reflects upon the matter resist the necessity of Perceiving The End & the means Employed by Nature or its Author? Who ever doubted or can doubt that the Eye was made to see And the Ear to hear. The atheist may say he doubts it: but let a light break upon him or A Sound assail, he will open his Eye to examine or incline Ear to  hear it as he may most distinctly. His Action belies his assertion and shows that he knows the purpose for which those organs are formed & cannot refrain his Belief while he perversely denies it. Such is our Way or the mode of our Existence And if we are not changed is as necessary as our Existence itself.
Here the Poets Adage applys as in any other Instance.
Naturam expellas furca tamen usque recurret. 
Sceptics pretend to doubt: but they Act the Believer & do not mistake the purpose which things in Nature are fitted to Serve.
If that Character of the Creative Power which we look is Design Invention & Concert the leading Forms of Intelligence be manifest in the cases Specifyed. It is so also as far as our observation or comprehension extends.
In every combination the Part is exquisitely formed for its place; it is itself a combination & the design  for which its parts are fitted manifest themselves in the design which is Accomplished on the whole. Solid fluid & Aerial are composed of many Parts Aptly combined & come together with admirable Effect in this Terrestrial System or living World of Plants Animals and Men. This Terrestrial System is but a part in the Solar or Planetary System, where Science every where discovers the same monuments of Design as in the Organization of a Plant or an Animal. The Work is one & the Author we  no reason to Believe is Otherwise. 
Variety indeed appears to be an Object or primary End of Creation. But the Analogy that is preserved in the midst of Diversity marks the Identity of designing Power & unites a Multiplicity of Forms in one in many Instances they are mutually & Visibly Subservient & in all Consistent.
 We have Stated as necessary Truths:
That contingent Events imply a previous Power to produce them.
That Ends  means imply Design. And We conclude that this passing Scene is a work of Intelligence And so the first Cause or Primary Power is Characterised.
There cannot any thing have been prior to him he is self existent & Necessary. 
And if necessary at one Time or Place equally so in all every where present Eternal & Immense.
In his Attributes Necessary as well as in his Being.
If necessary in Power: Omnipotent. If necessary in Knowledge omniscient.
If necessary in the Energies of Creative preservative & and Beneficent Power. In these all consummate & Perfect.
His Work in every particular Instance is limited. On  Earth the Sea & the Land are Separate. Every Plant & Animal terminates in itself. The Globe with its Atmosphere is rounded And has an Empty Space in what to revolve or perform its Motions So of Other Planets and of the System itself.
The Space to which our Sight extends marked as it is with distant lights remote from us & from one Another which is respect to the Immensity of Space may be as a Point in respect to us is immensity itself & an Image of that Creation which is the Work of Boundless And unceasing Power which Acts by Choice & within the limits of Choice alone. 
In all this process as resulting from Truths absolutely or instinctively necessary it may be said we resort to the form of Argument a Priori long Since Exploded and now supposed to be a mere System  of Words without meaning & like a Cobweb tho visible at a distance has no Substance to Withstand the Touch ever presenting what we cannot deny: but what we never can lay hold on as true.
In this we agree with that Student of Euclid who after a Proposition was demonstrated  still recourse to the Compass to know whether it was true.
We are used to rely on Experience as the source of Information that we forget Experience itself is founded on the basis of Instinctive Necessity. & in its Applications must conform itself to the maxims of Reason or Necessary Truths of Things contradictory only one can be must be true of things Contrary both may be false but only one can be true. Two things equally to a Third must be equall to one Another.  Whatever Argument derives from these principles is an Argument a Priori. And there is no disscussion in which such argument must not be either expressed or Understood.
If we are to have experience as our Sole guide in every Case. We cannot reason it will be said beyond what we have seen or experienced.
If Arriving on the Coast of An unknown Country. The mariner upon seeing houses And Cultivated Lands concludes the Country is inhabited it is because he has seen such works produced by Men. He knows the Works of Men & where he sees the Work concludes that there are Men.
But the Works of Nature are different. Must he have seen the Creator at Work So that in seeing Such Works  repeated he may conclude the Creator Characterized As he experienced him was here.
On this Sceptic founds his refusal to admit any Inference from the Nature of Works altogether new to us & unlike to any thing we have Actually seen or performed by any Power whatever.
It is probable that no single Particle nor any number of detached facts whether a work accomplished or part of the means employed to produce it will prior to experience Suggest the design or contrivance from which the whole proceeded: but the process seen in detail & in Effect will not fail to present the Intelligent mind with Evidence of Design & with this of Intelligence modified by the end proposed Whether Good or Evil a Person having experience in Agriculture on seein a Plough in the Field or a Stack of Corn in the yard, apprehends  the whole process of Sowing and reaping: but a Laplander to whom this process was unknown or unexperienced on seeing a Plough had no perception of its Use Supposing from the Traces it might be intended for a Sledge he censured the Construction Seeing it at Work he still more severely condemned the practice of tearing up the Soil & destroying the moss or the Swerde on its Surface.
The Sower appearing to cast away his Grain to be irrecoverably lost was Still more blamed When the new plant appeared he supposed it should pasturd And was amazed to see it reserved to shoot to lose its Verdure & Decay: but when Reaped and the Grain which appeared to be thrown away is returned manifold into the Labourers hoards. The End & the means force themselves upon his mind & he perceives the Design and the Skill of the Labourer although he had no  previous experience of such a process and its result.
We are precisely in this Situation respecting Some Works of Nature we are in Such Instances presentd not with finished works or detached means but are present the process & in the relation of Ends & means find the apprehension of Contrivance and Design necessary to our Thinking Faculty.
To those who Think to this extent the Result is as necessary as seeing & hearing are to those who look about them or who listen to the sounds produced in the air arround them. Hence the Universal Apprehension of Intelligent Power operating in Nature An Apprehension that is part of Wisdom when the Apprehending mind is Wise And Partakes of its folly & dottage where the mind is doated or feeble.
It is like every other principle in the progressive Nature of man a Germ to be improved  or a Possession that may be neglected & even debased.
The Ends most Obvious to us in the System of living Nature or Procreation Preservation Accommodation, And Perfectibility or Progression.
These Ends are Consonant to the Nature of Beneficent Power Together with the means by which they are Obtained or promoted amidst the Variety and Analogy of the Whole Constitute the Supreme Order & Beauty of the Works of God. Unhappy is he who feels a Motive whether of Vanity or Interest to deprecate them or whose Mind is not wrapped in Joy apprehending the presence of their Author.
Procreation is another name for Creation itself or the continued extension of Being in this System.
The seminal & progressive means employed in it gives to created Intelligence the Power of Controuling it to his Purpose.
Individuals are preserved by Respiration & proper Food Species by succession.
 For their Accommodation The Earth with its Land Water and atmosphere, The Solar System itself are provided.
For man in particular a Scene of Action is opened. His Wants make it necessary for him to contrive a Supply. The Materials on the Surface or in the contiguous Strata abound but require the work of his hand to become Serviceable. 
His mind Capacious of Knowledge has the Fabrick of Nature to a considerable extent laid out before him.
The Society in which he takes Life The Supreme Blessing of his Lot is to him also the Supreme Object of his Anxiety & Care full of trouble distraction and Ruin if neglected or Mismanaged: Therefore a principal occasion of his best Exertions the School of all his Virtues or Nursery of his Perfectibility which in mere Animals as well as Plants consists in a Progress from the Seminal Germ of their respective Natures to the full Maturity or developments of their material Stamina: in him probably extends beyond this Visible Scene as far as the perfectibility of Created Intelligence can Extend.

XXXII. CHARACTERISTICS OF MANS NATURE

Man or else the mind of Man so far as known to himself is an Active Power.
His Energies are compared to the movements or Agitations of material Substances And Theories of mind have been admitted on the Slightest Analogies tho in Subjects so different.
The movements of matter consist in Approach or recession in impinction pression or friction.
The Energies of mind are Instinct Opinion & habit.
 Instinct is the original Form of Being in which minds resemble or differ from one another.
In this respect mind differs from Body The Associating from the Solitary the Benevolent from the Malicious. The mild from the Irascible The Prompt from the Sluggish &c. &c.
Consciousness of itself is the first great instinct of mind.
Perception and apprehension of Other objects is the next.
The fruit of this instinct is knowledge or opinion.
Opinion is acquired and varies indefinitely. Opinions respecting  the causes of Good & Evil or Enjoyment & Suffering affect the original Instincts or give desires And Aversions corresponding to the apprehension of Good or Evil.
The opinion of Good excites desire & hope.
The opinion  Evil excites Aversion & Fear.
Habit is the propensity to repeat what has been repeatedly thought or done.
This of Course is not original but acquired.
Instincts are in Nature agreeable or dissagreeable.
Consciousness  of Existence if undisturbed is agreeable. Benevolence is agreeable so is Esteem and Hope Malice & Fear in all their Forms are dissagreeable.
Active engagement if Clear of Malice or Fear is Agreeable; Languor is the Reverse. 
Habits are agreeable or dissagreeable according as the Acts of which they are the Repetition are so.
Instincts opinions And Habits are to man the constituents of Excellence or defect of Happiness or Misery.
The Prevalence of Benevolence and alacrity & exemption from Malice fear or Languor is the Excellence  and Felicity of Mind.
Just opinions of Good & Evil of the Attainable or unattainable secure the rectitude of desire & Aversion Success or exemption from dissappointment.
The Habit of What is Good facilitates & confirms it.
We look abroad for Happiness or misery: but that is an Absurd Habit.
These are conditions of the Mind not of any external thing & this is so evident that no one disputes it: But as we consider some external thing as the Cause of what is ill within we  precipitatly transfer the Name of Good or Ill to the External thing which we admit as the Cause.
A man is glad of an Estate He therefore says an Estate is a good or happy thing: But if he could be as glad without an Estate would he not be as happy?
True but how to be glad without an Estate is the Problem.
This after all should be no difficult matter; what so many have learned cannot be difficult.
In every Croud assembled to divert themselves few have Estates & these generally the least noisy in their Mirth.
With respect to  this matter that is of so much Consequence in human Life, The proper question is in what does its value consist? In its quantity,
or in its use? As to its quantity if insufficient to Subsistence or Health Life & every question relating to it will be at an End.
If on the other hand the quantity be sufficient to subsistence Health The proper use is all, for unused it is nothing, & Abused it is Worse or actually hurtfull. The diligent or industrious may be happy in honestly acquiring it. The proper occupation is a constituent of Happiness. The moderate the Frugal the Liberal & benevolent will be happy in using it And in this its  value consists that in contributing to preserve Life it gives occasion to those habits in which the happiness of Life consists. This we cannot doubt is intended by the Author of all things in laying the Scheme of human Life.
Are the Pleasures of Sense then to be reckoned for nothing in this beautiful Scheme? They are of value no doubt: but whatever that value may be in the Scheme it is counterballanced by the opposite Pain or Suffering of Sense, and in respect to the design it is doubtless the same in both The preservation of Life The one by alluring to what is Salutary; the other by deterring  from what is pernicious And in fact so far as the pleasures of Sense enter into the Sum of human happiness, they are most entire to the Temperate or so far as bodily pain is constituent of Misery it is most successfully avoided also by the Temperate and lightest in effect to the Intrepid and the Patient.
From all these considerations it is evident That what we are to rely on for happiness is not Wealth for in this our best endeavours may fail But on Industry Frugality Oeconomy Temperance Liberality Charity and Beneficence: For in these nothing  can hinder or dissappoint us.
Whatever we propose to ourselves abroad; it is within we are to look for happiness. 
The Maker of the Old Song: My Mind to me a Kingdom is is perhaps the best instructor in this mighty Choice of Subject on which to bestow our Skill & Labour. Here we may have agreeable Instincts or in lieu of them agreeable habits exemption from Malice or Fear envy or Jealousy Correct opinions Agreeable occupation of Thought possession of Science & the most Agreeable Range of Contemplation in the ends & means presented to us in the Works of God.
 Here perhaps it is not enough tho true to say That the Will is all That whoever is realy Willing to be Benevolent is so in the very Will to be so.
There are sometimes unhappy Propensities whether original or acquired which the Will cannot at once eradicate, & which mix their bitter with the most agreeable Resolutions we can form. Supposing ourselves for instance provocked to hatred while we are resolute to do nothing hostile while innocent in Action the Heart is Stung & cannot divest itself of all the Poison it has received. There is a Sore  within that must have other Medicine than the mere prescription of the Will not to harbour any Sparks of Hatred.
This Will indeed if real is migh Gain. The Work is well nigh done.
There is nothing to provoke new ills or to sustain the old. Not to have done harm in word or deed is agreeable & is easily followed o occasion with Obliging Acts of Will, And conciliating manners tho not at first umixed with inward alloy becomes so by degrees and minds from being at Variance unite in confidence And Goodwill.
 Nay but says on of these Sickly Patients who would purge himself of Ill. I found that my Innocence did but encourage further wrongs And after I had forced myself to obliging returns The Opportunities I gave were seized against me.
This surely is no Object of Love, and the Innocent can do no more than avoid the Contact of Contagion.
If the infected Labours under putrid or cankered sores The sound must admit infection to his own breast under the pretence of resenting what another  harbours as an ordinary state. He is in fact to be Pityed but to be shunned & forgotten. The very memory of such a past is dangerous.
Abstinence from Harm indeed is not the only form of innocence or Symptom of a Sound & healthful Mind.
The indignant Sense of Wrong in such a scene as Man exhibits is no less to be indulged And tho seeming to partake of Hatred is nevertheless among the surest Symptoms of a just & Vigorous mind. It is not Suffering but a test of Strength And preparation for the greatest Triumph that of Justice over Wrongs.
Aurelius had compassion on the very Man that would dethrone him:
but amidst the vile depravity of Marius and his Gang he would have felt with Sylla. We naturally Sympathise with sufferers but they who do not Sympathise with the Injured do but mock Compassion when they bestow on the Wicked who perish in the  Snares they laid for Other men.
Benevolence is not faint nor indiscriminately mild to all. It wields the Sword of War as well as ministering the Balm of Peace.
Its Indignation is a principle of Valour The most powerful of any in the human heart and extends its influence even to Animals of the most timid Race. The sheep when she has dropt her young will turn upon the Dog.
If Hatred even provoked be Misery or Dissease what shall we say of Envy or Hatred & of those whom Others Praise or  Love; merely for the Eminence they gain in what the Envious Value? It is a lurking Sore the most debasing & unhappy.
The more it dare not own itself, and works on false pretences sometimes even of Benevolence and regret. Preserve us Heaven from this Infection or teach how to Cure it.
Of This great part is gained If the Envyous but know themselves The Vile Tincture of their Thoughts & putrid burning Ulcer in their hearts.
None surely can be willing to be so afflicted, or Spare what Will can do to Cure it. The Will can certainly at once withhold  each overt Act or Word of Malice, And the forms at least of Candour may become a Habit.
We surely cannot for Wisdom or for Goodness. It is the Reputation or the Fame of these we Envy. If Fame be true is it not rather pleasant to think that Reputation may be gaind by what is so much in our Power as doing what we ought in matters trusted to our Care.
The Good Man is my Friend His track may lead me & his Arm Support me I cannot hate for that. Nay but his Lustre may eclipse me and for this I hate him. His  Lustre takes no light from me Tis the infernal Tint of hatred I assume that shades me in my own Esteem And in the View of Others.
Good is absolute or not at all. Why compare myself with other men?
Because forsooth Emulation is a rousing Principle! But he who labours to excell or Equal Other men has fixed his aim a point below the mark of Excellence & if he is not entered is hastening to the Door of Envy, or what is not better malicious Joy & insolence on the miscarriage of a Rival. Happy is he who does what he can in every  Laudable pursuit, enjoys what he gains himself & rejoices for what is gained by others. And this if our Object be real happiness may be the common Lot of all. Who can restrain me from cultivating in my mind the most Agreeable thoughts Habits & affections & from doing what is proper in My Station And if this be happiness have I not to rejoice that Others do the Same?
Yes but this  weeding Envy from a Field on which it never yet has grown. The Field of just Aspiring minds to Wisdom & to goodness. The Envious fix on Joys to lead their Hopes and  Fears their Triumphs & their dissappointments. This is the bare exhausted Soil on which they reap the baneful Fruits of Envy & Malignity. And if they would expell Such Noxious Matter from their hoards, They must clear the Ground they must relieve the mind of false opinions and the admirations that misslead its Judgements. Fashion Dress Idle Fame and Fortune must be left for Balls to play at And our Object be to play our Party well & leave nought to chance but the Event which we may try to Rule but take as it is given from higher  Powers over which we have not any Controul nor Cause of Anger while they leave us still what is our Pastime and felicity. The same Ball to play at the same Ambition Still to play it well Perhaps to gain a Prize we have not thought of the Worth Splendor of a Being doomed to form it for higher Scenes Amidst the Labours of this Lower World.
Next to Envy or Malice Fear & Jealousy are the principal Sources of Dissease suffering in the human Mind.
Among Animals of which some Are a Prey to others, the weak are timid & prepared for  Flight & this is their means of preservation.
In childhood or Infancy man too weak & timid on every new or Strange Appearance his Cry demands protection. The Nod of Hectors Crest allarmd Astyanax: But on the Approach of manhood this is not to be endured. His Faculties enable him to distinguish real from Apparent Danger, And his means of Preservation Resistance Art & Conduct incompatible with Terror.
On the Approach of danger he is qualified to devise the means of Safety And Danger is  ordained for him that he may try his faculties. 
Tu ne cede Malis is the motto of his Life. Fear so useful to the Infant would be to him a Traytor & ensure worse than the Evil which he dreads.
Epictetus somewhere says you are affraid of this & other Thing But you have more reason to be Affraid of Fear itself. The very thing you dread is not so bad as this to be affraid. 
The mind is on The Rack debased and Stupefied so Anxious to be safe as to be incapable of any means of Safety.
The Sense of Mankind is strongly Bent against this Weakness. Contempt  and Obloquy attends it in the World that sees the effect Shame & consciousness of meanness haunt it in the mind itself.
The sense of Honour is enough to make the Coward wish for Courage And in this Case the Will to be reformed is the first Step to Reformation.
While Fear still lurks within we may command the overt Acts And by Acting like the Brave learn to pass through danger undismayed or detect the imposition where a Bugbear threatens or untried Scenes allarm.
All men are willing to disguise  their Fears, The Wise or Prudent would eradicate them. How? you will say. Forecast & be prepared for what may happen. When you Bathe say Epictetus, consider what may happen in the Bath & be prepared to bear or remedy it with deliberate & manly Firmness. This  your Specifick Safety on all occasions. To be affraid is to be weak & helpless. If this be truth and sure it is. Fix it in your mind by constant Thought & Habit. The Ills you dread are mere impostors And owe the greatest of their Effects to your Timidity.
 Fortitude alleviates present Pain and Setts the future at Defiance or takes the most effective measure to Avoid it.
The Ills of human Life must terminate in Death and owe their terrific Aspect to its Supposed Approach. And is it then so terrible to meet what Thousands meet in every Hour What Cato Brutus & Aurelius incurred & what in Fact is a mere Feat of Nature as common & as necessary As Birth itself or Stature waxing from Infancy to youth & Manhood. Nature has inspired this care of Life that we might  not idly part with it not that in any Case it can be kept for Ever And She has ordained The Weakness imbecillity and decline of Age to wean us Gently From it.
What then is Death. The King of Terrors A Transition to some Further Scene of Being under the same Wise & Beneficent Government which we experience here.
Or if it be with us to terminate Existen or cease to be Then to us tis Nothing but to the World a Continuation of what it is happy to have seen & to Anticipate.
 Or of these we are informed that Death is neither: but the entrace on a State of Retribution of Reward or punishment corresponding to the Part that we have Acted here. On this foundation the object of our Fears should not be Death: but that which renders Death terrific the fatal errors of a Sinful Life: A  Principle which may be better termed than Fear the Steady purpose of an honest mind.
Fear is the link by which the Tyrant holds his Power by which the Slave is bound. If you would be free you must not wear the Chain: but Spurn injustice wheresoever it is. Strength or Weakness you are surrounded by a troupe of Men of whom even those who mean no ill would impose if not withstood their yoke on all arround them and recur to force or Violence where persuasion fails.
In states where  Wisdom Rules; Fear is the Lot of Guilt. And who denies The Preservation of a State depends on what its members can perform to Save it.
Man by Art & Confederation is the Sovereign Power on Earth.
Other Races can not contest with him. Tis in his own Race alone he finds an like his own presented to his breast.
Arms are necessary & in many a Scene there is No Other Safeguard to the innocent. But arms on Cowards are of  Avail. A Weapon even in his own Hand would be unfruitful unlearn this dastard Prejudice the state has no support in him.
 Here the office of Private Moralists devolves upon the State: The task is easy to dispel the Fear of Arms by practice & the permitting men  use them is necessary if to inspire the heart with Active Valour.
To the Warmth of Patriot Sentiment Esteem of Valour and the Rank it gives must be instilled.
This be your task you Generous Statesmen who know the human Heart and can conduct the Multitude whether in the Ways of Peace or fields of War.
The Ills that spring from Cowardice & thus call for Notice from the State have  many forms in private Life for which the unhappy Sufferer is deeply concerned to find a Remedy. What is Jealousy but the Fear of what may be doing to our prejudice It operates in distrust and seeks for causes to Augment itself. When oft the very worst we dread is less an Evil than the guard we place to hinder it.
The name almost appropriated to the Distrust of the Fidelity which the Sexes in their connection mutually require implys the meanest & most helpless State of suffering.
Happy are they  who know it only from the Stage where it has been dragged into view by Authors who can best unfold the human heart.
Spies Information Assurance disbelief the Slightest signs received for certainties desire of Evidence to confirm Suspicion Aversion to whatever tends to remove it.
Horrid Purposes restrained by Fear And distress confirmed by hatred of Relief. The Brave made Cowards & the Innocent involved in Guilt. Read the Moor of Venice where this & more will tend the Heart to Pity, And where The Evil may suggest the Cure.
 If there be resolution or remaining Strength of mind disdain to notice what ought to be contemned the Part that must depend on others Caprice & their own affairs, to all besides indifferent.
This unhappy Ill should serve to cure itself. It seems to Arise from Love and in proportion as it grows should kill the Root from which it Springs.
But in this Expectation facts And often hatred seems To feed what sprang from Love And all is madness or defect of Reason. If the Insane could be made  Sensible of where he erred tis poss some Benefit might come from the Resolution to be Wise.
Tis all perhaps The Jealous or the Coward can accomplish for himself.
Distrust and Treason are the Bane of human Life Begetting and begotten they are mostly joined together &  this vye with their Counterparts Fidelity & Confidence. The Macedonian Conqueror of Persia we are told being ill of a Fever had secret Notice that his Physician was suborned to poyson him And while the informers illet was in his hand The Physician brought a Potion he had prepared.
The King  received & Drank it then showed to the Physician the caution he had in his hand what could innocence have done in such a Scene. Burst you will say with Love and Admiration too big to be contained: No! He too was Calm familiar with Fidelity and thought such Confidence a common Thing. Twas here The King was Great his conquests but disgraced.
Suspicion is too oft the Child of Guilt or Conscious Vileness.
The slightest mark of such a stain allarms the genuine Moralist. Tis better to be deceived than live in Fear or own a Party whom he  dare not trust.
The Moralists first Object is to be free from Suffering. The Sun shines bright amidst the Cloudless sky And Being is joy when nought offends and all is Peace. Thought is pleasant Memory is Sweet And Prospects are all Gay. Benevolence & Confidence will Spring where Malice and Distrust are wanting Self Esteem is pleasant as remorse & shame are painful: But let the Moralist beware of fancied Merit. Tis safe to brood our Innocence but the Virtuous Seldom thin they have done enough or that Mankind owe them any thanks for being  it were vile and miserable not to have been.
Self Esteem is dangerous. Its Genuine Object is Benevolence And Love to Man. The very ground on which it grows forbids Contemptuousness or Pride. The vain for ever dwell on what they have to merit Praise the modest & the worthy rather think of what they want to please themselves.
Perfection present in the works of God or in the sense of Innocence & Candor is of all Delights the most agreeable.
Its names are Merit Beauty Excellence and Greatness wheresoever applied they carry Praise expression of Esteem & Love or admiration. Well understood they form the Mind to Dignity and Goodness: but misapplied they lead to Guilt or folly.
What is the Coxcombs what The Tyrants Bane but that the one mistakes for Excellence some frivolous distinction of his Dress or Person.
The other mistakes his Power for greatness. Beware then how you use these names or suffer the vulgar acceptations to prevail with you. Hence Caesar Triumphs all besmeared with Blood, durst Vie for Praise with Catos Innocence  and hence popular applause is next to Infamy. Ambition is the Spur to mighty Deeds And tho we want a name for Genuine Greatness yet this is prostitute and if not qualified by some restriction means no more than Riches Birth and Titles.
Beyond the limits of Vulgar Fate Beneath the Good How far, yet far above the Great Ambition too tho it should ever be desire of somewhat better than the present is in common use consigned to love of Power folly treachery & Crimes. Let not words Misslead or vulgar Notions pass for true opinions.
The  Speculative are sometimes not unjustly charged with Paradox:
but none so ruinous as what the very mob exhibits.
The Cry for Liberty or mean Licentiousness and yet admire the Arm of Force that by its Triumphs falls to crush & leave them nothing but the Name of Man. Julius whose Victories turned the Multitude who servd to a herd of Beasts was for Ages Worshiped as Divine.
The very life of man is Action And Languor not to be endured. d8 The unemployed betake themselves to what they call diversion oft more toilsome and more dangerous than any Trade or Labour Yet hear the Vulgar Moralist with him ’Tis happiness to be exempt from  Duty & have Nought to do.
This is the Paradox of Folly & of Crimes. Beware of Languor or a vacant mind. They lead to guilt & misery. The merest trifling is to be preferred and Any honest excercise of mind or Body Comparative felicity. 
Few are the Conditions in which there is not some function or some Duty to be done. These we sometimes hate or deem a trouble & fly to pastime to relieve our Languor & fill up our time. This is mere dissease and Folly. If you wish for Pastime Be assured that nothing can amuse you better than that which  in the present Moment you Are called to do. 
Ever have some Object & some standard by which to fix your Choice. 
What is this to the Labourer at his Plow or Spade or Artist in his Workshop to the Master of a Family among his Household: the Object is familiar & near at hand.
The dissengaged must have to look for it And to chuse it well is happiness for Life.
What should this Object be to Man: but Man himself And his true Good.
The Moralist has told us that The Good of Mankind is the choice pursuit of Man.
Does he therefore mean that all be Statesman and calulate alike for Europe Africa Japan or China.
The Good of Mankind to every Individual is at home. 
Be what Man should be this is your Good & that of every Man within your Reach.
The Fair & Candid is the Friend of Man. From him the Stranger has no prejudice to dread; The weak no Injury; The mighty no delusive flattery,
Nor the Humble Supercilious neglect or Scorn.
There is influence in Goodness to diffuse itself; and here Beneficence is most effectual tho there should be occasion to Feed  or Cloath the Poor. The Eye that sees will bless it & the Ear that hears will praise; And in this the way to happiness will be displayed.
This is to Love & serve mankind.
Tis not indifferent how the Ingenuous mind directs its thoug.
The dissengaged & they who would be wise will choose their Contemplations and their studies. Whatever God has made may claim their Notice But the first of Sciences is that by which we Assign to every subject its relative importance.
To Man what Knowledge can precede that of himself and of the God who made him. What claim his notice if he mistake the End prescribed to him or sees not  the means by which it is to be attained.
What is he? Where? Under whose Government? And whether bound?
These are Questions of such consequence to him. That untill they are resolved no Themes besides can claim attention. The Animals are doomed to feed on Stores provided for them, without inquiry whence they come.
To Man the Giver is of more importance than the Gift. Tis he ensures him of his Lot, and makes each present Gift the earnest of Eternal Goodness:
The Wise Aspire to Independence: but to exist is to depend on God The Principle and Source of Being. Ignorance or Mistake of him is misery & Degradation  from The Rank of Man. And whatever leads from Great first & best of Objects But betrays the Mind And frustrates all its Powers of Reason  Intelligence.
Thus Mans felicity begins in Peace of Mind exempt from Malice & from Fear Active in Benevolence & in the Contemplation of Supreme Perfection The mighty Source of Being from whom he sprang & to whom he must return promoted or degraded. 
Such is his Rank in Nature Free to Act and bear The Consequences.