The Justice and Necefsy of the WAR wvith our AMERICAN COLONIE.S Examincd.

A SERMON, The justice and necefity of the WAvR with our AM ER IC A CoLoN ES, confidered.
Shll I yet again go out to battle againfl the children of Benjamin my brother, or Jhall I cease ? Judges xx. 28.

HESE words are taken from the hiftory of that war which the children of Israel carried on against the tribe of Benjanin, on account of an enormous a& of cruelty and injustice done to a private person of Israel, by the men of Gibeah, a town of Benjamin. Compensation for this injurywas at first demanded; but it was refuted with insolence. War ensued ; and the Israelites were defeated in two great battles, with the loss of forty thousand men. They had consulted the Lord each time they had taken the field; but, for wife reasons, only known to himself, he fought not on their fide. The children of Israel, affliced and dismayed, and affraid that their fins we A the thl fi-;-ct cifc G ! ller difo :T'.tlrc, kep-c a blc ,tn lhl unto te l.ord, ' and v(ci;t up, ' and ca;.Ce unto tile ho;ife of God, and wept, ' and there lft bLio!rc he Lord, and fafl' ed that d:.iy untiil even, and ofi'rcrl brnt o;(er'ings, and pcace-oferings c!;ifrc the L' ord.' Aitertl;is h.!: prcpar tic,: , they a gain inquired of the .Lord, ' lhall I yet a' gain go out to battle againfi the chil'dren of Beoja.i in my brother, or ifhali 'I cease ?' 'I he plain concluihon from this conduC. of the !iraelitcs is, That nations must persevere with fortitude in a righteous cause, and continue to apply to God by prayer, and all thlc dutics of rLligi.n, if they hope for success in war.

On former occafolis, frr.iiar to this, when wvc have been called upon, by our present Sovereign, to address the King of Kings, for a blelling upon his counfcs and arms, it has been on account of forci';n wars, in which the safety or honour of the nation or its ailies, have necefilarily engaged us on the clearclt grounds; and there is no need of cxplaining the:l to you. The very last war was :n'Jictsken on iuch grounds; for it was · i n1 in dcfence of our ancient colonies, (now in arms againat thieir protectors), who were then in danger of being subdued by the enemies of the Britilh empire. You may remember with what zeal and afiedeion you espoused their cause, and what sincere and fervent prayers you repeatedly offered up to heaven in their behalf, touched with the sense of their calamities, and alarmed at their danger. How soon are things changed!
and how great the change ! Not long after the conclusion of that bloody and expensive war, in recent remembrance, while that generation still lives and flourishes which we saved from the foe, those ungrateful colonies, by their foul 'revolt, have forced us into the must unnatural and dangerous war againft themselves. And, left your minds, my brethren, should not be prepared to change as fafl as theirs, left the remains of your partial affeaion should make you fliut your eyes to thejuftice and necessity of this war, I think it incumbent on me, as a proper exercise for this day, to flhew you the grounds on which we are gone out, and ought agagn to go out a.nainlZ the children of Benjamin, Beijamini, our brother, andsJhould not cease, that your prayers for success to almighty God may be equally rational and fervent.

I shall, in the ifl place, endeavour to shew thejuftice an nciceliity of this war. And then, zdly, Point out our duty, in the present circumflances, to God and to our country.

In the ift place, I am to shew the justice and necessity of this war.

But how (hall I enter into so wide a field ?

or in what method (hall I treat such a copious subjel ? The {ketch I can now give you of it, must of necessity be ihort: And I muff trust to your previous knowledge, to fill up and fupply.my brief and imperfeet delineation.

Let us examine the grounds of this re volt, and try if we can find them in ancient right, or in recent provocation; or, if there ihould fail, let us then fee if expediency obliges, or the honour of the nation permits us, to yield to their demands.

The adventurers who first set out from Europe to the new discovered country of America, went all in search of the pre cious k S )

cious metals. Our colonists engaged in -*their enterprizes with the fame view; and, when they were disappointed, they changed their object for others more lucrative to themselves, and to the mother-country.
Discontent with the various forms of government, civil or ecclesiastical, that prevailed in their turns at home, during the last century, led many afterwards to seek for more peaceful abodes in that distant region. But, whatever were the objecs of the first settlers of our American dominions, separation from the government of Britain was none of them; for, to preserve their connection with their native land, they went all under charters granted by the sovereign of this country, with certain rights to the lands where they fettled, and with the grant of certain powers defined by the charters, and to be administered in such manner as they prescribe. As corporations, they had rights given them to make bye-laws for themselves ; and, as corporations derived from, and subsisting by higher authority, they continued subjed to the controul of that authority. It is impossible, indeed, indeed, to conceive any other idea of a corporation erecdcd by charter, than that it hlould continue fubjedc to the author of'
that charter.

And if they, for their own interest, an xioufy preserved their connecion with Britain, it was clearly her part to keep them in fubjeiion and dependence. For what end did file fend out colonies, but to benefit herself, to extend her commerce and her power, to increase induflry and population, and advance her happiness and prosperity ? Why (hould fle have nourifled and protected them in their infancy, supplied them with the neceflaries of life, and the means of improvement, if fie had not confidered them as part of herself? Why ihould she have fettled them once and again, when driven off by the natives, and encouraged and strengthened them at great expence of blood and of treasure, it not for her own common benefit and theirs? And why have the colonies, for almost two centuries, been such favourite objects of her legislation?
Those who are acquainted with our body of laws, laws, know well how great a part of it refpe&s the colonies. Their affairs of government and commerce are so thoroughly incorporated with that code, that they could not be erased from it, without alinoft dcftr(ying the whole. This of itself fiufficiently ihewvs how much their interefl and ourG6 have been blended together, and firongly marks their dependence on the legislature of Great Britain.

On this subjed, indeed, till of late years, there has been no dispute. The colonifis acknowledged the authority of the King and parliament, and submitted to them on all occafions. In return for their obedience, they claimed the protection of the fiate, which was given them, with every mark of partiality and indulgence. And thus, with all the advantage of distant fettlements for the improvement of their fortunes, they and their poferity remained denizens of Great Britain, with the power of returning when prompted by inclination or wealth, and of enjoying the most ample privileges of native subjeCts. Antient right then furnishes no ground for this revolt.

Let us next fee if it can be justified by recent provocation.

You all know, my brethren, the neceffi ty of taxes for the support of the state.
As we give up part of our natural liberty, and submit to be reltrained by laws, that our persons and property may be safe from the criminal invasions of other men, we likewise yield part of our property to secure the reft: That is, to pay the neceflary expence of government and the execution of the laws; to support the supreme magifirate and his judges and officers in suitable dignity, and to defray the expence of fleets and armies, for the common defence and proteEtion of the whole. And, left the covetous should with-hold his share, the law forces it out of his hoard, that the reft of his fellow-citizens may not pay more than their just proportion. By the happy conftitution of our country, these taxes are not arbitrary demands, but laid on by the representatives of the people, with the content of the house of Lords and the Sovereign ; so that no nation was ever so well secured againft an oppressive or unequal taxation.

To make it compleat, every person within our wide extended empire ihould contribute according to his ability, otherwise the burden must fall unequally.

When the colonies were in their infant slate, struggling with difficulties and with enemies, they were not in a condition to contribute to the common charge. They needed bounties and rewards for their encouragement; and accordingly they received them from the parent-ftate. But afterwards, as their commerce and wealth increased, they were sometimes diretly taxed, as well as the reft of the Britifi dominions, and that as early as the times of Cromwell and Charles the Second, and down. to the period immediately previous to the dispute. These taxes, indeed, were laid on with a sparing hand, because the colonies had but lately emerged from infantweakness: But the authority of the aas of parliament was never disputed till now, and the taxes imposed by them were paid when demanded.

But, if there had been no exercise of this right of the legislature, prior to our own days, the right must have remained entire, because it is eli:; tial to government, founded in justice and equity, and in the law of nature ta i] nations. The supreme power of the slate would, at any time, have been entitled to impose part of the public burden on our fcllow-lubjeds in America, provided tho{e iinpolitions were just and fair. For I do not contend for passive obedience and non-reiiltance to supreme authority:
But then the only jul: ground of reliitance is the oppressive, tyrannical, or unconfiitutiona! exercise of that authority. `

The colonies pretended, at the beginning of th dispute, that it was unccnhtitutional to tax them, because they were not represented in parliament, and a new diftinflion was formed, in their behalf, between the right of legilsation :and that of taxation. Consuetude was .:fficicnt to obviare these obje-ions. All the arguments in support of them have, however, been again and again ably refuted, and particularly of late, in a sermon on a!legiance, by Dr Campbell Principal of the Marillhall College, Aberdeen. See also the rights of Great Britain aflcrted, and an Enquiry into the guilt of the war, &c. by Dr Roebuck.

The Americans, however, do not plead that they were taxed beyond their proportion or ability: They aboblutely deny the right itself. This docrine is entirely new, and is the undoubted offspring of their wealth and power. Let us trace the fats that apparently led them to take arms, as they rife in their order.

After a war, undertaken, as I have said, entirely on account of the colonies, which, though fuccefsfui beyond our mnofl sanguine *wiflhes, was expensive to the en,)rmous extent of near one hundred millions; when, to lessen this grievous burden in a fmrall degree, the slate laid on them an incontider.^ble tax, the amount of which was to be applied to their own internal government, they would not fublnit to it. Though they could neither justly complain of the quantity imposed, nor of the application of the tax, nor plead their inability to bear it; for their trade and-riches were greatly increased; yet they wantonly refused pay ment; and, without the leait provocation, riotously dcltroyed the property of fair merchants, to a great amount, that happened to be the subjea of that taxation. Compenfation was demanded for this great injury to private proprietors, and fatisfation for such a daring affront to the laws. Both were haughtily refused.

On the refusal of fatisfadion for their violation of private property, and outragious contempt of public authority, the legiflature, equitable and steady, enaded laws to punilh the offenders, and to enforce the authority of the state. As it was impoffible to bring the guilty to junice in common form, it became neceflary to punifh the community that screened their crimes; but the penalty was to cease the moment they delivered up the offenders, and made compensation. But the colonifls made choice of the nmoR violent part; they obftruaed the execution of there laws, and an armed force became necessary, as in other ca!es of resistance againfi law.
They attack the troops in the execution of their duty: Then, coinfcious of the atrocious nature of their offence, or rather in the train of a concerted plan, they combine, from Dan to Beersheba, from one extremity of the land to another. ,Trufling to their distance from the parent-flate, and the firength they had acquired under its genial wings, they overturn the antient chartered governments, and ered new ones in their place. They inflame the ignorant multitude. By ieducion, or by force, they arm every man. They oppress his Majesty's loyal fubjeas, and the best friends of the conRfitution, and drive them from their estates and poffeflions *. At las, after various subtile and artful professions, they pull off the mask; they declare themselves an independent republic, make war upon the parent-ftate, and implore the aid and proteaion of fur antient foes, from whom we so lately delivered them.

Such is the recent provocation of which the colonies complain. Such rather are their pretences to justify the effeas of their info lence * Their treatment of the episcopal clergy has been remarkably barbarous, and demonflrates that, to be Whigs with them, men must be of the highest republican and antimonarchial principles The church of En.
gland supports the revolution on good grounds, and, in South Britain, is indisputably the firmest barrier againt fanaticism, either in religion or politics.


lence and pride. They excitethe few by the profpes of ambition: They intangle the many in the mazes of fophiflry. They dignify their own unreasonable claims, lately propounded, by the name of sacrcd rights, though hofile to the conflitution. The inildef execution of the laws, they hold to le tyranny, and jult punilhmncnt, or felf-defence, they exclaim againi: as the molt barbarous murder. Though, in every refped, a part of our dominions, united to this government and subjea to its laws, they asfume the language of a separate ard independent state, and thereupon form reafonsfor acually becoming one; they rebel against lawfulgovernment, and, fiom the necessary consequences of their own conduct, they form arguments to justify rebellion. But these colours are employed only to impose on and deceive the giddy multitude, who are not to be driven to arms without either real or imaginary oppressions. The project is of a more antient date, coeval with the century itself, with the dawn of their wealth and profperity; and, when Canada yielded to the British arms, the long-wifhed for profpe&
at last arose on the cloudy imhagination of the New-England fanatic, the flattering idea ( I5 )

idea of power and independency, and a glorious republic.

It is their ambition, then, that has led them into an unjufi and unprovoked rebellion against the patent-ftate. Let us now inquire, what motives may be derived from expediency to engage us to yield to their claims, or how far we can honourably agree to them.

From the (hort representation I have given of the cafe, you will observe, that this is a war merely in defence of. our eftablilhed constitution and government, and the rights of the state. On our part, it took its rife from a legal attempt to enforce the laws, and preserve their authority. And, though the legiilative powers, in abhorrence of civil diflention, were willing to depart from their just claims; yet their mild propositions were rejeaed with disdain:
And we are now involved in a war, (how tedious, expensive, or bloody, God only knows), in defence of that constitution which was eftabliffed by the wildom, the courage, and fortitude of our forefathers, those venerable ancestors, who proteted and cherished, with so much care, the first inhabitants ( z6 )

inhabitants of our plantations, and imparted to them that freedom which they had so nobly acquired.

Under this government, we have lived with more security and happiness than any nation ever did. In their religion, all men have enjoyed an ample toleration; in their property, undisturbed security; and, in their persons, a liberty inviolate. Far superior to the republics of antiquity, the government of Britain has maintained the rights of human nature, with a happy equality:
And, while the multitude has been an object of her molt tender care, the avenues of laudable ambition have been opened wide to talents and merit of every kind. Not only have we lived equal, and safe, and free, under the government of laws interpreted with equity and adminiftred with moderation, but, in consequence of this peculiar slate, we have attained to the highest degree of national felicity, prosperity, and glory.

Shall we then susser the befl of govern ments to be shaken to its centre, to be invaded, to be dismembered, to be destroyed ?
No, surely; for, besides that the dignity of the state, makes it highly inexpedient to let rebellious iiibjecs go unpunifled, our valuable interelts, and the security of that conflitution which we hold so dear, call upon us to go out to battle agaiIf the children of Benjaminl, our brother. You will observe, that every argument which is used in behalf of the revolted Americans, except what arises from their distance alone, applies equally to many other parts of the British empire; and the views of their adherents on this fide the Atlantic extend, if not to the entire deltruction of this happy government, at leait to so new amodel of it, as would not leave one flone upon another of the ancient and goodly fabric. Without upbraiding the colonists in this place, by observing, that the distance which they now alledge with so much arrogance against our interfering in their affairs, was not pleaded by us when of late they lb humbly implored our protection, it is obvious, that, if the feet, be-cause they are more distant, ihall be suffered to withdraw their fubjeaion from the head, soon will the hands and arms and evcrymem C bar ( is )

ber of the body revolt, in their turn, against their guide and conducor.

But, fay some, it is more expedient to yield even to their unreasonable claims, than to engage in a war so expensive, and so bloody, as this is likely to prove. The first counsels of prudence are not always wife, nor the fitft ditates of humanity always humane. Such counsellors do not confider, that, by one-great exertion to re-establish the authority of the state, we ihall save millions that would be loft in the violent disjun&ion of this mighty empire; that, by carrying on this great war with perseverance and fortitude, we shall prevent innumerable and endless wars that might ensue; and that it is as just and necessary to shed our blood now, in reducing our ungrateful children to a sense of their duty, as it was so lately to defend them against their foes.

Nor is it our interest alone that obliges us to reject their demands, but their interest also. Now, indeed, they are deluded by subtie leaders, ambitious of pre-eminence and power, who have known by what arts to inflame the people, even to madness: Yet they very lately confessed, that, under this government against which they revolt, they have been free and happy, and have grown to that height of wealth and population which, we fiy, has made them forget or defpifeall obligation,and aspire atindependency. What region of the world indeed could boaR of greater felicity ? They enjoyed unbounded liberty of conscience, and civil liberty in perfetion; they were governed by their own laws, that partake of the fame liberal spirit with ours; they possessed a fertile country, and aflourifhing trade;
they paid next to no taxes*; and, in exchange for their fubjetion to the fovereignty of Britain, provincial animosity and rivalfhip was kept within bounds by her controlling power, and foreign hostility was warded off by her fleets and armies. In ihort, the state of mankind was so happy and so inviting in that diflant region, that the mother-country was in danger of being depopulated by the passion with which men were * Not above the soth part of what is paid by every person in Britain.


were seized to go, in quest of prosperity, to that fortunate and favourite clime. While we languified under a heavy debt, contrated on their behalf, they were flourishing in commerce, and increasing in numbers, from the happy effeds of that war which cold us so dear: And the comparion with their fate made ours leem the more grievous.
And yet they at once darken the glory of this golden age by their own perverlity: For, when we call upon them, in the fillnefs of their opulence, to pay a finall proportion of the expence of government, they resist the law that imposes it, and fly to arms. The annals of mankind do not contain a more unprovoked or inexcusable revolt.

Let them not add falf:hood to rebellion!

Let them not lay, that we are the aggreffors! The British parliament had enacted laws that bound the colonies, from their firil establishment. By their charters they were fubjeQed to taxes, and they had been frequently taxed by aats 'of parliament.
Was it a just ground of refinlance to law, that we did not yield at once to their new request to be exempted from taxes ? Was it a foundation for a civil war, after we had put them in a prosperous slate, that they were jealous left we should one day lay heavier taxes upon them ? This might have been the subjet of proper representations, and of new plans offered to the slate; but surely no just cause of war. For what government can give up the antient and eftablifhed mode of raising a revenue, till a new and better method is substituted in its fiead?

I said, that it was for their interest *, no less than ours, that we should reduce the plantations again under the legal govern ment It has been often said in private conversation, That, whatever we may think as Britons, yet surely, were we Americans, we would think and at as they do;
and I have often heard it rashly answered in the affirmative. I call it rashly; for, besides all the ties which ought to bind the people of that country to this state, from allegiance, affection, or gratitude, as the objet of all government is the happiness of the people, a wife and good man would deliberate maturely, before he.
would agree to a change that might, in place of certain freedom and prosperity, introduce the moRl uncertain effects, perhaps slavery and the worst of all govern.
ments.


ment of Great Britain; for, betides the relief that may bejufly expeced by his Majesty's loyal and suffering fubjeds, who have been expelled in great numbers from their homes, and robbed of their property, who can foresee, supposing the revolted colonies to prove successful in their attempt to become independent of the parent Rate, under what form of government they may fall, into what divisions they may be broken, to what foreign yokes some of them may yield, or what species of defpotifin may arife among them ? When the branches fall off from a mighty tree, not only are they deprived of the principle of life that made them flourilh, but the bond that united them together is dissolved. But, on the supposition that they shall remain in union, in cafe of success, and form one great independent late, mufl not that fate be the rival of Great Britain ? and would she not soon subdue our remaining provinces on the.continent, and make herself miltrefs of all our islands in the weft Indies, whence we derive so much wealth and power?
Would not all the arts follow the riling Empire, Empire, and Britain be left a gloomy and desolate isle, to furnish new abodes for the Danes and Normans of a future age?
May heaven avert so great a calamity! I love my country, I revere her constitution.
No form of government ever diffused such equal happiness over the human race.
And shall I fee that sacred temple of liberty reduced to ruins, on the uncertain projet of rearing an Utopia in a diltant land ?
Religion and reason, as well as every feeling of a British heart, forbid me to behold filch a profpe& without grief and indignation. If forget thee, 0 ! Jerusalem, Let my right hand forget its cunning: If I do not remember thee, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. Pfal. cxxxi. 5. 6.

To yield to the unreasonable demands of our colonies, would be no less dishonourable, than it is highly inexpedient.

The prosperity of nations depends, under God, in a great measure, on the credit they maintain with their neighbours around them, on their reputation for wisdom and arms.
Such as are ill able to defend themselves, if they have acquired wealth, are so much the more a tempting prey to braver and more warlike nations. It is imprudent to rely entirely on the law of nations, or on the faith of treaties: To be faie, or to preserve peace, a people must be firong; for a name in arms is the most formidable of all barriers. How must we fink, then, in the eyes of all Europe, if we susser our laurels to be torn by our own degenerate and rebellious sons, whom we have long softered with so much care ?
Twenty years are hardly elapsed, since (might we believe their loud supplications)
they were in the utmost danger from their, neighbouring colony of Canada. To have listened to them, one would have believed, that fifty thousand Canadians were enough to have driven no less than two millions of British Americans, that is, fort- times their own number, from their abodes and possesfions,fron their cities and their havens, and overwhelmed them in the Atlantic ocean. On their alarms and complaints, we engaged in that most expensive war. They had not then roused their warlike spirit; they referved it for rebellion; but retired behind the shield of Britain;. and it was owing to their unmanly countenance and feeble defence, that the enemy gained so much ground, as made it difficult to expel him. At length he was expelled-from our dominions; and, to deRroy the very root of fear in time coming,.
all the colonies of the enemy on that continent were subdued, and, at the peace, more important conquests were ceded, to retain the former as provinces to the parent-ftate.
What return have we received for placing them in a state of perfect security ? They have become proud, and turned against their deliverers. The indignant spirit of the nation mull rife on the baseness of their conduet; and the recentness of the benefit heightens the guilt of their ingratitude *.

D . To * It may be said, that gratitude is not avirtue to be ex pe&ed from one nation to another: But that I deny; for, though it is not wife always to trust to the good faith of nations, because their governors may be prefidious, yet, without julfice, and good faith, and gratitude, all the great societies of men would be no better than robbers or banditti. Besides, the Americans are not another nation, (on which fuppolition, there has been much false reasoning), but apart of Britain, united to it by every tye.


To ingratitude they have added the mofl false and insidious arts. At first they make the most ample declarations of duty and allegiance to the King: They profess the warmest desire of preserving their connection with this goveinment: They difclaimn all pretentions to independency: They assec to lay themselves at the foot of the throne, imploring deliverance from the thraldom of parliament: And, firange to tell, are delirous of fubiitting to the will of one man, in order to be freed from the government of laws. But, when our Sovereign, like atrue friend of liberty, refers theircomplaints to the great council of the nation, this wisdom and virtue difgul their poisoned minds, and they spurn at that royal authority which they pretenu ro revere. They frame false and infidious addresses to the neighbouring colonies, whom, for their loyalty, they had just now treated with the utmost contempt. They even attempt to mislead the inhabitants of these ilands. Thyc endeavour to ihake our allegian. e to the King. and to destroy our reverenc: for the constitution. They try to pervert our undciert;,:J;nds, to reduce our willsinto revolt. They would convinceus, that despotism is etablifhed, while we feel that we are governed only by laws: And that we are a wretched nation of slaves, while we enjoy perfect freedom under the mildest administration. And, to crown all their insults on our underlandings, they at last break out with their declaration of independency, their first and darling objed, which they concealed so long under a cloud of grievances and fears. Turning their aversion and malice from the parliament on the King, they represent our mild and gracious Sovereign, who reveres the laws, and supports the constitution, as the most cruel, vindiaive, and despotic tyrant.

But why need I enumerate their iniideenis After the most violent outrage on private property, the mos haughty refusal of satisfation when demanded, and the most daring refinance to the execution of the laws, they have resorted to open rebellion to juitify their conduct. T hey are in arms againit their country. They have mustered a force which they deemn invincible: Their ships of war cover the ocean: Their hosts of armed men croud the flore of the vast Atlantic.

They lift themselves up against that paternal arm which so long cherished and proteted them: They would sheath the sword in those bowels from whence they sprung. Liberty was but a pretence, for they were always free; independence was their aim. They complained of grievances that did not exist, and mustered up phantoms of ideal apprehenfions, that, under the colours of pall or present oppression, and jealousy of the future, they might raise such a power as would cancel those obligations they were unwilling to repay.

Who then can doubt for a moment on whom tolay the guilt of this war? T he faithful magifirate who stops his ear to the criminal's desire to escape from justice, or the kind parent who does not yield to the unreasonable demands of a froward child, may as well be accused as Great Britain on this occasion. The very name of Brethren, by which, with all the ties that it implies, we have so often been obtested to desist from this cruel and unnatural war, demonfirates the jultice and necessity of it on our part, since it points out their connecion with us, marks their dependence andobligations, and 29 )

and aggravates the treachery and violence of their conduct. These unsteady measures with which they have upbraided us; that lenity which they have conltrued into incapacity to govern; that reluctance to punish, which they held to be weakness and fear;
now that, from seditious fubjeats, they have become open enemies, are so many incitements to us, to ad with unanimity and vigor.

Let us, then, no longer hesitate, Whether we fhallgo out to battle againJf the children of Benjamin our Brother, or j/hall cease.
The oracle of reason (and the sacred oracles support it) obliges us to conclude, that it is most expedient and honourable, as well as just and necessary for the ltate, our common parent, to bring back by force this favourite and froward child, made rebellious by indulgence, to a just sense of his duty, and to the happiness he so long enjoyed in his father's house.

I come now, in the second place, as I proposed, to point out our duty, in the present circumstances, to God and to our country.

And here, without queflion, we ought, in the first place, to confess and lament our fins, and to turn to God and our duty.
Ior, though we cannot be accused of any guilt in refpet of the immediate occasions or grounds of this war, yet, as they lie in the order of Providence, 1 am asfraid we cannot clear ourselves of blame.

From the beginning of the world unto this day, fin has occafioned-the downfall of nations and of kingdoms. Infidelity and irreligion, neglect of God and of his worship, and the most licentious morals, as they are intimately conneCted together, so have they generally preceded the declenfion and fall of states. And who can deny, that these are theJigns of the times ?
that these are the strong features of iniquity which mark the present age?

If men retain found principles, however much they may fiSometimes depart from them in practice, being led away by temptation and the error of the wicked; yet there is hope that they may one day return to theirduty, because a slumbering conscience may Rill awaken, and dying principles again revive.

But what can be expected, when there is a profelted disbelief of all moral diftindions, when truth, and jufice, and honesty, and the love of our country, and indeed every principle but daring ambition and vile felf-interef. are ridiculed, despised, and exploded ?
While the inferior ranks of men are corrupted, by the delire of gain or pleasure, into fraud or profligacy of manners, the fuperior ranks fall sacrifices to luxury and esfeminacy. Infead of the manly pursuits that would lead thein to acquire fuchtalents and qualities, as might enable them to adorn and detend their country, and strengthen her constitution, they waste their health and fortunes in everlasting gaming and voluptuoufnefs, and in all the modes of living that debate or debilitate the mind, no less than the body. I speak only of the many; for, God be praised, we have still tome in the higher ranks of life, who would do honour to the most virtuous age: We have still some, who, in spite of the infection of the times, think it glorious to lead or to join the fleets and armies of their country, and are now exposing their lives in defence of that conflitution, which, of old, was the nurse of patriots and heroes.

But, when we confider our fad degeneracy, uponthe whole, mufl we not confess, that we are afinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, afeed of evil doers, Ifai. i. 4. &c. and may we not fland juflly amazed to confider, that even the God of all patience should have born with us so long, and suffered our profligate manners? When we reflect on the high degree of prosperity and glory to which this nation was raised in the last war, by the hand of the God of battles, and confider our own dreadful ingratitude, by the fad abuse of our great and singular privileges; have we not jult reason to fear that God is now faying to us, as he said formerly to the Jews, Shall Inot visit, for the/e things, faith the Lord? andJhall not my foul be avenged onfuch a nation as this ?

What then can be more proper, on such a day as this, than to deprecate God's difplealure, andjoin in humble supplications tohim, that he would be pleased to avert thofedreadful judgments that hang over us, and which we have such just cause to fear may fall upon us! What can we do, but every one of us this day commence a thnroti,h rcformation ofthofe particular vices and crimes, which, though small in our eyes, accu.:.ulate the mighty fu.n of national guilt ? 'nd let us join the holy prophets of Israel, who, on their solemn days of fafiing and prayer, besought God to remove his judgments, and turn away his anger from them: And, particularly, let us join with the prophet Daniel, when he thus addresses the almighty, Dan. ix. 6. &c. O ! Lord, accordingto all thy rtighteoufinef, 1 befiech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jeru/alenm, thy holy mountain: because, for our fins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us, &c.

I have mentioned in general that torrent of corruption which overwhelms this nation, and may be the cause (as it has been in other ages and regions of the world), why God should now visit us with fore calamities. But this observation applies to other nations as well-as to us. Let us try if we can point out some particular grounds of fear, which are more peculiarly applicable to our own country, that we may lament and correct them as far as we can. For, though the plans and conduct of providence are laid deep, and are carried on in silence and darkness, yet the moral causes that undermine the greatness of nations, may sometirnes be traced. Allow mc to mention a few that seem to me to have been immediately productive of our present danger.

The i/t I illall mention is unbounded ambition, and national pride.

In the late war, which was undertaken in defence of the colonies, though we were at firfl unsuccessful; yet the spirit of the nation being roused at last, and well conducted, we were victorious in every quarter of the globe, and left not our enemies a single province or island that could be the subject of contest. When the negociations for peace were entered upon, you may remember how difficult it was for his Majesty's prudent and moderate ministers to frame such a peace as would please the people; and, after it was made, there arose a storm of violence and clamour that has hardly fitbfided to this day. Nothing less would satisfy the national pride and ambition, than the retaining all the conquests their arms had made. Time and experience have flewn the truth of what some then boldly averred, that we kept by far too many of our conqueRts; enow indeed to threaten perpetual commotions, if not downfal to the state. To the retaining of Canada for the security of the Americans, it is entirely owing that they have become so insolent as to rebel against the parentstate. And, in so great and unwieldy an empire, we may expec convulsions everyday.

The great objec of a free Rate ought to be to perpetuate its liberty; and no temptation of wealth or of power should ever feduce such a Rate into a conduct that may prove fatal to its chief object. History proves, that great conuefts have always been ruinous to free governments: And similar causes will operate similar effees to the end of the world. Such dominions are too unwieldy to be governed. If they consist of fertile regions, in climes favourable to human nature, they are in danger of depopulating the mother-country : If they are barren and unhofpitable deserts, they are not worth the expence of retaining them.

Europe, for fomne centuries past, has been themoft flourishing quarter of the world.

The govcrtnmrnts of it, though various, have been balanced by eachi other; and the people in general have been happy even under the n:oit dcfpot:c fcrms it contains, because the views and conJuf of princes have becc moderatdt b)y ;icir mutual jealousies.
Was it for us, who I;d exclainmed lb loudly againi} universal m onarchy, and had laid out fb much blood and treasure to oppose those ambitious p:lwers, who, at different per'ods,l were iu!rpoed to have conceived the idea, was it fir us to extend our dominions from pole to pole, and to all the fliores that are wathed by the Indian or Atlantic oceans ? Was it wiic in a free Rate to raise such a jealoulf in other states, as wxould produce a combination againf: us, which mioht one day prove our ruin, whether we conquer or are conquered ? For, in the first cafe, we Ihould certainly perish by our own corruption, as, in the fcond, by the pomwer of the enemy.

To tiis caule is prcbably owing that weakn.is cf government, which has been of late so much felt and' complained of, and which no capacity seems hitherto able to repair.


repair. 1 mean, the machine of government itself, (not the adminiifration of it), which has lot mnuch of the spring and energy it had in former times; witness the infamous abhue that has been suffered, the dangerous tumults that have passed unpuniflled, and the relaxation of the executive power, even in refpedt of crimes against itself. In vain has opposition, with her warning voice, and fahcion, with her clamorous tongue, ascribed this imbecillity to the hands who direca the machine; for the chiefs of every party in the Iate have directed, in their turns, with no better success. And no wonder that it is so; for the internal force that was fufficient to move those wheels of government, which so long guided these happy islands, and their ancient colonies, could not fail to prove too weak, when loaded with new conquests, distant as the extremities of the globe, and larger than all our former dominions. Such are the effects of unbounded pride and ambition: And such are the rebukes which the wife providence of God has contrived for the haughtiness of man.

In the 2d place, Let me mention, as one of the more immediate causes of our present danger, that unbounded licentiousness, which, for a long time, has prevailed in writing and discourse.

The liberty of the press is indeed a most sacred right of Britifl freedom; but, like all other privileges, it may be abused, and, and when it is, may be produtive of the most pernicious consequences. No character has been sacred enough to be safe from the torrent of calumny and reproach, which, f)r fiome time pall, has poured itself upon the public ear. The most private afylum of domestic peace has not been secure against that malignant poison that glides in every breath, and is scattered about on every page. The throne has been openly attacked; and not only have the measures of government been arraigned, as in former times, but the legislature itself has been ridiculed, traduced, and almolt libelled in its own hearing. And what is the consequence of this vile licentiousness ? Has the tongue of sedition, and the pen of faction proceeded to such outrage, that they are now no longer believed ? That may be true with refpea to the characters of individuals; but we may reft assured, that the unbounded freedom which has been used has lessened the relped due to the Soveregin; has destroyed that reverence in which the legislature Ihould be held; and, while itj has overawed the magistrate in the execution of his office, it has, at the fame time, impaired the dignity and weakened the force of the laws themselves. We may be certain, that this rampant licentiousness has overturned all ideas of subordination, which is the bond that holds men in society together, and prepared their minds to meet, without concern, if not to wish for, a revolution of government.

How can we otherwise account for the publications that have proceeded from men of gravity, of professedly good intentions, and of no mean talents *? With what other view, than to a revolution, have those elaborate treatises been composed; or what other can be the aim of their authors, who, amidst pro * See the works of the Reverend Dr Price, aad others.


professions of allegiance too, take so much pains to decry the present government of Britain, and to present us with an idea of something infinitely more perfet, which we are soon to fee eftablilhed in America, and which they seem to wifli, and hope may likewise take place at home ? But a repu-'
blic of such unbounded extent, as that of America would prove, is an experiment that remains to be tried in the hiftoryof the world. We know that our ancestors tried it in vain, within far narrower limits. They, too, had great expectations of that perfeetion to which human government was going to arrive: They believed that a millennium, and the kingdom of the faints, was at hand: But they were sadly deceived; for they found, in their fiead, the iron sceptre of an usurper, supported by military force.

There is a line Somewhere between the liberty of the press, and that licentiousness which would subvert the very government which supports the liberty of the press.
When the times are calm, that line will be found out and applied.

Allow me to mention, as one other more immediate cause of the present danger, in the 3d place, The murders, and rapines, and enormities that have been committed in various places of the British empire, and uill remain unaccounted for, unpunilhcd, and unarraigned.

Besides, that filch inflances of impunity to great crimes, demonitrate the \veakneis of the executive power, and tend to increase corruption, making men more daring and obllinate by their pernicious example, they likewifc continue to cry to almighty Gcd for vengeance: For blood mufl have blood. And who can fay that the God of heaven is not now stretching out his arm to recompense those nations who have that guilt Rill hanging on their heads ? The Indian tribes of America have almost entirelyvanifhed, through the treachery or cruelty of the new possessors. Those very colonies, who plead so high for liberty, and alledge that they have taken up the sword only in its defence, under pretence of driving out the heathen, (a pretence in Christians no !ess impious than it is bloody,) by barbarous F policy, policy, or by force, have almost wholly eradicated the ancient inhabitants of those regions; while they hold thousands and ten thousands of wretched Africans under a cruel bondage, from which the most painful death would be a joyful deliverance.

Can we believe, that deeds have been committed in another quarter of the globe, by natives of these islands, that will make the odious names of Cortes and Pizarro be forgotten, and slain the British annals to the latest poflerity ? In times of ignorance and bigotry, the minds of men have been known to run a career of enthusiastic fury that aftonilhed themselves when they became cool; and stern war is an apology for the most atrocious actions. But, in a period enlightened likethe present, in profound peace, amidst intercourses of mutual confidence, and thb mild operations of commerce, to surpass all former ages in perfidious barbarity! Ah! Cursed thirst of gold! thou canst transform man, even when refined and civilized, into a furious beast of prey!

Nor can we, as a nation, clear ourselves of the guilt of tlefe great crimes, if we have suffered thole under our controul to commit them with impunity: Or if, after making cxtenfive conquefls, we have robbed innocent and defenceless nations of the benefit and protetion of their ancient governments, without establishing new ones in their flead:
Thus leaving them an easy and a tempting prey to avarice and cruelty. The bloody and deceitful man, the vengeance of God will surely overtake.

But, in the midst of all our fubjeds of confession and sorrow and lamentation, whether of a private or public nature, and with a firm resolution to contribute all in our power to correct what is amirs, and to do our utmo.f for the national welfare, by carefully keeping every man of usfrom his iniquity, now that the Hofl has gone forth againfl the enemy, we shall do well also to turn our thoughts on the peculiar and seafonable blessings which the Almighty has poured down upon us, left, if we ihould fail to mark them, or prove ungrateful for them, he may turn a deaf ear to our lupplications for farther mercies.

Amrong such peculiar and seasonable blef sings, we are to rank the plentiful crop which he hath heftowed on us in all corners of the land; insomuch, that we shall have no dependence on foreign nations, who might have taken advantage of our necessity. We ought also to mark, with gratitude, the providential opening of new channels of trade for all our manufadures, the demand for which has increaled beyond our most fanguine expedations, jult tin the moment when the breach with the colonies might have occalioned a molt dreadful calamity.
Let us trace the over-ruling hand of heaven to(, in the present peaceful disposition of our potent neighbours, who seem to attend nore to the general interest of Europe, than to yield to the dictates of national rivalfhip and animosity. Let us likewise observe, with pleasure and thankfulness, the alacrity and courage of our soldiers in the cause of their country, after much inidilous pains had been taken to make them cool and backward in the service. Let us, with the warmed gratitude and praise, mark the ardour and fuccess with which they defend that antient government, which the pretended ibns of liberty spurn 43 )

ipurn at with contempt, whilfl they fly before that manly spirit which is its genuine produd ; and let us return thanks and blefiings to the Lord of Hofls, the God of battles, by whose inspiration alone heroes and patriots are formed, who girdeth our loins to might, and teacheth our hands to war.

It would be highly improper, it would be impious indeed, to apply the oracle of God in the present cafe, and to fay, with prophetic authority, Go uip,for to morrow the Lord will deliver them into ycur hands.
No ; this I may not venture to fay. The event is in the womb of providence ; and the iace is not always to the wist, nor the battle to theJflong, for God often counteraas the probability of second causes. But this I will fay, in opposition to the authors of feeble and timid counsels, that a righteous cause, and persevering valour, joined to a pious truftt in the Almighty, give the belf ground to hope for success in war.

In the wars usual in Europe, when rival nations have contended with each other, it has often been on points of small importance, and the parties have gained nothing in the end by the contefl, but the exercire of arms. In such wars the interests of mankind in general are safe. For that equal balance which has been maintained so long in the great European republic, does not admit of one nation's making large encroachments, or conquests, on another. But, in the present war, we are to retain, or lose forever, not our new provinces, that are hardly yet a part of the fate, but our antient colonies, that are coeval with our navigation and commerce, those great branches that are deeply engrafted into the commonwealth, which have grown with our growth, and cannot now be lopt off, without hazard that the tree Shall thereby perish. An objet of such importance requires national fortitude and perseverance.

As Christians, and as men, no doubt, we ought to wish and pray for peace. Every thing in the present cafe prompts us to such a prayer; but always with this condition underlood, that it be equitable and safe.
How far we may hope for a return of asfedion and allegiance from the present generation of colonists, who are now in aaual rebellion against the British goverhment, I pretend not to fay. God can turn the hearts of men as he pleases, in opposition to common rules. But one thing is clear and certain, that, as the sword should not be drawn against the fubjeds of the state, without the most urgent necessity, so should it not be Iheathed without full security and submission on the part of the offenders;
for a peace, on any other terms, would only prove a short and dangerous truce, to prepare them for a fresh revolt.

Fully employed in our own private oc cupations, far removed from the feat of war, and in perfe&d repose, we are apt to be indifferent to the interests of our country, and careless about that very government that gives us security and repose, till we are roused by such a call as this, to reflect on the blessings we enjoy. Let us feel the generous spirit of Britons, rising with just indignation against those degenerate and rebellious colonists, who would rob us of our glory, and defiroy that sacred temple of the constitution, that can only secure their liberty and ours. And, as our patriotism thould 48 )

should be roused, so should our loyalty; for, on this occasion, they mufR go hand in hand together. In times of peace and tranquility, the exercise of this duty is not always apparent, even in the most faithful fubjeds. They are not called upon to perform any as of fealty; and, being at a diftance from the feat of government, the personal qualities, and even the royal dignity of the sovereign, seems to be forgotten.
But, when disturbance or danger approach, those principles and affetions that lay dormant, soon awaken with the alarm, and the most zealous loyalty appears in the condua of every good citizen.

Let us now support the throne, for it is fiaken! Let us unite in warm affeCtion to our King, whose character, like the fun, hfines the brighter for the spots with which facion and rebellion, for a while, have endeavoured to obscure it. And let us demonstrate our patriotism and loyalty, not by loud and empty professions, but by a meek andrefpe&ful spirit to those that are set over us, by our reverence for the laws, laws, and thankfulness to heaven, that we are fill under their government.

Above all, let us not 1upprefs that war like ardour for which we have ever been diflinguithed. Without magnanimity and valour, wealth and power are precarious, and wisdom and liberty but empty names.
To be secure, we must be brave. All America is now in arms; shall we remain feeble and unwarlike ? The plough and the loom must be left for a while, that we may not be obliged to abandon them for ever. For, if the Almighty does not interpose to subdue the minds of our domeflic foes, or if we do not exert our native flrength, in vain ihall we think to conquer them by foreign hands. If we could, they might, perhaps, in future, learn tofear thefeverityofa mafler, but neveragain would they revere the authority of a parent.

Since, then, my brethren, to yield to the claims of America would be inexpedient and dishonourable; since the war is juRt and neceffary, let us prosecute it with vigour, with chcarfulnefs and perseverance, till the rebellious children of our brother Benjamin find, that the fame ardent national spirit that could cherish, can also corret; and that the fame powerful arm that firetched across the Atlantic to save, is not now so weak but it can punish. Thus shall we do all in our power to preserve to pofterity a government, the most favourable to human nature that ever existed, and to prolong theperiod of light, and liberty, and happiness among mankind.

But, while we are of necessity at war with the children of Benjamin our brother, let us not forget the near relation they stand in to us; let us not entirely extinguish our affeaions to the child, because he is for the present froward and disobedient. Let us bend his will, but not subdue his spirit. Let us chastise him in kindness, not lay him in anger. Like good King David, when his son Absalom rebelled against him, Let us give our captains and our mighty men a charge, that they deal gently with the young man; and, when he returns to his duty, let us receive him with open arms. AMEN.AN ARGUMENT To prove that the Tragedy of Douglas Ought to be Publickly burnt by the hands of the Hangman.
A sect, whose chief devotion lies 
In odd perverse antipathies ; 
Who falling out with that, or this, 
And finding somewhat still amiss, 
Compound for sins they are inclin'd to, 
By damning those they have no mind to,
HUD.
EDINBURGH: Printed in the Year M.DCCLVII. /Price Threepence.)

ΑΝ ARGUMENT, &c.
JOSEPH ADDISON, Esq; was certainly drunk, when he laid it down as a maxim, in one of his Spectators, " that of a perfect tragedy is the noblest production of human nature." His opinion, I know, but too universally prevails; and I am aware of the dangers that attend writing against received maxims. The voice of the people, is justly held to be the voice of God; and the author escapes well, who suffers no greater loss than his reputation, for having openly contradicted the notions of the venerable multitude. Yet, from I don't know what motive, whether it be the love of truth, or a regard to the welfare of my fellow citizens, I feel an irresistible inclination to write against the favourite tragedy of Douglas, and endeavour to prove, by reasons that seem unanswerable to me, that the author of that much extoll'd piece deserves to be stigmatized, and his performance to be publickly burnt by the hands of the hangman.
And perhaps it may be found, after I have executed my charitable design, that the majority are not on the side the world imagines. The greatest part of the rich and gay, indeed, will always have a pride in supporting what they believe to be the most rational, elegant, and refined of all entertainments. But in this country of freedom, where every man has a right to chuse his opinion in all matters, sacred and prophane; and where the bulk of people are silent, rather because they do not know what to say, than thro' any defect in the passions ; I am next to certain, that I shall be able to open such an universal cry against this minion of persons of rank and taste, as shall forever condemn him and all his works, past, present and future, not to oblivion, but to perpetual infamy and disgrace.
And having the trumpet to found, as it were, to so great a body as the vulgar of my native country, I must be allowed the liberty of using a considerable variety of notes, that, if it be possible, I may hit the tone of every puppy in the pack; that is to say, (to descend from the poetical stile, which I abhor) I will muster up such a number of arguments, as cannot fail, one or other of them, to reach conviction to every true presbyterian in Scotland : Nor shall I trouble myself much about their consistency with each other; for I expect that every candid reader will be contented with that argument that hits his own fancy, and leave the rest to his neighbours; always remembering, that my work is sanctified by the sincere design of opening the eyes of my deluded countrymen, and warning them to shun the paths that lead to perdition.
And here I shall omit all general declamations against the stage, for I aim only at particulars. I do indeed believe it to be an invention of the devil, and I cannot deny that it has always been supported by his agents: I know it is pernicious to the morals of men, and altogether inconsistent with true religion. But as I likewise believe, that puppet-shews, ballads in dialogue, romances, fictions of poets, not to mention musick, and painting, and whatever else imitates the passions and manners of men, absolutely unlawful, and tend to make us in love with lying vanities; and yet am not fully instructed in the several tastes of my fellow-citizens; I do not chuse to cut down all the courts of Europe in a box, and Sir William Wallace Wight, and the Pilgrim's progress, and Jack the giant-killer, together with the whole works of Henry Overton, at a single blow ; lest I should disoblige many good and worthy friends, and provoke them to a dislike of the whole of my following arguments. Besides, I am justified in this prudent measure by some great and reverend examples; for as the learned and pious clergy of this city, of whatever party or faction, (for fear of giving offence I suppose) have winked for many years at the diversions of the theatre, and permitted the most virtuous matrons, and tender virgins, to repair to that shop of iniquity unreprov'd, reserving the fire of their zeal till it should be blown up by motives purely ecclesiastical: In like manner, it is wise in me, their humble disciple and imitator, to wave the general argument, and apply my whole force in one direction against the celebrated tragedy of Douglas.
In the first place, there is hardly a single word of this admir'd piece true, from the beginning to the end of it; for tho' there was a paper printed under the title of the full and true history, I can easily prove that it is all an invention, and perfectly inconsistent with the thread of Scottish history. As for instance, he makes the landing of the Danes to have been in East-Lothian; whereas, in reality, it was in the shire of Air, and at the very town call’d by that name. Our author, I presume, has falsified this important fact, to flatter the gentlemen and farmers of that rich county to support his play. In chronology too he has made a palpable error, when he represents his hermit as alive at the time of this invasion of the Danes; and yet says, that in his youth he was a soldier under that warlike prince Godfrey of Boulogne. One would have imagined that after the just and severe censures that have been past on the Latin poet Virgil, for such an error in chronology, our author might have taken warring. But the presumption and folly of poets is infinite. - Thus it appears, that our boasted poet, is either entirely ignorant of the history of his own country, or has wilfully falsified many important facts, so that he must be consider'd as a disgrace to his profession, and country, either by his ignorance, or want of veracity.
I have only touch'd upon the points that are material, and can easiest be disproved ; for every other circumstance of the story is the fiction of his own idle brain, and contriv'd on purpose to deceive. And what a gross immorality is implied in such an action, I need not explain to any person who is acquainted with the first principles of religion. Nor is it any excuse for, but a high aggravation of his crime, that the whole story is wrought up in such artful language, and made to have so much similitude to truth, that many persons of judgment and solidity, and otherwise of respectable characters, have been seen to weep bitterly at the representation of it! wasting those precious tears, that ought not to be shed but on the serious contemplation of human vanity, or occasions of real distress. And indeed I think it can be imputed to nothing but diabolical art, and the influence of that spirit, who lies in wait to subvert human reason, that men of sound minds can be brought to weep at events that never happened, and bewail the misfortunes of persons who never existed.
Another reason is, that the tragedy of Douglas is reported to be what they call a good tragedy. Now, (not to dwell on the contradiction in terms, for one may as well say, a good hypocrite, or a good atheist, as a good tragedy) supposing the tragedy of Douglas to contain nothing but good sentiments to represent good characters, to have a good moral tendency, to paint virtue as amiable, and vice as odious ; in short to have a good effect upon the minds of the whole audience, which is granting as much as ever was ask'd ; yet, for the sake of these excellencies, if there was no other reason, ought this piece to be publickly burnt by the hands of the hangman.
And here I must be allowed to use a figure, not uncommon with authors of eminent fame; the assuming of that to be true, which I formerly declin'd to prove, from reasons of prudence: for it is necessary for me now, to have it taken for granted, that stage plays, and all dramatic entertainments are absolutely unlawful, and directly contrary to the word of God: or at least, it must be admitted me, that they do infinitely more evil than good; for altho' matters of this kind are said to depend on very nice calculations, yet I see clearly, that the bad consequences of constant attendance at the theatre, are many and various ; whereas I perceive not one single advantage to be gain’d by frequenting that temple of vanity. Now since it would be for the benefit of mankind that the stage was abolished, he who attempts to reform it, by writing within the rules of decency and virtue, is to be consider'd as a public enemy, who takes pains to gild a poisonous pill, in order to allure you to your ruin; and deserves equal praise with those conquerors of the earth, who by mild and equitable laws, have reconciled the conquer'd to the loss of their liberty. Whereas it is to be wish'd, that no piece were ever perform'd in the theatre, but what is shocking to humanity, and altogether abominable and detestable, that the people at last might be provok'd to drive it and all its cursed contents to hell, from whence it came. And for this reason I suppose it was, that the church of Scotland in ancient times made a law, prohibiting any of its members to form the plot of a play upon any part of scripture history, lest the people should have been insensibly led to favour the plays themselves, for the sake of that good book from which they were taken. 
My next reason, which is level to the capacity of infinite numbers, and which I am certain will do great execution, is, that the suppos'd author of Douglas is a clergyman: and what must be carefully observ'd, is said to have some peculiar qualities, such as learning, eloquence and wit, insomuch, that his company has been very much sought after by persons of superior station, and what is worst of all, he is young. Now, as it is a thing perfectly new in this country, for a clergyman to write a tragedy, I do not see what title this rash young man had to go out of the common road. In our neighbouring country, a Dr. Young, or a Dr. Brown, may pass uncensur'd, after having written tragedies of some little reputation ; for they are dignified clergymen, and have a good right to shew talents superior to most other ecclesiasticks; but in this church, which is founded on presbyterian parity, he is a bold man indeed, who ventures to distinguish himself above his brethren.
Besides in the exercise of his poetical gifts, he must have gone through a course of study altogether foreign to his duty as a clergyman ; he must have wasted a great deal of precious time, in making himself master of the Greek and Roman poets, and other heathen authors of pernicious tendency ; and indeed if he be a true poet, must have been guilty of the heinous sin of idolatry, in paying little less than divine honours to his muse. And if our author possesses the superior talents ascrib'd to him, so much the more deserving of punishment has he made himself, by prostituting his genius to prophane uses, and employing the parts bestowed on him for important purposes, in the service of Melpomene a goddess of heathen extraction.
Had this youth of genius followed the true theological track, and devoted himself to smoaking tobacco, to drinking of ale,and the study of controversy, which has been so beneficial to the Christian church, he might have made his name immortal, by some valuable treatise, like the late account of the present state of Judas Iscariot ; or, the candid and impartial estimate of the profit and loss of religion. Had he employed himself in the study of city politics, and human nature, he would certainly have become a master in experimental preaching, and one day might have produc'd some such searching piece of eloquence, as, the rise and fall of Haman; or, the other characteristical discourse of an eminent author. Had he followed the useful occupation of farming, or sent the savings of his stipend as a venture to sea, or dealt in the gentlemany trade of horsecouping, he might have been tolerated ; for such things are not without precedent among the brethren. Much more would he have been accounted blameless, or praise-worthy, had he spent his time in managing a burgh, or in sauntering about booksellers shops, or in diverting himself with his children by the fire-side, or in inclosing his globe with his own hands, or in attending all the burial and christning feasts, or in digging his own garden, or any other inoffensive and profitable method of making the lazy hours pass lightly away, practis'd in city or country.
Besides, this gentleman, as I am informed, within the compass of nine or ten years, has made no less than two trips to London, for two or three months at a time, and thereby deserted his charge, and exposed himself to the high censure due for non-residence. It is very true, that many other ministers in Scotland, have been frequently absent from their charges for a longer space ; and it is particularly the custom in this city, (where no man can say that ministerial duty is not carefully performed in all its parts) for the ministers annually to make a journey to the country, especially during the harvest vacation, insomuch, that were it not for the uncommon strength and benevolence of one b---r, the inhabitants behoved to cail in the neighbouring ministers, to join them together in wedlock, and christen their children. But then it must be noticed, that as the town is totally deserted by people of condition at that season of the year, any body is thought good enough to preach to the vulgar citizens ; so likewise there is a very wide difference betwixt the employments of our young author, and those of the pious and diligent pastors of Edinburgh: for they, good men, are either travelling for their healths, or paying court to their patrons, or relaxing their minds, worn out with spiritual cares, at mineral waters, or shewing the world to their gentle spouses, and their gentlespouses to the world, or strengthening their parties in distant presbyteries, or seeking ecclesiastical preferment; whilst this extravagant author, against all order, regularity and custom, is endeavouring to obtain for himself a place in the annals of taste and literature, by this detested tragedy of Douglas, which is the cause of all my perplexity and trouble. Thanks to the watchful guardian of this church, and the power worshipped by the uncontroulable ruler of the English stage! he has not yet been able to gratify the better half of his wishes ; and in them I trust with joy, for the full disappointment of all his future endeavours.
There is one circumstance I cannot reflect upon, without the utmost surprize, grief and indignation. It is, that, according to the best information I can receive, this same audacious theatrical divine is extremely popular in his own parish; and not only popular, (for I have known pious ministers much admired for their preaching, and yet, thro' the malice of Satan, brought into contempt in other respects) but entirely esteemed and beloved by every single person there. Now, this circumstance concerning our young author, I the rather believe to be true, because it consists with my own observation, that many young brethren, much of the same stamp with himself, in spite of all the secret artifices, or open attacks of the g--ly, have some how or other preserved the esteem and affections of their parishioners. There is nothing that relates to the present state of the church that hath given me me more real affliction, or occasioned more perplexing thoughts in my hours of desertion. The wiles of Satan are as endless as his malignity is great ; and most successfully of all, he attacks religion in the shape of human virtue : by enduing those fine modern ministers with candor, openess, humanity, and an affectionate concern for the welfare of their parishioners, he blinds the carnal minds of the people, so that they cannot perceive how deficient they are in true grace: whereas, by infusing cunning, envy, covetousness and spiritual pride, into the hearts of many godly and orthodox brethren, he weakens their hands, and destroys the effects of all their zeal and labour.
My fourth reason is, that the tragedy of Douglas is said by some sanguine friends of the author, to be an honour to our country. It is true, that some great men of antiquity have thought it very honourable to be able to compose a tragedy ; and having acquired all other kinds of fame, have repined when that could not be added to compleat their glory. But these men have been generally heathens, and can in no respect become examples to us. Neither do I think it is very likely, that in this cold, barren, and remote country, in which there is so little encouragement for the industrious manufacturer, and adventrous merchant, much less for such useless members of society, as the composers of idle poems; or that out of the bosom of the poorest and most despised, tho’ the best church in the world, there can possibly have arisen a tragic poet to rival Sophocles and Euripides, Corneille and Racine, Shakespear and Otway. For my part, I will not believe that he resembles any of these great prophane men but one, and that only in one single circumstance, viz. his having mistaken his employment. For Euripides was at first bred to be a wrestler; but he was soon found unfit for that manly and laborious profession, and therefore, like our author, obliged to turn a maker of tragedies.
But if it were really true that the tragedy of Douglas conduc'd so much to the honour of our country, it ought to be kept as dead a secret as the flourishing state of any of our manufactures; and no person who has the least regard for his native land, will be ever brought to own a truth so dangerous to our prosperity. Have we not the greatest reason in the world to fear that the English ministry, with who we do not stand in a very favourable light since the rebellion, will take it very much amis, that any body here should have the presumption to think he can write the English language as well as they can do in London? Is it not highly probabic, that if such an insult should ever reach their ears, they will load us with some new tax, to keep down our ambitious spirit? I have often heard it affirmed, that the French duty would not have been demanded for claret, but things allow'd to go on as they have done since the union, had it not been for that superb and magnificent building call'd the New-Exchange, which no doubt will surpass all the exchanges in the world, when once it is finished.
As it is therefore of the utmost importance to the welfare of our country, to present any jealousy from rising in the minds of the English, let us industriously suppress every appearance of genius and spirit ; and I am persuaded no good Scotsman, however prejudic'd he may be, will grudge to sacrifice our single tragedy of Douglas to the interest and prosperity of his country. What would David Garrick Esq; say, were it possible for him to hear, that a tragedy he rejected, as cold and unaffecting, made the whole city of Edinburgh almost mad for a fortnight, and drew endless tears and lamentations from every spectator? Let us, by one bold stroke, deliver ourselves from all future apprehensions. I am persuaded that a seasonable example of this kind, will deter other enterprizing young men, from turning their talents to the service of the stage; for, tho' it be true, that one precedent like Douglas, is enough to bring us an hundred tragedies in a year; yet I am very hopeful, that after this necessary severity shewn to that piece, there will be but very few hardy enough to trouble us for a long time with compositions of that nature : Next Wednesday then, let it be publickly burnt by the hands of the hangman, and I shall exceedingly rejoice, that I have been instrumental (tho' unworthy) to save my country from ruin, and prevent the downfall of true religion.
My fifth reason is, that the tragedy of Douglas has certainly given great offence to the nobility and gentry of Scotland. For since it is accounted, however falsely, a proof of learning and genius to have written a successful tragedy, were not the laity intitled to lead in a matter of so much importance ? and is it not the height of folly and presumption, for this rash young man to step in before his betters, and take upon him, forsooth, to raise the reputation of his country higher than ever it was before, for fine writing, which is the first and most excellent of the fine arts? Have not the gentry in Scotland been always jealous of the increasing power, and abilities of the clergy? What else could have induc'd them, against their own interest, to favour presentations, of which more than two thirds are in the hands of the crown? Besides, from the success of Douglas, and the boasted merit of that performance, the laity have good ground to fear, that the next application to parliament for an augmentation of stipends, will be more successful than the former; for the English lords and commons will no doubt think it great pily, that men of so much learning and ability should be confin'd all their days to offices not so lucrative, tho' a little more honourable, than those they casily procure for a favourite footman.
And here it is but just to own, that religion has gain'd one considerable advantage by the tragedy of Douglas. For several persons, not remarkable heretofore for their zeal and piety, have been lately observ'd to express themselves with a proper degree of warmth, in behalf of and the sanctity of the ministerial character. Thus it was likewise during the dependance of the augmentation scheme ; for there was then a manifest increase of zealous professors. I hope our new converts will persevere, and bring forth fruit, longer than they did.
I have many other reasons to add, but understand I am happily prevented by the zeal and vigilance of the presbytery of Edinburgh, who by their wise conduct have already rais'd such a cry, as the general assembly itself will hardly be able to silence. They have long been the leading presbytery in the church, and after this master-stroke of ingenious zeal, I soon hope to see them dictate to every other presbytery in Scotland. For observe their admirable conduct; they scorn'd to attack the stage on its weak side of comedy, or even on that of exceptionable tragedies ; but have waited many years with the utmost coolness and patience, till a tragedy appear'd with which every mortal was highly delighted, and which the best judges pronounced to be one of the most moral poems that ever was compos'd; and that strongest part of the stage, to shew their undaunted courage and zeal, they have manfully attack'd with all their forces. But further, to shew the world the goodness of their cause, they have broke through all the barriers of the sacred character, and overturn'd the independent jurisdiction of presbyteries by a single letter.
In this wonderful letter, they have taken an effectual course with those brethren, who had the assurance to go and see the tragedy of Douglas, in the presence of many of the judges of the land, the greatest part of the ruling elders in the church, and the best and worthiest persons of every parish in town; and who have been frequently heard to say, that they did not think tragedy unlawful, that it might often do good, and was by no means contrary to scripture, or the laws of the church. But these priests of Baal shall soon be made sensible how undecent it is for them to partake of the favourite amusment of persons of rank, and how dangerous to taste of pleasures, otherwise innocent, that their brethren do not care for.
I am informed too, that the reverend presbytery have prepared a warning and admonition, and are soon to volley the thunders of the church, against the supporters of the tragedy of Douglas. The storm no doubt will be very great, for it has been long in gathering. And as they permit you to sin on for two weeks longer, (for the paper is not to be read till the last Sunday of the month) you may firmly believe, my fellow citizens, they will make you smart the more severely for all. You are well acquainted with the clear and regular, and impartial conduct of the presbytery as a court, as well as with the decency, sobriety, and purity of a great many of the leading members in this affair. Be not therefore so head-strong, as to judge for yourselves in time to come ; but be so wise as to use the advantages you possess, and surrender yourselves implicitly to the direction of your pastors. What tho' you have ground to believe, they do not act in this matter precisely according to their sentiments, remember that religion is at stake, and you must forgive them. Have but patience for a little while, and they will soon slacken their discipline. Wo is me, that the nature of man cannot be altered! When this personal attack is once over, what reason have I to hope, that they will take any more notice of plays, than they did heretofore! Some of these devout father-confessors have artieled with their fair young penitents for two plays a week the rest of the winter, if they would but abstain from the tragedy of Douglas. What a key this private anecdote is to a great part of their conduct.
I cannot conclude this work without congratulating the reverend presbytery upon their zeal and courage, and the success of their laudible endeavours; and admiring that wonderful concurrence of circumstances, that has produc'd such unusual harmony of sentiments among them. If it should long continue, blest be the day that brought to light the tragedy of Douglas! for unior and peace among brethren, are to be purchas'd at any expence.
But let not the choscn and faithful few be too confident in this temporary union, occasion'd perhaps by passions the simple reader is little aware of. Proceed ye, jou sacred band! with vigour and resolution, before the children of this world recover their wisdom again ; if you do not strike the blow now, never more hope to find them at your mercy; and as the first step to a full victory over this vile tragedy, move the presbytery to come in a body next Wednesday, to the place where the cross once stood, precisely at one o'clock, and you shall behold that abomination of abominations devour'd by flames hotter than your hottest zeal.
F I N I S







ESSAY UPON TAXES.

PARTICULARLY TENDING TO SHEW That the Miniffers of the Church of SCOTLAND cannot in Law, and ought not, in Justice and Equity, to be fubje6ted to the TAX upon HOUSES and LIGHTS.


T IE AT ervery Government has dhe juftefRight to etact Tribute or Taxes fromt the Subje6t, is a Matter unqueffionable, both from Scripture arid the Nature.of Things, At the fame Time 'tis manifest that few ThingS teqfuire more Wifdorim, and more of the Genius Of Legiflatiot, as adapted to the Fotm arid Cirtumftaiies of each particular Government, that making a juift Iifcriminatiot arid regulating pro-"
perly, what is that Proportion to b'e taken from., and that which ought to be left in the Pofi-ffiorn of the Proprietot. Hence it follows, that the'
greatest PrudenCe is requisite ii firing this Mat-'
ter, and that no rimore be demanded than what inay be supposed needful for the right Adminiftration of Public Affairs. This, however, muff be left to those Persons to whose Care and Management Affairs of this Nature are entrusted.
Perpetual or frequent Disputes, concerning Things of this Kind, ought by all means to be avoided, especially when Subjets have no just Ground to calrin Question either the Knowledge, or Wisdom and Fidelity of their Governors ; and as Disputes upon such Points, often occurring, would greatly retard the momentous Operations of Government; nay farther, as the Expences of Government are designed for the common Behoof, any Violations of the Laws, relating to Taxes, by the Subjedts, however. little it may be the Obje& of Reflexion to the Bulk of Mankind, who attend t6 few Things beyond their narrow Circle, is in Reality more heinous than private Theft or Robbery. For this muft'of Necessity draw-after it the most dreadful.Confequenpes, if it were praatifed by any considerable Nurmbers.
It may be further observed, that Injuries of-this Kind. are not lessened, but greatly aggravated, by their affe aing a Public. They are not only against those who govern, though they must be first alarmed, but they must in less or more asse&t our Fellow Citizens, who muft.be obliged to make up such Deficiencies as are occasioned by the -Frauds of rome, and be necessarily subjeaed to 'other Burdens upon this Account, besides many other Jnconveniencies and Difadvan.

tages needless to be particularly mentioned, some of those of -a more priv;ate, and others of a more public Nature, .

. r S. *Froma Frodm these and the like Coni iderations, it muff be abundantly manifest to every.thinking Person, that all Men are obliged to pay flich Takes as are appointed by their' lawful Governors. But Chriftians, above all others, are not merely bound to this, from a View of the Ends of Government, and the geieral Reason of Things, but for Confcience-fake. This is the indisputable Command of their great Master, to render unto Cafar the things owhich are Cefar's. And in exa& Conformity to this Precept, the A pofle Paul orders, not only Subje&tion to the hligher Powers in general, upon Christians, but particularly mentions this very inaranice, of giving Custom, or Vedigal and Tribute to whom they are due. For, for this Cause, says 'he, ' Pay you Tribute also: For Rulers are G'd's Ministers, attending continually upon thisvery Thing, i. e. to support and to fe-.
cure the great En'ds of Government.' And every one who efleAs' must know, that the Bond of Conscience, as it has an immediate Referen'ce to the Authority of the Supreme Lawgiver,: hob is able "to save and to destroy, is infinitely the ftrongeftof all others.

If these Observations are just, and indeed I cannot fee how they can be easily controverted, they miruf be very clear aidd firong Reafoins, which can juffify any Individuals, or any Order of Man, for declining Subjeton,. alng \with their Fello0w-Citizens, to any Tax .tha: is: fixed by their lawful Rulers, and from1 ihich lthey are, nobt particularly exempted.

.Notwithstanding these Observations, however, we may still be allowed to make some Remarks p upon upon the. different Kinds of 'Taxes, together witfh a brief Detail .of the Tenor and Spirit of the Laws of. Sc otland, as they relate to this Sub je&.

It is observed .by the acute Author of the Spirit of Laws, that Taxes may be laid on Perlons, Lands, IMerchandizes, on any Two of these, or on all Three: A Tax on Houses or Lights, may be reckoned among the Personal ones. Now, he observes, that in taxing of Persons, it would be an unjust Proportion to conform exa&ly to that of Property. This he illuftraces by a Law which obtained amongst the Athenians. That People was divided into four Clafles : Those who drew five hundred Measures of Liquid or dry Fruit from their Estates, paid a Talent to the Public ;.
those who drew three hundred, .paid Half a Talent ; they who. had two hundred paid ten Mimne, and the FEurth ,Clats paid nothing atill.' This .Txrleaids, :weis, founded in Reafin iand Equity)
thopLugh itwas not according toithe Rule of PropQrtioSn ibecaufe,; though it did not follow the Proportion of Property, it followed its of their Wants. It was judged that every one hbad ar equAlShare of' what was neceflary for Nature, and t hat,whatr was thus.neceffary ought nbt to be taxed,- That tf this succeeded the uTfefbl, which mighit taxed a but nt so muci: as the super-flootus,r ;nd i:'at the La"rgenefs of the' Taxes on what wi~ uperfluous, prevented Superfluity. If any Set of Men therefore, the Author adds, confined to w iac isjuft necefrary, or only a Competency for Sufiitence, the least Disproportion here wuft be of the greatest Confeqpence;



It may be further observed, that as the Wealth of a Nation increases, the Expences of Governanent must .increase too, and of confequehne, Taxes must naturally increafemin a certain Proportion. But if there is any Order of Subje&s, s.hofe Income or. Salary, instead of admitting Addition (as.thar of others, either in the mers cantile YWay or by Agriculture, or by their Stations in Life commanding more Attention) muif necefTarily be diminifihing; from the very Nature of Human Affairs, such Subje&ts ought to be kept free from being included, without Necessity, in Taxes laid upon others. They must always be thus kept free, under a moderate and inild Government, if they would not fubje& them to the greatest Inconveniencies and Hardflhips.

'Tis true, a Tax upon Houses and Lights is .not upon a Matter .naturally improveable; and therefore it may.be said, it may bear as hard upon others in this Refp e., as upon the Clergy of Scotland. But, though this is triueinWbhe-Senfe, "is fai-fe in another : For the Means Boffu~j5rting such Houses are in a mercantile Natii:, wrhile 'tis.s i-.a flourishi-ng State, always iimprving, with -refpe& to ochers; whereas by the 'i2.aws of the Country, with refped to the Cleigyg these ..Means .mauft be al ways decreafin - ;f6'thit-even .supposing them.capable of pay ingiat prefenib their * Capacity, though for a Time they.i y beirinfenfible of it, must be always d.miiiini1-ia-nd diminifhing too in the-famrePrpdo4'iiIthat of .others increases,. ":

" oro n: 4 tha of But-,.b.ecaufe 'tis generally thIght that it is unbecomiing the Ministers of cthChtril bas Scotland '- '-***- ^ ' ':'- * *

to make any Demur, or Opposition to the Payment of the Tax upon Houses and Lights, and because 'tis also generally thought and lfaid, that they have no Law to support them,, it, may not be improper to take Notice, not only of their peculiar Situation as an Efrablifhment, but ofthere express Laws in their Favour, upon which they build their Security. Notwithstanding the Laws however to be afterwards mentioned, if their Situation were of the fame Kind in other RefpeAs, with that of their Fellow-Subjects, I am persuaded they would think it greatly unbecoming their Office 'and Chara&er, to decline paying. any Tax judged reasonable by the Legislature ; nay, they would chearfully pay from a Convi&ion of Duty, and to set an Example in this, as in other public and private Virtues, to their Countrymen.. They are justly sensible of their numerous Obligations to that mild and equitable Government under'
which they live: To this Government,. under a.
kind Providence,. they owe their Support as a Church, :aid their being maintained both in their Civil ~nd keligious Privileges. :I am fully perfuaded, they would reckon it at once undutiful, ungratefuila nd highly indecorous, to obftru&iany Measure they saw necessary for the Service of their Country' They, would willingly even quit. their private Rights to promote the public Utility.
My knowing these to be their Sentiments, nay the firmest Resolution of most of them, expressed both in public and in private, and indeed manifefted whenever they have had a proper Opportunity of exerting their Influence, made me think myself bouridin Juffice to set forth the Grounds of of their Defence, against being comprehendedi m the Ac of Parliament which has been now of considerable Standing, and which has undergone several Chaiges.

That their Relu&ance to pay in this Instance, is not from a Spirit of Cppofition, will, I hope, be manifest to every candid and impartial Person, after confiderihg the State and Circumstances of the. Church of Scotland, from the Reformation and downward; after considering also the Laws of .their Country, supported, so far as I have ever heard, by constant uninterrupted Cuffom;
and more particularly from their present Situation, compared with that of their Fellow-Subjets. These I flhall endeavour, so far as my Knowledge reaches, to represent with all the Fairness and Simplicity of which I am capable.

In order to exhibit a just View of the Firit of these Particulars~, io more will be needful than to tread in the Steps of the Rev. Dotor Wrtfron, so far. s he goes -inr his universally admired'and'
j ufly; celebrated History of Scotland, Afte-accountiting for the Rife and Progress of the.Reffrjnation, from' Religious, Moral,; ~nd Political Causes; and at the fame: Time aflignung the jutefte Reasons for the immenfe' Wealth and Poweriof the Popish Church; he 6bfervs that the Account given may discover the Eodundations on which so stupendous a Stru~ltuetwas ere&ed. Among other Things he-tikes Nbtoice, that the-Nobles, accidftomed to air aative Life, difdained any of the- more fede ntary; :mployments; that where-aever Penetration anid Addresswerene ceffary, the Clergy were entruffted, because B the y they alone were properly qualified for such Trust Hence all the high Offices in -Civil. Governmerit devolved into their Hands.. Of Fifty-four Persons who had held the Office of Lord Chancellor, the first Office in the Kingdom both for Dignity :and Power, of these, from the earliest Ages of the Monarchy to the Death of Cardinal Beaton, Forty-three had been Ecclefiaftics : And that, by the original Constitution of the Court of Sefsion, where the Lords were Supreme Judges in all Matters of Civil Right,. the President and one Half of the Senators were Churchmen, .. Is it any Wonder, after Truth had forced its Entrance into the Minds of Men, they ihould attempt the Deftru&ion of such a Fabric ? Is it any Wonder they should endeavour to emancipate themselves from such Slavery, by which their Souls were kept in Fetters, and their worldly Subltance entirely at the Commandi of a Set of domineering tyrannical Masters ?

Now, after this Fabric was demolished, and the Reformation established by Law; after the Riches :of. the-Popifh Church were got into other Hands, let. us fee bow the Clergy of ;the Reformation .were treated. Amongst there, there wer.e.afew-Superintendants dispersed into diff renc Parts, who, from their superior Capacity, were. appointed-to infpe& the Life and Dotrines of the opher.Clergy; but their Jurifdi&ion extended no. farther than to Things sacred-; they.
neither: cliaimed a ,Seat in. Parliament, nor pretended any ,Right either to. the Honours or Riches of -.he forner Bishops. 
The 'The first General Afrembly, held in the Year 1560, we are told, and indeed it is but natural to presume it, bore all the Marks of an infant and unformed Society. As they were feeble and irregular, they could possess no great Authority ;
nor did they' venture to make any Decisions of much Importance. However, in the Year following, they presented the Model of their intended Policy to a Convention of Estates; and itjs observed, that however easily they might have obtained the San&tion of that Assembly to their Rules, with refpec to Discipline and Jurifdiation, yet their Design to recover the Patrimony of the Church met with a very different Reception.
We are told, that after all the Arguments used and drawn from various Quarters, the Nobles having once seized the Prey, held it fatl; and, beftowihig upon the Proposal the Name of a devout Imaginationi, they affected to confider it as a visionary Proje&, and treated it wit-h'he utmost Scorn. - Our Historian, before he concludes his Narrative of Tranfac~ions during the Year- 1561i, further observes, that though the Number of Proteftant Preachers was considerably encreafed, as no legal 'Provifion had' beenr yet made for them, they had only drawn a scanty and-precarious Subfiftence foinm the Benevolence of their People:
Upon this he justly remarks, that to' fuffer the Ministers of an established Church to codntinue in this State of Indigence and Dependence, was an Indecency equally reptignant to. the Principles.
of Religion and to the Maxims of fdiund Policy,, and would have justified all the Imputations of B z Avarice, 

Avarice, with which: the Reformation was then loaded by its Enemies. And after observing with great Diftinanefs, the various Alterations which the,Revenues of the Church had undergone dur.ing the three Years- immediately preceding, and what Perplexities and Embarraffments were by this.. Means occasioned, he gives us the Plan which-met with Approbation and Acquiescence.
An-exac& Account of the Value of ecclesiastical Benefices, throughout the Kingdom, was appointed to be taken ; the present Incumbents were allowed ,to keep Poffefion; Two-thirds of -their whole, Revenue were reserved to their own Use, and the Remainder was annexed to the Crown ;
out of which" Third the Queen undertook to assign a fufficierit Maintenance. to the Proteitant Clergy.
" Though I feel myself prompted to. transcribe the excellent Remarks of our Historian,. upon this -j*rt; of ScQttih Hiftqory, by which it -is eafy.to discover the mean, interested, felfifh, and.
ava~ttious .: iews of all who had got these Revenues within their Grasp, or who had this Profped;
yet, :that I may not be tedious, I shall only fart. her rpention .the Result of the Whole.

He-obfer.ves that the.- Protestant Clergy were no considerable Gainers by this new Regula-tion: They.found it to be a more easy Matter to :kindle Zeal, than to extinguilh Avarice, Those eryMen, whom formerly they had swayedwith ah'folute Authority, were now. deaf to all their Remonfrerances. When their Stipends were.
afligned or-modified, by some of the most zealous Leaders, an fIundred Merks Scottish, or 5l. I Is.


ido d. was the Allowance which.their Liberality afforded to the Generality of Ministers; to a few Three hundred Merks were granted. About Tvienty-four thousand Pounds Scottih, or 2000]J appears to have been the whole Sum allotted for the Maintenance of a national Church established by Law, and esteemed throughout the Kingdom the truer Church of God.. Even this Sum waS paid with little Exadtnefs, and the Minifters'were kept in the fame Poverty and Dependence as formerly.

In 1564, .though the ecclesiastical Tranfa&ions were not considerable, the famne Representations, and no Wonder, concerning the Poverty of the Clergy, were renewed; but though they were flattered with Promises of Redress, we do not fee that it was eithei obtained, or that they had Ground to expe& it, but rather the contrary.

In 1566, two Assemblies of the Church were held. New Complaints were made, and upon, good Grounds, of the Poverty and Contempt under which the Protestant Clergy were fuffered to languilh. Penurious as the Allotmenti for their Subsistence was, they had not:received the least Part of what was due for the preceding Year. Upon this our Hliftorian juffly observes, that nothirig less than a Zeal, ready to endure and to fuffer every Thing for a good Cause, could have persuaded Men to adhere to a Church so indigent and to negleded. After assigning some of the Causes to which this was.to.be attributed, it is observed, that the Queen was obliged to prevent the just Remonftrances of the 4tfrembly, by falling on some new, Method fog t'h e the Relief of the'Church i but after all, thoigh fote Spynptons dof Liberality might have been eKpeaed in their Assignment, which was intended toi sooth the Clergy, and to filenc'e their Clamours ; yet both the Queen and the Nobles held f:t the Riches of'the Church which they had seized. A fu.m which, at the highest Computation, can scarce be reckoned equal to 900oc.
Sterling, was deemed fufficient for the Maintenance of a whole national Church, by Men who had lately seen single Monasteries pofflffed of.
Revenues far fuperi6r in Value. It is then .remarked, to their Honour, that however much they were affeAed and alarmed at whatever threatened the reformed Religion, they bore the Grievances which affeced themselves with aftonilhing Patience.

Towards the End of the Year 1.567, we find all the Acs of the Parliament 1560, in Favour of the Protestant Religion, were publickly ratified, and; new Statutes to the fame Purpose were en ated ; n, riothing chat could contribute to root out ithe.emaiais of Popery, or to encourage the Groikth ', f the Reformation, was negle&ed.
Notv~it hfianding this however, it is observable, that riefamne& prfimonious Spirit still prevailed in ths'Patlianiient as formerly. The Protestant Clergy, ;nier :many Difcouragements and ex.tremeP&overty, had for Seven Years performed all Re~if-ius Offices ia the Kingdom: The ExpedienstU. n upon.- for their Subsistence, had hitherto proved ieffeaual, or were intended to be so; bus: onptwithftanding their known Indigence, cid he; warm Reinnftrances of the Affcirbly of the the Church, the Parliament did nothing more for their Relief, :than prescribe some new Regulations concerning the Payment of the Thirds of Benefices, which did not produce any considerable Change in the Situation of the Clergy.

It is again observed in 1569, thiat as the N~inber of the Protestant Clergy daily encreafed, the Deficiency of the Funds, set apart for their Subfiftence, became greater. Many Efforts were made towards recovering the antient Patrimony of the Church, at least so much of it as was poffeffed by the Popish Incumbents; but though the Manner in which their Addresses and Complaints were received.by the Regent, Murray, was very dif.ferent from that to which they had been accuftomed, no effe6tual Remedy was provided; and while they fuffered intolerable Opprefliori, and groaned under extreme Poverty, fair Words and liberal Promises were all they, were able to obtain.

. . - ,. ..

. , In 1574, under the Administration. 6Morton, it is observed, that to all the Abuse of Power, with which he was charged, he added that ofhiij'ftice -towards the Church.
. The Thirds. of Benefices, out of which the Clergy received their Subsistence.
had always been slowly and irregularly: a oid to Collecors appointed by the General ;A mbly ;
and during the Civil Wars no Pay ient could be obtained in several Parts of the Kingdom.
Under Colour of redressing this Gevianice, and upon a Promise of assigning .every Minist-er a Stipend within his own Parish, the Regent extorred from the Church the Thirds to .whici' they had a Right by Law ; but the Clergy ,i if1ad of ob0taminng taining any'Advantage by this Alteration, fouind their Payments became more irregular and dilatory than ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with the Care.of four or five Parishes ;
a pitiful .Salary was allotted him, and the Regent's insatiable Avarice seized on the Reft of the Fund.

In I584, such Laws were passed as totally overturned the Constitution and Discipline of the Church. The new Statutes then framed were calculated to render Churchmen as inconsiderable as they were indigent ; and as the Avarice of the Nobles had stripped them of the Wealth, the King's Ambition was about to deprive them of the Power which once belonged" to their Order.
In 1585, we find the Clergy were the only Body of Men who obtained no Redress of their Grievances, by the Revolution of the preceding Year;
however much they had been flattered, or how much soever they might have flattered themselves, with the Promiifes that had been made them, still their Claims were sacrificed to the Interests of the Laity.

In I587, we find all the Church Lands, formerly unalienated, which were either held by the Bilhops, who poffeffed the Benefices, or were granted to Laymen dulring Pleasure, - by an Act of the Eleventh Parliament of James VIth, annexed to the Crown, and the King impowered to apply theRerts of them to his ownUfe. TheTithes alone were reserved for the Maintenance of the Persons who served the Cure, and -the Mansionhouse, with.a few Acres of Land; viz. four, by Way of Glebe, allotted for his Residence. Though tittle little Advantage accrued to the King by this Annexation, which was owing to various Causes ;
the Bishops were great fufferers. But as they were odious both to Clergy and People, neither the King nor his Ministers. were any way solicitous to ad.vance their In.terests ; nay the Profpe& of sharing in their Spoils, induced all the Parties to consent to a Step so fatal, to the Wealth and Power_ of. the dignified Clergy, -by which Means it became more easy. to introduce that Change in Church-government, which was soon afterwards effectuated.

This Change took Place in 1592, when Prefbyterian Government was established, by A& of Parliament, and.when the several A6s in 1584 were rescinded or explained; and it is observed, that at this Time, the King, who often disgusted his Subje6ts by indulging the Popish Fadion, endeavoured to atone for -this- by Commisfions to the Presbyterian Clergy, more liberal than he himnfelf would otherwise have chofe.aito grant.

In 1597, however, when the A& of0 general Annexation had -reduced the few surviving Bishops to Poverty and Contempt. and: when, by Means ps iome of the Clergy, Attempts were made to 'introduce Episcopacy C such was .the Abhorrence of the Generality: to this -Form of Govern-ment, thaitt to .this they-.-facrificed. every Consideration of Interest or Ambition ;{they. reje&ed both Power and -Honours with-as: much Zeal as-any of.their Order ever-courted-.them.

From rhefe Fadts, with refpe-b to the Clergy of Scotland, for a considerable Number of Years, C. theik their indigent Circumstances must plainly appear ;
this muff be manifest, whether they were under Episcopal or Presbyterian Church-government:
It is evident, that whatever Salaries they got, they were intended for no mere than mere Subfiftance, and that notwithstanding some additional Allowances, as Circumstances might alter, they were fill kept in a State of Poverty and great Dependence.

Notwithstanding this Situation, however, it would appear that they either aatually did fuffer, or had been in Danger of fuffering Distress, in somewhat relative to their Livings; and therefore in this very Period some A6ts of Parliament were framed to give them Security in this refped for the future.

This brings me to give a thort View of the Law of Scotland as it stands in relation to this Matter :

." By A& Thirteenth Parliament James VIth, ,, Section 166, it is ordained, That all Ministers "' Stipends be in all Time coming free from all 6' Taxations or Impositions whatsoever; to the s Effe& that IMinifters may bruick their Sti"c pends in all.Time coming.without any Trous' ble, according to their Aflignation.'" And by SeAion 169, intituled, No particular, M of Parliament Ihall pejudge Minifers of their Livings, it is ordained, -"' That whatever, A& or Coniti.' tution of Parliamer~.tJn Time coming be made, *' in. Favour .of.any particular Person, whereby c' the Provision of any Ministers Livings may "* be taken away, or in any wife prejudged, diy re¢ly or indirectly, in their said Provisions, " e Rets, S19 3 " Rents, or Profits thereof4 or any Part 6f the " fame, (hall be in all Time coming null, and of t' no Avail, Force, or Effe&, unless where the "' fame in Whole or in Part shall be reduced be" fore the Judge Ordinary."

It is true, this laft-cited Adt is, in its Letter, only a Precaution againit Miniffers Provisions being hurt by any A6ts which might be made in Favour of particular Persons; but it clearly Ihews, that it is the Design of our Laws to confider Ministers Livipgs as a bare Subsistence or Maintenance which cannot admit of Diminution.

The Law above is plain and explicit, and as it was founded in the jufteft Reason, we need not doubt, but, with whatever Difficulties Ministers had to firuggle, it was carefully observed; at least we find no Corriplaints in the subsequent Period arising from this Quarter, which is a pretty strong Presumption that there was little or no Ground for such Complaints ; and it is well known that in 1650 a Number of Ministers got their Stipends somewhat augmented.

In 1666, a new Valuation was put upon all the Lands of Scotland, in order to Proportion the Land-tax; but no Valuation was put upon the Lands of Ministers Glebes. No other Realon can be given for this, but that the Legiflatrre was abundantly fenfibli, that Ministers Glebes, being a Part of their Provisions or Livings, were by the Law exempted from all Taxations; and the fame Law equally extends to their Houses, which are a most necessary Part of their Livings, 

It were easy to take Notice of many other A&s of Parliament in the Reign of Charles the Firfr, all in the fame Spirit: Even when Episcopacy obtained it may be dblferved, that in all A6ts for collecing Taxes, the Bishops, and all other Provisions granted for pious Uses, are still exempted.

It is also well known, that whatever A&s were made with refpe& to. the Church, during the Reigns of the Two Brothers, and which were inconsistent with former Confiitutions in Behoof of the PreLbyterian Interest, were repealed by King William and Queen Mary after the memorable Revolution.

Farther still, by the Scottish Claim of Right, and by the Oath of the King and Queen, subjoined to the said Claim, the King is bound not only to maintain the Church of Scotland in its Dotrine, Discipline, and Government, but to rule the People committed to his Charge, according to the Will and Command of God revealed in Scripture, and according to the loveable Laws of the Constitutions received in this Realm rio ways repugnant to the said Word of the eterial God.

Again, by the At for securing the Protestant Religion andPrefby cerian Church-government, at the Union of the Two Kingdoms, not only the then Queen Anie swears arid subscribes, but all her Succeffors, attheirAcceffion, are to swear and subscribe, that they -tialp not only inviolably mairncain and preserve the aforesaid Settlement of the true Proteftant Religion, with the Government, Worship, and and Difclpline ; but also the Rights and Privileges of the Church, as established by the Laws of the Kingdom in Prosecution of the Claim of Right. And by the Eighteenth Article of the Treaty of Union, it is expressly stipulated, that whatever Alterations may be made by the Parliament of Great Britain, there is to be a Difference made betwixt the Laws concerning Public Right, Policy, and Civil Government, and those which concern Private Right ; by which latter must surely be meant, according to the Tenor of that Treaty, not only Laws relating to Individuals, but incorporated Bodies. And it is ftatuted, that the Laws which concern Public Right, Policy, arid Civil Government, may be made the fame throughout the whole United Kingdom -but that no Alteration be made in Laws which "concern Private Right, except for evident Utility of the Subje&s within Scotland.

Thus I have deduced a short Hiffory of the State of the Clergy of the Church of Scotland, for which there are fufficient Vouchers in the Book referred to ;" and this History brings us to the Time when the express Statutes were framed in their Favour.; all the other Statutes and Securities are manifestly of..the fame Tenor and Spirit.

I thall now endeavour, as briefly and clearly as I can, to apply these Laws to. the present Question, and to the Situation of the Scottilh.
eitablifhed Clergy in their present Circumstances.
Whether they would, with any Decency or Pros priet-y, have been fubjeated to Taxes, while their Situation Situation was, as has been represented, even though no Laws had been ena&ed in their Behoof, may be left to the candid Judgment of all who know their History. Instead of having what was proper to support them with any tolerable Degree of Decency, becoming that Station of Service in which- they were fixed, as the authorizedTeachers of Religion and Morals, the most scanty Allowances were made, and these Allowances to ill paid that their frequent Complaints cannot seem furprizing. It is evident they struggled with, and g'roaned under,' all the oppressive Weight of Poverty, while others were reapiig the rich Advantages of the former Incumbents ;ieven when Scotland was u:nder an Hierarchy, which, by-thebye, was always an Obje&t of general Difguff, the Biifhops were but in a forry:Situation with refpe& to their Benefices ;and 1\ence the Rules relative to theni in the Cafe--'Taxations. But the Prefbyt-rians, and the inferi6r Clery, when they were episcopal, instead of having any Thing to spare, were under an absolute Necessity of the ftri&efteFrugality and Parsimony : It may indeed be amazing with what Patience they bore their Hardships.

As this is the true State of the Cafe, and :as the Laws of the Realm stand thus with refpe& to the Clergy, can it be thought any way unniatural that they ihould be alarmed, when they are in Danger of being taxed in common with others ? Though their Situation is greatly altered, in some material Refpe&s, for the better, since the Revolution; yet it may surely admit of a Question, .

Question, whether in Proportion to the Wealth of the Nation, or the Situation: of others commonly reputed of the fame Ran, their Livings are much bettered ? I imagine it can require no great Dexterity to prove that they are not. Now when this muff be felt, it needs surely to be the less furprizing they should take the Alarm when they are threatened ; this very Thing indicates their Claim of Exemption; at the fame Time there is no Doubt but they may take false Alarms even upon this Head. 1 look-.upon this to be the Cafe, both as to the Malt-tax and that upon Candles; that the Clergy should be included in there I can think no way improper, as they are neither supposed to be Makers of Malt, eyen of the Grain which is produced from their Glebes, nor of Candles. And besides, if they were exempted in such Instances, great Frauds mightr be committed by People employed in making of Malt particularly, which it is the Duty of Clergymen to guard against; and those employedina.
the Excise might be involved in many p-erplexing Difficulties. Again, all Taxes upon,.1:Merchandizes they must lay their Account to.paras well as others ; besides, if any Minifterqsire2 by their Birth, Marriage, or any other Circuminft~nces.
foreign tn their Office, providedin fuchs Qrnaments qor Superfluities of Life, as fubjeh tfliem to, any Taxes which either are, or .mayle laid upon these, it would be abfui-dto make jppofi-'
tion in fIuch Cafes, because is in ·thir; own Pw.er to be without them ; and if t~l~ycloofe to have them, why should they pretend toa Right of SImmunity Immunity ? To ail stich Taxes, so far as I am acquainted, the Ministers of Scot~ind, ndtwithstanding their straitened Circurmftances, submit without Relu&ance.

But the Tax under Consideration at present is undoubtedly to be viewed in a Light quite different. from all these laft-mentioned, or, indeed, from any other to which they have ever been in langer. of being subjected. To this then, and ~hat: is immediately conne&ed with it, I shall confine rilyfelf in the subsequent Part of this Performance.
. The Equity of the Tax upon Houses and Windows, whatever Alterations the Ad of Parlia·Jent has undergone, or whatever Disputes may have beern about.it, I think can hardly be -.called in Qyeftion.- Though there had been fame flight Grpund for Dispute in particular ITnftances, this.
is superseded and removed by the Authority of the.Leegiflature, who are, no Dotibt, the most proper- Judges of Matters of this. :Sort, .and Judges too constituted by all different Ranks of Men in the Nation, except the Clergy of.Scot]and, who have no Representation of their own Body there. But while all this is allowed, it must be :also allowed that it is competent, notwithstanding a general Law, from .which no Class 9f Subjedts seems to be exempted, for.every Oxder or Body of Men to plead their oiwn peculiar legal Privileges and Immunities; nay riot only muse it be allowed,that they are rightfuUy intitled to this, but .it would be a just Imputation upon them, 

~ehri, both by particular Persons amongst their Cotemporaries, and by their Successors in Office, if they should overlook or negle&t such just Claim, such ireafonable Pleading, by which their Interests would be so materially affe&ed.

This is truly the Cafe with relation to the House and Window Tax, as it is thought to inc dlude the Miniffers of the Church of Scotland.
It is well known that, notwithstanding the Terms of the At of Parliament, they have hitherto, at least in most Places, so far as my Intelligence exrends, declined paying the said Tax, for their Houses and Lights, though the A& does not exclude them. But this does not arise from any Oppofition to the Law, or any Reluctance to comply with the Coniftitutions of Parliament. They suppore themselves to have a broad and firm Foundation to support their Claim, as standing upon the Laws of their Country, by which certain Immunities are granted to them upon Account of their peculiar Circumfftances; and that 'of Freedom from all Taxations upon their Livings in particular. That this is the Truth of the Cafe, they think appears uncontrovertibly manifest from the Statutes already quoted. It also appears from the Manner of assigning or modifying their Stipends, and the flanding Laws and Practice with refpe& to their Houses and Glebes.

As I have mientioned the assigning of their Stipend, it may not be improper to give a Ihort View how their Stipends are assigned by the Judges appointed for this Purpose.

( 26 j If the Clergy had a Right to the free TitheS of their several Parithes, declared by Law to be the Patrimony of the Church, or if these were assigned to them, even before these Tithes are fold or valued, this would be a pretty good Provision. But this is far from being the Fa&. For it is only out of there free Tithes they have their Stipend assigned or modifyed, at the Dif"cretion of the Judges. To affertain thefe' Tithes, they are made a Fifth Part of the payable Rent, with certain DeduCtions in particular Cafes. Thus, fuppoling the Rent of a Parish to be ioool. and to be fixed at this Rent upon a Suit for a Stipend to the Minister, the Tithe here is zoo . If this were given to the Clergyman serving the Cure;, it would be a grand Allowance, and an Allowance against which there could be no legal Obje&ion by the Proprietors of Land. But this is far from being the Cafe. For it is only out of this .200 1 after certain Allowances are made, that the Stipend is assigned. And if 1000o. Pounds Scottish, or 8 3. 6 s. 8d. Sterling, is given, it is generally reckoned a great Allowance. That this is the Fa&, I am persuaded will appear from the Decrees of Modification and Locality which have been granted since the Revolution. Indeed, in Parishes Where the yearly payable Rent may be double to.the Sum mentioned, there may not be nigh so much free Tithes, owing to Valuations or Sales of pretty old Standing: And by our Laws, as they stand, the Tithes must be computed according to the Rent of the Lands as it stood at the Time of such Yaluations. I have only given a Ihort a lhort Sketch of this (Point, as it would 6e enIdless to enter into the Mirutise of it; only it plainly appears, that by our very Laws, while the Proprietors of Lands may be increasing the Value of their ,Estates to a very great Height, the Allowance to the Minister can never exceed a certain Suin.

But whatever is assigned them, whether it be more or less, according to the different Circumitances of their Parishes, it is manifest from the known Laws of Scotland, and even from the -uniform Language of the Decrees of the Judges, that it is given them as a necessary Provision for their 'Sdbfiftence, and no more than what is accouinted .needful for this Purpose. Now, as it is only out of this Provision they can be supposed capable of paying Taxes at any Rate, mufftit not be extrei3ely hard toifubje& them to a Tax, where, without any Difficulty, they can be diftinguiihed from all other Subjeas? It is justly observed by the Author of the Spirit of Laws formerly quoted, that in general where Taxes are not exorbitant, and where People continue to have Plenty of Necdraries, even particular A&s of Injullice can do nro larm. If on the contrary People are permitted to enjoy only just what is neceflary for Subsistence, the least Disproportion will be of the greateft'Confequence. If some Subjects do not pay enough, the Mischief is not so great; their Convenience and Ease turns always to-th public Advantage. But if some private People pay too much-'; by Which he means too much in Proportion to their Circumstances, their Ruin rePD " dounds dounds to the public Detriment. If the Governmentproportibns itsFortune to that of Individuals, the Ease and Conveniency of the latter will fooa make its Fortune rife. The Whole depends upon a critical Moment. Shall the State begin by impoverishing the Subje&ts to eprich itself? Or, had it not better wait to be enriched by its wealthy Subjets ? These Remarks, I am persuaded, are justly applicable to the present Point. Is it not manifest, upon the mott cursory Infpeaion into the State and Circumstances of the Church of Scotland, from the Reformation downward, that her Clergy in general could never have been fubje&ed to any public Burdens without the greatest Hardships bordering upon Oppression?
And surely if it was thus in former Periods, when the Livings of Ministers, all Things taken into the Accournt, bore a greater Proportion to the State of others, generally reckoned of mtiuch the fame Rank: .ri Life, it must be much mniore so now, when this Proportion is greatly altered to their Disadvantage..

To.demonftrate this can require no .great Depthiinlpolitical Arithmetic. In this Maitter, it is only needful to call to Mind some of the wellknown, Maxims concerning Money, whiether real or artificial, Is it not obvious that the real Value of Gdoldajd Silver, and other Metals, and corfeque~nty of Coins, is diminilhed in Proportion to theixjPlenty, and augmented in Proportion to their Scacity ? From which it follows, that thovgh":thipfame Names may be given to certain cuantitipes ofhefe Metals, minted after a certaiq "Manner 

Manner, it by no means follows, that the Value is the fame at one Time as at another ; or that one can purchase the fameNeceffariesor Conveniencies of Life with any given Quantity at all Times. In Thort, though the Value of other Things isin some .Refpeas liable, only making Allowances for the Difference of Times and Seasons, the Value of Money, whatever Names may be affixed to certain Pieces, is next to nominal. Such Ministers therefore, who have their Stipend paid in Money, when Money is plenty, and consequently cheap, must of Neceflity at any Rate be reduced to the greatest Inconveniencies; pay, if they have not something else to depend upon than their bare SLivings, they must fuffer the greatest Distress ;
and this Distress, either greater or leTs, from thefe"
Parts of. the Country where they have their Refidence. This is what every one must be con.
vinced of at first Glance, Such indeed whose Saleries are paid in Grain, either wholly or in Part, though this is greatly less preearious, and consequently allowed to be more fit for Men in such Offices, as a continued Support in the fame Station. with refpe& to their Neighbours; yet when the Quantities are small it can make no such Difference, especially making Allowances for Seafois,-as to fubje& them to any public Burden where it can be avoided. That this is the Cafe in Scotland is manifest from the general Run of the Quantities deemed necessary as a Provilion for the Families of Clergymen, in Things which po Family can be without, and any Superplus that may be supposed, is to furnilh with other Necessaries NecefiTares or simple Conveniencies. And it is obvious, that Ministers in Scotland, who have no more than their Stipend, even though we should suppose it to be amoogft the largest, and the moist pundtualy paid, can,in the present State of Things, aim at nothing higher.

I doubt not, but many will be greatly astonished, when they hear-of the small Saleries granted to the Clergy soon after the Reformation. But their Aftoriiihment may perhaps be considerably abated, when they confider of what high Value Money was at that Time and long after, because of its Scarcity. I remember it is narrated in the Preface to Kriox's History, that about ihat Period when there was agreat Dearth approaching to a Famine, every thing rofe' so high, that an Ox fit lor the Plough could not be purchased under ten Pounds Scottish, or sixteen Shillings and eight Pence, nor a fat' Sheep under half a Crown, and all other Things in Proportion. When this was t'he Cafe, in such Circumstances, we may easily discern 'how fcar&ceMoney was, and that confeqiiehtly a very little must have borne a high Value, greatly difproportioned to what it has borne for a long Timne past. Though I dare not affirm it, I can have little Hesitation to think, their hundred Mnlerks Scottish then, were fully as good, if.not preferable to a thousand Merks now.

Waving however any Computations of this Sort, is:it not manifeft-that every Thing for the Ufeof Families, requires a great deal more Montey to be paid for it now, than it did not many Years ago ?



ago? From this, is it not also manifest, that chiefly, through the vast Extent of Commerce, more Money is in the Kingdom now than formerly ? This enables monied Men to give vastly more for Land, and to lay out more upon their Lands in the Way of Improvement. Through the great 'Increafe of Money, and this Money always circulating (for without this it were as good in the Mines) the Farmer is enabled to give, not a higher Rent, but more Money for what he poffeffes than before. This is a Point which might admit of large Illuifration, by running through all the Ranks of Life.

Now, is it not as clear as any thing of this Kind can be, that the Clergy of the established Church.
of Scotland, considered as such, are secluded, both by the standing Laws of Church and State, from numerous Advantages which others are capable of enjoying.? If this could be disputed, I might mention both A&s of Parliament and A&s of the General Assembly to make this Matter evident. Nor is this indeed any just Ground of Complaint, as it is taken for granted by these Laws, and by the whole Spirit of our Ecclefiaftical Constitution, that they are to give themselves wholly up to the Duties of their Fun&ion, and be as little as possible entangled with the civil and secular Interests of the World. , Only. it is a Maxim, not only Apoftolical, but founded in common Sense, and in all just Notions of Policy, that as they who serve at the Altar fhouldlive by the Altar, the Livings of the Clergy ought to bear some suitable Proportion to the State of the Country Country in which they officiate in its feviral Variations. Whether this is the Cafe at present, may, without the least Hesitation, be submitted to the impartial World to judge.

Not to go father back, let us only look to the State of Scotland at the Revolution, or at the Time of the Unioni or even twenty or thirty Yeats from the present Time, and let us compare their Livings then with what they are now, though no Alteration be made as to their Stipend, whether paid in Money or Victual, or partly in both;
and I apptehend it will appear at first Glance, that this Matter can hardly bear a Question. I am fully persuaded that twenty or thirty Years ago any given Sum would have purchased neaf double, and in some Places much more, than what the fame Money can do at present.

In speaking upon this Point, I confine inmy Ideas intirely to those which are suggested by Law, which is the ainly fair Way of reasoning and judging in Cafes of this Nature. However comsortable and happy in their worldly Situation some Ministers may be upon account of foreign and adventitious Circumstances, is a Question of a different Kind; a Question with which the Merits of this Cause has no concern; nor can it reasonably be admitted in pleading where the Right of the Cafe depends solely upon Law or legal Privilege. Ministers in such comfortable Circumftances may perhaps discover no Aversion to be includedin this, more than in other public Burdens, or Taxes upon the Superfluities, the Ornaments and Conveniencies of Life but this can be no Rule I 33 1 Rule with, refpe& either to the Church in general, or the great Bulk of Clergymen whose Circumstances are extremely different, and who have nothing but their Stipend to support.
them.

As the Chutrch of Scotland has none of their own Body to plead and to support .her Laws and Rights in Parliament, can it be any wonder that these Laws and Rights, peculiar to themselves, though ouice well known, should through Time be forgotten ? Is it any Wonder that the Scotilh Members of Parliament, supposing them ever to well disposed to promote the Interests of the Clergy, and willing to defend their Rights, lhould omit their Duty in this Refpe&, through .not knowing these Rights, diftinaly, especially as many Ministers may notperhaps know them themselves ? Even the belt employed Lawyers, and who have the most extensive Knowledge of the Laws, do rnot rerttember those Laws which.relate to every particular Cafe upon which they are consulted, until they are put in Mind of them.
And can it be any Surprize that this should be the Cafe here, when there never was Occalion, until of late, to look into the Laws of the Country, as they relate to the Clergy with refpe& to. their Livings. My mentioning this, fuggelts, by-the-bye, a ftrongArgument ofitfelf, for the Justice, the Equity, and Propriety of their Claim of Exemption.
They are able to plead, not only the Laws of their Country, and these Laws declared to be unalterable by the Treaty of Union , noc only the Terms E in I 34 T in which their Livings are assigned them, as only a necessary Provision for their Support but their:
Immunity from all' axes of this Nature for Time immemorial. And this Argument is farther fortified by the Exemption of-their' Glebes from the Land Tax, notwithstanding the general; Terms of the Law in this. Matter. The Custom also with relation to Manfes in Royal Burghs,. is.
well known ; namely,: that these Houses are, at.
least the Miniffter is, exempted from paying any Cess.

From these and the like Confidrations, found"

ed upon the Laws of Scotland, and the Circumfitances of the Church .and Clergy, it cannever be supposed to be the In-tention of theLegifature to bring them into a Sctae ofDiftrefs.
They, as an Establishment, aie upon a quite different Footing from the Church 'of England.
Their Livings are assigned and" allocated to them in a very different Manner. TheCergy, where their Stipend .is given out of the: Tithes, have only so .much out of such as,,are free, as. the, Judges, appointed for that Ptirppfe, deem ne-.
ceffary, according -to the Difference ofPariflies and other Circumstances; a small Portion of, the Land, as a Help to maintain their Fatmilies, and such Houses as may be judged competent for'
their Lodging,, planned and built at the commorn Expence of the Proprietors of Land. From the "

very Phraseology of the Decrees of Modification and Locality, these are all supposed to be freeofrom public Burdens, even though they had, po explicit Laws in' their Favour 3 and when both , 3:5 .both t~hese are strengthened by confiant Custom, one can hardly think but the Argument should "be conclusive, If there and the like Arguments plead fo.r their 'Immunity'from paying Arrears for a considerable Time palt, they surely plead strongly too for 'their not being ifubjeaed for the future, while their Circumstances continue as they have been represented, and that without either Exaggeration, ' or the least Design 'to exaggerate. I can have no ,doubt to assert, that the Clergy of Scotland both 'profefs, and really feel, the firi&teft Attachment :to One of the 'beft of Kings, and to our happy ,Constitution ' for-which, if properly called to it, ;they would be willing to rifque their All. But while they'have the-higleft 'Regard to the most *exccellent Governmtent, and the mildest Adminifitration, to which they have >been so much in-debted, they would still be wanting in that Justice they owe to themselves, to the Laws of 'their Country 'ftanding unrepealed, and to their 'Succeffors in Office, if they should tamely yield .up any of these legal Privileges with which they are veiled. Should 'they give up these, without :urging what they haveto fay in their own Defence, whom would they have to blame ? Not our Legislature, which in !Questions ,of this Nature may not be fufficiently informed of their peculiar Privileges. Not even the Scotch Memrbers of JParliament, unless .they be supposed to carry in .their Memories all the Afts of the Parliament of Scotland, and Regulations and Cufftoms in consequence of them, or founded upon them:

E2 Not .Not the Gentlemen of the Country, whatever diminutive Ideas many of them may entertain of th&eClergy in general. They would in this Cafe have themselves to blarme, and thermfelves alone, for not asserting and vindicating, in a legal Manner, their own Rights, which are founde4 on their particular Situation, and in the Laws of their Country. They may in this Cafe hope to he crowned with Success, when they strive lawfully.

It would be to discover Suspicions of themselves, as well as of their Claim, for the Clergy of Scotland to imagine, that our gracious Sovereign, or the supreme Judicature of the Nation, would find Fault with them for urging in a becoming Manner, and with a decent Freedom, what they deem to be their just Rights and their legal Privileges-While every Thing in the British Conftirution -is legal; the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Privileges of the Subject; and thefre Privileges diversified according to di.ffererit Circumstances, they at any Rate only a5t the Part of other Subjets, by pleading in the Spirit of Meekness, Gentleness, and Moderation, there their peculiar Ones, and the Laws upon which they are founded. If others, vested with their Office and. Charater, have not the fame or the like Arguments to urge for themselves, the Clergy of Scotland are not to be blamed for this : And besides, the Laws with refpe& to the Clergy, in South andNorth-Britain, are evidently founded in quite different Principles. The Scotch Clergy are hopeful, while ·they do not grudge their Brethren in England their manifold Advantages of 1 37 3 of a different Sort, they have no Ground to be jealous of their looking upon them with an envious Eye.

But even abflra&ing from all these Confide;

rations, which they look upon to be their great Bulwark, not only as Ministers upon such an Establishment, but as SubjeCts of a legal Government, have they not the best Reasons to expose to the View of the Public their present Circumstances ? Can it be already forgotten, that not very long since the Church of Scotland made Application to Parliament for augmenting their Livings, according to the different Situation of Parishes, and particularly for enlarging the Minimum of their Stipends, besides some other Emendations, which were looked upon as needful for their Relief in certain Cafes, and to free them from unnecessary Charges in Initances of Law Suits ? Did it not then appear, from the Reports of Ministers, and the Records of the Commiflion for. Plantation of Churches, that the Fats stood as follows? Of Eight hundred and Thirty-three Benefices, feparatiog what is allowed for. Communion-Elements, there is one under 25 . Three above 251. and not higher than 30ol. Twelve above 30o . and not higherthan 35. Twentyfive above 35 1. and not higher than 4o1. One hundred and Six above 401. and not higher than 45 1. One hundred and Twenty-fix above45L. and not higher than 50 1. Eighty-four above 501. and not higher than 551. One hundred and Nineteen above 551. ancdnot higher than 6o 1. Ninetyspur above 60i1. and not higher than 651. One hundred £ 40 1 the Value of Lands exposed to Sale; in ihort, the.
greater Quantities of Money pafling throughevery Body's Hands but chose of the Annuitants and Stipendiaries; let there well-known Fa6ts, open to the Observation of every Person, bear Witness, These are Fa6ts which are always genuine Truth, and which, need no artificial Colouring. But they are Fatas, which, whatever Attenition may be paid to them, fully and clearly indicate the growing Distresses, to which Clergy"men, as such, must be reduced, unless something is done in their Favour. If the Argument rises.
higher than was originally intended in this Essay, the Writer is not to blame for it, as he has only:
mentioned the Circumstances as they truly stand;.
and if these Circumstances strongly plead for bettering the Livings of the Ministers of. Scot'
land, they certainly plead more strongly .for not diminishing them by Taxes. Besides, ,I always., fay Clergymen, as such, because it would be un-.
fair Reasoning, not to abftra6t from all foreign^
Circumstances, such as profitable Farms, Succelion to Inheritances larger or lesser, Mjiarriages,.
&c. By means of these and the like Circumstances, fame niay be raised above others, theirl Families better supported, and their .Office and Chara&er put above that Poverty and confeguent Contempt to which they might otherwife.be re-duced. It may be fairly avowed, that the Circumftances, withrefpe&tto Living, are daily upon the Increase; and when this is the Cafe, it furniihes, out another strong Argument for. Exemption from the threatened Burden. Is it not manifest that that exa6ting it of Ministers would make matny conliderably worse, and such too who :could least bear it, as it might happen that their Houses, by Reason of the Plan fixed upon by the Landholders in, their Parishes, are furrifhed with.a greater Number of Windows than those of others who might be better able to pay. Nay, it may be affirmed, that in many Places of Scotland paying this Tax would be a considerable yearly Rent.

I acknowledge, an Argument drawn from Poverty has nothing graceful in it. Coram Rege.
suo, de paupertate tacentes. Plus pfcente ferent.
This in general is a just Maxim.

But why should the Clergy be ashamed to owi their Poverty now, more than some Years ago,.
when they published it aloud to the World, andwhen, from the Circumitances already mentioned, and many others which might be added, it must have been less than at present ? And.chough it is true.-Nil habet Paupertas durius in fe, quan quod ridiculos Homines facit. Why should we not rather choose- to bear a little present Ridicule, than be exposed to a great deal more. after-.
wards ?

May it 'not be added to. all that has been.

offered, that .the Maxim, Obfta Principis,. is;
ajuft one here as well as in other Cafes. Are notc the Clergy of Scotland bound in Duty to themselves, and -to their Successors in Office, to. do.
what they justly and legally can in this Instance ?. not only to exert their endeavours to beexempted-; but-to Ihow the World, that their F Exertions f 46 3 ixeti onsd are' hot tie EfT'es of Warntotmnetfs, of Humour, or Opposition to the Orders of Governmeint, but built uponi fich solid Grounds, that they have no reafonto be ashamed of themn ?
They have no Reason to.blufh upon accountof the Weakness of their Plea, but rather on account of the , Weaknels of-their Purses; to that they cannot be said to flatter themnfelves when they expect a favourable Issue. To which we may still fubjolr, that it is easy to foresee the Consequences of- not itandihg up in their own Defence, when the Opportunity is afforded, as, it is plain, if they do not, they can never appear with such a good Grace in any future Instances. Is it not evident, through the Whole of Hiuman Life, and in all Situations, how one Thing leads to another., and that without :
any direct bad Intention, especially in Matters of this Kind ? Every Body knows how ,much the Argument dlrawri frotm Precedents assets. If they urge not then: all that they fairly arid honeftywcan in the preferit Instance, which is the very firff which touches them as Clergymen ;
may they not afterwards from time to time, be subje&ed to all Taxes, where they can be included, so as great Part of their Livings, scanty even at the belt, mrny be exhausted? And if ever this should be che Cafe, upon whiom could they. justly throw ;tie Fault, but upon themselves ? I can be .

bold to affirm, that if-they are put upon a Footing similar to the Reft of their Fellow-fubje]s in *
Scdtland, -or if their. Livings are advanced in any tolerable -Proportion to the State of others;.
generally accounted much upon a Level with them, . none none will contribute 'their Share in all public Burdens more chearfully than they.
. I have only said what has occurred tomyfelf upon this Article. Without pretending to .any -iead for Legislation, .I can easily .discern the Reasons for the .Speciality-in the Sco.tilh A&s of Parliament: .I can also discern. that, they muff have appeared highly reasonable; and every Thing of a contrary Aspect highly unreasonable, both at the Time of the Revolution and of the Union.
Nay, I can farcher fee why the Clergy of Scotland have for so long Time been concluded as exempted from Taxes, .without any express Clauses in their Favour in other Aats of Parliament.. 1 can fuirther discern the Impropriety of struggling a Point of this Nature with refpe& to other Taxes, such as the Malt-Tax; because this might involve those concerned in levying such Taxes, as, well as the Makers of Malt,, in various Difficulties, besides exposing such Persons to manifold Temptations.. These, Clergymen from their Office and Charader, should be disposed,. even above all others, to prevent.,.Bur here none of these Circumfancescan be pleaded.. There can be nio Difficulty in distinguishing the Minifter's House, .from all other Houses in the several Parishes .ineither the Surveyors nor others! can be under .the least Temptation to Fraud, or Qrthr coniequential Instances .of Vice.
. And perhaps after all it may not be unworthy of Consideration, whether Glergymens Houses ought not to. be viewed in the Light of public Qnes, and4 come under that particular Denomina"' \ ' Uiun tiorl; They areHoufes appointed by Law, aid indeed many- Statutes there are about them.
They are to be fixed in every Parish for the Residence of the.Perfon who serves the Cure.
They are planned and built, as has been said before, at the common Expence of the Proprietors of Land. They have generally as many or as few Windows, and. there of as different Dimensions, is either the Vanity, or, if you please, Generosity or Parsimony of the Land-holders prompt them to determine. Betides, they are often so far from being proportioned to the Stipend assigned to the Minister, that a Minister with a small Stipend'
Ihall have a large House, and one with a much .

larger Stipend shall have a small House, Would it not then be a great Hard ship for the Poffeffors to pay Taxes, all other Circumstances considered, for Houses planned and built in the Manner mentioned?

For my own Part, I know not whether these or the like Considerations bave been urged ornot :
If they have been urged, and yet not listened to or regarded, there is no Help for such Misfortune.
It no Doubt becomes the Clergy of Scotland to submit with Patience to rhi_, and even to greater Hardships. At the fame Time it is their Duty to acknowledge, with Hearts warmed with Gratitude, the Prote&ion and Countenance of that benign and auspicious Government, to which they have stood, and still sand indebted for riumerous diftinguilhing Advantages. If these, or other Considerations of the fame Kind, have not been urged, as I am strongly suspicious they have not; because I have never observed the Argument to be rightly understood by those who think they ought not to be exempted from Payment; and because of the Surprize which I have often heard expressed, that the Clergy of the Church of Scotland ihould pretend to Exemption more than the Clergy of England. For these Reasons, as I am greatly suspicious they have not been urged, I cannot hesitate in declaring my Opinion, that they ought to be urged, or other additional Reasons which may be perhaps itronger than those now advanced. .And I can hardly doubt, but it (hall be clearly discerned by all who have the Management of Matters of this Kind, whether in South or North-Briton, that the Plea of the Scotifh. Clergy is far from being merely chimerical, or even without such Foundation as they may hope to stand secure. Nay, it is possible their Eyes may be opened to fee somewhat more than the Equity of the present Claidi, which can never be accused of Immodesty. Toconclude; I am fully of the Mind, that not only the Laws of the Realm, together with immemorial Custom equivalent to Law, and pre.
fumed to be built upon Law where there is no Presumption to the contrary, but the Peculiarities relative to the Livings of the Clergy of Scotland-these, with the other Circumstances which have been taken Notice of, make me persuade myself, that if they are fully represented, and fairly canvaifed, 

1 vaffed, they have good Ground so expeft to be kept - in the fame Situation with refpe& to the Tax' upon. Houses and Lights, as they have hihert.o. been.;. and consequently freed not only frb.m Trouble, but what must in many particular Inftraces.be extremely grievous and diftreling, NATIONAL DEPRAVITY THE CAUSE OF NATIONAL CALAMITIES

A SERMON 

Be thou inJiruAed, 0 Jerusalem, left my foul de part from thee: left I make thee dejolate, a land not inhabited.
ON hearing these words, as a ground of me ditation on a day of falling, of contrition and repentance, to avert national calamities, I doubt not but every one of us, as' usual, will endeavour to throw the blame from himself, and fix it on his neighbour. The poor will accufe, in their hearts, the rich and the great, for their pride, and luxury, and inhumanity;
and the rich and great will, in like manner,. accufe the poor, for their faithlessness, their ingratitude, and their double dealings. They who govern, will accuse those who are governed, of difaffetion, wantonness, and sedition;
and the governed will accuse their governors, of corruption, and venality, and the abuse of their power. But we mufl not forget, my bre A thren, thren, that although the imrnedaie caunel of the downfal of states may be ascribed to the iniquities of particular orders of men, yet it is the accumulated guilt of a whole nation, colleated often for many years, that forms the procuring cause, in the counsels of the Almighty, of the dreadful calamities that befal nations.

LET us then lay aside all partial and particu lar views, till they fliall rife before us.with full convidion, in tracing the history of our present state, and, with the blessing of God, turn our thoughts, for a little, on the following obfervations,' which appear naturally to arise from:the iwords of the Prophet.

1 thefirft place, That the Almighty governs the world, not merely by general laws, but by constant superintendence and frequent interpofition.

Secondly, THAT he gives long warning of ap proaching calamities, and waits with patience, to try if men will be inftrudted, and repent.

'hirdly, TIAT fin is the cause of all natibnal calaniities, and if perfilled in, will provoke the Almighty to make bh foul depart from them.

Fourthly, THAT a consequence of this depar ture must be, that the kingd m,'Jball become desolate, and tbe la d not inhabited.

AFTR. which, I shall apply this fubjdet to our prefen state.

MY jirjl observation is, That the Almighty governs the world, -not merely by general laws, .but by constant superintendence and frequent interposition.

WERE we to review the hiltory of the world, we should find this great truth clearly manifested, that though God hath eftabliihed order in the universe, and a chain of causes and effets which link all things together, invisible indeed for most part to mortal eyes, yet He frequently interposes in an extraordinary manner, to demonitrate that He attends to -human affairs, and to-create constant awe of, and dependence upon Him. The history of the Jews, which Jias been preserved by divine Providence for this purpose, and with which you are bed acquainied, affords the clearest proof on this subjee.

You muf have observed out of what small beginnings Jehovah reared the people of Israel, till they'became a mighty nation: With what tender care he brought his vine out 'of Egypt, when it was a feeble plant, and nourished and watered it, till it became a mighty tree. The great empires of the world were made subservient to the designs of Providence in their behalf. It was the will of God, that even Alexander the Great should feel some refpeOt for that obscure nation, and 'that 'he and his fucceflors should protect them. It was the fame Divine though Tnvifible Power, that direted the Romans to preserve their liberty against the attempts of the latter Kings of Syria, till Jesus the Meffiab Jhould come, and when him with bloody bands they bad crucified andlfain, these very Romans became the instruments of Divine Providence finally'to exterminate that impenitent and ungrateful people.

THE fame hand of God is visible in the pro grefs of Christianity. You must ,have observed with what design, the Almighty seems to have united all the nations of the known world un, der one empire, to make it subservient to the propagation of the gospel. And when the fame Roman empire, for the space of three hundred years, persecuted that new people of God, which grew up in all its immense extent, those perfecutions confirmed and etablifhed the Christian Church, and made her shine gloriously in the midst of herfaith and patience. Thus the leajl of feeds became a mighty tree. Thus, by means seemingly inadequate and improbable, the word of God pnightily grew and prevailed.

COULD we take an exat survey of the history of the world, as by means of the sacred books we are enabled to do of this single nation, it would fully confirm the observation we have made, that whether it proceed from the chain of causes and effects, or from the more particular interposition of the Almighty, that empires and kingdoms rife or fall, yet all depends on the secret designs and operations of Providence. It is the Almighty and'all-wife ruler of the world who prepares events in the molt distant causes. Urn.
expected success on one occasion, leads to confidence and presumption on another. The virtues of patriots bring nations to that degree of prosperity, which tends to such corruption of manners, as generally proves fatal to those very talents and qualities that produced it.

THE empire is now to be overturned; the minds of men become degenerate, and all their counsels are irregular, weak, and unitable.
Egypt, heretofore so wife, when her ruin drew pigh, as we read in the Prophecy of Isaiah xix.

became weak arid feeble; and 'ber heart melted within her, and her Jpirit failed in the midJI of her:: And the Egyptians fought. every one againJf hit. brother,. city against city, and region againjI region: And tbey fought to idols, and to charmers, and to them that had familiar spirits. Because the Lord had mixed irresolution and changeablenefs, and fear, into their counsels. Egypt knows no longer to which hand to turn; she is undone.

HE who ruleth in Heaven, is the Blefed and only Potentate ; the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and they who rule upon earth, be they many or few, who hold the sceptre, must always feel themselves controuled by a Superior Power. All their views and operations are imperfet, and unexpeted events proceed from all their designs: For they neither can discover the preparations that are made in the ages which are pall, nor foresee the course which futurity may give to all the plans of human device. For God alone reignetb unchangeable, and holdeth all events in his hand.

MIlfccond observation is, That God giveth long warning of approaching calamities, and waits with patience to try if men will be inftruded, and repent.

--THE history of the Bible furnifhes.many corin fpicuous proofs of this observ.ation.' How great was the patience of God towards the old world, when He waited, in the days of Noah, for the space of one hundred and twenty years ? How great was his patience with refpet to Sodom dnd' Gomorrah ?, For. when the cry of their fins had reached Heaven, and called loud for vengeance, yet God is represented as coming down from Heaven to earth, to enquire- into the truth of the report, and fee whether thiing were altogetber according to the coy that .ina come up unto Him. And when every thing was found as bad as possible, He is represented as still willing to save them, bad there been butten righteous in these wicked cities.

WHAT can be imagined more flow, and mild and merciful, than the proceedings of Divine justice. against a sinful people ? God is represented in scripture as taking a long time to make ready his bow,' and to whet his glittering sword, before his hand taketh hold of vengeance. Many a time he threatens and lifts up his arm, before he gives the fatal blow. And' when good men interpose, to prevent the execution of his wrath, he confiders it as the'niofm mdritorious service. Therefore he said, 'speaking of the Israelites, Ps. cvi. 23. Thkat had not Moses, his chosen, flood before him in the breach, to turtr away his wrath, he Jhould have defiroyed them !
And how does he receive of Phinehas, as a most acceptable service done to him, and which he hardly knew, speaking after the manner of men, sufficiently to reward, that he had put a flop to his anger againit, the people of Israel; as you r may fee in the 25th chapter of Numbers.

THUS did God deal with his people Israel;

and thus has it come down to us as an example, purposely recorded, 1 Cor. x. i. for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

OF this aftonifiing patience of God, there is a lfriking example in the context, for after God had threatened deftruiion to Jerusalem for her manifold and heinous crimes, he nevertheless gives her a merciful warning, to prevent the threatened ruin, by repentance, ver. 6, 7. Thus hath the Lord of hoisfJsaid, Hew ye down trees, and cast a mount against yerufalem: This is the city to be vifited,Jhe is wholly oppreffon in the midst of her. As a fountain cajteth out waters, foJhe cajieth out her wickednefs.-Before me continually isgrief and wounds. Then follow the words of the text, Be thou inJlru led, 0 Jerusalem, left my foul depart from thee, left I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. Be thou inftru&ed, O' Jerufalei! t 'i tihis last countel ai8' waihing, which by my servant the Prophet, thdu hail been Offered for the space of foity yeairs, and still mayest thou' prevent the dreadftul calamities that arie coming upon thee.

MY tbird observation is, That fin is the cause of all national evils, and if persisted in by any people, will provoke the Almighty to caute his foul depart from them.

THIS is so clear and obvious, that it hardly needs illustration. General corruption of manners at firfi unhinges all government, for it makes men weary of the controul of laws. As the private vices of the individual make him daily trample on the laws of God and man, they make him spurn at the regulations of political order, and ready to rebel against them, when his interest or pleasure Ihall seem to make it necefiary for him. Universal depravity leads to irreligion, for men love darkness better than light, wben their deeds are evil; and when God is no longer acknowledged among any people, it is tirme that his foulJ hould depart from them.
This is the greatest provocation they can give the Almighty. They are no longer guided by his counsels: They are left to the devices of their own hearts. And when a due refpet to religion no more pervades and conducs the counsels of any nation, you may be certain that they are in the high road to perdition. They have loft their light, and must wander in darkness. They have loft that sacred inffuece which overawes and restrains mankind and must remain at the mercy of human passions uncontrouled.

WITH what anxiety did the wisest people of antiquity, though ignorant of the true religion, inculcate the principle in general ? What pains did they take to preserve a sacred regard to oaths in the minds of the people ? and by how many costly ceremonies did they not daily remind them of their :dpendence on the gods for every success ? And how observable is it, that when that false philosophy prevailed, which either denied the existence of Deity, or his providential care of the world, they soon became depraved, and loft the love of their country with their refped for the gods, and suffered their boasted Republic, with but little firuggle, to end in a military despotism. Be thou in.
fJruraed, 0 Jerusalem, left my foul depart fromn thee.

MYfourth observation is, That the certain consequence of this departure must be, that the kingdom Jhall become deflate, a land not inhabited.


THIS must infallibly be the consequence, when there is an end of order and good government; for men will not long remain where neither person nor property are secure; and, n the contrary, it is a certain pioof, that the government is not radically wrong when ,he ccuntry is populous, and when the inhabitants are industrious and prosperous; for the end of government is the happinefs.of the people.

THE abolition of religion, and the dissolution of government, likewise engender faction and strife, and rapine and bloodIhed, which draw down the vengeance of the Almighty, and render a nation an easy prey to its external eneniies. With refpeft to that nation to whom this prophecy was directed, the sacred historian leaves us in no doubt of what besel them for their impenitence; for the city of Jerusalem and the temple were taken and sacked by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and the people led into captivity, and the land left in defolation. And with refpeft to their second captivity, which happened long after they had been restored and led back to their land, by Cyrus King of Persia, it pleated God to raise up an historian of their own nation, who was perfonally engaged in their wars, and has left a faith.
ful narrative of the particulars of the siege, and of Etheir fhal qcftructSio.by Titus Vefpafian.

IN his preface to this tragical history, Jose phus tells us, " That all the calamities and mif"fortunes that the world had ever seen, cpm"pared with this of the Je ws, were but flight , and inconsiderable." Of which he fayp, their civil dissentions were the immediate cause, and which they continued with little interruption of bloodlhed and naffacre of one another. During the whole length of the siege, amidst their party rage, they scorned and mocked at all holy things, and derided their sacred oracles as fables. Which made their hiitorian conclude with this character of them, "That as he thought no city had ever suffered such things, so po na.

"tion, from the begihning of the world, did "ever so abound in all manner of wicklednefs "and iniquity." A certain proof that God's Jful was departed from fbem.

THus, as I propose4, have I endeavoured to illustrate those general observations I made from the text. It remains, that I fliould make application of the subjed to the business of this day of failing and humiliation. The matter is co.
pious, and at hand; but you are already so well informed, and I have so frequently thought it my duty to touch upon. the subjet, that I Thall Dnly at this time briefly trace the history of our present situation, mark those fins that may be supposed to bring on such dire calamities as befel the Jews, and point out the warning and inAruaion which we may derive from history and experience, to regulate our present and future conduct.

IN executing what I sirss proposed, I Ihall lead you no farther back than to the conclusion of the las war, which we carried on against our revolted colonies with so much inauspicious conduct, and To many adverse events.

You mayall remember howmuch humbledand dismayed we receded from this contest. Our strength was wafted, our funds exhausted, and even our credit at the lowel ebb. Our commerce, it was fuppofed,had received a deadlyblow. The most fatal presages were entertained in the hour of our ihame and disgrace; and few they were, indeed very few, who fRill had hopes that Britain might again rear her head among the nations.
But if it is true, that when pride cometb, then copneSlb'ame; it proved equally so in our cafe, That before honour, is humility.

IT pleased God soon to revive our drooping spirits, and to give us rulers and counsellors who gained the confidence of the nation. Our stock and industry opened for itfelfnew channels; our commercial spirit was restored in all its energy;
and our fears of being undone, by the lots of our colonies, were soon dissipated. Our enormous debts, by wife management, were rapidly diminishing. We reared our head again among the nations, and escaped two threatened wars, by timely and vigorous preparation. We recovered, and secured our ancient allies; and, with a prudent policy, acquired new ones. The pro.
fperity of the nation, and the peace and fulness of bread, and happiness of the people, were never so great in any period of our social union.
In nb aera of the world, indeed, and in no region of this globe, was ever the multitude of men so free, prosperous, and happy.

We had already forgotten our late state of hu miliation, and were ready to fay with Job in his prosperity, IJhall die in my nefj, and multiply my days as the fand.-I break the jaws of the wicked, and I pluck the spoil out of his teetb.-My root isJpread out by the waters, and the dew lies all night on my branch. My glory isfreh in me, and my bow is renewed in my hand. Job xxix. 18.
&c.

NOT many months had elapsed since all this, and tenfold more we boasted in all the arrogance of national pride, forgetting the viciffitude and change that is attached to all things under the fun. You know the sequel, my brethren. The history of it is too recent to be forgot or mifunderfPood. The cloud which had gathered in the south, at last burst out, threatening ruin to the neighbouring nations. The minds of the lower orders, had been prepared by repeated factious appeals from the decrees of the Legislature, to their better judgment. Seditious writings were thrown in among them.
Daily papers of the most pestilent nature augmented the flame. Foreign correspondence encouraged the levelling spirit. T hey became ripe for revolt. They believed the false pro.
sessions of the devouring monster, which, under pretence of fraternising the world, meant to give law to all nations. They were ready to rife around the mock Tree of Liberty, though planted by a foreign hand.

HENCE the arrogance of the new usurping Republic. Britain united is a match for all the world, but divided by facion, may become a prey to every invader. Hence their attempt on a neighbouring Protestant ally, that they might direct her naval power against us; and hence their declaration of war, Without any just pre.
tence, though we, forgetful of their treache.
rous interposition in our dispute with our colornies were far from intermeddling in their internal divisions. It pleased God, by a blessing on our vigorous counsels, and on our arms, and those of our allies, to disappoint their favourite projec, and for that time to turn the battle from our gates; and during the reft of the year to crown us with various victories and conquests.
But let not him that putteth on his armour, bonaf like him that putteth it of. We must confess, that our lofty thoughts have been thrown down, and that our dream of uninterrupted prosperity is at an end. We are moR unexpectedly engaged in a war with the most powerful nationrin the world, the termination and consequences of which it is impossible to foresee. Ourbefl hopes of being soon relieved from it are, under God;
derived from that' spirit of diflenfion and anarchy which prevails atong them, and their total renunciation of those religious and moral principles which bind men together, and their actual commiflion of every dreadful crime, that can provoke the Almighty, and make his foul depart from them.

How we have brought upon ourselves so great a calamity, is a fubjecd of serious inquiry on such a day. Our fins are the cause; nothing else can interrupt the course of divine favour.
Let me briefly mention such as are most likely to bring upon us the dire calamities with which the prophet threatens the Jews. The First I shall mention is, our ingratitude to God, by whom we have been so highly favoured, and our spirit of murmuring and discontent.

HERE, if your time allowed me, I might enu merate the many national dangers we have efcaped, and the many blessings we enjoy. I might delineate that admirable constitution of government, the work of ages, the result of the wisdom and courage of our forefathers, by means of which we enjoy freedom and security, both personal and political, beyond any nation under heaven. I might dwell on the peculiar felicity of this constitution, which has so happily united the three simple forms of government, which has feleded the best parts of each, and balanced them so nicely, that none of them can exceed its limits, because they are all defined by the laws; which laws are enated by common consent, whilst the execution of them is entrusted to a body of judges, separate from and independent of the Legislature. I might remind you of the happy and flourjfihing fiate you have so long enjoyed, and of the Innumerable bleflings which have been conveyed to you through the channels of civil and political order.

WITH such great advantages, with such pe culiar blessings, what might not have been expe&ted from us in gratitude, or required in wife improvement ? but alas! we have not only Wmifemployed our talents, but have provoked God by committing many heinous fins. What gift of heaven have we not abused, turned against the hand that gave it, or perverted from the purpose for which it was given ? Our national prosperity has swelled us with arrogance and pride. We have made our wealth subservient to luxury and dissolute manners. Our liberty has degenerated into the most ungovernable licentioufnefs, and that government of laws in which we gloried with so much justice, we have to the utmost of our power subverted, by our contempt of all the restraints of law.

BUT not only have we shown our ingratitude to God, by the abuse of his blessings, but by murmuring and discontent, and even by denying the exijence of those bleflings, which of all offences is the most provoking to a benefactor.

MANY among us have listened to the false assertions of those who having nothing to lose, either of charaSter or property, hage been long endeavourihg to make the populace of this country believe, that they are more wretched'than any nation; that their natural rights are withheld' from them, and their acquired privileges torn away; that they are opprefled with intolerable taxes; that their King iS-a cruel tyrant; their nobles' degenerate and fe'Vile and base; in short, that they are wholly ruined and uidone; every one of which bold aflertidns ate false or greatly exaggerated.

FOR, with refpe't to taxes, which no doubt have been increase'd, by means of the wars in which we were engaged, with the almost unanim'ous consent, however, of the nation, yet the most prudent care has been taken, that they shall as little as possible assec the labouring poor; for it has been demonstrated, that a person in that condition, if he lives with becoming frugality, has not to pay in taxes for all he purchases during a whole year, above the value of the wages of five days labour. It is true, that the price of some' of the necessaries of life is railed; but that rife, it must be observed, bears but a very fnrall proportion to the rife of the wages of labour. Whilst some of the most common articles of living are not at all raised, and some only by a third or a fourth, you must admit, that the wages of labour in every infiance has been doubled, which has mended your situation much more than could have been imagined by any one who had not been a witness, (as I have been), how your fathers and grandfathers lived before you. ·

No better foundation has that reproach, with which the enemies of our peace and happiness endeavour to irritate the minds of the commons against their superiors, particularly the Order of nobility, by traducing them as infamous for vices of every kind, and especially for pride and inhumanity. Nothing can be more contrary to truth than this assertion. The nobility of Britain have their faults, because they are men.
But I will be bold to fay, that their characers in general, will fland a comparison with those of any other order of men in the kingdom, for many of the prime qualities of man, particularly for a delicate sense of honour, a nice regard to probity and truth, and a generous beneficence and kindness to the human race. As for luxury and prodigality, and debauchery, the common vices of the opulent, you know that the nobles are often far outdone by those who are many degrees their inferiors, who assec to imitate the manners of their betters, without having any of their virtues to dignify or reitrain them. Were we to search into and enumerate the vices of the poor, you would find that catalogue still larger, and of a deeper dye. But charity disposes us to cover theirJins, till they become so clamorous againft all who are above them, as to provoke justice and truth to retaliate in its own defence.

SUCH are the insidious devices by which the enemies of our happiness endeavour to prepare your minds for the total overthrow of fubordination, the subversion of property, and the introduction of universal anarchy. No wonder they are so bold, when they have not even spared our most gracious King, the pattern of every private virtue, whose reign is the acknowledged model of mild and legal government ?

Afecond fin, which, if carried to excess, mult produce the greatest national calamities, is a spirit of faction and party.

A party spirit is inseparable from our free con rtitution, and when kept within due bounds, is salutary to the state; for a prudent jealousy of sovereigns and ministers keeps them anxiously on their guard, not to infringe the rights of the people, and raises a nice feeling of liberty, and a vigilance against encroachments in the minds of all. But when this party spirit becomes sac tious, tious, when it sets no bounds'tb its oppofitidn, let the measures' be ever fb necessary, then it' encourages dfapffetion andfedition, which are'nibft likely to end in revolt'and'rebellion. Happy and rever'd be tbofe diJingui/hed Patriots who have been able to draw the line between falutary.opposition and dangerous fation, who have withdrawn from their' ancient afibciates; when they thought their country and: the conflitttion in peril, and have thereby opened' the eyes of their niimerous friends, who look up -to them for an example.

NOT so the deluded party among the Corm mons, or rather ihould I call them, the Determined Band of dark Conspirators, who first ap.
peared by expressing their harmless with for a Reform, which they did not understand, and then, under the specious name of the Friends of the People, to attract the multitude; and lastly, when they became more daring, after the French had declared war, and promised them assistance, when they assumed the proud Title of the Britih Convention, with the avowed purpose of forming a league among the people;
for overturning the constitution, and introducing such a republican anarchy as that of France. The civil magistrate at last took the alarm, and with that justice which the danger called for, and :the laws authorised, have in, flited deserved punilhment on some of the ringleaders.

AND now it were madness in the extreme, for any such enemies of their country, openly to ihew themselves, till such time as their boasted deliverers arrive. In the mean time, it is your duty to be jealous and vigilant, to discover their secret counsels, and to watch their first motions; for if their designs are successful, what man is there among us, who has but even a cottage he can call his own, whose property, or person, or life, would be secure for a day?
And for what is it that this dreadful overthrow is to be effeted? Equality of rights we fully possess already. The King is not more secure in his right to his palace, than the labourer to his hut: And for preferment, there is but one ltation in the kingdom, (which is the throne, for the fake of public peace), to which the loweft person in it may not successfully aspire, if he has ambition and ability. It is then the levelling principle that atuates there men. It must be equality of property that they aim at.
But this plan cannot be carried through, without the utmost violence and injustice, and cruelty and bloodshed. And how long will such equality last, after it is obtained ? Only while anarchy and war prevail. When they subside, and whenever peace and permanent government are eftablilhed, property must be again secure;
and whenever that is the cafe, a few will become rich, and many will remain poor, as it has been since the beginning, and will continue to the end of the world.

A third fin which gives room and occasion for the last mentioned, is the disregard of the public, and the extinction of the love of our country.

THIS is an evil that precedes the fall of na tions. While the love of a country remains in vigorous exertion, the fate of empires must at least be suspended, for it is the most unconquerable of all the passions. But unless when.zeal has been excited by a seditious spirit, with dangerous views, there has been such a total indifference about public good, openly avowed by some, and initilled into the populace by filch insidious arts, that this pristine virtue seems to be loft altogether, and buried in felfifhnefs and avarice. In great empires, such as ours, with all the arts of life in perfection, and the most flourifling commerce, luxury makes rapid progrefs, and corrupts the manners of men. All ranks pursue pleasure, and the gratification of vanity, with impetuous desire; and to fulfil that desire, seek after wealth and riches with a rage that seems to approach to madness. They lose fight of the public in the midst of those interested views, and there seems not to be one noble, generous, and difintereited person in the world.

THIS general itate of society gives occasion and encouragement to the ambitious and designing, not only to palliate their own vices, but to seduce the multitude to become their tools, by making things seem worse than they are.
Till at last that portion of intelligence and virtue, which the Almighty has infused into all nations, breaks forth in times of imminent danger. The few wife and good, who love mankind and their country, are roused into exertion.
The latent sparks of the patriotic fire are excited. The multitude arrested with her words of truth and soberness, as happened so lately in this affrighted land, awake from their delusion, and faction detected, abaihed and terrified, shrinks back into the gloomy caves of sedition from whence file sprang.

THE fourth and InJa fin which I shall men.
tion, by which we may provoke the Almighty to make his foul depart from us, Is the abuse of our religious privileges.

WERE we to take a view of the History of our Church, we should find abundant reason to bless the interpofinghand of Heaven on many occasions.
From the first dawn of the Reformation, we had in this part of the united kingdom, the most violent itruggles to maintain against the civil power, as neither the vices nor virtues of our Princes, were interested in our behalf. And even after our Sovereigns were of the Reformed church, they had retained such an aversion to our mode of worlhip and government, that we endured the fire of persecution through the greater part of las century, and yet we were not consumed.

AND when it pleased God in his mercy to fend us a deliverer at the Revolution, to free us from slavery and arbitrary power, he at the fame time did not forget this suffering church, but directed that wife prince to yield to the wilhes of a zealous and faithful people, and to re-establish our favourite form of worship and church-government amongst us. From that happy period, we date our religious as well as our civil freedom; for then it was that toleration first introduced true religious liberty.

BUT alas! have we not abused this precious boon from heaven, so much wiihed for, and at first so much prized, either by our neglect of it, or by endless and fantastical divisions ! As there is now no outward constraint, some have taken advantage of that, and so live, as if they difavowed the obligations of religion. The influence of bad example has but too much descended amongst the lower ranks; for there are not a few of those, whose chief consolation formerly lay in the hopes presented by our most holy faith, and who are incapable of refiraint by any other principle, who absent themselves wholly from religious ordinances. :Whilst a greater number substituting their own humour and caprice, in place of reason and conscience, have separated from those societies of Chriflians, to which they were originally joined, without examination and without just cause; and itrange to tell, it is chiefly among those who think themselves too pure to join with the eftablifnled churches in either division of the realm, that are to be found the most zealous friends of that dreadful tyranny, which has made the renunciation of Christianity their badge of fraternit,, and professed Atheism their test offidelity.

MAY not this neglec of the superior orders, and their imitators, and the wavering difpofition of the multitude in refpea to modes of worShip, be a preparation in Providence for' ome dreadful catastrophe, as the just punishment of such an horrid abuse ? If the higher ranks will -not take warning from the events that have happened so lately, and so near them; if they will not use their influence and example for the preservation of those religious principles which they confess to be the great bond of society, and the chief guardian of morality, they muf be left to feel the effects of their own infatuation. The judgments of God, unless prevented by a change of manners, must proceed with unrelenting energy and effect: For if Jerqfalem will not be inflrusted, his foul Jhall certainly depart from her, THUS, as I proposed, have I briefly delinea ted some of those fins by which God may be provoked to make his foul depart froml us, and consequently expose us to the judgment of becoming desolate, a land not inhabited.

I HAVE only to conclude, by exhorting you to the duties of the day, which are humble supplication, and sincere repentance and amendment.

IN private distress, and in public calamity, the mind of man flies for comfort, and aid and protetion to the Deity, to that everlaJfing arm which only can save. But it is impiety and vice that separate us from God, and piety and virtue that unite us to him. We must lay aside our fins, if we would escape impending judgments. We must perform the duties required, if we would obtain a return of blessings. We muff be fincerely religious, if we would obtain the protection of that God whom we adore. We must love our country, if we would fee her flouriih.
We must lay aside party spirit, ere we can hope for vigorous exertions. We muff quel domeffic sedition, before we can as with one heart and onefoul, or expec to frufirate the machinations or repel the attacks of our enemies. With traitors in our bosom, every danger is doubled. Let us rouse that warlike ardor, for which we have ever been distinguished. Without magnanimity and valour, wisdom and liberty are but empty names. Let usfJandfaft, and quit oulfelves like men, and belirong in the Lord.

Be thou inflruaed, 0 Jerusalem! Let us take warning from the fate of that highly favoured nation, to whom this address was originally diredted, and which, after repeated trials and deliverances, by the most obstinate impenitence, at last finally loft the favour of the Almighty, and was driven from its ancient feat, and continues to this day a wandering people, in confirmation of the prophecies, and as a monument of divine vengeance.

Be thou inJfruted, 0 Jerusalem. Let us look back to the events of last century, and take warning from the fatal experience of our forefathers A Prince of many private virtues, misled by evil counsellors, and the example of some of his predecessors, presumed to at contrary to the laws. A long civil war ensued, in which the King and his party were worfed. They who were uppermost, finding it necefTary for their safety, that the King ihould susser, frustrated all plans of conciliation, and brought him to the block. After a short struggle for a settlement in a republican form, the dispute terminated in a military (djpotimi, when Cromwell the usurper, with an army at his back, reigned for seven years vith a nore arbitrary fw.a' than any monarch i 1.urope. At his death, his iron sceptre fell i. le feeble hands of his son, who held it but for a fewv months, and left the republicans to ct,, 'd once more for their favourite government. .lhe jarring parties, however, could not agree; but in their turns usurped dominion for one year more, in swift succession; the supreme power being thrice changed within that space.
When, at last, by Divine Providence, one wife man, at the head of an army, had the sagacity to provide the only remedy for the diftra&ed state of affairs, and to meet the almost unanimous with of the nation, by calling back to the throne, the heir of the kingdom.

SOME of you well know, that previous to this usurpation, and while it lasted, the fame wild levelling doctrines which of late have poisoned the minds of the people, and the fame frantic plans of government, were disseminated through the kingdom; with this only difference, that the first were intermingled with a high religious fanaticifin, whilst those of our days are pervaded and inflamed throughout, with afanaticifm of a different kind, with thatfor atheism and infedelity. Look back, my brethren, to the bloodshed and tyranny and diftrations of that period, and try, if without the lead provocation, from grievance or encroachment, you can bear the thoughts of having the fame scenes ated over again !

Be thou intru7ed, 0 Jerusalem. Turn your eyes abroad, and be warned and inftrudted by what has befallen our infatuated neighbours in so Short a space of time, and hold fast the plan of government so dearly purchased by our forefathers, and conveyed to us as our most valuable inheritance. Happy was it for us that our conflitution is so firmly eftablilhed in the laws of the realm, and in the affiefions of the people, that it tsood unmoved the first ihock of threatened danger, and that even the rash and inconsiderate have had time to observe in the dire disasters that have befallen our neighbours, what the dreadful consequences must have been to this highly favoured isle, had their plans of innovation been received and executed. The most prejudiced must admit, that this frantic people, not remaining contented with a moderate reform, and a limited monarchy, with which they began, have committed themselves to the unruly direction of a furious mob, who paved their way to power at first by rapine and blood, by the overthrow of all order and subordination, all justice and law, and fill maintain it by the fame iniquitous means, with the addition of Atbeiin profejfed, as any religion must be a check and a rebuke to their impious deeds. Confider the fieps in the broad way to deftrudtion, which they have taken with giganticJirides, and shun them as the gates of hell, for they lead infallibly to perdition.

Be thou inruEted, 0 Jerusalem. As there is not to be found in the annals of the world, such a cruel and bloody tyranny, as for more than eighteen months past has been exercised in that devoted country; if you would not fee your own fertile fields laid waite, and streaming with blood, and the remaining inhabitants driven or carried into foreign lands, let me beseech you, my dear friends, to resist every attempt to introduce such a desolating anarchy among you!
And to this end, you must support this inevitable war with unanimity and vigour, with more than common exertions; for the necessity of the cafe requires them at your hands. In this war, you are not merely to fight for some diflant province, nor in defence of your allies, nor for the support of your trade, nor for the honour of your arms; you are to fight for all that is dearest to man, for your religion and your liberty, and the power of governing yourselves; for, this insolent Convention, if they are able, mean to overturn every government, and to give laws to the whole world.

FINALLY, my brethren, liften to the advice of the wife man, Fear thou the Lord, and honour the King, and 'meddle not with them that are given to change. A sense of religion, and a due reverence for laws and magistrates, are principles inseparably united; and in whose ever breaf they reside, that man will not be greatly moved, by the projects of the idle, or the plots of the wicked. Amen.


PLAIN REASONS, &c.
Fellow-citizens and countrymen,
THE time is at last come, when duty, as well as inclination, obliges me to address myself to you, on a subject of the greatest importance. The liberty of the press is not the least valuable of an Englishman's privileges : and though of no higher rank than a tradesman of the city, I am not afraid to write my thoughts with freedom, and offer you my advice in this bold and public manner. I had the advantage in my youth of being one year an apprentice to an attorney, in which service I contracted a great affection for the constitution and the laws of my country; and although an accident took me out of that honourable profession, yet the early tincture I had received, together with the taste for politicks that prevails so much in the city, have made me apply myself, more than could be expected from one in my station, to the study of public affairs.
I need not explain the pains I have taken to make myself master of the political science, nor point out the means by which I have attained it. Besides the books and pamphlets which are open to all, I have often been admitted into the House of Commons, on extraordinary days, by a door-keeper, who is my customer and particular friend. I have likewise been long happy in the strictest intimacy with the president of a certain club, who has a very profound knowledge in the art of government. He it was, I must confess, who first inspired me with the desire of becoming an author, for he often assured me, that there was a gravity, clearness, and consistency, in my reasoning that surprised him. I was flattered by his good opinion to undertake the present work, which it has cost me no small labour to collect and to arrange. If I shall be so happy as to be of any service to you, my dear countrymen, the loss of time and of business, nay, even the ruin of my wife and five children, shall not much discompose me.
I have been particularly attentive to a certain great man, ever since he re-assumed his power; and it was not long before I discovered many gross errors in his administration, and perceived the tendency of all his measures to be fatal to his country. But you were then so much dazzled by his splendid pretensions, so infatuated by his eloquence, and so elevated with a few trifling successes, that the attempt would have been vain to call you back to moderation and common sense : but happily for you, the case is now altered. A single event has opened your eyes. An old lieutenant g----l has broke the charm. A dreadful miscarriage on the coast of France, which you could not possibly foresee, has shaken even English constancy: and your ears, thank God, have been open'd to the voice of reason and truth. Those noble patriots who have always secretly opposed the measures of the great pretender to reformation in the state, on the least hint from you, will put themselves in motion. May God grant them courage. in proportion to their other abilities, and we shall soon see them again absolute masters of the K--- and K---- !
To you then, my long deluded country men, and fellow-citizens, do I address myself on the commencement of this necessary storm of F--ct--n. I am a plain man, and one of yourselves ; and I have nothing to fear or to hope for. From me then you may expect candor and impartiallity. In my work you shall certainly find the utmost clearness and perspicuity. I hate the stiff affected stile of our modern writers, which often makes their works of very difficult interpretation; and as for wit and humour, I am bold to say that a man must be without morals who can use them in the present desperate state of his country.
To give you at once a proof how much I abhor hints and insinuations as mean and dastardly arts, I will open up to you, without reserve, the full extent of my design, which is to convince you, if I can, that the right honourable W---- P---, esq; one of his M----y's Sec----y's of state, is a m-----r extremely dangerous to his country, and to lay before you, a few plain reasons for removing him from his m----y's presence and councils for ever. As sanguine as my hopes of success are, it is possible they may be disappointed. But whatever be the event, as my intention is sanctified by the sincere love of my country, after this effort to save it, I shall, at least, enjoy that peace and contentment of mind which arise from the faithful discharge of one's duty.
Before I proceed, I must beg that the honourable m----rs of both h----s of p----t may not think themselves neglected, because I have not addressed myself to them in particular. I would not willingly offend any true-born Englishman, and far less such respectable persons ; but as I am certain that the love of their country is their ruling passion, and that many of them have private motives, besides, to wish for the downfal of this proud and irregular m----r ; I will leave them to the influence of these moral causes, and if they should prove too weak in the breast of any scrupulous m----r, let him swallow such of my plain reasons as he likes best, and they will infallibly cure him of all his scruples.
My first reason for removing W---- P--- esq; from his M----y's presence and councils for ever, is because he his the minister of the people.
THE fact is notorious, that without par---tary interest, against the inclinations of the c--t, and in oposition to a powerful f--ct--n, Mr. P--- was raised by the voice of the people alone, in time of danger, to the high station he now fills. I do not say that he is now as disagreeable to certain illustrious personages as he was at first; for there are some who give out, that he is as artful in gaining private esteem as in acquiring public confidence, But I affirm, that, besides the affront given by their country to so many greater and abler men, by this piece of ill-judged distinction, which must breed an eternal resentment against his person and administration, the voice of the people may be considered as a kind of undue influence on the S--v--r--n, and other members of the Leg--sl--t--re, and is therefore highly illegal and unconstitutional. If former m---s have acquired dominion over P--ts by corruption, which has been loudly complained of, I do not see that we are in any better condition now, when the same kind of power is attainable by means of the people's blind admiration of magnanimity, and the vain glory which arises from an obstinate pursuit of popular measures.
But there is a greater evil behind than any of those I have mentioned: for if the m--r follows the example of his great predecessors in power, he will be ever ready to comply with the humours and interested views of those who have raised him. As this man, therefore, was raised by the people, it is to be feared that he will study to preserve their favour, and in all his measures pay regard to the genius and interest of the people of England, which, God knows, has been often found very inconsistent with maxims of state and the principles of modern policy. I will make this as clear as the light of day, by en instance.
I could mention the habeas corpus bill, and the act for encouragement of seamen, which are exactly in point; but as these are past transactions, they would confine me strictly to fact, which is a very great restraint to an ingenious author. I chuse therefore to rest my proof on something that is future, though not in the least uncertain : let us suppofe then Mr. S----y P--t to be as successful in the conduct of the war as your hearts can desire; yet when he comes at last to treat about peace, is it to be expected that he will offer our enemies such terms as they can possibly agree to? Will he not stand too much upon the honour of England? Will he not scruple to make such reasonable concessions as may be necessary for the trade and naval power of our enemies? Will he not insist on our preserving such conquests as may prevent the encroachments of France in all time coming? And will he not, by his unseasonable obstinacy, hinder us from obtaining such a kind of peace, as has hitherto been the end of all our wars, successful or usnuccessful? It is plain then that his being the m---er of the people threatens ruin to England.
Were it possible for him to remain in power till the conclusion of the war, I am confident the King of France will insist on it as a preliminary article, that he be compelled to resign his office, and leave the management of the negotiation to men of cooler heads, who understand and regard the interest of Europe more than he does. Let us dismiss him ourselves, that it may never be said to the disgrace of the English nation, that we have yielded to the desire of a tyrant. And, indeed, I have no doubt, that before I have done, I shall open such a cry against this presumptuous darling of the people, as will soon bring him down from his lofty height, to the private station from whence be rose, which is the proper sphere of an inhuman and untractable virtue.
Another reason for dismissing Mr. P--t, is because he was a chief promoter of the militia.
IT is evident, that in this respect, he acted his part well as a m---r of the people. No-body, almost, had ever dared before, seriously to think of a subject so disagreeable to great men in power, and to the worthy gentlemen of the army. Experience had taught the last mentioned, that one British soldier was equal to ten of the militia of France; and on that account, they were solicitous to save us the shame and expence of so useless a body. They hold that fighting is a trade, which no man either can or ought to exercise unless he has served his time to it. Nay, to hear some officers discourse on the subject, one would think there was a secret mystery in shooting and being shot at, (something like the mason-word) which if a man does not know, it is impossible for him to be a warrior.
Whatever is the cause of it, there is no doubt, that in this respect, they are extremely zealous for the honour of their country. And so far have they carried their zeal, as I have been told, that when a wrongheaded Yorkshire Squire, during the time of the last rebellion, raised a company of voluntiers, at his own expence, and marched them into the North, some of the good-natured Off—rs of the ar—y, took all the pains in their power, (without leading the man into private quarrels, which might have been dangerous to themselves) to disgust him at the service ; in which, at last, they happily succeeded.
I know it has been often said that a standing army is unconstitutional and dangerous. And such as our army was at the beginning of the war, it was certainly thought improper or insufficient for the defence of this island ; for we sent for many thousand foreign troops to secure us against the invasion. Fear seized the people. Some were afraid of the invasion, and some of the foreign mercenaries; but the whole nation called for arms, as their forefathers always had done upon the like occasions, arms were offered them; but, happily for the nation, they had changed their minds. The danger was over, and they had recovered their senses again: and let it never be forgotten for the honour of England. The people rejected those very arms, with disdain, which they so lately demanded with clamour; and thereby gave the noblest proof of a delicate love of liberty that is to be found in all the annals of mankind.
I have heard of a people called the Cappadocians, somewhere in the East, or on the coast of Africk, who, in the times of the Romans, refused liberty when it was offered them; but then it is probable, that they had no hope of obtaining the use of arms, without which their liberty would have only served to keep them in perpetual terror of their warlike neighbours. Whereas the English, in full possession of liberty, the freest people upon earth, refused arms when they were offered them, because to accept of them would have betrayed a suspicion that the liberty of so brave a people could ever be in danger.
It has been said that there is a noble band of patriots behind the c—rt—n, on whose part neither vigilance nor zeal are wanting to frustrate the schemes of the mender of the state ; and to their artifices the miscarriage of the militia act has been ascribed. But as I am conscious of my own abhorrence of arms, especially of firelocks, I cannot give these great men (whom I honour) the praise I think due to the people of my native land. It has been reported too, that the m---r and his friends are very indifferent about the milita act, in the form in which it now stands. If that is the case, I could almost wish it were put in execution ; for if he ever has power to carry through an act of his own, the good Lord have mercy upon us! There will not then be a shop-keeper of us all, but must stand four or five hours a week under arms, and perhaps on great days be obliged to shoot. Rather than suffer such an encroachment on liberty and property, I will give my consent to surrender the island to the French or the Germans.
There is nothing in the world, let me tell you, my dear friends and countrymen, that would provoke me to fire a gun, and I confess it was this same militia act which first put me on my guard against this bold and dangerous m---r. There was something so romantick and daring in his attempt to arm a free people, that I began to suspect he was very wrongheaded. Besides the ills I have mentioned, this act is fraught with a thousand more that I have not time to enumerate. The few following will serve as a sample. The milita act, in process of time, would have made the landed-interest an overmatch for the moneyed-interest, under which we have been so long happily governed : and then a Lord or a 'Squire would have been a greater man than the greatest stockjobber in London. It would have infallibly destroyed the game, and lost us the glory of being the finest sporting country in the world. By doubling the number of warlike men, it would have exposed our wives and daughters to double danger, and, which is worst of all, it would have diminished the public credit, because all Europe would have thereby perceived that we were not in a condition to maintain a sufficient standing army.
My third reason for humbling this haughty m---r, is, because he harrasses the army beyond all example.
HIS predecessors in power either collected the military force of Great-Britain round the capital, where, cantoned in towns and villages, or encamped on some of the wholesome Downs, they waited peaceably for a foreign invasion; in which situations the officers of distinction had the full enjoyment of all the pleasures of life, as became free Britons; and did no duty but what conduced to health, and served to whet their appetites for delicate food, beautiful women, and moderate play: or, at the worst, they were sent over in a body to the plains of Flanders, to wage regular war under generals of ability, for the glory of their country, and to maintain the ballance of power. But our new conductor of the war has altered the whole system, and made a commission in the army as intolerable as a place in the gallies of France, or a station in Bridewel. For not to mention his sending the half of our troops to North-America to be scalped by Indians, or blown up by the more perfidious French, and those devils the Canadians ; has he not for many months been contriving and executing expeditions to the coast of France, for no apparent reason but to vex, fatigue, and harrass our troops, and especially those pretty gentlemen the o--rs of the g---ds, beyond what they are able to bear? The man, as I have discovered in the course of my reading, was once an officer of the light horse himself, so that it is very difficult to conceive, what can excite his rage so much against his own order.
If I have any notion of the military art, the great object of it is the preservation of the army; and from the minutes of several courts-martial, which I have lately perused, I have learned that the safety of his majesty's troops was formerly not only the m---r's, but the g- -n-r-l's chief care in the conduct of the war. But, if this man be suffered to proceed, at the rate he has begun, for one year longer, I am really of opinion that no man above the rank of a colonel will remain in the army. And what will become of an army without generals? It is needless to explain. Many of the most antient and respectable officers have already declined the service; and such an universal discontent prevails among them, that I tremble for the approach of that hour, when the whole hoary band, who, like the venerable lions on the heads of our hips, have stood so many storms of battle, and cut their way through so many seas of blood, hall, with one consent, lay down their truncheons at the feet of their master. For my part, I would rather be a shoe-black, or rake the kennels for hobnails, than serve as a l--t or m--r g--l under such an enterprising and expedition making min---r.
I do confess, my dear countrymen, that, upon this subject, I cannot keep my temper: It is not the great men themselves I so much regret, for most of them, thanks to the discerning spirit of our former m---rs, and the gratitude of their country, are able to live independent of the service; and the remainder, if they please, will find refuge and rest in the armies of the monarch of Prussia. But, it is the service itself, it is the conduct of our future armies, it is the honour of my country, that makes me so earnest on this part of my subject.
In the name of all the powers of war, why was he not contented with the miscarriage of the expedition in the year 1757? Why must he contrive new projects to stamp the names of the commanders of that famous year, and the great things they might have done, still deeper on the memory of the public ? Had he any reason to think that there were abler or better men than they upon the lists, or men who had the honour and interest of their country more at heart? No, it is evident his design must have been to ruin the army altogether, by contriving impossible descents upon the coast of France, or such as are worse than impossible.
It is very true that the shipping at St. Maloes have been burnt, and the bason of Cherburg blown up; and it is possible too, that 50,000 troops have been detained on the coasts, who, but for our alarms, had been on the banks of the Rhine. But did we not lose 300 men at St. Cas? And is not the life of a single British soldier of more value than a thousand wooden ships, or ten thousand bulwarks of stone? And as for the detaining of 50,000 Frenchmen at home, I rather compute that as loss. For besides that France had the advantage of their pay, which would have been spent in Germany but for our invasions; if so great a number of troops had joined their army in Westphalia, they would have been much more streightned for provisions, and the victory at Crevelt would have been still more glorious.
But great and unaccountable as our loss was, in the late descent upon the coast of France, there is one circumstance relating to that expedition which gives me more pain than the loss we have sustained. A circumstance which, if foreseen by the m---r as barely possible, there is no punishment he does not deserve. It is this; That since the days of the Edwards and the Henrys the English have had no opportunity of fighting the French upon equal terms in their own country, till the 10th or 11th of last September. I tremble when I think of the imminent danger our army escaped. A g-----l after the m----r's own heart would have certainly fought. With an English P--ce once more on French ground, with the fortune and valour of another Edward on his side, he would have seized the glorious opportunity, which the chance of war brings round in 500 years. He would have fought, and what would have been the consequence? If we may believe in past examples of the like situation, and in the acknowledged bravery of our troops, it is more than probable he would have been victorious. He would have embarked at his leisure, and returned in triumph; and next summer we should have made war exactly in the same manner; a thing, as I have shewn, utterly disagreeable to all the great o--rs, and pretty g-tl-m-n of the army. I do assure you, my dear friends, the very thoughts of the hazard we run of making a Cressy or an Agincourt of it, has kept me awake many a night; and my indignation against P--t is raised in proportion to the number of sleepless hours he has cost me. Let us thank heaven, which better directed our g---l ; had he yielded to his own stupid impetuosity or listened to the advice of one rash c---l, we had been undone by success. But the guardian angel of Britain interposed, in her well known shape, of a council of war. We turned our backs, and the enemy gave us a kick in that side which was turned to them, and all such idle expeditions are at an end forever.
But what have been the consequences of this war of alarms, expeditions and enterprizes? Has it not produced things strange and unheard of in the island of Britain ? Have not upstarts and beardless boys gained some name in the army? Heretofore it was age, and long service in the field of war, or of St. St--ph--n's; it was a modest deference to the opinions, and an implicite submission to the will of their superiors (which are the great principles of military discipline) that procured men preferment in the army. But now, to be impudent enough to talk of battles and of sieges, to have what they call a genious for war, as if a man could be born a general any more than he could be born a button-maker: and when in the field to have minded something besides their platoons or battallions (which is absolutely contrary to good discipline) these, and such as these, are now the chief qualities that recommend a man to favour and preferment.
A fourth reason against Mr. S---y P--t is, because he sets himself in opposition to the established manners of the age.
THE clergy, it is true, whose trade it is, and a few half-thinking dry moralists, have been long declaiming against the excessive luxury of the times; but it is well known to every considerate citizen of London, that without luxury this nation were undone. What is it that supports foreign trade but luxury? What promotes the quick circulation of property but luxury? How are the industrious poor to be maintained, but by supplying all the necessities which luxury alone creates to the rich? It would be tedious to go round the circle by which it can be demonstrated, that there were no hopes of ever being able to pay the national debt but by the encouragement and growth of luxury. And it would be as needless as tedious, because every reader will perceive the truth of the proposition with half an eye.
Now I am credibly informed that the present m----r keeps but a very moderate table, has but a very few servants, and indeed sees but very little company; in short, that he copies the simplicity of antient manners, and is so odd as to divert his leisure hours, if he has any (for that is uncertain) in reading of books, or with a chosen friend or two and his own wife and children. Whence I conjecture that he is either covetous or has a slow understanding, or really designs to discourage luxury by his example. That the first is not his case, I will do him the justice to allow, because he has sometimes shewn a very foolish prodigality, some instances of which I shall probably mention hereafter. I rather incline to think that he is a man of very slow understanding, and is obliged to see little company, that he may have the more time to plod on the affairs of the state. For that the business of this great nation, can be carried on with very little expence of time, or of thought, to men of ability, is manifest from the example of many of his predecessors. And that he is a man of very limited parts, appears farther from the choice he has made of a great many bl-kh-ds to serve under him at several of the boards. For it is very remarkable that his chief favourites are those, who, like himself, are seen very little in public places, and are all day long to be found puzzling their heads in their respective offices.
But stupidity itself can never account for the scantiness of his table, and the plainness of his equipage ; for there is nothing to hinder dulness itself from living in great splendor even in solitude. It is therefore plain that he not only wants capacity, but has formed an absurd design to discourage good living by his example. And since this is really the case, it is amazing that the trading part of this nation can hear is name mentioned with patience. For besides the hurt he intends to do the industrious tradesman, and merchant, by drying up the great source of their gains, this scheme will put an end to their desire of riches, since, if it succeeds, it will be next to impossible for them to find a bankrupt lord, with whom to marry their daughters.
The man is subject to the gout, and an abstemious diet may be necessary for his health. But would he feed all England on boil'd beef because he must live on water-gruel? Or is it so rare a thing for great persons to live in the midst of pleasures which they cannot enjoy? Eating and drinking have been useful instruments of government ever since it was formed, and I hope in God it shall not be in the power of any single m---r to bring them into discredit. The more I think of the unreasonableness and unjustice of this part of his conduct, the more I am persuaded that his administration cannot possibly last. I know the constitution of the city of London, and the method of managing business there; and I may be allowed to have some little notion of the influence of turtle and of venison. But in the mean time, alas! the figure of the nation must sink in the eyes of foreigners, much more than he can raise it by his vaunting expeditions ; for our feasts were become the wonder and envy of all Europe. In this respect we had arrived at a high pitch of glory. We excelled all the modern world, and came the nearest of any nation to that delicacy of taste and profusion of expence which was exhibited by the great emperors and senators of Rome in their private entertainments.
I need hardly mention gaming, a branch of luxury encouraged by able statesmen, as of infinite service to a great nation, as it occasions a brisk circulation of money, sharpens the genius of young men of fashion, and breeds them to business, disengages them from the pursuit of bad women, or indeed of any women whatever; entirely roots out the love of wives or children, and breaks all the bonds of friendship ; affections that often interfere with their duty to the public; and by bringing them by times into necessity, not only hardens them against misfortunes, but fits them above all things for the service of the state. But our new statesman, it is certain, never plays; and it is whispered, that, in this respect, he is imitated by a few young people of great fortunes. It is easy to foretel what will happen if he continues long at the head of our affairs; a race of independent lords and gentlemen will arise, under his influence, who may disturb the tranquillity of the state, and possibly overturn it. And this prophecy will appear to be but too well founded, if you'll confider,
Another reason I have for pulling down this lofty m---r, that is, because in his fortune we have seen an example of the height to which a man may rise by eloquence and magnanimity.
I Remember that a good many years ago, I heard it affirmed by a leading member of the royal society, that the very end of eloquence, is, by an artful address to the imagination and passions, to mislead the understanding. And ever since that time, I have been of opinion that a man of true probity would no more give ear to an orator, than a person of chastity would fasten his eyes on a harlot. Truth is always naked, and when any thing assumes her name, and at the same time appears dressed out with many gaudy ornaments, you may be sure it is not truth, but falshood. I might appeal to your own experience, fellow-citizens, and ask you if you have not been oftner cheated and befooled by those we call well-spoken men, than by all the world besides? The use of eloquence, therefore, upon any occasion, must be highly immoral.
I have read, somewhere or other, in a book of history, that it was the custom of some antient city, for the sherriffs to hear causes and pronounce sentence in the dark ; lest, I suppose, the persons or the behaviour of the parties should have prejudiced the judges in their favour, and inclined them to pervert justice. And if partiality can make its way into the mind of man by the eye, there is nothing to hinder it from entering there by the ear also. When you have a bad cause before any of the courts of law, do you not employ that counsellor who is the best pleader and has most eloquence ? And for what reason? Why surely, that by his false and deceitful glosses you may persuade the judge out of his senses, and sway him to favour your side of the question. And for what other reason can it be, but on account of its immorality, that some of our most pious and learned b-sh-ps, and a great part of the clergy, have totally laid aside the use of eloquence as unbecoming the chair of truth and gravity?
It is to me matter of great wonder, how the wisdom of this nation can permit the debates in parliament still to be carried on by the speeches of the members. I am sure it would be infinitely better if each of them delivered his opinion in writing, on a lip of paper, which the clerk might collect into a box, which box Mr. Speaker could carry home in his coach, and then discover the sense of the majority over a bottle of wine at his leisure ; as we are told the king of Prussia always does when he calls a council of war. Many advantages would accrue from this method of debating, for it would preserve that equaltiy among the members which is essential to our constitution; it would prevent the discovery of many important secrets of government; by those blabbing fellows who are always giving themselves airs : it would save the nation an immense sum that is laid out for speaking; and, which is not of the least importance, it would let them home to their dinners before three o'clock, and put an end to that heathenish custom of turning night into day.
After having said so much against eloquence, the application of it to my present purpose, shall be very short. It is generally thought that this fame Mr. P--t, whose power gives me such concern, not only excells all of our own age and nation in that bewitching eloquence which overpowers the mind, but comes the nearest of any modern to Cicero and Demosthenes, those greatest masters of the art of speaking which the antient world has to boast of. If it were now lawful to believe in sorcery and enchantment, I should certainly be of opinion that this arch-orator is in compact with the devil ; for a very reasonable and good man once told me that when Mr. P--t was got to his height in one of his great speeches, he verily thought that the parliament house (which is as large as many of the churches in the city) was shrunk to the dimensions of an ordinary closet. I could have no conception of what my friend meant, if he had not explained himself by adding, that if the assembly of the Gods, which heathen authors talk so much of, could be convoked again, or if all the kings and emperors of the earth, with all their retinues, could meet in some vast place like the amphitheatre of Vespasian at Rome, the dignity of such an assembly could not surpass the greatness of the man, and the power and splendour of his eloquence.
And having told you this story, the article of magnanimity will need little illustration ; because all good authors, who have wrote upon the subject, lay it down as a principle, that to excel in eloquence a man must have this quality likewise. For my own part, I do not see the connection, for I know several sneaking fellows who are exceedingly well spoken. Be that as it may, our statesman is none of these, and all men allow that by these two talents alone he has arrived at the summit of power. And this, I must insist upon it, is a very dangerous example, that may be remembered for a century to come. When ambitious young men have discovered this new road to preferment, they will certainly take into it if they can. Eloquence will become their favourite study, and they will wholly neglect all the other arts that are so ornamental to human life, and so honourable to their country; as neither horse-racing, nor coach-driving, nor bruising, nor cocking, nor any other species of gaming, can be of the least use in acquiring eloquence, they will abandon them for ever. O England! O my country!
But this is not all, for magnanimity, when rightly interpreted, signifies a stubborn and unyielding temper; a mind insensible of the charms of riches, or of pleasure ; it signifies a proud and disdainful spirit, that is uncapable of complying, and will hold on its own course through poverty and disgrace, or even death itself; and if the youth of this nation are to be trained up in such principles, judge ye, my dear fellow-citizens and countrymen, how it will be possible to govern it, there is but one remedy, and that is in your hands. It was you who raised him, and you must e'en pull him down again; with unanimous voice you must petition the k--g to remove him from his presence and councils for ever; and so shall you infallibly draw off our young nobility and gentry from the study of pernicious arts. For as the wise man says in the Proverbs, "though the man of understanding will not always take advice, yet even the fool will take warning."
Another reason for dismissing Mr. S--y P--t, is, because he is a great encourager of learning.
IF the man himself is truly learned, I will venture to pronounce that he is altogether unfit to be prime m--r of Great Britain. For I have known many scholars, and have never yet met with one who could so much as comprehend the course of exchange, and much less understand all the dark mysteries of the art of stock-jobbing. And how a scholar of a m--r shall be able to settle the ways and means, and with the help of his Greek and Latin go through all the perplexing mazes of the funds and finances, is quite unexplicable to me.
I have heard, indeed, that there are certain inferior m--rs to whom the care of those important branches are committed, and in whose honesty, as well as skill, our great man has implicite faith. But I have my own doubts, that men of his chusing will be too like himself, fine florid holiday declaimers, but quite uncapable of doing real business. Or if they are indeed men of business, I laugh much at their pretences to honesty in that strict sense some odd people now affect to use the word. We of the city know what it is to have the handling of money, and it is impossible to convince us that any one, but a fool, can let millions pass through his hands, as if they were so many sea-shells, or dead lies for the British Museum.
I heard a pleasant instance of our great man's learning, given, not long ago, in a coffee-house by a smart Oxonian, who thought he had hit on something extremely clever. "At last," says he, "we have got a man of learning and parts, who has read the antients, and avails himself of his reading, at the head of our affairs. It would have been long ere any of our statesmen of Arthur's College, who never read any books but Hoyle and Demoivre, had discovered the true method of making war upon France but Mr. P--t has learned from Thucidydes, the prince of historians, in what manner the small state of Athens exerted its naval powers and by expeditions and descents became the most formidable republick of all Greece." "And it would have been long," replied old slyboots, from a corner, “ere the able statesmen you despise would have contrived such a ridiculous and impracticable lottery as that of the year fifty-seven." The Oxonian grumbled something in contempt of the noble science of calculation, then strutted to the other end of the room and called for coffee.
What ground they have for it is more than I can tell ; but it is certain that many of the wits at our end of the town, plume themselves not a little on the learning and taste of the m---r, as if there were an hundred poet laureats to be appointed in a year or two. They tell you that if you look back through the history of the human mind (a book that I have searched for in vain through the whole city) you will find that great genius's always come in flocks to any country like the birds of passage ; and that if you have seen one, you may be sure that more will very soon appear. They quote certain periods of time, which in a certain jargon of their own, they call by the name of Siecles ; and they flatter themselves that such a period is now begun, which will prove a perfect golden age to poets, painters, architects, and fiddlers. If these are the genius's they are so fond of, for my part, I should be very glad to see them all fairly on t'other side of the channel, except one. I mean that excellent artist who built the Mansion-house with its Egyptian hall, and the noble row of lamps all along the magnificent entry. That solid edifice I confess is worthy of the chief magistrate of so great and opulent a city, for there is not a single chimney in the house but I'll be sworn, has more marble in it than any five of their boasted tombs in Westminster abbey. And it would make me extremely happy to have the opportunity of drinking a glass with the worthy gentleman, who, I hear, comes to town every year, and dines at a tavern hard by the Mansion-house, merely for the pleasure of p-ss-ng against the wall of the hugest and most ponderous house In the world.
But to return to my subject, and to tell truth, what alarms me most, is that this m--r and some more of the same stamp are openly protected by the ap-- suc-- And indeed what may not such desperate men as those attempt? If they have warmed the young ---'s heart with a romantick love of the constitution, and filled his head with whimsical ideas of patriotism and virtue, it will be utterly impossible for the able statesmen of the old-mould ever to come into power again.
Amidst my fears for the confusion of our finances, and the decay of our trade under such an administration, I have still one ground of comfort, and that is, that a very small part of what is given out, may only be true. I'll tell you all the reason I have for this hope. You know that the learned and egregious Dr. Br--n, in the second vol. of his Estimate, has drawn a character of Mr. P--t, which, at first reading, gave me infinite pain, as it confirmed all my fears. For as preacher of the kingdom, the Dr. frequented many of the levees at the court end of the town, and had access there to the best information. But I felt my spirits become gradually lighter as I read on farther, and came to my good friend's character of himself. For as he certainly knows himself much better than he can know Mr. P--t, with the help of all his levee-lights ; and, as in his own character, he has at least given us the cube of the truth, I am willing to believe that with the same measure he has taken to himself, he has also meted to the m--r.
My next reason against Mr. P--t, is, because he has meanly complied with the maxims, and followed the measures of the tories.
EVER since the revolution it has been the constant topick of the tories, and of all the patriots, real and pretended, that the ocean is the British element, that our natural strength lies there, and that if we exert it to the utmost, this island will not only be safe but prosperous. But such as been the vigour and steadiness of our m---rs, that, till now, they never once complied with these absurd maxims of their enemies. This infatuated man is the first who has ever fairly made the experiment; and, as whatever he does, he does with all his might, a few flight essays have not satisfied him, for he has carried on the naval war with so much heat and violence, as to set an example, and establish a precedent that, I am much afraid, will never be forgotten. And henceforth it will be impossible for the best disposed m--r to send over an army of fifty thousand only to the assistance of our dear and faithful allies, while the French have a single ship on the sea, or a fishing-town on the coast. Nay, from what I have observed of this m-—r's conduct, I doubt very much whether or not he would have permitted one battallion to join the army on the Rhine, or granted one shilling to the king of Prussia, if his wiser predecessors had not, on purpose, left our affairs in such a dangerous situation, as made it impossible for him to avoid it.
For has he not, to please those malignant tories and mock patriots, made the navy of England more terrible than ever it has been since the days of Oliver Cromwel the usurper? Has he not employed a force on the ocean that awes and amazes the whole world? Has he not asserted our right to the sovereignty of the sea, and demonstrated that Europe united, is not an over-match for us on that element? In one word, has he not shewn that though it may be proper for a horse to kick with his heels, yet it is undoubtedly prudent in a bull to push with his horns, when he is attacked by his enemies; and thereby brought the old genteel method of kicking in Flanders into too much contempt amongst us. For my part, though I hate the French, yet I could almost with for such a frost in the Channel as has sometimes been seen in the Baltick, that a hundred thousand Normans might walk over to Kent on one of our star-light mornings, and convince the inflexible Mr. Secretary, that even while we have a navy according to his own maritime heart, it is the easiest thing in the world to invade us.
And here I might apply all my former found reasonings against harrassing the army, were not our seamen in general, both high and low, such a parcel of brutes as to count hardships and dangers as nothing, when compared with the honour of the British flag. But though the tars are an unelegant set of mortals, who neither ask nor deserve any pity, yet who can be so hard of heart as not to regret our fine, tall, gallant, ships of war, which are eternally tost upon the boisterous element, and daily exposed to the sweeping hurricane or gnawing worm in the most distant parts of the world, to please a navy-mad m---r and the tories.
It is not long since men of milder tempers, and of a more reasonable and moderate way of thinking, were at the head of our fleet ; men who had the safety of his m---y's ships very much at heart, and prudently weighed the enemy's metal in scales, ere they proceeded to action. But I don't know how the former system is worn quite out of fashion : and I believe there is now but a very few officers of the navy who would not fight, although they were inferior in weght of metal to the enemy by several pounds. But I think it a matter worthy of the consideration of parliament, whether or not the same rules that take place in horse-racing, should not be extended also to sea-fights; and whether it should not be declared, that if either party carries but an ounce weight more than his antagonist, there is no match at all, or that the one which has overweight shall be the lawful prize of the other.
But to return from this digression, the exerting our utmost force by sea is not the only instance wherein Mr. S--y P--t has shamefully complied with the old maxims of the opposition (and which, by the by, is the strongest proof of his baseness or folly ; for as he was very deep in the opposition himself, he ought, the moment he accepted a place, to have renounced all his old principles and notions, and acted on the plans of his predecessors in power): for he has likewise employed the Highland rebels in the American war. None of his measures have given me greater disquiet than this has done, and I do not think there is any thing like it to be met with in all history.
The rebel Highlanders, according to a former plan, were to have wrought in manufactures, which they hate, and are altogether unfit for, which would have been a punishment somewhat adequate to their crimes ; and whereas one half of their country is almost wholly impassible, the obliging them to carry goods from one part of it to another was treating them as they truly deserved.
But the plan at present in execution, I protest, is more like a reward than a punishment, For although they are sent to America (where I would not chuse to go) yet, the making soldiers of them at all, is indulging the genius of their nation, and rendering them of real service to Britain, which ought, by no means, to have been done. Nay, it is giving them a fair opportunity (which they will certainly take) of regaining the favour of their sovereign by their valour, and of winning back again, for their friends at home, that antient dress, without which, there is no possibility of enduring the rigour of their climate.
It will be said, perhaps, that more than one half of the Highlanders are loyal, and were actually in arms on the side of their king and country in the time of the rebellion, and therefore deserve to be as much encouraged as any other of his majesty's subjects.
For my part, after what has happened with respect to the Highlanders, very few things could give me surprize. It is more than probable that if general Keith had survived the war, it would have been forgot that he had rebelled against his king, when he was fully seventeen years old. Nay, if the good nature and generosity of our new system continue at the rate it has begun, I would not lay the odds, that the old Earl Marshal, as they call him, Keith's brother, will not be recalled, and permitted to die in peace in his own country. But mark it, good countrymen and friends, and lay it up in your memories, that O. M. haberdasher, ventures to foretel, that if these same Highlanders are not all scalped by the Indians, or sold for slaves to the planters of the sugar islands, they will sow the seeds of presbyterianism so deep, and diffuse the spirit of war so wide in North America, that it is two to one if a single colony of them all remain under the British government, so long as the short period betwen the present war, and the year two thousand two hundred and fifty-nine.
My eighth, and last reason, for removing Mr. S--y P--t from his M---y's presence and councils for ever, is, because he is an honest man.
I Am sensible that many of my worthy readers will start at this extraordinary reason, and yet, on mature reflection, they will find it as conclusive as any of the former ; and here I will fairly confess that I heard it five or six times mentioned, before I considered it as any thing else than a piece of raillery against the enemies of the new m---r. But having been lately informed by a friend from the other end of the town, that this is the objection against Mr. S---y P--t that weighs most in the breasts of the far greater number of his wise and honourable opposers; I set down with all the coolness and impartiality of which I am master to consider the force of it. I was soon convinced that there is truth and justice in this objection: and I am well assured I shall be able to prove it to the satisfaction of all my readers.
The first thought that occurred to me in my enquiring into the mischiveous tendency of moral honesty, was the station or profession of the person to whom it is objected. Much is to be learned from that, as you will soon perceive. Be pleased to observe then, that though it be very criminal in a barber to cut your throat, or in an appothecary to give you poison; yet for a highway man to levy your money, or a shoplifter to convey away your goods, or an attorney to perplex and prolong your suit, could not reasonably surprise you, because each of these actions is done in character, and is a part of the respective calling or profession. Now it must be remembered that the person in question is neither a mercer, draper, nor a grocer, but the first m---r of a great nation. And one Machiavel, a most excellent political writer, has established this maxim, that it is impossible to govern a great kingdom to purpose, unless the person governing lays aside all sort of regard to morals, especially to that plebeian virtue, commonly called honesty.
But honesty is the great fault which Mr. P--t's opposers lay to his charge ; and which entirely disqualifies him from ruling the state. They allow that he means well, and is a man of some parts, but then, say they, the rigour of his principles is intolerable. There have been periods, they add, when such kind of men have been useful to a state. In one of the republicks of Greece, for instance, such a man as he would have been a noble bulwark against the torrent of corruption, which drove Greece headlong into the snares of Philip, the Macedonian. Or in the city of Rome, a Mr. P--t might have preserved the freedom of the state, and averted the domination of a perpetual dictator for an age or two longer; or even in the barbarous times of Charles I. his talents might have availed in bridling prerogative on the one hand, and in setting bounds to the rage of privelege on the other. But in the present age, when men and manners are polished to the last degree, when the elegant arts and the softer virtues have refined the human soul; in these happy days of moderate vice and tractable virtue, when evasion having come in place of transgression, men are governed more by love than by fear; and when gratitude for benefits received, and esteem of the benefactors, are more powerful principles than dread of the laws and regard to the constitution ; such a character as that of Mr. P--t is out of its place, it comes not in with propriety; It mars the plot of the play, and therefore ought to be supprest altogether.
Such is the candid language of Mr. P--t's opposers ; and the effects of raising him so unfeasonably to power, are already but too apparent. Not many months ago, patriotism and publick virtue were quite exploded. Experience had taught the nation that these were only ideal qualities that had no existence in nature. None but odd fellows ever so much as named them, except in derision: and all men of sense publickly owned that private interest was their sole pursuit. But of late our coffee-house conversation is set to a new tune; and disinterestedness, and the love of our country, is the burden of the song. Now this is a very great evil, for men of such notions will be very apt to thwart the measures of the government: and it will be extremely troublesome and expensive to the m---r, who hall then govern, to take them off.
Let any man but seriously consider the present state of his great nation, and he will soon come to think with me, that honesty is the most unministerial of all qualities. On this article, instances croud so fast upon me that I am  puzzled to which I shall give the preference. To be a successful minister, a man must have a multitude of friends to assist him, otherwise the wheels of government cannot be kept in motion. And the only sure way of making friends, is to give to every man every thing he asks. But honesty makes a man difficult and nice in his choice and leads him to consider the fitness of persons for offices, which, if made a rule, would probably cut off ninety-nine of a hundred. Honesty would make a m---r endeavour to discharge part of the national debt as soon as possible, lest we should come into the strange modern situation of being a rich people and a poor state. But then what would become of all the worthy money-brokers and stockjobbers, together with the whole children of Israel, who have served the publick for nothing so faithfully and so long? Honesty might excite the m---r to score out all fine cures and pensions from the civil list, and to invent methods of raising the taxes at a cheaper rate. But where would we find such another body of firm and active friends to the court through every rebellion, such brave champions for the administration through every change of min---y? Honesty it is possible, might move the m---r to make the statute-book of the land be copied over in a more legible hand: perhaps he might abridge what is clear, unravel what is perplexed, and omit what is useless, altogether. But then what would become of the venerable body of the law, from the silvertongued counsellor, who rolls in a chariot of state, down to the burrough attorney, who, by indefeasable right, fleeces the lieges around him, to make himself a garment, (I had almost said to build himself a palace) of their wool? And, to mention no more, honesty might tempt a m---r to turn his eyes upon, and stretch his reforming hands, even so far, as our sacred seminaries of learning. But then it is probable they would become academies for the liberal education of gentlemen, and no longer remain cloisters for discipinling monks and friars, which was the original design of their institution.
And if honesty in general be a vice in a m---r, I take that branch of it called disinterestedness to be absolute folly. There is an instance of this kind that has been often boasted of, by some of our great man's half-witted friends. It seems that on the payment of one of the subsidies to a faithful ally, a very handsome sum fell due to Mr. P---t, then pay--r g---l, as a perquisite of his office. But how do you think this haughty man behaved when it was offered him? He disdainfully refused the royal gratuity, and told the astonished Italian, "that the k--g, his master, paid his servants too well, for them to accept of fees from foreign princes.
This story has been spread over Europe. And what do you think foreigners (the Dutch for instance) will entertain of such a statesman? Will not they, and all the world, be under a strong temptation to cheat us to the utmost of their power, while they have to do with such a simpleton of a m---r! Nor is this the only instance of his folly and disinterestedness: for much of the same nature is the tax on places and pensions, which he and his friends and favourites carried through last year with so much applause of the unthinking multitude. But thus do I, and all men of sense, reason upon the subject. "That if the f--ls have so little regard to their own interest, and are so uncapable of managing their own affairs, it is truly shameful to entrust them with the business of the nation."
Before I come to a conclusion it is necessary for me, in justice even to Mr, P--t, (with whom, as a christian, I would chuse to be in charity, though not as a m---r) to make this public declaration, that, although I have used his name all along as the chief and head of his party, and although I know that, generally speaking, one man is the life and soul of all co-partneries, yet I am very far from ascribing all the evils that I have enumerated to him alone. No, there are many others, who, though guilty in a less degree, because they have had less, mischief in their power, yet as they have discovered the same malice of intention as often as they could, are therefore to be considered as his brethren in iniquity, and sharers with him in the same condemnation.
It is high time for me, fellow-citizens, and countrymen, to bid you farewel. I have now disburdened my conscience, and if the nation is ruined, I take you to witness that I have washed my hands of her blood. It is very true that my predecessor in founding the trumpet of alarm, the learned Dr. Br--n, is entirely confuted and discredited by the importance of Britain in the present war; and foreigners, from hence, will learn to look on transactions, and not in books, for the characters of nations: they will learn to distinguish between the genius of a ministry, and the genius of a people ; perhaps they will be convinced that the spirit of a great nation is not always wholly extinguished, when her governors happen to be base, weak, or pusillanimous. But though my latest predecessor has, in the end, been unfortunate enough, yet I know you to well to fear that you will wait till events justify or refute those plain reasons of mine : I mean such of them as are predictive; for the greatest part of them are already confirmed by what is past. In like manner, as you read my learned friend's book with insatiable avidity for many months, and belived every word it contained, I know you will also read and believe mine. And my bookseller will find this little piece such excellent property, that I hope he will give me whatever I ask for my next performаnсе.
But you must speak and act as well as believe, otherwise your credulity is good for nothing. That band of illustrious patriots, whom I have so often mentioned with honour, can furnish you with a man (or with several men) who has been trained up in those principles of sound policy, by which this island has been so long happily governed. A man who has given notorious proof that he possesses none of the unministerial qualities I have so justly ascribed to the present m---r, and to whose character and conduct not one of my reasons will apply, Him you must find, him you must exalt, for such as he, alone, can rescue the state, and save the nation.
I know that Mr P--t and his friends support their spirits with an old prophecy of one Humphrey Oldcastle, esq; who says in a certain place of his book, "Let but one great, brave, disinterested, active, man arise, and he will be received, followed, and almost adored, as the guardian genius of those kingdoms." Hitherto you have acted as if you had been in conspiracy with that old dotard, but after the warning I have given you, I know you will do so no more. To the m---r too, and his daring band of associates, I have directed a threatning, from better authority than Oldcastle's, in my title page ; and lest it should be thought that I bend the sacred text to my own purpose, my bookseller has furnished me with a collateral evidence in a scrap of Latin from the Solomon of Rome ; and bids me tell you, that he hopes you will vindicate the credit of the age you live in, and demonstrate that yet there are times, when
Ob Virtutes certiffimum exitium.
TACIT,
O. M,
Coleman-street, 
January, 1759.Stipend Ministers of Church of Scotland 

A LETTER to a FRIEND S I R, I Have read the Pamphlet you sent me; and sincerely believe, that whoever has advised our Ministers to this unreasonable Demand, has been no personal Friend to them nor their Cause either in Church or State, It is a common Notion, that the Ministers of the Church of Scotland have very small Revenuesi and are ill supported. This appears true to such as are dazzled with the Splendor of the dignified.
Clergy of some Countries: But, on Inquiry, it will.
be found, that the Incomes of our Ministers are not only sufficient, but that they possess a greater Proportion of the Revenues of their Country than any other Protestant Clergy whatever.

It can easily be made appear, that. the whole A mount of the Land and Houses of Scotland possesfed by the Laity, does not exceed L. 820,000 per annum. Our Land-tax, at two Months Cess, a-, mounts to L. i2o0oo: And it is universally known, and I believe will not be contradiced, that, take the Kingdom throughout, two Months Cess amounts to above 3- d. in the Pound of the real Rent: And it will be difficult to find any County in Scotland, which, at eight Months Cess, that is, four Shillings in the Pound Land-tax, does not really pay one Shilling and two Pence. Ad:
mitting this, it follows, that as 14 d. is to 240d.
i. e. one Pound Sterling ; so is L. 48,00oo, our Land-tax, to L. 822,858, the Rent of the whole Land and Houses of Scotland possessed by the Laity. One sixth, or L. 8000, of this, is to be paid by the Boroughs, and is to be confidered as a Tax on Houses or Trade, rather than on Land which being deduEted, as it ought, reduces the real Rent of all the Land in Scotland to L. 685,714.

It is disagreeable to find one's self obliged to publilh this to the World, when Money is at least as much refpeEted as it ever was in former times; and is become the Standard for ascertaining the Value, not only of individual Men and Things, but of Nations too. However, as I am persuaded it is from not having confidered the State and Poverty of this Country, that so pious and disinterefted a Set of Men, as the Synod of Glasgow and Air, have been misled, and the fame Error might mislead others; I hope I shall be forgiven for endeavouring to reconcile those Gentlemen to their Circumstances, by making them sensible, that it is only owing to the Poverty of our Country, if they are not the richest Protestant Clergy in Europe; for, on Inquiry, it will appear that they really possess above one tenth of. the Revenue of the Kingdom, take it in what Shape one will.

I am assured, there are above a thousand efta bliihed Clergymen in Scotland, including Second Ministers, Professors of Divinity, King's Chaplains, &c.; and I believe it will not be disowned, that the Stipends of these amounts to at least L. 65 per annum, one with another: It will likewise be allowed, that the Glebe, which must be four Acres at least, and generally consists of the best Land in the Parish, is worth 2os. per Acre: The Cow and Horse Grass, and Church-yard, one can hardly value at less than 40 s.: The Exemption from Land-tax, Rogue-money, Highways, &c. cannot be computed at less than L. 5 per annum: And, laft!v, the Manse or House Rent, in which the Minister will hardly drive a Nail, and where all ~~- ~ Reparations L 5 J Reparations must be done by the Heritors, is certainly worth L. 7, o1 s. per annum, especially as there is generally a Garden to it; and I imagine it cannot be proved, that any Manse has of late been built for less than . oo; and it is but moderate to allow 74 per cent. for Money laid out on Houses, where one is bound to uphold.-Thus the thousand Ministers in Scotland actually possess and enjoy above L. 80,ooo per annum out of L. 685,7I4, the Rent of the Land, or of L. 822,857, the total Amount of Land and Boroughs in Scotland. And as the Number ot Peo;
pie in Scotland is thought to exceed L. I,ooo,ooo, it appears that iooo Clergymen possess above a tenth of the Income of that ,ooo,ooo0, i. e. 100oo Shares each, and yet are not contented.

The great Noise one is used to hear about the overgrown Revenues of the Church in England, has probably produced the Proposal in queftioni and yet I can assure the Reverend Gentlemen, that, on Inquiry, they will find themselves infinitely better off than the Englilh Clergy, notwithstanding all that is said of their huge Livings.

There are I,000o Parifles in England: The Amount of these Livings taken together, does not come to L. 120, one with another; and taken feparately,-there are not 500 out of the wholethat exceed L. 200 or 250 a-piece.

It will not be amiss to compare the Income of an Engli/h Clergyman of L. I20 a-year, with that of a Scots Minister of L. 70.

Living # Living of the English Clergyman, L. 120.

r 6 Living of the English Clergyman, L. 126.
Out of which he pays down for First Fruits and Tenths, Institution, and Induaion, L. 120.
This at double Interest, he being only Te nant for Life, -- 2 0 Land-tax, at 4s. in the Pound, - i8 o Window-tax, Poor-rates, High-ways, Church-wardens Rates, &c. - 12 o Vifitation-money to the Bishop, L. 5 once in two Years, - - 2 IO Reparation of his House and Offices, par ticularly vast Barns for the Tythes, 5 o In all L. 49 io Thus there remains to the Parson, - 70 10 I will appeal to any Man that knows England, if any Part of this Sketch is exaggerated.

Scots Minifer's Stipend, L. 70 Glebe, - - 4 Cow and Horse Grass, - 2 In all L. 76 Thus a Scots Minister, with L. 70 a-year Sti pend, fees more Money than any English Clergyman who has a Living of L, 120 a-year.

The Clergy in Holland, except at Amferdam, foterdam, the Hague, and two or three other great Towns, have none of them oo000 Guilders per annumn, which, with the Taxes they pay, does not make L. 70: And there is no Protestant Country in' Europe, where the Income of the Clergy amounts to one twentieth of the Rent of the Lands, except in Great Britain. And in England the Revenue of all the Clergy, Cathedrals included, and even the Revenue set apart for keeping up these fumptubus Edifices, does not exceed L. I,6oo,0oo. Tho? the Land of England is confessed to amount to L. 20,000,000 per annum; which is but two twenty fifths of the whole: Whereas our Clergy cost us one tenth.

Harrington propofes'an fgrarian'Liw, by which in England he would restrain the Poffeflion of one Man to L. 2000 per annum in Lahd; and thinks, that in Scotland no one Man ought to possess more than 500 a-year. Our Countryman; Fletcher of Salton, was of Opinion, that no Man in Scotland ought to have above L. 200 a-year. Surely, in a Country where these Patriots thought it of dangerous Corifequence, that any Person ihould poffess more than L. 5 or 200 a-year, they would never have recommended a Man as an Obje&t bs Charity who enjoyed L. 70, Suppose Mr. Fletcher's Country Gentleman to succeed to L. 200 a-year in the common Way in Scotland,after having buried Fatherand Mother, and let us state the Cafe between him and a Minister, Suppose him to owe for burying his Pa'rents, entering Heir, Infeftment, and some old Acormnp.ts, '

Brought forward 300 To two Sifters and one Brother's To cher, at L. 200 each, - 600 Interest of theit Sums, - - 4 Land-tax, &c. for L. 200 a-year, - 13 Reparations of all Kinds, including Kirk and Manse, - 10 Loffcs by Tenants, Some little extraordinary Expences that the World requires of a young Laird, and from which a Minister, who is supposed to poffcfs Philosophy and Religion, is exempted, But supposing this fame Laird to be left io,ooo Merks of Debt, or a Jointure, and let one only imagine how the Comparison will stand.

On the whole, I sincerely wish the Rent of Scotland amounted to more, and could afford more. In that Cafe the Ministers might hope to be listened to; but, as Matters itand, they have an ample Share of the Property of their Country.

Scotland is really poor: And one would expec from the Christian Clergy, they would Ihow us an Example of Moderation, to reconcile us to the Inconveniencies of our Situation. I own it kiTens them not a little, in my Opinion, to find them set an Example the other Way: But no Step of theirs ihall provoke me to forget, that they are Ministers of Christ, are good Subjeas, and generally Men of Virtue; though I cannot thir.k this unreasonable Scheme quite consistent with that Characer.

We are all sensible, that, especially since the Union, our young Gentlewomen are very ill o1f, TheirSex debars them from the Advantages the Men reap from it, by eftabliffling theInselves in our Plantations, the Fleet, Army, &c.
Suppose a Petition was to be offered up to Parliament in behalf of all the young Women and unprovided Widows of genteel Education and Behaviour, humbly begging the Legislature to take their Cafe under Consideration, and representing, That whereas the great Demand the Publick has had for young Men in our Wars by Sea and Land, our Colonies abroad, &c. they have not, nor, by the Nature of the Thing, cannot pollibly be provided for by Marriage; therefore they beg to be allowed an Eftabliflment of L. 20 a-year each, out of the Rent of the Kingdom.

I think a great deal might be said in support of such a Petition. But what would blow it up at once is this: - There are at least 20,000 such young Women in the Kingdom, and the Amount of their Demand exceeds one half of the untaxed landed Rent of Scotland. And the Anfwer would be: Ladies, since you have the Miffortune to be born in a poor Country, you muff submit to what Nature seems to have intended and corre&t the Inconveniencies of your Situation, by Frugality, Temperance, and Patience. These are the Ornaments of your Sex in all Countries;
but it is decent in your Circumstances, to make a Virtue of Necessity.

I flall now examine the Reasons set forth in the Pamphlet, and fliall follow the Order in which I find them there.

Reason I. The Support and Education of a Fa mily is vastly more expensive now, than when the Stipend was fettled by King Charles I. a hundred Years ago. At that Time indeed it bore such a tolerable Proportion to the Rates of Things, and Circumstances of the Times; that for a while the Ministers of the Church of Scotland lived comfortably: But 'n6w it must be owned by every Person, that the necefiary Expence of'living is generally doubled, yea in many Articles near tripled, above what it was then': All Vivers, Cloathing, and Goods of every fort, are vafly rifen in their Value; the Wages of Artificers; and Servants of all kinds, greatly advanced. So that, on there Accounts, the Maintenance'of a Family;
and the Education of Children in any measure of Decency, according to our Station in the World, is become impossible; for the Stipend in most Parihes does not exceed sixty or sixty five Pounds, and in many not fifty, in some not forty, nor even thirty: So that an Augmentation seems to be absolutely necessary, if those thatferve at the Altar, are to live by the Altar. Had our Encouragement been assigned us'in Church-lands, our Subject would have risen with the other Lands in the Country, and would' have kept with them a growing Proportion to the necessary Expence of Life; but our Subject, being stated and unimprovable, is now greatly left behind in Value, even in Proportion as the Necessaries of Life are' advanced. The Clergy 'are the only Set of Men in Scptland, whose Income is not in'
:reafed'with the Expence of the Times. The Land-rents are greatly raised, Salaries of all publick Employments considerably augmented, and the Profits of Traders and Mechanicks increased according to the Expence of Living. As for thoti Augmentations of Stipend-which- have beeti granted within these hundred Years, they have been but few in Number, the Additions which have been made, very inconsiderable, and, of late, Applications for Augmentations have been generally rejeted.

Answer. It is by no means true, that Neceffa.

ries are bec'ome dearer than they were ioo Years ago. It appears from Bp Pleetwaod's Chronicon pretiofumn, a Bool no body should be without, that Corn, on the Price of which all o'ther Things depend, has been cheaper within these 50 Years, at a Mlediurm, than in any Period of Time for ioo Years before. The fame Principle appears from Sir Henry Spelmaniis Works, publiffed by Gibson, in the Article on Coin. Cloathing of all Kinds is cheaper now than in Charles I.'s Time t And Woollen and Linen Goods, of the fame Quality, never were so cheap in Scotland as now. The Difference is, that Luxury has crept in amongst us, and we do not content ourselves with what our Forefathers never aspired to.-No doubt Englijt Broad Cloth is not so cheap as home-spun, nor Holland as Linen, nor Silk as Stuff: But I will venture to fay, with Sir Jo/iah Child, that no Man of Sense ever chose a Wife in a Silk Gown, that he would have reje&ted in Worsted. I am afraid our Enemies will fay, the plain Englilh of this first Reason is:-Truly it is grown the FaJbion to be luxurious; and, as the Clergy ought to have the Lead on all Occasions, may it please your Maje.
fly, &c. to put us in a Condition to vie with the best of thez: in it.

It will be found, that the Augmentations and new Creations since the Time mentioned far exceed the neat Profit on the Improvement of Lands in Scotland: For it is not fair, where a Man has laid out a large Sum in improving Land, to itate all that to the Account of Improvement. If I lay out L. Ioo on Land, and raise my Rent only L. io a-year, all that can be stated as Improvement, is the odd L. 5 a-year. And I am afraid, if L. 5 per cent. is to be allowed for all the Money laid out on Improvement of Land there Ioo Years, it will be found our Improvements have been backwards. And once eftabliflh the Principle, That Stipends are to be increased as Land improves, it will be deemed such a Tax on Indufiry and Agriculture, as will put a total Stop to it.

I beg to know, whether the Pay of an Officer, Soldier, and Sailor, is increased within the Time mentioned ?

The Augmentations have been rejected of late, because the Judges of the Land thought the Clergy had enough.

Reason II. The Parishes in Scotland are general ly much more populous, and consequently the Toils of the Ministerial Office, in visiting, examining, baptizing, marrying, and attending the m ning, t--J--· -----s Sick, much greater than when our Encouragement was fixed; our Labours are greater, and possibly more useful, both in a religious and civil Sense, than the Labours of any Set of Men in Scotland, who are so ill paid.

.fik-wer'. It cannot be made out, that Scotland is incrca'ed in Number of People within there hundred Years: But Evidence can easily be brought to the contrarv ; for which one needs but appeal to their ovn Siffion-books.

Reason III. It is impossible for us, upon our present small Income, to maintain that Influence and Regard which is due to our Fun&tion and Cha.
rater. Wants and Straits naturally depress our Spirits, bring us into a mean Dependence on our People, and greatly fink the Credit of our Office with those of better Rank.

Answer. This is borrowed from 7eremiah Col lier; and indeed has been so often exploded, and is so liable to Ridicule, that one needs only put them in mind when it was they have had most Influence, and have been most regarded; whether in the poor, or wealthy Times of the Church ? and, whether a good Life and Character, or a Coach and Six, commands most Refpe& to a Clergyman and Philosopher ?

Reason IV. The Smalnefs of our Stipend is apt to divide our Attention betwixt the Duties of our Office, and some secular Projet, for maintaining ourfclves in our Station; whereby our Thoughts must be diftrated, our Cares divided, and our facred Labours become enervated and fruitless.

Answer. This differs widely from the received Opinion of all Nations, ancient and modern: Not to mention, the ancient Philosophers, far less the modern Papiffs, this really looks as if the Author had forgot the Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, and had never read any Ecclesiastical History.

Reason V. Our present Circumstances render us incapable of that glorious and divine Part of our Character, which conifts in Kindness, Hofpitality, and good Works; without which the best Sermons and most assiduous Labours of the Miniftry, will prove in a great measure ineffe&ual with our People, and afford only an unsatisfying Pleasure to ourselves, With what Grace or Zeal can ,eah we recommend Beneficence and generous Deeds to our Hearers, when we want Power to rhake the Light of our own Example shine before them i Answer. This is so ludicrous, that one is at a Loss how to treat it. The Subjec is of a serious Nature; and'yet lappeal to every thinking Man, if it is here seriously treated; not to take Advantage of the Indecency of the Expressions, Hospitality, and the Light of oar own Example jhine before them.

What is proposed, is, not to augment every Stipend, but only such as are below L. ioo a-year.
Are such as have theHappinefs to possess that Sum remarkable for Hospitality ? Is it by the Light of that Virtue that they instruct their Flock ? or are we so unhappy in poor Scotland, where that Revenue can fall but to few People's Share, that a Man cannot shew a good Example to his Neighbours without L. ioo a-year ?

Reason VI. Were our Encouragement more considerable, Gentlemen capable of giving their Sons a liberal Education, would be more likely to educate them for the Ministry; whereby the Church would be adorned with able Ministers, and .the civil Constitution remarkably strengthened by their Influence and Connexions.

Aifwer. This is tfill founded on a supposed In tention to increase the Revenue of every Minister, as well as the poorest. Gentlemen, when bred to the Ministry, never doubt of obtaining a good Living, if they have Merit. And I dare fay, it never was an Obje&ion to a Gentleman's breeding his Son to the Church, if he inclined to it otherwife, That he was not certain of obtaining one of the middling Livings for him.

Reason VII. If there were such an Augmenta tion L 5 J'

tion made to the Stipends over Scotland, as would make the Minifters'live'with Comfort in their refpeEtive Parishes, Transportations, with the manifold Inconvenieniies attending them," would be in a great measure prevented.

Answer. This tilakes greatly against the Scheme.

No body'will'deny, that it is an Objetion, and perhaps'the strongest,' againft'our Ciurch-govern' nent, That as there'is ho Room for Preferment in it, Men who naturally delight in Ease, want one of the chief Motives to Appilication. This is a Proposal to take away the only Incitement left us. Besides, if all Livings were rmade alike, it is likely futh as corfidered their own Intereft, would make 'Application, to quit a laborious and populous Charge, for a small and remote one. Thus one might expet tb fee Translations from large Towns and Parishes, to the remote Parts of the Country.

1 Reason VIII. The Attachment of the Church of Scotland to the Royal Family on the Throne;
and to our prefeht happy Constitution, has always been both dutiful and zealous, particularly in Times of Rebellion and 'publick Danger. This gives us Ground to expect a fair Hearing with his Majesty King George, and every lioneft Whig in the Britit Parliament.

.Infwer. 'As to this, the King is the Head of the Church butt he is' likewise the Father of his People. It must be confessed the'Clergy did their Duty on a'late Occasion and so did the Country Gentlemen. Such as did otherwise have defervedly suffered fur it; or have; it is to be hoped, been set right by his Majesty's Clemency. The Country Gentlemen have suffered greatly by the Rebellion, from tte double Taxe trhey paid iM ' .... : - .

* ;:
' ....- moRt most Courfties during that unhappy Period; thie were put to great Expence and Inconveniencies, ir removing their Goods, Vexation of their, Tenants, Neglect of their Business, furnilhing Carriages and Horics to both Sides; betides the Risk ofthe to.
tal Loss of their Prpperty. I do not know that any Miniiter in Scotland loft any Part of his $ripend; and if any Manse has been injured, the Parish is bound to make it up. I muff add, that it looks ill for the Clergy of a Kingdom, who owe so much to the Royal Fanily, and are. under every Tie, human and divine, to support our happy Eltablilhment, to make.aMerit of having done their Duty on that Occasion,. since they must have deserved the severest Censure if they, had done otherwife: And, not content with that,-to ask a Reward out of the Pockets of their Fellow-fubjets, whole Poverty they ought to commiserate, vaill ever be thought unworthy the Ministers of Christ, I mluftobterve, that what is;mentioned in the Pamphlet, of levying the Stipends as the Landtax is, viz. by Quartering and Dragooning, is-a Method which I should imagine will hardly recommend the Doctrine of Christ;' as, I am sure, it can receive no Sanction from it.

P. S. I will perhaps be said, that the Mini irers in Scotland have not L. 65 a-year, one with another. It is the fame Thing to my urpofe, if their Revenue amounts to L. 70,000 a-year in all, It is imagined their Numbers exceed IooO; and whether that Sum is spread amongst i Iop, or con.fined to 50o, is the fame with relation ,to the:Rent of the Kingdom. Besides, it will-be found, on dIn quiry, that 3^d. ii the Pound isconfiderablydlefs than the Land-tax of Scotland at two ,Months . es .
The TENDENCY Of the CONSTITUTION of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, to form the TEMPER, SPIRIT, and CHARACTER of her MINISTERS 

PSAL. xlviii. I2, 13, Walk about Zion, andgo rolund about her: tell the towers thereof: Mark ye well her bzlwuarks, coifider her palaces: that ye may tell it to the generation following.
1 T is an important queflion, what effet moral causes have in forming the characers of men, since on that depend the utility and excellence of laws and inftitutions. For if natural causes solely, or chiefly, operate on the human mind; if men are formed like plants, by the heat of the fun, and the fertility of the foil; the labours of the sage and the legislator are in vain: But if, on the other hand, they can be moulded by discipline and laws, and may attain to dignity and virtue by the force of wife inftitutions, the best service that can possibly be done them, is to bring them under the power of good government, or to preserve it among them when already eftablilhed.

IT is with a view to this question, that I propose, in this discourse, to confider the conifitution of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND;
not as it is founded in the word of God, or as it is agreeable to the plan of the primitive times; more important propositions still, which have often received as much illuftration, and been confirmed with as much proof, as the nature of the thing would admit; but only in certain points, as it is connected with focietv, and as its external laws and regulations, that are of human invention, have a tendency to form the temper, character, and spirit of its members. The goodness of its institutions, in this refpeit, I fhail beg leave to confider as the towers, bulwarks, and palaces of our Z; ON, which help at once to protect and adorn her; which will recommend her to the love and reverence of all her sons; and prove, by one argument more, that, even in her outward fabric, the is not unworthy of that wjfdom which cometh from above.

MY Reverend FATHERS andBRI THREN, I hope, will forgive me, for attempting a subjet, which I humbly apprehend becomes me better, than if I held up a model for their behaviour as ministers of CHRIST; which has often been done by masterly hands, on such occasions. I am sure they will hear me with candour on points with refpee to which I may be so liable to mistake; and on which I shall, nevertheless, speak with freedom, prompted 'by the love of my own order, and veneration for this CHURCH.

IN discoursing of this fubjeat to an audi ence of another kind, I should firfl delineate the conffitution of this CH U R H, as consisting of different orders, formed into fubordinate judicatories, with all the powers of government so equally and properly divided, as to make a republic of no imperfel kind, But this is so well underifood by my reverend hearers, that it would be impertinent in me to consume their time upon it.

IT shall therefore be the chief object of this discourse, to fliew the tendency of the conifitution of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND to form the temper, spirit, and character of her members. And this, by the blessing of God, I ihall endeavour to point out in three material instances, that refpec them as minifters, as BF.ITONS, and as men. For I wvill 1few, in the if; place, The tendency of our ecclesiastical constitution, to preserve good morals, and purity of doctrine.

2d.l/, Its tendency to inspire us with the love of liberty, and the free government of our country.

d7;. Its tendency to form the personal characer of its members.

I am, isJ, To si1ew- the tendency of our eccleiaftical conftiution to preserve good morals, and purity of docirine.


THE apostle PAUL, speaking of the mini fters of the gospel, requires it as their first quality, that they be blameless, or irreproachable, i TI M. iii. z; for thisreafon no doubt, left the people, to defend themselves from their rebukes or censures, Ihould fay, Phjfician, heal thyself! a reproach, that, whenever it falls with julfice, takes from them all liberty of speech, and obliges them to tolerate vice, and to fear the vicious. For though their charater and miflion is independent of the merit of their lives, yet the bulk of mankind are neither refined nor equitable enough to make this distinction;
but when they despise a man's private asions, they will despise his public miniftrations too.

IN other churches, the pomp and splendor of worship, the power and dignity of the fuperior clergy, and their temporal wealth and dominion, will preserve influence and re ipe&
to their order, even after corruption of manners has crept in among them. But the members of this H R C H, without dignities, without power, without wealth and dominion, hold their ascendant over the minds of men, only by their virtue and abilities.

AND happy is it for us, that, being men of like frailty with others, we are laid under the restraint of discipline: a discipline by the laws of the realm still vested in this cH UR CH, by which she can not only exclude from her highest privileges such of her lay-members as lead vicious and disorderly lives, but entirely expel such corrupt ecclesiastics as bring disgrace upon their order: a discipline that, though strict in its own nature, yet is mild and gentle in its execution; for the censorial power is committed to the most subordinate court that has jurifdidion over the clergy;
its inspection is near, its vigilance perpetual;
and, by giving check to the first appearance of faults, it prevents their growing into crimes.

BY the nature of our constitution; there is little danger that the CHURCH mhould become remiss in the exercise of her discipline:
for the depends on that, in a great measure, for the esteem mhe has in the world, and for her influence over the people, to whom the last appeal is made in the trials of a candidate for the ministry, for they are at liberty to objet to his morals or his dotrine ; so that the virtue and credit of her members are deeply interested in the execution of it.
Her discipline is still further secured by this means, that as there is a perfect equality among all those in whom the censorial power is vefied, the connection of protecion and dependence, which has a tendency to screen faults, and to flatter vices, cannot take place;
but, on the contrary, the jealousy and rivalIhip of a republican spirit, will never fail to favour the firic execution of the laws.

WHAT I have said with respect to the mo.

rals of the clergy, extends also to the duties of the patforal office, the diligent execution whereof is committed to the fame watchful care. It likewise applies to doctrine, the purity of which it is necessary to secure.
For as the minds of men are not formed to think exactly in the fame manner on all points, and as the love of singularity, ordiftinction, might carry them far, were they at liberty to give vent to their peculiar opinions, it is a wife restraint, that confines our public teachings within certain limits prefcribedby the CHURCH. Hard as this may seem to bear on liberty of conscience, there cannot be a national church without it; for if full freedom was allowed to the extravagant fancies of men, they would soon divide, and branch out into a thousand different sects. It is necessary too, that the magifirate, who is to protect the public religion, should know what it is, and have it clearly defined.

BUT it may, perhaps, be objeced to what I have said on this point, that the sac is againft me; and that our discipline, which I have represented to be of so much utility, and of so much force, has, in reality, loft its effect. This I cannot think clear, by anyv means: for it is much more probable, tiat the complaints on this head should take their rife from that peeviih humour, which, in every age, leads men to depreciate the worth and virtue of the present times, when compared to the former ; or to a spirit of faction, to an alteration of manners, or to some other less obvious source; than that our constitution of government, without any visible cause, should have loft its vigour, or the principles I have mentioned no longer operate on the human mind.

BUT, my Reverend FATHERS and BRE T H RE N, let us look round us into the world, and we ihall do ourselves the justice that the reft of mankind are willing to do us; for, in this respect, there are no ecclesiastics that stand higher in the general esteem, than the clergy of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND. And, in fact, after all the complaints that have been made, of degeneracy, and corruption of morals, of what crimes have they been guilty ? Of what kind, and of what number have they been convicted ? What ordcr of men can boait of so many members whose characers are unfullied even with the imprutation of crimes? They are not angels,but men:
They cannot boast of perfect innocence and virtue; they do not pretend to an exemption from the infirmities of human nature: And if now and then, a man of like pafion.s with others, has yielded to the force of temptation, and surfered the jufI punilhment preicribed by the laws of the CHURCH, is not this a firo:ngr proof of the goodneis of our discipline, than of the licentiousness of our mrcrals IF tome guilty persons have escaped, is that to cb imputed to the corruption of our courts, rather than to the imperfedion of all human tribunals: Are not the essential fonrs or tial to be observed, without which the innocent could not be safe ? For what crime has any person been tried and acquitted of late, before cur judicatories, of so deep a die, as it would be for a member of our sitwreinme court, in his capacity of a judge or juirmlan, to decide in a particular cafe, upon impr'clns of charater received out of Cecrs, or on his own general ideas of expeCdienc-: ?nd public gocd .ce can I readily admit that our difci !.nue h.-s of iate growln more remiss, or that !e or.l-s of t:. cicrgy- are now less pure, *t:.n ill cr.rer periods of this CHURCH. For lv.-.ci. !at- nl any ilrefs on the general G; .i-a.:ion, That great crimes are leail cii-tr n i:n :er:cds of refinement, when mens minds are foftcned by the progrefs of knowledge and the arts, and brought under habitual restraint by the flability of legal goverment; I apprehend, that the complaints on this head may be, in a great measure, accounted for, by attending to a plain dililnlionbetween IMAN^NERS and MORALS.

IGNORANCE and fuperfition, from age to age, have fixed on things quite indifferent in their own nature, and, by stamping on them the characters of vice and virtue, have rendered it extremely easy for the artful and designing to impose upon mankind, and raise a charader of sanctity, at the finall expence of being rigid and exact in trifles, that have no connection with religion or moraiity ; like the Pharisees of old, who paid tithes of mint, ani/e, and ciuimin, but neglec7ed the weightier matters of the la w, jtudgment, merec), and faith. But the incredal of knowledge, and the progress of society, have restored many of there artificial virtues and vices to their own class again: and while religion and virtue have, in reality, gained by this alteration of manners, the ignorant and fuperfiitious, (for there are some in all ages), continue fill to think them of the fame importance as before, and judge of characters by the false standard of former times.

WH A T then is called MIANNERS, in gene ral, or even the DECORUM of a particular charac'er, are not properly the objecs of laws and discipline. No rules can be prefcribed for modes that are changing every day, no landard can be fixed for what is shifting continually; but every person must be left to the corrections of ridicule and contempt from the world, which are always applied to singularity, affectation, and indecency. Yet, even in this refpec, the minilters of this CHURCH are aided by her init-tufions : lor this ipecies of faults, though not subjects of law, are liable to the private ac.dmlonitons. and fraternai rebukes, of the cerforiia pov-er.

So far then as la. -s and regulations, and the ieftrailrs of diicicline, conduce to make men virtuous, or to keep them lb, the conifitutioi of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND has been wifely framed. I proceed, in the 2d  place, To fllew its tendency to inspire us with the love of liberty, and the free government of our country.

BE SIDES the sentiments natural to a BRI TON born since liberty was eftablifled by law; betides the liberal education of clergymen, and their early acquaintance with those books of antiquity that inspire mankind with elevated thoughts, and the love of freedom which reigned in the state of society they describe; there are circumstances peculiar to this cHURcH, which muff endear the free constitution of their country, more to her members than to other men.

WH EN the reformation was first attempt ed in SCOTLAND, under that form which is now eftabliihed, and which had the inclinations of the people in every age; it was not only for the rights of conscience that our forefathers struggled and fought, .but for the rights of men: they made war not only on priests, but on tyrants; and when thev conquered, they eftablifihed civil liberty, as the only guardian of true religion. The hard contentions of the times had, of themselves, a tendency to route and enlarge the mind ; and being engaged against the fame enemies, and involved in one common cause with the patriots, in every period of our hiiory, the PRESBYTERIANS appeared ftrenuous afiertors of the liberties of mankind, and of their country. On the other hand, during all the efforts of illegal power, our CHUR CH, as one of themoft determined and formidable foes of tyranny and tyrants, was sure to feel the firit effets of their wrath;
at least, examples of lenity were so rare, that ihe was not deceived into the false confidence, that such flattering suspensions of hostility were designed to produce.

AND not only are the members of this CHURCH excitcd to the love of liberty, by their attachment to their friends, and their avefion to their enemies; but our very mode of government, and its genius and spirit, must form the mind to liberty, independent of the connec'ion of interests, or our attachment to the ILLUSTRIOUS FA1MILY on the throne, and our gratitude for the many blessings we have derived from them: For equality, which is the foundation of freedom, is the foundation of our ecclesiastical conflitution too; and the spirit of democracy is so entirely preserved in all its institutions, laws, and forms, that none of her members can possibly be subjects of any other than a firee fiate.

BUT this is a quality that our CHURCH has always been owned to poflefs; and to such a degree, that her enemies have endeavoured to represent it as one of the worst of her faults. For it was long objected to the PRESBYTERIANS, that they were of such a turbulent and seditious spirit, so violent and factious, as to be incapable of rule, and particularly incompatible with monarchical government, such as that of BRITAIN has ever been. But, on ftrit inquiry, this very complaint will be found to conduce to their praise: For in what times were they turbulent and seditious ? Only in the times of tyranny; when to submit, was to degrade human nature; when to be peaceable, was to be a save. But, under the government of laws, with a race of KI NG s on the throne who have asserted and enlarged, not encroached on the rights of mankind, no church in the world has been more obedient or more loyal. Witness her condu&t in every period of danger to the state; witness her unshaken attachment, her active zeal, in the rebellions that have of late torn the bowels of our country.

BEFORE the principles of toleration, that do so much honour to the last age, were established, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND was, no doubt, often seized with a spirit of violence against other denominations of Christians, that, had fie been singular in that respect, would have juitly rendered her an object of aversion. But this was far from being the cafe: file was not, in this point, more ignorant, or more revere, than her neighbour-churches; and having often felt the heaviest hand of persecution, it was no wonder that fle was sometimes violent and unrelenting in her turn. But for half a century past, since the minds of men have become calm and steady under a legal government, and since the ardent zeal of enthufiafm has given place to, or been tempered, by the benign principle of CHRISTI A CHARITY, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND has demonstrated the truth of that position of a great author, " That uniformity is an idea " of weak and vulgarminds:" For infubmifsion to thelaws, in loyalty to the CROWN, and in liberal and generous sentiments to those who differ from her, she is outdone by no church in the world.

IN this view, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND may be confidered as of great utility to the public; for without power or temporality to make her dangerous, the breeds a set of men with principles of freedom, who afting in a body, and having an ascendant over the minds of the people, mull, while uni'ducedl and uncorrupted, be one of the bulwarks of the slate. Before the happy mra of the union, the commons of S o T L A ND, led by attachmlent to their chiefs, or prompted by religious zeal, appeared often indeed in the field, on the fide of liberty; but it was a liberty they neither enjoyed nor underflood. And on account of certain untoward circumstances that relate to the bails of government in this country, the diftinc sense and knowledge of civil and political liberty, has not diffifed itself so far among them as might have been expeced. But the clergy of this CHURCH, fully fenfble of the blesings we enjoy, and well-infTructed in the nature of government, in some degree compensate for this defect;
for they fill up the middle rank between the commons and their Superiors, and, in their intercourse with the people, fail not to impress them with just ideas of the rights of men and of BRITONS, and to inspire them with that love of the public which binds them t- their country. While they retain their characder for piety and good morals, they will not abuse this influence over the people: when they depart from it, and become vicious and corrupt, they will no longer be believed.

BUT I proceed. in the 3d place, To point out the tendency of our ecciefiaflical constitution, to form the perfonal characters of its members.


IT is thought, that allmen receive a certain caRl, or turn of charaCter, from their prosession and manner of life; and, so far as this influence extends, it is of importance what diredionit takes. It must be owned, that there are some general prepoffiefions againft the clerical profeifion, as unfavourable to certain amiable and manly qualities, and as giving so deep a'tindure to the very virtues that belong to it, that the piety of churchmen is believed toborder on hypocrify, their morals on austerity, their learning on pedantry, and their zeal for religion aid the good of mankind to be, for the molt part, assumed as a pretence to aid or to cover their pride and ambition. But 1 am of opinion, that the tendency of the coniiitution of our CI-IU RCH, not only obviates theie general objections, but also that it has force enough to form a very refpedable character;
and, in particular, that admitting ibme few peculiar disadvantages to which her mmniiters are liable, there are not, on the whole, many orders of men, and no clergymen of any denomination, whoie functions and manner of life are better suited than theirs to produce a spirit of independency, or to exercise and strengthen some of the best faculties and afediions of the mind.

IF it be true, that it belongs to the righ trous, and the free, to be bold as a lion, the miniLter of this c H U R C H muf derive forti;tde and elevation of mind from the causes already mentioned. His very manner of obtaining a living, never by purchase, feldom by personal application; the consciousness of being well-qualified for the office, after having had his abiiities and morals everely tried; together with that equality oi rank with the fathers of the CH RCH, to xwhich he is at oace admitted; tend, in the beginning, to inspire him with manly and generous sentiments: and the natural effed of the paforal employment, in which he is afterwards ,engaged,, is to raise, and not depress the spirit. He has made choice of a profe-ion lwhicih, though not opulent, is liberal ; he has entered into a ltate which, though not improvcable, is independent.
W -ithout the habits that contradc the heart, without lthe views that enslave the mind, the member of this CHURCH therefore refts his hopes, in this world, on personal diftindions alone; on his talents, his learning, or his virtue.

IN other churches, the great power and wealth of dignified clergymen, no doubt, throw a splendor on the whole body, and may often be strong incentives to a noble and manly ambition: but as they leave the bulk of the order at so great a distance, and make preferment a constant objec of attention, it may be questioned, how far they are favourable to some of the belt qualities of the mind. In our CHURCH, equality of rank, whatever inconveniencies may otherwife attend it, effectually prevents the growth of some kind of vices; for every one of her sons standing on the fame ground with another, looks neither down with faftidioufilefs, nor up with adulation.

THE part, besides, that every clergyman of this CH U RCH engages in, whenever he is ordained, not only to teach but to rule, must strengthen and invigorate the mind.


For though the objects may appear but small in comparison with the great affairs of civil government; yet the fame talents are exerted, the fame affections and paflions are exercifed, the fame powers and energies of mind are employed in church-courts as in others.
And in the freedom ofdebate, in the bustle of popular assemblies, in all applications to men, force and spirit are improved more than in any other exercise; and the faculties of the foul are not only whetted, but enlarged. It is more than probable, that our situation will ever prevent us from excelling in elegance of behaviour, in poliihed manners, orin graceful accomplishments; nor is it of much importance that we mhould. But if we do not attain those better qualities, that enable a man to adt a vigorous and independent part, whenever his own opinions and affections, or the public good, {hall engage him, we are without excuse; for no churclhmen were ever placed in a fituation of more advantage for acquiring them.
We stand at present, as I apprehend, diftinguiled, as a body of men, for some of the qualties I have mentioned. Piety, good morals, and fidelity in his office, are indifpenfible in a minister; but without a free and independent mind, he will want one of the best and most effectual guards to his virtues, AN eminent author has ascribed certain peculiar vices to the clergy, which, he fays, are derived from their profession and manner of life, in so much as to justify, in a great degree, the trite maxim, that " priests " of all religions are the fame," and tend naturally to destroy the candour and ingenuity of their tempers, to render their probity for the most part suspicious, and to make them dangerous to civil government.
Now as these reflections coincide but too much with the prepossessions of many, and as religion itself may susser by such imputations upon her ministers. it will not be improper to hew, that this charge does not apply to the members of this CHURCH, and that our constitution itself obviates these general objetions.

THE charaderiftical vices of clergymen, that he chiefly dwells upon, are hypocriiy, ambition, and pride. "To hypocrisy," he al ledges, " they are inclined; because, being drawn from the common mass of mankind, they will either have no great turn "for devotion; or, were they ever so good, "to support the character of their profef"sion, and to impose upon mankind, they " must appear to be fiill better than they "are." But our CHURCH is so happily conflituted, that this objection does not apply to her members.

FOR admitting that the restraints of difci pline might give check to the natural charadcer, were they to operate alone; yet, when they are counteracted by the principles of freedom and the spirit of independency, which I have flewn to belong in a remarkable manner to the miiifters ofthis CHURCH, they cannot possibly overpower the candour and ingenuity of the mind. Our republican form of goverment, which exposes every man's character and conduct to be nearly inspected by his equals ; our contentions in church-courts, where our talents and passions are fuficiently employed ; prevent both the inclination and the power of imposing a feigned feigned character on the public. Our early and constant intercourse with the world, our daily communications with our people, the simplicity of our worship, and, perhaps, even the flight distinction ofdrefs between us and other men, are all circumstances that disqualify us for acting the part of impoftors.

NOR is this all: For if artifice and disguise were attempted, they would now meet with buta cold reception. Superfition and monachifm having been long banished from PROTE S T A N T churches,the characer of a clergyman that is most beloved and respected amongft us, is that which is most amiable and respectable. The arts of popularity may, no doubt, sometimes be tried, and particular prejudices and weaknesses of the people may be applied to: but these arts cannot long be successful. The other parts of a man's conduct that are inconsistent with his arts and his pretences, being exposed to the near infpection of familiarity, and the vigilance of rivalfliip, will soon betray or detect his real character. Popular virtues only, can al D ways ways retain the love and esteem of the people.
An unfeigned piety, a tender humanity, diligence in the paltoral office, integrity and candour, liberality of mind, steadiness of conduc, uniformity of zeal; these are the qualities that render a man a popular and refpeciable minifler of this CH URCH. And there, I hope, we do not in general need to feign, to please our people, or impose uponmankind.

WITH as little force can the charge of ambition, in the fene he means, be brought against the ministers of this CHURCH.

HE alledges, " That,while the ambition of other men is commonly satisfied by excel " ling in their particular profession, and " thereby promoting the interests of focie"ty, the ambition of the clergy can only be satisfied by promoting ignorance and " fuperfition, and implicit faith, and pious ' frauds : and having got, what Archime"des only wanted, (viz. another world on " which to fix his engines), no wonder they move this world at their plcafure ; which "being "being added to the close union of intereits "that takes place among clergymen of the " fame religion, makes them extremely for"midable to society."

How much soever such objeAions may apply to the priests of the church of ROME, whose hearts are hardened, by celibacy, to the interests of society, there is no PROTESTANT church against whom they can justly be laid. And with refpedt to the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, nothing can be more soreign to her constitution, or to the spirit and practice of her members. For, to cure the jealousy of the state, fle has admitted to a parity of rule with her ministers, the order of lay-elders, who are incorporated in all her judicatories in such numbers, as to be effectual guardians of the interefis of society, against every poflible combination of the clergy. And as I have already observed, that we could not impose on the people, were we ever so much inclined to it; I must add, that every clergyman, being a member of the great community of BRITAIN, which involves in it the interests of religion and liberty, as well as of our particular CHURCH, D 2 the the private corporation-fpiritis thereby couri°
teradced and controlled, so that it can never be dangerous to society. And to this great public we are bound, not by our principles alone, but by one of the strongest assertions of the human mindj the love of our families and children.

IF the charge of pride and obstinacy, when laid against the members of this H U CR H is not already fully answered by what has been said concerning the two preceding objeeions, lee it be farther observed, that mens minds are wonderfully softened since toleration was eftablilied; for fecdaries having no longer the power of hurting each other, their animofities are in a greatmeafure at an end. And let me add, that our c H R c in particular, guards against there vices, by the equal power of its members, as rulers in a free and independent community, where pretence and authority have no effect, and nothing but reason and superior powers of periuafion can prevail.

THUS THUS have I endeavoured to liew the ten dency of our ecelefiaftical constitution to form the temper, spirit, and character of its members: or, in other words, 1 have marked the towers, bulwarks, and palaces of our Zion; which' though not sumptuous and costly edifices, yet are founded deep, and are well-calculated for strength and duration.
But they are not perfect so far as they are human, like all things else, they are liable to defects a few of which I beg leave to point out, before I conclude, that we may Ikilfully bend our endeavours to support our JERUSALEM where she is weak, and to repair her where she has fallen into decay.

THE sirs 'defect I shall mention, is in the very fabric of our constitution itself;
which intrusts the fame bodywith the higheft judicative and executive powers, and even with great part of the legislative too: A combination that, in some cafes, would be extremely dangerous ; and, even in our cafe, is attended with this inconvenience, that our courts, in their judicative capacity, may Sometimes decide on general expediency, ra ther L 32 1 ther than particular laws; and with the temper of judges, less than the spirit of legiflators. Hence it is, that partiality and injustice may be exercised, the innocent may be condemned, and the guilty may be acquitted. One compensation or balance, however, there is to this defec in our conflitution, which is this, that the supreme power is not lodged in a permanent body, but in a court ofreprefentatives chosen every year; and who being themselves the peers of all those who are tried before them, are not likely to be either able, or willing, to persist in any plan of oppression or injustice.

Afecond defect is a certain consequence of our republican constitution, which makes us liable to faction and party-fpirit.

AN evil no doubt fraught with many breaches of charity, and with much alienation of mens mind from each other. For men who set out with the firm belief that they are promoting public good, and serving the great ends 6f virtue and religion, and who are countenanced and confirmed by their their associates in this opinion, are apt, when aching in a party, to go lengths, of which, in other situations, they would be utterly a{hamed. Hence the liberty that is taken of making truth and conscience to be only of one fide; of branding each other with the names of LIBERTINE, and HYPOCRITE ;
of magnifying an indecorum into a crime, or of conitruing a revere or morose demeanour to be vile grimace; while the enemies of our C H U R c H lie in wait for such fair opportunities of seducing the credulous from every fide, and the foes of all religion fit in the scorner's chair and laugh.

TH I s evil, which calls for the attention of all men of worth and virtue to mitigate and assuage its more violent symptoms, is however the genuine product of our conflitution; and as long as we are free and independent, and, at the fame time, imperfect creatures, can never be wholly cured. But it is happily controlled in its most pernicious effects, by the broad basis of our fupreme court, which brings members from every corner, uninfected with each others local local passions; and by the institution of el?
ders: an order not only most wifely calculaed to promote religion and good morals among the people, and reconcile them to the discipline of the CHURCH ; but also to unite us more closely with the commonwealth, to.
prevent the jealousy of government, to guard against the encroachments of ecclefiaftical power, and to abate the ferment of minds sometimes overheated with partyzeal and itrife.

THE third and laj1 defect that I fiall men.

tion, is the incompetent provision for tile clergy: a defecL that I do not unjuilly ascribe to the conflitution; which was formed on a surrender 6f the patrimony of the church, and all temporal power and dominion, with entire reliance for its support on the sense which the public should have of its utidli. Tlis is an evil not only severely felt by the miniftcrs of this establishment.
(who. I am bold to f-v. would :io, diihonour ar.- focicty upon earth), but of che m:-s tLreaLening asped on the CHURCH ; since It -ay soon fill her with persons of inferior birth and mean education, to the ruin of learning, learning and religion too: an evil, however, that we cannot justly impute, in all its extent, to the illiberal spirit of the generations that are past, since they could not possibly foresee the rapid progress of commerce; otherwife, it is probable, they would have fixed on such a kind of provision for the clergy, as would have risen, in some proportion, to the prosperity of the country, and not fallen in its value every day.

WHAT we may hope for from this fplen did age, so fertile in grand and magnificent projecs, is beyond my conjecture. But if the CHURCH of SCOTLAND is such as I have represented her to be, of so much utility, and of so little danger to the public, her falling Rate, in this refpet, will one day become an objed to Legislature itself: and men, capable of great and extensive views, will fee that, by preserving our CHURCH in her vigour, they will execute a work truly worthy of themselves ; they will strengthen one pillar of religion and liberty that is in danger of decay, and help to prolong the period of light and happiness to mankind.

~E ~BUT, But, my Reverend FATHERS and BRE THREN, tho' this defect in our constitution is a subjed of anxiety and regret, and of uneasy forebodings, we need not yet fall into defpair. There are some considerations that serve, for the present, to extenuate this evil, and from which we may derive a temporary comfort, MA 1Y we not hope for a partial, at least, and gradual redress of this evil, from the wisdom and attention of our own Supreme Court of Law, f .ar as our i-tation is intrusted to their care ? Have not many minifters of this CHURCH already experienced,what iult slntimersr that learnedand venerable bod- entertain 6f the narrow allowance made for them, when compared with the flourifiling itare o this couniry Though the provision for the clergy has fallen very much in its value: -zr Is not their rank, in some resied, railed; not on:l b, the removal of cel ain political prejudices, which separated them f2rom many of fperior order; but also by the ri' of aii orders or men beneath them, throuhal tihe impro-vements of industry, and the incri.ai oGf w-eath ' \hat advantage may flay not be gained, from the clergy's having become the chief depofitaries of general learning, now that the attention and efforts of almost all other men are devoted to commerce alone ? Do not our universities borrow many of their fairest ornaments from the CHURCH? And what glory may not be won in that field of diftindtion so lately opened to the learned of this country, I mean, composition, and the art of writing; where the whole range of science is before them, where there are laurels enough to satisfy the most ardent ambitionofpliterary fame It is here, ye sising hopes of our JER U AL E M my younger friends, who are still candidates for the ministry, who have forsaken all to follow this ungainful profeflion; it is here that you must look for your rewards in this world. Here you will find obje&s suited to your taftes; here you will perceive a Ihining path to reputation, that will answer the defire of your hearts : For admiration is the passion of young and generous minds; and the love of diflinaion is predominant with the youth of genius, far above the love of wealth. It were indeed happy, if, by our E 2 re regulzatons and our own concduc, we could make it a mark of diatinclion to be admitted of our order.

IT might now be expected that I should address mrnfelf to the reft of my audience, and offer rome apology to them for having made, what they may think, an encomium on my own order; an encomium to which they may alledge they are bound to pay but little regard. All that I {hall fay is, that an njuft panegyric is the severest satire. But if the view 1 have given of the constitution of this c H r C H be true, I have not improperly followed the Psalmist's advice, to -ialk about Z-clz, to tell her towers, to mark well her bulwarks. a.nd conjider her palaces, that ye ;.I' tell it to the generatil.i following; that -vcu may impress on your own minds a sense of the excellent churchl-government you are under, and may inculcate on your children and rofterity a just efteerm ofthofe whooha.v the charge of your foulsj who have 4ot doii-=
sii; over your lfaith, but are helpers of your joyr LET us then join together in fervent prayer to to the KING and HEAD of his CHURCH, *who hath not only fenced her with towers and with bulwarks, and adorned her with palaces, but hath made her all glorious within, that he would bless all his own divine inflitutions, to the salvation of men, and the glory of his kingdom; and that whatever he hath left us to devise for the fake of peace and good order, may, through him who alone infpireth with wisdom, conduce to the fame great ends that our Jerusalem may always have prosperity, and that the gates of hell jmay never prevail agaijl her. AME N, F IN I S.
The Question relating to a SCOTS Militia considered.
My LORDS, and GENTLEMEN,
I Address this discourse to you, because it is to your public spirit, and attention to national measures, that we owe the present hopes of seeing a militia soon established in Scotland. I live at a distance, and shall be glad, in offering you the thanks and praise you deserve, to be anticipated by an abler pen. Your patriotism cannot fail to have roused congenial spirits. But though I have only received general information of your proceedings, I cannot deny myself the pleasure of publickly congratulating you, on the acquisition you have made of the esteem and gratitude of every man who is a lover of liberty and his country.
I am sensible, that, in the following pages, I cannot add a single idea to your ample knowledge of the subject, nor one spark to your zeal for a measure, so necessary for the safety and honour of your country. By means of your honourable names, I hope to become less obscure, and make the voice of a remote though independent freeholder reach the ears of his brethren, who are now full of expectation from your well-judged and public-spirited measures.
Of all the wonders that have been performed by the present administration, the establishment of a national militia, though not the most shining, is far the greatest, whether we consider
the obstacles that were to be removed, or the consequences that must follow. When the battles of Minden, Quebec, and Bellisle shall only serve to adorn the page of the historian, the
militia will continue, to give liberty, strength, and security to Great Britain ; and the reign of George II will thence derive a glory that in future times will appear superior to the greatest increase of dominion, or of trade.
Improvements in policy, it is true, seldom arise but from pressing occasions ; and the zeal of the wisest of patriots is found unable to produce remarkable changes, except when it acts in relief of some real complaint. Happy is that nation where the ministers are capable of taking advantage of such necessities to form lasting and national institutions, instead of patching up the state with temporary and selfish expedients.
The internal defect which was so plainly pointed out by our losses and alarms in the beginning of the present War, which gave occasion to the change of policy I now speak of, was not unknown to the friends of liberty in the former age. Ever since the happy revolution, men have not been wanting, who have shown us the insufficiency, and warned us of the danger, of trusting entireiy to standing armies. The truly British spirit of our soldiers, no less than the moderation of our princes, has hitherto secured us from that danger ; bitter experience has more than once taught us the insufficiency of such a force.
It is wise to learn even from an enemy. The French, taught by our example, ever since the days of the great Colbert, have been extending their commerce. They saw that their natural strength and military power alone could not maintain their equality with Britain ; and therefore they endeavoured to derive an artificial strength from trading colonies and a powerful marine. Their example, their menaces, and the sense of our own defenceless condition when threatned at home, so lately experienced, have taught us in our turn to cultivate every part of our natural strength, as well as our artificial ; that is, to mix the military spirit with our civil and commercial policy. I call the natural strength of a nation, the extent and fertility of its land, the numbers, the industry, and the bravery of its people. And I call the artificial, foreign trade, paper credit, and a navy. For however necessary the latter may be to the grandeur and dominion of a state, they are only like the ornaments of a building, which may be spared or destroyed, and yet the fabric remain safe and secure : But the former are like the essential parts of an edifice, which if you remove, certain ruin must ensue.
When we engaged in the present war, (a war truly national, in which independence, not dominion is our object), we have been accustomed to see our fleets victorious on every sea, and carrying the terror of our name to the most distant regions of the globe. Our wealth had formerly secured us powerful allies, and put mighty armies in motion to fight our battles on the continent of Europe. But no sooner had we engaged in this war, singly against our powerful enemy, than he discovered and we felt our weakness. The whole world had seen five thousand undisciplined militia from the most remote parts of the kingdom, defeat the regular forces that opposed them, carry terror and dismay within an hundred miles of the capital, and bring the government and constitution of Britain into the most imminent danger. The alarm of that fatal year, and the distraction of our councils, will stain our annals for ages to come. This pitiful insurrection, which, with the least attention to internal policy, could have been quelled in a week, brought our army from Flanders in the utmost hurry and confusion; and, what is still more shameful, obliged us to call into this island 12,000 of the most despicable foreign mercenaries, whilst every generous spirit felt equal disdain of the foe, and of the auxiliaries, and deplored to see the body of a free people, the best, the natural strength of every kingdom, the disposers of wealth and of power, reduced to so feeble and contemptible a state, without the means and without the capacity of self-defence.
The rebellion was quelled at last; but not till it had opened the eyes of every thinking man, and shown him our bosom bare and defenceless. The fear and the expence, if not the dishonour of that year, might have been a lesson to the dullest statesman. But the season was not yet come, when the wisdom of our patriots could act with advantage. We resolved still to trust entirely to the troops who are in the King's pay; instead of arming the people, we encouraged schemes of policy for enfeebling them more ; and that a warlike spirit might remain in no corner of the island, in place of reclaiming the Highlanders, and availing ourselves of their valour, which was always in our power, we wholly disarmed them.
In the mean time our politic and watchful enemy failed not to take advantage of our infatuation. While he aimed in reality at our distant colonies, to increase his own commerce and naval force, and to lessen ours, he seemed to meditate a mortal blow at our bosom. 'Tis uncertain whether or not he really intended at that time to invade us ; but he threatned loudly, he made formidable preparations, and the effect was the fame upon this nation as if he had been serious ; for we were alarmed, we were frightened, beyond what the posterity of those who have established a militia will be able to believe. Then it was that our navy, that boasted bulwark of Britain, was thought unequal to the defence of that part of our coast which lay opposite to that of the enemy. The rest of the kingdom was abandoned, and all our troops were collected round the capital to ward off the mortal stroke. Then it was that the parliament itself, confounded at the near approach of danger, prayed his Majesty to send for some thousands of foreign troops, to save from slavery and ruin ten millions of free Britons. O! nation of women! to suffer again so much shame and dishonour ! But weaker than women are a people abandoned to despair. And what could a disarmed and enervated people do on such an occasion? They judged from the fear and perplexity of their leaders, and believed that the fate of this temple of liberty, this happy seat of commerce and the arts, this mighty empire of the sea, depended on the decision of one, single battle. The history of states and kingdoms has proved that every thing but public virtue and natural strength afford but a precarious support, and resemble a machine, where if one movement be hurt, the whole is disordered ; but that a great and free people, trained to arms, like a human body, may receive many wounds, without being wholly destroyed ; or rather like the fabulous Hydra, will grow from defeat. Our fears then were as just, as the conduct of the French was politick upon that memorable occasion.
But let us reflect upon the consequences. Our fears of an invasion made us leave our distant settlements and colonies in a defenceless situation ; neither ships nor troops enough could be spared from more important service; the French gained their aim, our fleet in the Mediterranean was unequal to the relief of Minorca and a few battalions of regulars was still a less adequate force to cover our frontiers in America; both of course fell into the hands of our enemies; while Europe stood in amazement to see the haughty queen of the ocean neither able to protect her colonies, nor to defend her seat of empire.
But, amidst our losses and alarms, our free constitution, it would seem, still preserved that secret energy which has often drawn medicine from poison, and turned calamitous events to its own advantage. For the disasters of that shameful year, awaked the nation that had been laid asleep so long in the lap of luxury, and heaven directed the voice of the people to raise a man to power, who was born to restore a falling state.
And yet the violent opposition the militia met with, when the nation was so circumstanced, will appear incredible in a future age. From that incredibility the noble patriots who first schemed, proposed, and carried it into execution, will lose half the praise due to their persevering magnanimity. But they have gained their end. The irresistible principle of that salutary law has at length prevailed, both over secret artifice, and avowed resistance. Opposition itself has not a little contributed to make the militia respectable. There are now 18,000 who have been embodied for some months, and called out of their respective counties. Every one who has seen them do justice to their merit ; their most violent enemies affect to be fully convinced. Officers and private men have learned subordination and discipline to a great degree of perfection ; in rank and fortune, which are pledges for their fidelity to their country, they are no doubt superior to those of whom the armies of Europe are composed ; and in point of discipline, they are allowed to have attained all that regiments possess who have not been in actual service.
Thank Heaven ! and the patriot spirit of England, that there is no need to look back to antient times, nor abroad among foreign nations, for authorities in favour of a militia ; since it is confessed by all, that the southern part of our own island, within the space of a single year, has furnished unquestionable proof, that a free nation, while engaged in commerce far beyond all the ideas of antiquity, and sunk in luxury that seemed to forebode a falling empire, has been able to rouse itself on the approach of danger, to revive the military spirit, and to form an establishment that equally secures it against domestic tyranny or foreign invasion. How will ages to come revere the memory of those noble patriots, who with that persevering wisdom which always overcomes, have precured us the greatest of human blessing !
When one considers the great advantages of a well-regulated militia, it becomes matter of wonder, that Great Britain, that has excelled all other nations, antient or modern, in other kinds of policy, should have been without one so long. The views of speculative men, the friends of liberty who have formerly written and spoke upon this subject, seem to have been directed to the securing the constitutional freedom of their country. They had seen almost all other nations enslaved by mercenary forces, and the fear of such an event excited their patriot spirit. In pursuit of this object, their writings abound in proofs of the fatal effects of standing armies, and of the promptitude with which they have always become tools, for the establishment of despotism and arbitrary sway. It must be owned, that those great men had reason as well as facts upon their side. It is impossible to find an instance of a prince who became absolute without a standing army, and no sound argument can be brought against intrusting the people in free governments with arms. " There is no limitation of monarchy," says the renowned Fletcher of Salton, " that is any real security to the liberties of the people, but that which puts the sword in their own hand. The power of granting and refusing money, though vested in the subject, is not sufficient where a standing army is kept up in time of peace; for he that is armed is always master of the purse of him that is unarmed..  The possession of arms," continues that great patriot, " is the distinction of a freeman from
a slave. He who has nothing, and belongs to another, must be defended by him, and needs no arms: but he who thinks he is his own master, and has any thing he may call his own, ought to have arms to defend himself, and what he possesses, or else he lives precariously and at discretion." True distinction ! which will obtain while there are freemen and slaves. To be actually in bonds is not to be a slave, for that has happened to men of the noblest minds. But to be of a base, a dastardly and servile spirit, to want the desire and capacity of self-defence, that is to be a slave; for these vile qualities bring a man under the will and power of every one who thinks it worth while to command him.
But, in spite of the clearness and certainty of those principles, the freest nation on earth had almost forgotten them, and in a few ages more might perhaps have acknowledged an order of men for their masters, whom they were so willing to trust for their defence. Experience indeed, at the glorious revolution, hath taught us that liberty is dear to all orders of man, and that we have but little reason to fear that the favour of an ambitious prince will, before an aera of general corruption, be able to purchase a surrender of the rights of freemen, even from our soldiers. The wisdom and justice of our sovereigns have been also no less a security to Britain, than the extensive property and liberal minds of her military officers. The fear of the pretender, the great armies of France, and other continental powers, have been strongly urged as unanswerable reasons for keeping up a numerous standing army. And our eager pursuit of trade, together with the softness that luxury induces, and the contempt of military honours which wealth begets, have been our motives for yielding to these reasons.
Necessity at length brought to pass what neither philosophy nor eloquence were able to atchieve. Our standing army was unequal to the uses for which it was designed ; a more certain internal defence was found necessary; and thus the pretender and the armies of France have procured us a respectable militia. We have at length had recourse to the ancient principles of our constitution; and those noble patriots who thought of security against invasion only in the second place, if they thought of it at all, have had their generous aim accomplished, through the fear of that danger, which they perhaps looked upon as a pretence or a bugbear. So little foresight has the sagacity of the wisest statesmen, and so much sway has necessity and expedience, in the government of nations.
Pardon me, my Lords and Gentlemen, for having dwelt so long on the causes and occasions of this constitutional law. I shall next consider the advantages of a militia in general, and the chief objections that have been made against it ; and then proceed to inquire into the reasons for extending or not extending this law to our own country of North Britain.
I have already hinted that there is a certain spirit or force in every free government, that dictates salutary laws in cases of necessity, and, like the vigorous constitution of a human body, draws good out of evil, corrects what is noxious, and assimilates it to itself. It may further be observed, that Providence has so united what is wise and just, to what is easy and beneficial, that men have little more to do, than to pursue those measures which are most obvious and honest. In the present case, we had only to look back to the original principles of the constitution, to find a militia ; and thence it appears to be the most obvious, and natural, and just expedient for our defence. It must also be allowed to be the most certain and frugal method that could be devised.
Who does not admit that Britain is stronger, by all the number the militia consists of, since they were arrayed? When once the militia is complete in England, is it not evident that we shall be able to act offensively against the enemy with an additional force equal to their number, which is 32,000 men? I could almost venture to say, that our return to principles congenial to our constitution, has given a firmness and vigour to our councils unknown before ; and that from the date of the first execution of the militia law, commences the æra of the success and glory of our arms. But though our force is thence increased, and our councils invigorated already, it is in future wars, if this shall terminate when I wish it, that we are to expect the full benefit of this national institution. At the end of seven years 90,000 men must have been trained to arms in England alone, and in process of time, all the sensible men of the kingdom. And then having established the best defence any state is capable of, viz. the united strength of every individual, let the French, or let all Europe, invade us if they will.
If the war shall last another campaign, Britain must exert her utmost force. Besides foreigners in our pay, we shall probably have no less than 130,000 native soldiers ; an army that it is impossible for us long to support, and which at the end of the war, in half-pay officers alone, will leave a very heavy burden on our revenues. But it were easy to demonstrate that in a future war, by means of the militia, which loads us with no half-pay, and costs us little expence except when actually employed, we shall be able to exert an equal force against our enemies with half that number of soldiers.
Thus it appears, that a militia is the most certain and most frugal method of defence. Let us consider what effect it would have on our army. I would not be thought to mean any reflection on the regular forces of Great Britain, when I affirm, that they will be improved by the establishment of a militia ; nor do I chuse to bring any late events in proof of my assertion. I regard and honour the army; and I congratulate my country on the glories of late so justly acquired by her native troops ; for till war cease upon the earth, a reputation in arms cannot fail to be a capital advantage to any nation. By arguing for a militia as the firmest internal defence, it is not my design to invalidate the reasons for a standing army. The dignity of our Sovereign, and the grandeur of the state, require a lasting establishment of military force. To mix often in the wars of Europe with a body of British auxiliaries, would preserve our military reputation, and be the means of ensuring our officers to service and the practice of war. The army would thereby become an example and a model to our less experienced, not less capable militia.
The establishment of a militia, on the other hand, would be a singular advantage to the standing army, as it would remove the peoples ground of distrust in them, and recover to them their confidence and esteem. The manners of a nation have an irresistible influence over the mind; and as few will have the spirit to be brave where cowardice is not dishonourable, so none will dare to be cowards, where the whole men of their city or country are known to be brave. Besides, as emulation is allowed to be one of the greatest spurs to noble atchievements; by establishing a separate order of military men we kindle that passion in the breasts of our soldiers. Every one thinks himself accountable to his relations and friends for the whole of his conduct ; and let the public judge of him as they will, he will find some consolation in the esteem of his own family. But by raising the military spirit, and rendering the friends and relations of every soldier capable to judge of his conduct, a jury is established in every family of the kingdom, where even women and children will be feverer judges, than the public itself.
I shall now consider the objections against this national institution. There are only two of any importance. The first is drawn from the consideration of our trade and manufactures; the second, from an apprehension of the inefficacy of a militia.
It is said, That a military spirit is contrary to the interest of a commercial nation ; and that the militia will interrupt the industry of our people who are employed in trade and manufacture. The short answer to this objection, is, That perhaps it might have weight, if what is necessary to our safety, could be contrary to our interest; and if we could preserve our trade and manufactures, without employing any hands in their defence. But we shall consider it more in detail. It is unquestionably true, that when the militia are embodied, and march out of their respective counties, labour loses as many hands as they consist of; and if the militia were designed only for parade, none but madmen could approve of the institution. But when the end of the institution is the security of our lives and liberties, and of that very trade and manufacture, what reasonable man can object to it for a moment ? Especially if it be considered, that labour loses less by it, than by a standing army. Soldiers in time of peace are wholly lost to their country. The militia follow their occupations, except on the few days in a year when they meet in divisions to learn their exercise : and even in time of war, as the militia are raised equally from every place in proportion to its numbers, when they march from home, manufactures must feel it less. A large recruit of the army, which falls chiefly on the towns, carries off the manufacturers, and is subject to no rules, but the caprice, interest, or good fortune of the officers. If it be added, that, after this root of internal strength is firmly planted, a much smaller number of soldiers will be needed, on the sudden emergence of a war; it will appear that trade and manufactures are gainers by the institution.
We hope likewise, for the honour of trade and manufacture, that they will not be found inconsistent with a spirit of liberty, and the capacity of self-defence. They do not appear to be so in the natural world. In the most industrious republic that nature knows, the republic of the bees, every citizen is always in arms; and among that warlike people, to be cowardly, and to be lazy, are synonymous terms: for the drones, who carry no sting, are expelled as useless to society.
But will the private men of the militia, it is asked, return to their labour again, after being embodied, and doing their duty as guards or garrisons for a year or two? In answer to this question, I shall ask another: Will the 70 of 80,000 men who must be discharged from the army at the peace, will they, after six or seven hard campaigns, return to their labour again? No doubt both must return to their labour, or enter into foreign service, or starve. But the militia have this advantage above the army, that they are inrolled with the certain prospect of being dismissed at the end of three years; and therefore they can seldom lose sight of the occupation to which they have been bred. Besides, they return home with their officers at their heads, who are gentlemen of fortune in their own country, who may have probably gained their affection and esteem, whom they will be unwilling to disoblige by idleness or profligacy, and who will encourage and protect them to the utmost of their power.
Another objection against the militia, is, That they can never be of any use, because the art of fighting cannot be learned unless a man makes it his sole business and profession. This objection takes its rise from the idea commonly annexed to the word militia, which of late has fallen into contempt, and brings to one's mind the birthday-parade of the trained bands of Edinburgh. The objection is supported also by the practice of modern times, which has made the military a separate profession. But there was no occasion for a new law to provide us with an ineffective militia; the old statutes were sufficient for that purpose. All the essential parts of discipline can be acquired in a very short time; and the regulations in the late militia-law, if supported by the spirit of the gentlemen in each county, are sufficiently calculated for that purpose. Let us then call the militia now to be established by another name ; let it be an army of the people, and no ideas of inefficacy or cowardice will be annexed to it. They are to be armed, trained, and cloathed in the same manner with regular troops, and the same subordination is to take place amongst them, though not to be enforced by military law, except when they march from home. In time of peace indeed, and always till they are called out by their King for the defence of their country, they are to live in their own houses, and work at their respective trades, except on their stated days of exercise ; at the end of three years they are to be dismissed : They are to have no pay but either on their field-days, or when they march out of their respective counties, upon actual invasion or rebellion, with consent of parliament: they will generally consist of sober and virtuous men, who have both substance and reputation to lose : and their officers are to be gentlemen of the highest rank and greatest property in the country. Unless then it can be said, that idleness forms the bodies, and dependence the minds of men, better than labour and independence ; and that a little pay can excite the indigent and ignoble to an higher pitch of honour, than that with which principles and affection can inspire a superior order of men, when they fight in defence of their fortunes, their families, their religion and liberty; hired soldiers in point of valour cannot excel the militia, nor the standing army, the army of the people.
But will any man fight, it is asked, who can hire another to fight for him? I answer, None who are capable of putting so base a question : for all men of worth and principles know, that fortitude and courage are the guardians, not only of property, but of all the virtues; and yet, as the question is suggested by a strong idea of personal safety, that very idea revolved again in the mind, one would think, might dictate another article of self-examination ; that is, How do I know that the man who fights to-day in my defence, for a small part of my money, may not to-morrow take it into his head to fight me if I won't give him the whole ?
It is needless to bring old examples from the armies of Rome, or from those of our own country of Britain ; and it is equally needless to quote the present armies of Switzerland, or those of the great King of Prussia, whose native soldiers in time of peace are permitted to live at home, and follow their business for nine or ten months of the year; since England at this moment furnishes indubitable proof, that, in a very few months, the spirit of a few noblemen and gentlemen, under the inspection of a magnanimous administration, has been able to restore the military character to its honours again, to revive the warlike spirit, and to form such a popular army, as the most prejudiced officers by profession acknowledge to be equal to our regular forces. It is childish to say, that, in spite of their appearance, they would fail in time of real danger: for that is to say, that neither the maxims of common sense, nor the rules of the military art, are good foundations of judgment. I remember a time, when it was allowed that even an undisciplined militia could fight; that was in the year 1745. Strange! that a disciplined militia for us should be good for nothing, and an undisciplined one against us be so very formidable. O! but the militia of the year 1745 were Highlanders! The time was when every man in the kingdom was as good as a Highlander; and such a time will come again, if we are not wanting to ourselves.
I should be very sorry if any thing I have said should seem to state an opposition between the militia and the army. I think both are necessary; the one for our internal defence, and the other for foreign wars, and the support of our power and dominion. Without a militia we Cannot be secure; Without an army, In the present state of Europe, we cannot be great. A few eminent officers of the army have been zealous promoters of the militia: It was weak in any of them to discover the least jealousy. Whatever strengthens the whole society, must be for the happiness, security, and honour of individuals.
Thus I have endeavoured to trace out the causes and ends of this national institution, to point out the advantages that may arise from it, and to obviate the chief objections that have been made against it. And why was not this Constitutional establishment extended at first to Scotland ? What good reason can be given for delaying so long to let us feel, in this important article, the benefit of the union? What had we done to forfeit our rights as Britons even for a single hour? To make answers to these questions leads me to the last branch of my subject, which I cannot enter upon without anxiety for the event in dependence, and indignation for what is past. The time has been when the hirelings of corruption were ready to brand every man with the imputation of folly, if not disaffection, who had courage to mention a militia as a rational measure of defence. But the general system, which those arts of affected zeal were intended to flatter, is now changed, and the persons who used them are, I hope, now as despicable for their impotence, as they were always for their want of capacity or candour.
I have been informed, that the illustrious person who first moved for a militia in the house of Commons, in the conclusion of his speech, made an apology for his not proposing to extend the bill to Scotland ; and expressed his hopes, that some of the gentlemen who were skilled in the laws and customs of that part of the united kingdom, would soon move the house for leave to bring in a bill, that should be accommodated to the state of that country. At that particular time, it is said to have been in the thoughts of some of our representatives, to move for such a bill ; but the English patrons of the militia finding they were to meet with a violent opposition, begged it might be dropt at that time, lest it should give a handle to their opposers. But, to the shame of our members of p---t, two years have been suffered to elapse, and none of them have ever attempted to obtain for their countrymen the highest privilege of Britons; the only certain mark of distinction, by which freemen are known from slaves.
Is it that the ancient Scottish spirit is quite extinguished ? or is it that the Jacobites had truth on their fide, when they upbraided us with being a province, and a conquered kingdom? No. The genius of the Scotch never shone with greater lustre than now: In war and in letters we have acquired our share of glory, and our generous fellow-subjects the English meet us half-way in every step we take towards the full completion of the union. Happy should we be, if there were no bar in the way to prevent the immediate extension of every constitutional law in this part of the kingdom! Thrice happy! if, possessing every privilege of Britons, we knew the value of freedom, the greatest of human blessings, and felt that quiet sense of liberty which animates our countrymen beyond the Tweed.
The inhabitants of Scotland have so lately come to share in the policy of that wise and happy people with whom they are united, that the national spirit is hardly yet diffused among the commons. We are accustomed to put implicit trust in our superiors: to them we respectfully leave the care of all the measures of government, and few posess that inquisitive temper, or elevation of thought which freedom inspires. I am glad to make this apology for my countrymen of Scotland, who, when every county and every borough in England, on a late occasion, called loudly for arms as their only security, remained silent and spiritless, like the effeminate inhabitants of a conquered province; the more shame to those whose rank and power, and the trust reposed in them, required them to watch over the welfare of their country, that they took no step to secure to us the most important right of freemen and of Britons! Are we then a province and a conquered kingdom? No. But what avails it that we are free and independent, while we create to ourselves racks and bow-strings in the fear of offending, and wear chains and fetters in servility of mind?
Let us suppose, that the treaty of union had contained in it such an exception as I complain of : suppose, in the 4th article, which secures to all the subjects of the united kingdom a communication of all the rights, privileges, and advantages, which do, or may belong to the subjects of either kingdom, that an exception had been made of the privilege of arms for our own defence; and let us consider how such a clause would have been received in the parliament of Scotland. It is not impossible but men might have been found at that time capable of glossing such a national affront into a favour, and of paying their court by yielding up the honour of their country. Might they not have said, " That the Scotch had been too long addicted to arms, to the neglect of all the arts of peace: That they were much beholden to the generous English who had undertaken to protect them: That their navy was the best defence against foreign invasions, and their militia the best security against sudden insurrections of the Highlanders: That we were happy in being freed from the trouble and expence of defending ourselves: That, safe and secure under the care of such faithful guardians, our lazy and idle commons would at length apply to trade and manufactures ; and that our nobility and gentry, instead of wasting their fortunes and their blood in quest of the bubble honour, would live in peace and pleasure at home, beget sons and daughters, and accumulate wealth for their children?”
In what a different tone may we suppose the noble patriots of those times would have spoken? How would indignation and disdain have kindled the spirit of the gallant Fletcher on such an occasion!
“ My Lord Chancellor,” (might he not have said) "if I may call by that name the first officer of a now degraded kingdom! I have often told you in this place, that the possession of arms is the only distinction of freemen from slaves: and I have as often called upon you to arm the people, as the only security for our independence. Had the parliament of Scotland agreed to my proposal, we had not suffered the shame and dishonour of this day. By arms, and by arms alone, our ancestors sustained the reputation and power of this kingdom; and then did they properly bear in their ensigns the motto, That none should provoke them unpunished. Without arms that motto may be reversed, and all may not only provoke, but trample upon us with safety. In fertility of soil, in numbers of people, in industry and wealth, we are infinitely surpassed by the English.--- It is by arms alone that we can preserve to ourselves a name among nations. To offer us a communication of every privilege with the exception of arms, is to set before us all the dainties of the earth, and then to tie up our hands that we may not taste them. If we once give up our arms, there are no terms so hard that we must not accept of ; but while we yet have arms, and the power to use them, to agree to this article, is to make ourselves a jest and a proverb to the world. I move then, and it is the last motion I shall ever make if it is not agreed to, that the treaty be instantly broke off, and that all the commissioners who signed this infamous article, be stripped of their honours, and declared traitors to their country.”
Such undoubtedly would have been the sentiments of Fletcher upon the supposition I have made. The present times indeed are different from those he lived in: the manners and sentiments of men since that period are greatly changed. But no softness of manners, nor feebleness of sentiment, can dispose men to brook the disgrace of such an exception. Let us try it by a single instance. Suppose Yorkshire had been excepted, or even only omitted in the militia-law, what a storm of rage and resentment would have fallen upon the ministers who had presumed to offer the exception? Is there one of all their thirty members, if he had been a tame spectator of such an affront, that could have ever hoped to have represented any part of that county again? Even Middlesex itself, the very centre of degenerate manners, must have felt the shock of such an indignity through the double coat of torpor that wealth and luxury has wrapt around her.
Who then can say, that the Scotch are a people proud and impatient of injury or scorn, beyond any other in Europe, when they have waited for two years in the utmost tranquillity, till every possible excuse or pretence has become stale? And who can now tax them with want of trust and confidence in their superiors, when their patience is well nigh degenerated into a reproach, and their silence may imply a backwardness to vindicate their own honour, or to bear a share in supporting the dignity of the British crown?
This shire, of which I am a member, had the honour to be the first that called for arms. Thanks to a venerable judge, who joins the boldness of Cæfar to the firmness and integrity of Cato ! The clergy, to do them justice, had done their part; they had attested the loyalty of the people. After the example of this shire, several others took the disarmed state of Scotland under consideration ; the spirit rose, the flame spread from shire to shire ; and then you, my Lords, and Gentlemen, as the representatives of almost every part of Scotland, gave form and substance to the earnest wishes of a whole people. You have acted with honour ; you have managed, I doubt not, with wisdom; you have deserved and you have obtained the gratitude and praise of your country.
And here I cannot omit to take notice of one piece of neglect which the freeholders of Scotland, with all their zeal, have been guilty of upon this occasion; that is, the not instructing their members upon an affair of so much consequence as the militia-bill : An affair by far the most interesting and important to North Britain, that ever has been laid before the British parliament. For, with the most hearty approbation of the union, and its salutary effects, I do maintain, that if the militia bill, now brought into parliament, does not pass, it had been good for Scotland, that there had been no union. But this neglect my yet be made up for, if the gentlemen freeholders will lose no time in calling meetings of their respective shires, and sending up vigorous instructions to their members, on a point which decides the fate of Scotland.
I would have this measure instantly followed, not because I am under any apprehension that the bill can possibly miscarry in parliament, but because I would have every sort of excuse or pretence put out of the power of our own n-b-rs, and leave them no room to pretend, that this is not a measure earnestly wished for, or impatiently expected by their country. They will now have an opportunity of wiping off, by their zeal and activity, the reproach to which their long silence, and our ignorance of the cause of it, has justly exposed them. The time of distinguishing those who have deserved well of the pupblic, or of marking them with infamy who have betrayed the rights of their country, is now fast approaching; and the freeholders and burgesses of Scotland are not insensible, that the seasons of their power are only periodical, and that it is but once in seven years, that they can reward the public spirit, or punish corruption.
And here I cannot but testify my surprise, that the freeholders of Scotland, men for the most part of independent fortunes and good education, should show themselves so tame and manageable as they have done upon many occasions. When once indeed they are fully roused upon national points, I believe there is no body of men in great Britain that are capable of showing a more unconquerable integrity: But it must be owned, that in the exercise of their own inherent power, they have for the most part been indolent and inattentive in a shameful degree. And the consequence has been, that our r----t---ves have on many occasions betrayed the rights and honour of their country; nay, the nation has been thought of a base and servile spirit, on account of a few who have carried to p---t the dispositions of a needy or sordid mind, instead of the liberal spirit of a British commoner.
I have indeed been often puzzled to account for the frigidity and insignificance of my brethren the freeholders. They are not very numerous. They live in friendship with one another. They are generally men of liberal minds and easy fortunes, and neither desire nor expect any favours for a court or a minister ; or had they any favours to ask for their sons or nephews, surely the very worst suitors they could employ are those dependent men, whose sole end in p----t, is to obtain posts and pensions for themselves. Whence then arises that difference they show to court dependents? Public-spirited and honourable men have an equal title with them to ask a proportionable number of offices, civil or military, for their friends of their own shires or boroughs; and it is certain, that they will both ask and obtain them, unless some base compliance is demanded as the price.
But tho' I am puzzled to account for the usual indifference of the electors of Scotland, I am at no loss to foresee what a national spirit will animate their conduct at the next general election. In ancient and uncorrupted Rome, the candidates for the magistracy, at elections, displayed the laurels they had won, and the wounds they had received fighting in their country's cause, as the best title they could plead for being raised to power and honour. And if the electors of North Britain shall put no mark of disgrace on those who shall dare to be cold or neutral in the question, whether or not their country shall be put in a state of defence, and in possession of the privileges of freemen ? from thenceforth I shall renounce the name of Scotchman, as equivalent to that of slave.
I hope, I am not too sanguine, when I believe, that whatever be the conduct of some of our own members, this application cannot possibly fail of success. The friends and patrons of the militia in England, who have wondered at the tameness with which we have suffered what they must think an indignity, and who began to doubt our zeal for liberty, will receive our proposals with a hearty welcome. The former opposers of that measure, in justice to the present sentiments of respect with which the success of the militia has inspired them, will certainly give us their assistance. An administration warm in the prosecution of this glorious war, and intent on the happy conclusion of it, cannot fail to second a proposal that will extend its ability to pursue the favourite object. And the wife and equitable legislature of Great Britain, must have weighty reasons indeed, before they can refuse to put us in possession of a privilege that we claim as Britons.
What Scottish heart but must feel emotions of joy, on the certain prospect of being treated with equal respect and confidence with the other inhabitants of Britain ? Who, till now, could have looked back on the danger and disgrace from which we so lately escaped, without feeling resentment and disdain of the state in which we were left, and the most anxious fears of greater distress and dishonour in the approaching summer?
Men of as little sagacity and foresight as of principles of honour, formerly said, that as the French could not seriously intend to invade us; and as a militia would necessarily involve us in trouble and expence, it was far more eligible for us to remain without one. But the good fortune and vigilance of Captain Thurot, which led him past the British fleet in the north sea, and who, for ought we know, still waits an opportunity of making a descent upon our coast, opened at once the eyes of every one who was willing to see.
An administration less capable of imaginary fears, than any one which Britain ever saw, thought it prudent to draw the small military force allotted us, round our capital ; which left many hundred miles of our coasts, friths, and bays wholly naked, and exposed to the depredations of the enemy. Had the French made a successful descent in the south of England, our little army must have been instantly withdrawn ; and all Scotland left to the mercy of M. Thurot, till such time as the invaders of the south had been driven out of the island ; that is to say, that 1,200,000 people without arms or discipline, or leaders, must have submitted to 1200 in arms, and laid their lives and fortunes at their feet. Scotland needs the internal defence of a militia even more than England ; because when both are in danger, the fleet and the army are necessarily employed in defence of the latter, the seat of wealth and of empire.
What single day was there all last summer, in which the towns of Ayr, and Irvine, or even Port-Glasgow, the port and warehouse of the rich city of Glasgow, might not have been insulted and subdued by a privateer of small force? And how many other towns in Scotland are exposed to equal hazard, without the power of making the least resistance? This is no spectre of danger raised by a timorous fancy. Every body was convinced of the reality of it, till Admiral Hawke defeated the French fleet. But the same danger may return again: for though such conquests as those I mention, would not much avail the King of France, they are no inconsiderable objects to the master of a French privateer. And though the British government would feel itself very little the weaker for the disasters of private men, yet the smallest towns being intitled to her protection as well as the greatest, such insults would expose her to the contempt of foreign powers much beyond the real loss, and to domestic disquiet equal to the heaviest blow.
Whet avail the bravery of our fellow-citizens, and the glory they have acquired in the present war, if, while they fight in distant regions, to add to the fame of the Scottish courage, their country, filled with men as gallant, but naked and untrained, be insulted, plundered, and ruined, by a handful of desperadoes, whom, if they had arms in their hands, they would despise and chasten? Did not the heart of every Scotchman burn with shame and indignation, when he beheld a people inferior to none in Europe for military glory, trembling at the approach of Thurot's pitiful armament, and waiting in a state of helpless dejection, till they should feel where the blow would fall? To whom will posterity impute this disgrace, the greatest which ever befel our country?-Not to the people; Scotchmen were never unwilling to take arms in their own defence; nor to any backwardness in our superiors to trust a brave and loyal people. Would to God, I could say with truth, that the nobility and gentry of Scotland had more early discovered that attention to the honour and security of their country, and to their own importance, which became them.
The success of our arms during the present war, has, no doubt, been great and glorious ; but as adversity soon throws us into despair, prosperity as soon elates us into presumption. The commerce of France is destroyed, her colonies are subdued, and her navy is ruined ; but these are all but members of her artificial strength, which they may suffer to be maimed or lopped off, and yet remain a great and a powerful kingdom. The want of genius or integrity in the governors may have occasioned a temporary declension, or luxury and corrupt manners may have really impaired the vigour of the state. But we should beware of imagining that France is irrecoverably gone, or that a nation can make but few or feeble efforts only, where every gentleman is an officer, and where they actually march 400,000 men into the field. As she has not listened to proposals of peace, she certainly intends to push the next campaign with the utmost vigour; and it is not impossible that we may be exposed, in North Britain, next summer to equal or to greater danger than that with which we were so lately alarmed. Thurot has not yet returned to the ports of France; and as the plan of the ensuing campaign has made it necessary to call away from Scotland the two regiments of dragoons, who could have scoured the coast on which the enemy appeared, much better than foot are able to do, we shall be left in a state still more defenceless and deplorable than before. One advantage it is laid we possess indeed, that there are two battalions of the gallant Yorkshire militia at present near the borders of Scotland, who will probably be sent thither upon any sudden emergency, and who will not grudge to defend us, till such time as our own militia are arrayed.
By that constitutional establishment all such dangers will be avoided for the future: for though the numbers of the militia should be small in proportion to the extent of our coasts, yet being dispersed over all, no part will be perfectly guardless; by means of the rotation, the numbers of trained men will be nearly doubled on the fourth year; in a few years more all the men able to bear arms will have been trained: In the mean time a military spirit will revive amongst us: our gentlemen will become officers: and on the approach of danger, volunteers, with which this country always abounded, will find able leaders as well as order and discipline, in the battalions of their respective shires. So that in a few years hence the regiment of this shire or county, which may probably consist of some hundreds, might upon, an appearance of real danger, in a few days be increased to 2000, perhaps in a few days more to double that number; for when once the people are trained to arms, and catch the warlike spirit, their strength can only be computed by the list of those that are able to bear arms.
Let every Scotchman recollect the terror and disgrace of the year 1745, and let him congratulate his country on the certain assurance of never beholding such a scene any more. In the days of old, when Scotland subsisted by its national spirit, such an insurrection of the Highlanders could not have penetrated on this side of the Tay; for at that time the inhabitants of the mountains were the least warlike of the Scots ; but, to the grief and indignation of a disarmed people, a few thousands of the clans over-ran the country, and the friends of liberty, and of the government, incurred the same imputation of disaffection with the rebels, because they had it not in their power to resist them: and to this day, perhaps, the opinion of our disloyalty had prevailed, if the same desperate band had not marched through England to within an hundred miles of the capital, without meeting with resistance. I will venture to affirm, that from the 21st of September, when the rebels beat the troops under Gen. Cope at Prestonpans, to the 17th of January, when they defeated Hawley at Falkirk, there was time enough to have armed and trained as many men of the shire of Ayr alone, from whence not a single man joined the pretender, as would have driven the rebels to their mountains for shelter; but at that time it was thought more proper to intrust the Dutch or the Hessians, than the Scots, with the defence of Scotland. His Majesty's most wise and generous councils have reclaimed the long deluded Highlanders to loyalty, by confidence and rewards; and their bravery has in a great measure atoned for the shame and distress they and their fathers have brought upon their country. Two battalions of sensible men or militia are already appointed for the defence of the West and the North ; and shall the low country of Scotland, the great body of the people, the Presbyterians, who yield to none of his Majesty's subjects in their love of liberty and zeal for the government, shall they be the only part of the united nations who are not to be intrusted with arms?
Scotland, it must be owned, has always bred a race of fawning miscreants, who have built their own fortunes on the discredit of their country; vile whisperers, who take possession of the ears of the great ; and having neither honour nor abilities, make their way to preferment, by fomenting the prejudices of men in power. Men of this character, equally servile and insolent, cowardly and fierce, having often marred the fortunes of private persons, by the odious and false imputation of Jacobitism, are capable of obstructing an establishment for the safety and honour of their country, by secret insinuations of general dissatisfaction. If such men had truth on their side, the friends of the government, it might be thought, would range under them; for in the divisions of a country, zeal burns in proportion to the opposition it meets with. But if they are factious, and yet have no party; if they have power, and yet are not courted ; if they have rank, and yet have no influence; if they have fortune, and yet have no friends, the conclusion to be drawn is both certain and obvious.
It is proper to warn such parricides as these, who would stab their mother to the heart, of the just resentment of all her faithful sons. Having already experienced the scorn and neglect of all men of liberal minds, let them forecast in their thoughts, whether or not they will be able to bear the strong antipathy and hate of a whole injured nation. In fact, the disaffection of which Scotland has been accused, has chiefly existed in the violence of parties, who have alternately imputed it to each other, in order to depress their adversaries. But the great body of the people have always been zealous for liberty, and the illustrious family now on the throne. At all times it would have been safe to have intrusted this country with arms, because the disloyal have ever borne a small proportion to the loyal. But as the Highlanders, ever prompt to rise in arms, are now out of the question; as the confidence, for which great minds are remarkable, has been successfully applied to win their attachment and fidelity; we can boldly set the low country of Scotland in competition with any part of Great Britain, and bid all men defiance to point out any province, division, of county of England, in which there is more loyalty, or less disaffection, in proportion to the numbers of people.
It is high time for me now to bring this long letter to a conclusion. But, before I take leave, I must call on you, my Lords, and Gentlemen, and upon all the nobility and gentry of Scotland, to confider, that when you have got the militia-bill passed into a law, you have performed but one half of your duty. The execution of it still remains, and that will require both attention and spirit. Your love of your country will, no doubt, inspire you with zeal and activity in her service; and, I hope, it will not check your ardour, to be told, that, in raising the minds of your countrymen, you will yourselves rise to significance and honour. Pardon the expression, my Lords! your particular situation admits of improvement, though your birth seems to intitle you at once to every dignity. The offices of Lords Lieutenants, or Colonels, can add nothing to your honours or rank; but they may give you new weight and consideration in the view of your country. Represented only in one house of the legislature, excluded wholly from the other, and placed above the learned professions, no road to distinction remains for you, but that of arms. And where can the peers of Scotland appear with so much dignity and independence as at the head of the national militia, instituted for the preservation of liberty and laws, as well as for defence against foreign invasions ?
It is in your power, and in yours alone, my Lords, and Gentlemen, to make the militia in Scotland soon as respectable as that of any other part of Great Britain ; and the continuance of the war, though in other respects much to be regretted, is happily favourable for such a design. Many of the nobility and gentry of our sister-country have set you the example; they have restored their own order to its honours again, and prevented the decline of a nation which has been sometime threatened with the consequences of luxury and mistaken ideas. Let it not be said, that you only rival their follies, but fall behind in a love of liberty and independence. The commons of Scotland, by nature a bold and hardy race, inspired by your example, and encouraged by your protection, will soon recover that manly spirit which becomes a free people, and members of the British community. To them your countenance is an honour; your smiles are rewards; these you can bestow upon all. Superior merit will deserve more substantial favours. Industry itself, it is hoped, may be improved by this new institution: for whatever brings the people under the immediate care and inspection of their superiors, put them in a situation the most favourable for virtue and good morals. I am,
My LORDS, and GENTLEMEN,
Your most grateful
and obedient servant,
A FREEHOLDER.


