
            HERMIONE, OR THE ORPHAN SISTERS.
            A NOVEL.
            IN FOUR VOLUMES.
            VOL. I.
            LONDON 
                  
               
            
         
         
            

with submission and without a murmur. The Almighty is about to deprive you, as you must at present imagine, of your only surviving parent; but know, ano-ther yet remains, who, I trust, will be pre-vailed with, after I am gone, to supply the place and fulfil the duties of a father.
               To this solemn address, which seemed to annihilate my senses, I was unable to reply; but Fanny's feelings found vent in tears. She burst into an agony of grief—oh dearest papa, cried she, who upon earth can to us supply your place? when you leave us, we shall be alone in the world; no one cares for us, no one loves us, we have no friend but you.
               For the sake of heaven compose your-selves, my dearest children, replied my father. I leave you neither unprotected nor unfriended; and severe as is the first early stroke to youthful and susceptible hearts, a little time I hope will abate the poignancy of your regret; but the pre-sent

and transient indeed have these been since I left you. The only circumstance which yielded me any consolation in all my distresses, was the delightful hope, that the day would come when I should exultingly reveal all to you, and recom-pence you and myself by making the old age of my beloved father and mother affluent and happy.
                     That day, repeated she, after a pause, will never arrive; and perhaps it is a just punishment from Heaven for having deserted you; in which case, as my repentance is most sincere for that and all my transgressions, I trust in God it will be graciously accepted, and that I shall find in the grave that peace to which my bosom has been so long a stranger. But oh, my dearest father and mother, all my fears are for you; to me, death is a release from misery; since I retain no longer the affections of Lord Linrose, I preserve nothing that

attaches me to life. I feel, indeed, for my three infants, but while my mother survives, I am certain they will never know the loss of their own; and I hope they will neither inherit my weaknesses nor my misfortunes. Oh, may it please the Almighty to deliver them from im-bibing one particle of their cruel father's hardness of heart.
                     The old people folded her alternately in their arms, and mingling tears with their blessings, assured her of their perfect forgiveness, and entreated her to live for their consolation.
                     Oh! my dearest parents! cried she, how can you wish me so ill! distract me not, I beseech you, with your despair! God knows if I am really so near my end as I imagine, but I feel myself in-wardly gone, and so exhausted, that I think the struggle must soon be over. She then recapitulated the melancholy circumstances of her misfortunes as well

as weakness would allow her; but having wholly exhausted herself, she mentioned being extremely drowsy, and kissing her infant, perhaps it may be for the last time, said she; do not quit my bedside, my dearest mother, while I sleep; and stretching forth her hand, already be-dewed with the damp of death, she grasped her mother's with a feeble effort, and recommending herself to Heaven, in that attitude composed herself to a repose from which she never awoke. Her sleep, at first agitated and disturbed, soon subsided into a lethargic stupor, and she expired at midnight without a sigh.
                     Think, my children, what this recital costs me. It is worse than death to write! To think on such a scene—to think—God of Heaven! that I was the accursed murderer of that suffering angel! that my hands dealt the fatal blow which stabbed her to the heart!
                     
                        
Oh! my daughters! be not over-powered with horror. Let not, at least, a compassion too just for your hapless mother's fate, wholly obliterate from your bosoms that regard which your father has hitherto enjoyed. The be-nignant saint, I trust, accepts the tribute of that bitter remorse which has clouded the remainder of my days, and now re-joices in that blessed reward which her merit and her calamities so justly claim in a more glorious state of existence.
                     I now hasten to conclude the horrid tale; and return to myself, on that dreadful evening when your mother's letter was put into my hands.
                     Her sufferings, unutterable as they proved, being unimbittered with the agonizing pangs of remorse, could hardly surpass mine during that miserable night. My feelings were, if possible, heightened by the absolute necessity of concealing what I endured, under a smiling counte-nance;

this, however, I could only hope to effect by the assistance of wine, which I poured down in quantities, in hopes of drowning care and stifling con-science.
                     To augment my distress, which in-toxication, without bereaving me of my senses, could but little allay, on returning to the company, I found them in all the enjoyment of mirth and innocence. The music had been conveyed from the lawn to the saloon; and the moment I ap-peared, I was solicited to join the dance. Too conscious to refuse, I was con-strained to cover my anguish by assuming an air of gaiety, the most forced and unnatural. Happily the company were too much engrossed with themselves, and the amusement in which they were engaged, to observe me; but the dance being ended, Lady Linrose, my beloved Lady Linrose approached me.
                     She enquired in a tender whisper,

why I had so long secluded myself from the company, and expressed her fears lest I was ill; for which apprehension my pallid look, and an agitation not to be disguised, gave but too much cause. I answered her, as composedly as I could, that I had a severe head-ach, which dancing had encreased. She then besought me, with an anxiety that stabbed me to the soul, to fatigue myself no more: and carelessly repeating that it was a complaint to which I had been liable from my infancy, I turned from her the moment I could do so without appearing abrupt.
                     Good heavens! cried I to myself, into what a gulph of misery have my ungoverned passions plunged me! And what would your sufferings be, most amiable, most beloved of women! did you know the injury I have done you. Were the fatal tale to reach your ears, how would your present tenderness in-stantly

be converted into contempt and detestation.
                     These tormenting ideas made me avoid her the whole evening: and I dreaded the hour of retirement, lest, when we were alone, she should observe my distress, and renew her enquiries. My pretence of illness, however, was easily admitted by her unsuspecting mind; and I pretended to sleep, while my feel-ings were in a state which would admit of nothing like repose.
                     Next morning a party on horseback was proposed, and agreed to by all but myself. I excused myself on account of business; intending to take that oppor-tunity to get rid of my friends, and perform my promised visit to your mother, severe as was the task.
                     I knew not exactly the cottage in which she had taken up her abode; but concluding it would not be difficult to

find, I resolved to begin the search as soon as the company were set out.
                     One of the ladies, who was extremely gay, importuned me with eagerness during breakfast to postpone my business for at least one half hour, and accom-pany her with one or two more of my friends in a walk to the extremity of the park, to give my opinion of a situation for a rustic temple, which she had ad-vised my Lord to erect on a particular spot beyond the park gate; after which they meant to join the rest of the party, and pursue their morning rambles to-gether.
                     Conscious guilt made me agree to the proposal, as I supposed I should be soon afterwards at liberty; and I accordingly followed the young lady and my father, attended by Mr. Benseley, who was the friend to whom I was most tenderly attached, and indeed the one who most merited my confidence and friendship,

and accompanied by my dear Lady Lin-rose, who hung on my arm as we walked along, vainly endeavouring by the soft-ness of her attentions to soothe an un-easiness, the cause of which she could not penetrate.
                     Just as we got out of the park, we observed a good looking young woman, who suckled an infant, at the door of a cottage which stood directly on the road side.
                     That little thing appears hardly out of the egg shell, said Lady Linrose in passing. How comes it, good woman, that you expose it to the air so early?
                     Indeed madam, replied the woman, because it breaks my heart to enter the house. The mother of this child expired this morning; and her old father and mother are at this moment lamenting over the body in so piteous a manner, that it would melt a heart of stone to witness their distress.
                     
                        
These words made me shudder with the most dreadful apprehensions. But I was endeavouring to persuade the ladies, who were greatly interested by this mournful tale, to walk on, pre-tending great haste, when a figure pre-sented itself to our view, which instantly arrested their steps and rendered me mo-tionless with horror.—It was the old man himself, the father of your mother; who having perceived me from the win-dow of the cottage, in the frenzy of his despair, rushed out upon us. His aged withered face was pale with grief, and his whole frame shook with rage. Ad-dressing himself instantly to me—Come in here, detested wretch! cried he; come in here, and contemplate your work: see here the fruits of your villainy in the destruction of my darling child, your true and lawful wife; who lies here sacrificed by your treachery, and murdered by your own hands.
                     
                        

moments, added he, after a short pause, are unspeakably precious. Let Howard be sent for in all haste; tell him to make all the expedition in his power, and inform him that I expect, from his faithful attachment, the most painful, though most necessary offices of friend-ship —that he will close my eyes and re-ceive my last injunctions. A messenger was instantly dispatched. Mr. Howard was at Clarance, whither he had gone but the evening before, having left my father in perfect health. He travelled with the utmost haste; yet the few hours that elapsed before he appeared, to us seemed an age. My father, though the dreadful symptoms of approaching dissolution rapidly encreased, still retained his senses unimpaired; and on being in-formed that his friend was in the house, he expressed his gratitude to heaven that he had not breathed his last sigh without seeing him, and desired that he might
I heard no more: but uttering an exclamation of horror, fell insensible on the ground. Lady Linrose, shrieking with terror, threw herself by my side to support me, and Benseley, who was more able for the task, held me in his arms as I lay.
                     I almost instantly recovered my senses: but unable to stand the horrid explana-tion which I knew must follow; unable at that moment, when the keenest re-morse began to pierce my bosom and wholly unfitted me for dissimulation, to vindicate my innocence or even to at-tempt the slightest appearance of defence, while the old man's assertion was too strongly corroborated by the effects it had produced, I kept my eyes still shut, and pretended to remain in a state of insensi-bility.
                     My father stood in mute astonishment at this scene, too much confounded to unravel what it meant. The farmer's

frantic violence he might have conceived to be the sudden consequences of in-sanity; but the situation into which his words had thrown me, gave no small de-gree of credebility to what he had ut-tered, wild and extravagant as were his expressions.
                     What does all this mean? cried he to the farmer.
                     It means, returned the old man, that your son, my Lord, is a villain! yes, a perjured villain! He has married ano-ther, when my daughter has been law-fully his wife above six years, and she this morning expired a victim to his cruelty and crimes.
                     Oh horrible! exclaimed Lady, Lin-rose; abominable wretch! how, my Lord, can you tamely submit to hear that frantic old man utter falshoods so infa-mous and impossible?
                     Infamous it is, cried the farmer; would to heaven it had also been impossi-ble:

then had I at this instant rejoiced over a long lost and adored child, instead of mourning her miserable end in tears and distraction. Oh my Lord! conti-nued the old man, subdued by grief, which now succeeded to rage and indig-nation, throwing himself on his knees at my father's feet, from your character I dare hope for justice: you shall speedily be convinced that my innocent child has been deluded in the most shameful man-ner; and mean as is our rank, her fame must and shall be vindicated.
                     He then presented a paper to my fa-ther, which he entreated him to peruse. It was the certificate of my marriage with your mother; and my Lord, who by this time began to be somewhat staggered, appeared infinitely shocked on hastily throwing his eyes over the contents.
                     Farmer, said he, hesitating, and in much agitation, I believe my son may have injured your daughter; in which

case all the reparation she could have claimed, or you now can ask, shall be granted you; but as to his having made her his wife, that is an assertion which she has evidently invented to save her credit with you after her fall, and the falshood of such a pretence is enough to persuade you that she has not been with-out her share of the guilt. My son is, as you see, sufficiently affected with the unfortunate catastrophe, and I am very far from vindicating his conduct; on the contrary, all that can now be done to appease and console you is undoubtedly his duty; but in what manner this is to be effected, we must afterwards consider. I shall take another opportunity of talking with you on this subject.
                     Come, Madam, said he to Lady Lin-rose, who, breathless with apprehension, had remained during this conversation in all the stupor of silent horror. Pray lean on my arm, and let us be gone from

this place. Let us leave my son to the care of his friend. He is in no situation to justify himself at present. We ought therefore to suspend our opinion of his behaviour till he can explain matters fully. All that he is accused of is ut-terly impossible.
                     Young men, even the very best of them, continued he, as he obliged her unwillingly to walk away, supported by his arm and accompanied by her compa-nion, are but too prone to vices which in the more advanced periods of their lives they reflect on with regret and remorse. As to the ridiculous story of the mar-riage, I hope it gives you not the smallest uneasiness.
                     I cannot leave him thus, cried Lady Linrose, whose voice now burst through the sobs and tears which had stopped her utterance. But my Lord urged her strongly; and her friend so earnestly be-sought her to leave me to Benseley's care,

that she at last unwillingly attempted to go, though she often reverted her eyes, and was yet in sight, though at some distance, when Benseley saw her drop on the ground.
                     As soon as the ladies departed with my father, I opened my eyes. The far-mer darted a look of enraged indignation at me, and walked sorrowfully into the cottage almost immediately; before the door of which this dreadful scene had been transacted, and into which the wo-man and child had retreated at the be-ginning; though I perceived that she had brought more than one face to the window to remark the consternation into which the company had been thrown.
                     Only my friend Benseley therefore re-mained; and even him I dreaded to look on, though he laboured to soothe me with words of comfort. Oh, Benseley! cried I, as soon as I could find courage to speak, lead me from this spot, where

every object conveys horror inexpressi-ble! I will explain all to you hereafter; but at present my mind is incapable of talking, thinking, or acting for myself!
                     Would you return to the castle? cried he.
                     Oh! God! any where but to the castle. Hide me for ever from all be-neath its roof, and most from my amia-ble, my injured—
                     I dared not add, wife: my lips at that moment of anguish refused to be-stow that appellation, except on the still more injured deceased.
                     I supported myself on my friend's arm, and shame supplying the place of strength, we were soon out of sight of the cottage, and of Lady Linrose.
                     Tell me, cried Benseley, as we walked slowly on, tell me I entreat you, what all this means? I confound myself in vain to unravel the mystery. What am I to think of the situation in which I see

you? I perceive you accuse yourself of the poor girl's death. But country girls don't break their hearts from having made a false step; and it may have been with much more probability merely ow-ing to the circumstances of her situation; in which case, though you have certainly reason to reproach yourself, if she was innocent and seduced, yet there may be many alleviating circumstances to recon-cile you to yourself, and to excuse you even in the eyes of Lady Linrose.
                     Oh Benseley! mention not her name! (covering my face with my hands as if terrified at the idea of beholding her.)
                     Good heavens! my Lord, what do you mean?
                     I mean, that she has not, and never, never could have had a title to that name.
                     God in heaven! what do you tell me? exclaimed he in horror. What is it you force me to suspect?
                     Talk not on this subject, cried I; I

am unable to bear it. Would to God that the earth could open under my feet and swallow within its bowels a wretch unworthy to crawl on its surface.
                     For heaven's sake endeavour to com-pose yourself, my dear Linrose, cried he. But where do you intend going?
                     I answered, to town; where I could more easily bury myself from the world, and hide my head from every eye that had a chance of recognizing me.
                     Benseley then entreated me to mode-rate the transports of my despair, and to walk forward towards a village, where horses could be provided. This he could not for some time prevail on me to at-tempt; but at last, the desire of secluding myself induced me to wish to be in Lon-don as soon as possible; and we made the most of our way till we approached near the village. My friend, tho' afraid to leave me by myself in that situation of mind, after vainly striving to calm the

tumults of my distraction, and receiving my solemn promise to attempt no act of violence in his absence, then departed to provide a post chaise from the inn. I confess that had not my oath withheld my arm when I was left alone, I was hardly enough master of myself to have resisted the temptation of putting a pe-riod to my existence; but Benseley, who dreaded the wildness of my despair, has-tened the execution of his orders, and soon returned to me in the carriage.
                     We travelled post, for my friend would not desert me in that moment of affliction, and procured lodgings the most private in an obscure part of the city. Instead of upbraiding me, he performed unceasingly the kindest offices of friend-ship; and perceiving me sufficiently pe-netrated with a sense of the criminality and weakness of my conduct, and en-tirely overpowered by the calamities which had resulted from it, not to my-self

be instantly introduced into his bed chamber.
               On his entrance, Mr. Howard found my sister, whom no entreaties could per-suade to leave the room, vainly striving to suppress sobs, which the apprehension of too violently affecting our dying pa-rent obliged her to endeavour, though ineffectually, to restrain. My feelings, alas! were such as admitted not of the relief of tears; the stupor of despair had benumbed every faculty. I was alive only to the sensations of misery; and con-cealed by the curtains, I kneeled at the side of the bed, offering up silent peti-tions for that recovery, of which I had now lost the most distant hope. My father, after expressing his satisfaction on seeing Mr. Howard, desired the phy-sician, and all, excepting that worthy friend, my sister and myself, should leave the room. This request being instantly complied with, he besought Mr. How-ard

alone, but to those I passionately loved, and indeed to all who were con-nected with me, he not only forbore to probe my wounds too severely, but ex-erted himself to plan what steps I ought next to pursue; and I, who was unable to think for myself, received a feeble ray of satisfaction on finding I still pos-sessed a friend who would not abandon me, and that my crimes had not made this earth completely a desert to me.
                     Immediately on my arrival, I was seized with a violent fever attended with a delirium, in the intervals of which I heartily wished the disease might prove the termination of all my distresses. My friend, who never quitted my bed side, on this occasion wrote, by my desire, a letter to my father, acquainting him with my situation, and confessing to him every circumstance of my misconduct. This I had no intention now of concealing; and a full confession of the truth, in my

situation, was the only virtue I could testify. Benseley informed him, that unable to shew my face to the world, or again to meet the eyes of the woman I had so unpardonably, so irreparably in-jured, from the violence of a passion which knew no bounds and would give way to no restraints, and sensible that I merited only scorn and abhorrence from her, I was firmly determined, should I recover, which was an event he well knew I heartily wished never might take place, to spend the remainder of my days in a foreign country, and to bury myself in solitude and obscurity, where my name should be unheard of and my crimes unknown.
                     To this my father returned an answer dictated by all that resentment I had so justly incurred. He desired Benseley to inform me, that my offences were of a nature that reflected not only infamy on myself but disgrace and contamination

on all who had the misfortune of being allied to me: that he had endeavoured all in his power, not from regard to my fate but from anxiety to preserve the fa-mily honour untarnished, to persuade the farmer and his wife to silence, in hopes that the horrid train of iniquity which had led to such calamities, might be at least in part a secret from the world: but the old people, above be-ing either bribed or soothed into this measure, held their determination unal-terable of vindicating the injured fame of their deceased daughter, and were in possession of sufficient evidence to prove the truth of that unmanly and detestable transaction: that for his part, he could not help approving their inflexibility, and was not even certain if he was justi-fiable in having attempted to skreen a wretch, though his own son, from the assured consequences of blasted and irre-trievable honour, which ever receives

its due punishment in the contempt, ab-horrence, and desertion of the world; and which being driven from society and shunned by mankind, is forced to hide its miserable head in obscurity, where not one ray of comfort alleviates the just though rigorous sentence.
                     Happy had it been, continued his Lordship, for his whole family, had he breathed his last ere he cast so foul a stain on all connected with him. As to his present illness, all that can be wished for by his unfortunate relations is, that time may be granted him to repent of the many evils into which his misconduct has involved them and himself. He next mentioned Lady Linrose. My dear Lady Linrose! At the sound of her name I shuddered. Let me know no further, cried I to Benseley, whom I had con-strained unwillingly to read aloud the letter to me: yet the next moment my anxiety being insupportable, I insisted on

hearing all. She had been violently ill, had been given over by her physicians, and was still in the most alarming situa-tion, though for the present the fever ap-peared to have given way to medicine. But what was even ten thousand times worse than this, and rendered me abso-lutely frantic with despair, her mind no less than her tender frame had suffered. She never had been herself since that fa-tal, that accursed day. If the wretch, said my father in his letter, is insensible to the many shocking calamities which his crimes have produced, you may add to the list that of having driven to mad-ness the loveliest and most amiable of her sex.
                     In the state I then was, it may easily be concluded that a severe relapse could not fail to be the consequence of this dreadful information; and it was more than once my intention to put a final pe-riod to my existence by my own hand;

but Heaven interposed to save me from an action which would have filled up the measure of my iniquities, and my friend at length brought me to a more tempe-rate frame of mind.
                     During this period, an old servant, who is since dead, whom I had ever con-sidered more on the footing of a friend than a domestic, as he had once known better days, and had attended me from my youth, contrived, by what means I know not, to discover the place of my concealment. He had been left with the rest of my attendants at the Castle: but on hearing of my misconduct, easily conjecturing my situation, his faithful attachment determined him to find me out, and to entreat my acceptance of his attendance in whatever part of the globe I should fix my residence. He had in some particular instances regarded him-self as under peculiar obligations to me; and with a gratitude and fidelity rarely

to be met with in higher and more re-fined spheres, resolved to attach himself to me. By his means I learnt every mi-nute circumstance of the death of your mother, and all the particulars which preceded that dismal event. He had gained his intelligence from the woman who possessed the cottage; and answered my interrogatories with an accuracy which I never should have received from other hands, and which must have augmented my despair, had that been possible.
                     As soon as I was able to reason or re-flect with any sort of composure, Bense-ley brought you, my beloved children, to me, which was indeed the only shape which comfort could have assumed to touch my heart. The sight of my Her-mione, whose countenance recalled her injured mother strongly to my mind, and in whose infant features the expression of her mother's sweetness and her virtues were strikingly marked, brought the

soothing relief of tears, the first that de-spair had permitted to flow; and the only idea which afforded any thing like satisfaction to my soul, was the resolution of retiring abroad with my children, and devoting the rest of my life to their edu-cation; to fortify their minds with such principles as might deter them from guilt and deliver them from calamities like their father's. This employment I con-sidered as the only satisfaction I could offer to the memory of your unfortunate mother, and I flatter myself that if she could look down, it would give her an-gelic mind pleasure even in paradise, to behold me instilling into the minds of her children, sentiments congenial with her own.
                     This determination my father ap-proved, and informed Benseley, who acted as agent between us, that he would settle an annual pension upon me, for which I was to sign a formal resignation

of all claims to what might have de-volved to me at his death, and which would spare him the mortification of dreading any litigation in future between me and my brother, who on this dismal event had been reinstated in his Lord-ship's favour, and with his wife and a numerous family, were recalled from Ireland, the place of his constant resi-dence ever since his limited finances had constrained him to leave the army.
                     I stipulated, in place of the pension, for twenty thousand pounds; which sum was placed in the funds, and the annual interest has been remitted to me by Bense-ley since my residence here, with all the zeal of sincere friendship. Through his means I made enquiry also about my little infant boy, whose birth had been marked by events so dreadful; and had the misfortune to learn that he survived not above a fortnight, and the old peo-ple mourned their daughter's death once

more in the loss of the child she had be-queathed to their care.
                     To that miserable old couple, whose days I had loaded with unmitigated sor-row, I remitted every year a certain sum, by unknown hands, being conscious that from the hated hands of the murderer of their child, they never would have ac-cepted the gift. But within five years after my departure, Benseley informed me that the pension was no longer neces-sary; a fever having carried off the old man in his seventieth year, and his wife followed him a few months after.
                     My melancholy relation now draws towards a conclusion; for as soon as my illness would admit of a removal, I bid adieu to England for ever. It was not, you may easily conceive, my children, without feelings unspeakably painful, that I departed; nor without a tear which wrung my heart, that I was separated from Benseley. Though tenderly at-tached

to open a bureau which stood in the chamber: you will there find a manu-script, said he, dated some years ago, and written by my own hand: this ma-nuscript, my dear girls, (addressing him-self to us) contains a horrid tale, which I could wish were for ever buried with me in the grave; but as it is essentially necessary that your real situation in life should be made known to you at my death, when, exposed to the dangers and difficulties of a world with which you are totally unacquainted, the protection of your relations must be peculiarly important, I have considered it as a duty incumbent on me, to leave behind an impartial re-lation of that series of misfortunes, that checquered train of evils, which have rendered me an alien from my family, an exile from my country, and have long banished comfort and tranquillity from my bosom. So oppressed was his arti-culation, and so feeble his voice, that our

to you both, the only ties which connected me with mankind, you were but in infancy; and your innocent prat-ling, interesting as it was to the partial ears of a father, could yet but ill supply the society of a friend tried and approved. With a mind so unfitted for reflection, my solitude must at first have been insup-portable, had I not regarded every pang I endured as a just penance for offences hardly to be expected, and never to be forgotten.
                     Submission to Heaven, and a proper sense of that religion which leads even the greatest criminals to trust for pardon if penitent, has supported me, and my suf-ferings have now subsided into a settled melancholy; which at times has even something not unpleasing in it, and which admits of all the rational comforts of life, in the enjoyment of the society of my children, and even a delight in contemplating the success of my labours

for their improvement. But these satis-factions must ever be mixed with that allay which remembrance mingles with every rising consolation. This temper renders my company little amusing to those whom accident has introduced to my acquaintance, and on the other hand wholly unfits me for intercourse with the world; so that I have continued to live from choice in a retirement which has been only once enlivened by a kind visit of some months from my dear Benseley, and within these two years by the agreea-ble society of my friend Mr. Howard, whose acquaintance and friendship I re-gard as a signal favour from heaven to soothe and console me. He has indeed beguiled many a lonely hour by the mild good sense of his conversation—hours which otherwise would have proved dis-mal and irksome; for where reflection gives no comfort, time fails of its usual power of lulling pain.
                     
                        
Immediately on my departure, I as-sumed the name of Seymour, that no trace might remain to lead any of my former acquaintance to the knowledge of my abode. Even the good woman Mrs. Benton, whom Benseley procured to take charge of you as governess, knew me but under that borrowed appearance, and was ignorant to her death of the truth. That event, which happened some years after I settled at B—, obliged me unwillingly to send you to the convent of — for further in-struction in the different branches of education, instead of supplying her loss by another tutoress in the same line; for though this might have been perhaps procured, I knew not where to apply: Benseley was not at that time in a situation, from various circumstances, to exert himself in finding a person properly qualified, and he was the only one on

whom I could rely in a matter of such infinite moment.
                     I did not think myself at liberty to deprive either of you of the little accom-plishments of your sex; the principal advantages resulting from which are the amusement they bestow in solitude; neither did I consider it as allowable to seclude you from forming those soft ties and delightful connections of friendship, with girls of your own age, which are the growth of that happy period of our lives and almost belong solely to it; while on the other hand, besides parting from you for so long a space of time, I was under great apprehensions lest your infant minds should be tinged, during your abode in the monastry, with the errors of the catholic persuasion.
                     I determined, however, to place you there for two years, and I bless Heaven I have had reason in no respect to regret the sacrifice I made for Hermione's im-provements,

nor shall I, I trust, in future for that of my dear Fanny.
                     I am now come to the conclusion of my painful recital. Adieu! my beloved children! when these lines are presented to your view, I trust you will draw that veil over my errors, with which affection ever softens and obscures the perception of the faults of those we love. I do not wish you to excuse my conduct: do not attempt it; for of none will it admit. Abhor my crimes; but try to distinguish your father from his transgressions, and preserve if possible for my memory, that unabated tenderness and duty which have constituted the sole consolation of a life worn out with remorse, and de-voted to repentance—a repentance, the sincerity of which Heaven, I trust, has accepted.
                     Should the Almighty take me to himself before you have engaged your-selves

protectors in the married state, my friend Benseley has faithfully engaged to be a second parent to you: to him, therefore, I bequeath you; and I desire that you may ever regard him as my successor in your obedience and affections. On him you may safely rely, who would have saved your father from destruction had he profited from his example, and who saved him from despair though he slighted and neglected it. I am not without hopes that your grandfather, though too justly irritated against me, may through my friend's medium receive you to his favour, when the idea of my existence no longer disturbs the repose of his declining days; and I enclose a letter to him, which I desire may be presented by your own hands.
                     Once more adieu, my beloved chil-dren! may the great God of Heaven graciously attend to the prayers I daily

pour forth for your integrity and welfare; and may he ever defend you under the shadow of his wings from harm and calamity; but above all, from those which result from misconduct.
                     
                        LINROSE.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER II. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     SEPT. 26, —
                  
               
               I HAVE received your kind letter, my beloved friend; the most agreeable circumstance that could have befallen me at present, when my heart, exhausted and depressed, can imbibe consolation or relief from the tender sympathy of friendship alone.
               How just are your reflections, my Sophia, on our dear father's unhappy story. Surely a sense so rigorous of his errors, and so many years devoted to penitence and remorse, must not only have entirely obliterated his faults in the

eyes of infinite justice and mercy, but ought to render every candid mind compassionate and indulgent to trans-gressions which conveyed so severely their own punishment.
               What a number of circumstances, unheeded at the time, do Fanny and I now recall, that prove how bitterly he suffered. The gravity and seeming austerity of his manners, which you used to say made him appear so awful that you never could feel at ease in his pre-sence, we concluded merely constitu-tional: alas! we suspected not that his melancholy had a source so deep, nor that a weight of painful recollections gave a heaviness to his heart, which de-prived every enjoyment of its true relish, and could not fail to throw a gloom over his whole appearance; especially in the eyes of my gay, animated Sophia, blessed with a mind at ease, and in possesion of

all the vivacity which youth, health, and lively spirits can produce.
               Yet, my dear, religion and resignation had effected in him a mild thought-fulness, which, while it repressed gaiety, was far from wholly precluding content-ment. His temper was indeed so serene, so amiable, so free from all caprice or ill humour, and his conversation so in-structively amusing, so complaisantly in-dulgent to all the little whims and wishes of his children, that our affection for him, warm and unbounded, was un-tinctured with dread or awe; and we ever regarded him in the light of an agreeable and entertaining companion, while we revered him as that of a con-descending and respectable parent.
               Has not the woeful tale drawn tears from you, my dear? As for Fanny and myself, I thought the perusal would have actually killed us. Oh! what a number of dreadful events, unsuspected and un-known,

dear father did not finish the speech without many interruptions from weak-ness and fatigue, and the last words half died upon his lips; but having a little recovered himself—you, my dear friend, said he to Mr. Howard, will I hope af-ford my girls consolation and support un-der the pain of this severe and unex-pected communication. To your care I bequeath them. See them safe under the protection of Bensley or my father; represent to them, when they are able to listen to comfort, that my penitence has been almost proportioned to my crimes; and ah, my dear Howard! if possible de-test not the miserable author of calami-ties, the guilt of which, fifteen long years of remorse have, I trust, obliterated from the records of heaven.
               Sophia, what were at that moment my sensations? Is it in language to ex-press them? Ah no! they were incon-ceivable and unutterable! I felt there

what a source of never ceasing regret, has it opened to our knowledge; and what a period of misery have the days of our dear father proved! ought we then to weep his release from a world where sorrow, under various shapes, has been his constant pursuer, and where, under the baneful form of remorse, it has conducted him to the grave.
               I hope my Sophia has not been uneasy at the unusual interval of silence, after the last dismal part of my journal, which I think I sent off about six weeks ago. The truth is, I have had a severe relapse since that period. Nervous fevers are, you know, extremely liable to return when one concludes the alarm over, and caution unnecessary; and this fit of ill-ness was not only attended but produced by a dejection of spirits so depressing, that I am astonished I have been able to survive what I have suffered. This last attack was indeed so violent, that my

physicians thought me for several days in extreme danger, and shook their heads in silence, while poor Fanny gave me up for lost.
               It has pleased the Almighty, however, to restore me; though I am yet so lan-guid that I scarce feel as if I had exist-ence: but I am infinitely better than I could have conceived possible in so short a space; and the relief Fanny's mind has received from this event, has almost wholly recovered her usual good spirits: her terrors on my account, by dividing her attention and engrossing her anxiety, have abstracted her thoughts from the past, and her escape from a still greater calamity, for such undoubtedly my death must have proved at this juncture, when we are left in a manner deserted and alone, has produced a wonderful change in her dejection. Her timidity of tem-per, even to helplessness, renders her so dependant on me, and so totally unfits

her for struggling against the difficulties of our unconnected situation, that my loss could be felt at no period so severely as the present.
               I have considered some points in her temper, however, as very fortunate at this melancholy season; when to have endured the burthen both of her sorrows and my own, would have proved a weight under which my spirits must have completely sunk; but though ex-ceedingly susceptible of strong agitations in the first moments of emotion, Fanny's feelings, probably from their violence, are extremely apt to evaporate, and when dissolved in tears and melted by afflic-tion, the soothing of a friend, and a few unavailing arguments of comfort, seldom fail to wipe them very speedily away.
               The sensations of sixteen, are in gene-ral I believe of this nature: acute but transient. I perceive my Sophia smiles at the important airs of seniority which

in this last sentence I seem to assume: but two years difference of age, at our time of life, claims more than will per-haps be admitted at any other period; and Fanny's residence at the convent, from which she returned but a few months ago, and the seclusion that preceded it, have given an inexperienced simplicity to her conversation, and an innocent naivetè to her manners, which, though amiable and engaging, bestow sometimes an ap-pearance of childishness that might lead one to conclude her still younger than she is.
               
                  
                     
                        SEPT. 28.
                     
                  
                  Madam de Clarence visited us this morning. It is ten days since she arrived in our neighbourhood, though we had not seen her; but she sent many kind and friendly enquiries to know how we

were going on, and informed us, in a short note, that indisposition alone could have prevented her from personally con-doling with us on our bitter distress.
                  She expressed, in strong terms of af-fection, the warmest sympathy; and as-sured us, that had not a disorder similar to mine confined her to bed, she would have flown to afford us what support and consolation a warm participation in our feelings could bestow.
                  You know this lady is one of the few acquaintances whose company and con-versation our dear parent was ambitious of our obtaining, and who, on her part, has always been so kind as to solicit our's whenever her chateau afforded gaiety and amusement.
                  She wept at the news of our intended departure for England. Alas! said she, your worthy father always told me, that in the event of his death the remainder of the days of his children would most

probably be spent in their native country with his friends; who, though displeased, as he has often hinted, at some part of his conduct, he doubted not would re-quire your presence, and proffer their protection when he was no more.
                  Her kindness made our tears flow profusely; but I thought myself only at liberty to inform her, that my father had indeed very near relations in his own country, (and mentioned his brother though not by name) to whom he had recommended us: adding, that though he had been so unlucky himself as to disoblige his family, we were in hopes they would not prove so cruel and un-relenting as to visit the sins of the fa-thers upon the children.
                  You carry a recommendation in your countenances, my dear girls, said she, kindly, the force of which few hearts can be hardened enough to withstand. My prayers shall follow you wherever

you go; and I hope you will have the goodness now and then to inform me, that they have not been offered up in vain.
                  She then departed, having exacted a promise that we would be her guests for a few weeks previous to our quitting France for ever.
                  Madam de Clarence is indeed the only individual, now your amiable aunt ex-ists no more, besides our good old Supe-rior and some of the sisters in the con-vent, whom on this occasion I can regret parting with; as she is the only person with whom my father's solitary plan of life has allowed of our forming an in-timacy. Independent of the vicinity of her chateau to B—, the warm af-fection with which I loved her amiable daughter, our young convent friend, originally prepossessed her in my fa-vour; and since her death, the worthy and afflicted mother appears to have

transferred to me that maternal tender-ness, which can exert itself no longer for the happiness of my friend.
                  My father had the best opinion both of her heart and understanding; and she alone (your dear aunt excepted, whose loss I hourly lament) possessed such in-fluence over his mind as to obtain for us a few days amusement at her chateau once or twice a year: an indulgence which his respect for her character in-duced him to grant; but which he al-ways granted unwillingly, and under ap-apprehension that a taste for gaiety, so natural to youth, imbibed in such agree-able society, might render our usual abode, on our return, languid and un-comfortable.
                  Short, indeed, were these intervals of festivity, and they generally passed like a gay hour away. I used constantly to count the days till spring returned; which season always brought our amiable

friend from the dissipation of Paris to our peaceful neighbourhood. But un-like, alas! was her last arrival to those which had preceded it! Her beloved daughter accompanied her not! and on my first visit to the unfortunate mother, my unrepressed sympathy and affliction cemented a tender tie between us, which induced her almost to adopt me in the place of the amiable child, whom death had torn from her bosom.
                  I am convinced, had lingering illness afforded my father time for such a confi-dence, Madam de Clarence would have been intrusted with his secret; and that to her care and tenderness he would have recommended his children.
               
               
                  
                     
                        SEPT. 30,
                     
                  
                  I am sure it will give my Sophia plea-sure to learn, that in our unfriended si-tuation

the worthy Mr. Howard has most conscienciously fulfilled the promise exacted from him by my father in his dying moments. Having performed the last sad duties to that dear and be-loved parent, he exerted himself to sup-port and console poor Fanny, who felt herself, during my illness, on the brink of becoming a solitary being in the midst of the universe. He wrote, immediately on my father's death, to Mr. Benseley, who is nominated our guardian unless Lord Belmont condescends to take that trust on himself; and having informed him of our irreparable loss, added, that as we were committed to his charge, we expected from his hand to learn what plan of life we were now to pursue.
                  Mr. Benseley's answer arrived some time ago, and along with it a long letter addressed to me, which I was not how-ever permitted to peruse till within these few days. He begins by lamenting, in

was yet an agony superior to that of los-ing all that is dearest to us on earth; and while distraction drew an exclama-tion of despair from my sister, horror benumbed my senses; and I sunk life-less on the floor.
               When my recollection was restored, I found myself in bed in my own apart-ment. The transports of Fanny's grief, and the gloomy silence of Thêrêse, and the physician who attended me, too evi-dently told that all was over with my dear father. Exhausted with the exer-tion of speaking, he had breathed his last sigh almost in the instant that I was carried out of his chamber.
               You, my Sophia, who are happily blessed with beloved and indulgent pa-rents, may be perhaps enabled to form some idea adequate to the distraction a loss like ours must have occasioned: yet, yet, my dear, this was not all; an aw-ful obscurity seemed to envelope some

the most feeling manner, the severe stroke we have met with, and receives, he says, the trust bequeathed him as the most va-luable legacy my father could have be-stowed.
                  I have had the inexpressible misfortune, says he, to bury within these few months an amiable and beloved wife, with whom I might have lived in a state of the most perfect felicity that this world can offer, had I not allowed an ungrateful anxi-ety for one denied blessing to disturb my peace and cloud all my other enjoyments. Heaven had left me but one wish un-granted—the want of family: and I was so blind and impious, as to allow an unreasonable chagrin on this account to four my relish for the many pleasures which remained. At length I beheld myself on the eve of having my anxious desire gratified: my wife brought into the world a son; but expired in giving birth to her infant, who survived her but a

few days; and I am taught the duty of contentment at the severe price of finding myself bereaved of all earthly felicity.
                  I receive, he adds, the children of my friend, as sent to console me for my mis-fortunes. I intend to adopt them for my own, and I hope, while I religiously fulfill my part of their father's will, they will not be negligent in the performance of the duties that belong to them; but will regard me in the soothing light of a parent, in which my late friend has in-troduced me to their acquaintance.
                  Hasten then to England, my dear chil-dren, concludes he. I hope you will have no objection to join the family of an infirm old man, who, though de-pressed by grief, and racked by the ail-ments and infirmities incident to a feeble constitution and declining years, preserves the utmost tenderness and indulgence for youth. I trust your friend, Mr. How-ard, will transact all the necessary business

that ought to have employed your guar-dian, had he been able to have ventured on so long a journey; an exertion which bad health and debilitude totally pre-vent him from attempting; perhaps, if Mr. Howard means not to remain abroad for any length of time, he may even con-trive to accompany you to your native country, and deliver up in safety his charge to the old friend who impatiently expects their arrival.
                  Is not this indeed acting the part of a parent, my dear Sophy? what an amia-ble and engaging old man Mr. Benseley must be. I long extremely to see him, and anxiously wish to endeavour, by the utmost duty and attention, to soothe his sorrows, and to render his old age com-fortable and happy. Though we never, never can supply the place of what he has lost, may not the society and attach-ment of two young girls, anxious to please and willing to submit to all his

little humours, gratify and amuse him, although we may not be able sufficiently to interest his affections. I hope so at least. I am sure I shall feel infinite satis-faction in performing a thousand little services to him, from the idea that my father so earnestly wished us to regard him as his representative.
                  Oh, Sophia! what strange reverses have two short months produced! what a revolution in my mind! to leave B— the abode of our youth—and to leave it without the smallest prospect of ever re-visiting it again; where every surround-ing object, the very trees which rear their lofty heads so high before the window at which I am writing, appear in the light of old friends who claim a tear at parting.
                  While I continue in this spot, where we have so constantly enjoyed my dear father's presence, though I miss him every moment, I cannot help fancifully feeling that I am not yet quite deprived of him.

'Tis losing all that remains of him, to leave this his constant residence, where every thing I see is connected with his idea. Yet how gloomy, how languid does every thing around appear! perhaps remembrance will be less painful when I am not surrounded by scenes which re-call him perpetually to my mind in the most endearing views.
                  Fanny and I have upbraided ourselves more than once for these ungrateful com-plaints, which during our private walks we used sometimes to indulge, on being so wholly excluded society, and in a man-ner detached from the rest of our spe-cies. Alas! we are thoroughly pu-nished for our folly; for never till now did we feel what solitude was. Our books, work, music, drawing, and a thousand other amusements, and that which we relished above them all—the conversa-tion of our dear and indulgent parent, made the day ever appear too short for

the innocent pleasures it bestowed. How different, alas! is the present, when his loss sheds a gloom on every hour, and time creeps with a dreary languid pace, because we carry to every employment no spirits for exertion, and minds un-fitted for entertainment.
                  Indeed I can give no reason for these discontented ideas having occurred to our minds, one excepted, which I ought to blush to confess, though I really be-lieve it was the original source of an ea-ger desire to see something more of the world than our way of life and my father's rules had hitherto permitted.
                  You must know, that at the convent Fanny was extremely intimate with a young girl, much about her own age, who was very gay, very enterprizing, and very fond of novels. That species of reading you know was prohibited, and no books of a romantic nature admitted within the grate. Fanny's young friend,

however, contrived, through means of an indulgent relation who lived in the town, to be privately supplied with abun-dant gratification of this kind, and un-known to every one but Fanny, who soon imbibed the same taste, used to devour with eagerness all the fabulous stuff she could get conveyed into the convent. Fanny was alone in a secret, the fruits of which she sufficiently enjoyed, till one unlucky day, when some of the nuns unfortunately discovered the Paysanne Parvenue cunningly hid beneath the quilt of her bed; and after a severe pu-nishment having been inflicted for the transgression, care was taken to prevent all possibility of its being repeated.
                  During a few days which Fanny passed at V—, in her way home, she con-trived to expend all her pocket money on purchases of novels; and Madam de Clarence, who had undertaken to bring her thither, perceiving her fondness for

this kind of reading, presented her with several in vogue, so that on her arrival she brought with her a little library of romance, which opened a field entirely new to me, and which was so insinuating to a person whose amusement depended so much upon books as mine had ever done, that though my father disapproved our studies, it was not unusual for Fanny and I to retire to our favourite seat in the wood, and unknown to him employ ourselves for hours in this forbidden reading.
                  I recollected that it was not till after reading these fallacious relations of the universal and uncontrouled empire of love, and the alluring recitals of con-quest, vanity, and fame, that Fanny and I began to suspect my father's descrip-tion of life to be the effects of singularity of temper and taste: to own the truth however, these emotions of regret on be-ing deprived of our chance for a share

in these pleasures, were but transient and left very little impression on our minds.
               
               
                  
                     
                        OCT. 4.
                     
                  
                  I am now almost perfectly recovered, my dear; and have been out more than once airing with Fanny, who is now as cheerful as ever, and talks of our jour-ney to England (which is to take place as soon as I am able for such an under-taking) not only without uneasiness, but even with eagerness. A natural sensa-tion of sorrow sometimes takes a mo-mentary possession of her spirits at the idea of leaving Languedoc; yet the pros-pect of shifting the scene amuses and delights her. Happily for her it is not her turn of mind to view evils be-fore they actually arrive; and she is to-tally blind on this occasion to the many mortifications and difficulties in which

our change of residence must involve us, and with which it is so intimately con-nected: for can we reasonably hope, Sophia, that our appearance will not revive the remembrance of all the un-happy circumstances of our birth: will not all our dear father's misfortunes again prove the topic of the idle and censorious, and must not we on that ac-count prove a subject for criticism, cu-riosity, and observation.
                  Can we even expect that our grand-father, so severely exasperated against his son, and of course prejudiced unfavourably towards us, will be induced to regard, with an eye of indulgence, two girls whose unwished for arrival must renew all the pangs which this dreadful affair has cost him? Perhaps an advanced age, and length of time, may have lulled his sorrows, to rest; perhaps too the world, occupied by other matters, may almost have forgotten an event that once "fed

hidden source of unknown and additional misery. We were filled with horror in-conceivable. To part with our dearest father at that instant, seemed an evil in-ferior to knowing he had lived with a load of anguish on his conscience; and anxiously as we wished, we yet dreaded ten thousand times more to have the fearful mystery explained.
               After a night of acute distress, sleep kindly came to our relief, and buried us for about an hour in a blessed state of forgetfulness; yet even in slumber, a melancholy gloom pervaded our repose, and we awoke only sufficiently recruited to be able to weep.
               We were then visited by Mr. Howard, who sympathized in our sufferings with a degree of feeling that must for ever endear him to our hearts. Ah, Mr. How-ard! cried I, the moment I could arti-culate for my tears—where, where are those fatal papers of my dear, dear fa-ther's,

its appetite for scandal;" how unwelcome then must an event prove, which awakens so cruelly Lord Belmont's remembrance, and revives the stain which he wishes to bury in eternal oblivion.
                  How can we then flatter ourselves that we, who unexpectedly appear only to wound and chagrin him, shall be properly acknowledged and supported? Oh no! my Sophia, he will abandon and desert us: or, thinking it excusable to make his grandchildren a sacrifice to family pride and family honour, he will plunge us into obscurity; where, entirely de-pendant on his will, we must languish out our days unnoticed and unknown.
                  You will accuse me, I know, of carrying my gloomy conjectures greatly too far; for while Mr. Benseley lives we can never know the want of a pro-tector: but if Lord Belmont persists, which I think far from improbable, in forbidding our claim to his favour,

never shall we revive the recollection of my father's errors by attempting to prove our identity. This would be a step repugnant equally to delicacy and duty. What a figure, my dear, must we then make in a foreign country, for to us it certainly is so, strangers and un-known, disowned by those on whom we ought to depend, and vouched for by Mr. Benseley alone, who may not survive long; for he is an old man and afflicted with many disorders.
                  Fanny is blind to all those evils which she calls imaginary, and upon which I do not expatiate, though I gently point them out to her at a distance; for I wish not to damp her pleasing hopes; I only desire to fortify her mind against the gloomy reverse which is constantly before my own eyes, but which I hope is partly the effect of dejection. She cannot help flattering herself, she says, that natural affection may work so pow-erfully

in Lord Belmont's breast, as to induce him gladly to receive us as his grandchildren, and anticipates, with all the vivacity of a lively imagination, that happy moment when we may embrace the venerable parent who yet survives.
                  Indeed the accounts which Mr. How-ard gives us of Lord Belmont, in some measure authorise these sanguine hopes. He tells us, that though he never was himself in his company, he is well ac-quainted with his general character, which is that of being strictly and uni-formly a man of honour and integrity. Though in his temper proud, stern, and inexorable, these blemishes are counter-balanced by great humanity and much warmth of affection; and though the austerity and formality of his manners render his society little courted, except by his particular friends, he is adored by his servants and dependants, and, if

not beloved, is universally respected by the world.
                  A strict regard to justice, said Mr. Howard, which is thought to in-fluence Lord Belmont's mind in a supe-rior degree, ought undoubtedly to in-duce him to acknowledge the daughters of his eldest son; who, both from their sex and peculiarity of situation, lay par-ticular claim to his protection; but how pride and prejudice, which form no in-considerable features of his Lordship's character, may prompt him on the other hand to act, is doubtful. However, certain it is Mr. Benseley will not re-linquish his title to be your sole director, unless my Lord engages to receive you as he ought.
                  I confess I am afraid this is a measure not likely to be taken: but we must patiently wait the event. From Mr. Howard we have likewise learnt some further particulars relative to our own

family. Though personally unac-quainted with any of the individuals of it, he has seen several of them, and re-members well this dreadful affair being for several months the topic of universal discussion. How little, said he, did I afterwards suspect my friend, Mr. Sey-mour, to be the man whose fate had occasioned such various reports and conjectures. Most people, it seems, believed him dead of the illness which had followed the discovery: and this rumour was probably spread, or at least tacitly confirmed by his friends; who must have regarded it as the most likely means of putting a speedy termi-nation to all curiosity and speculation on the subject.
                  You may believe both Fanny and I anxiously enquired if any intelligence relating to the unfortunate Lady Linrose had ever come to his knowledge. Mr. Howard said, that all he knew

was from general report only; but a story which had excited so strongly the attention of the public, could scarcely be concealed in any of its particulars. Lady Linrose recovered her intellects, he said, (alas! in such circumstances, the return of reason can hardly be called a blessing); but after the severe shock she had received, finding herself unfit for society, she had left England and fixed her abode in the most private manner abroad. Mr. Howard next informed us, that my uncle, whom he had often occasionally seen, had been thoroughly reinstated, to all appearance, in my grandfather's favour; that he had two sons, and he believed two if not three daughters, and that in them Lord Belmont's affections were said to be as entirely centered as his wealth must necessarily be at his decease.
                  This part of the family then, you may believe, will not look with eyes of

partiality on those who have some little claim to share in what they may have conceived to be solely their own: at least that is not an unnatural conclusion, and I have drawn it from a hint which, Mr. Howard let drop with regard to my aunt, the present Lady Linrose, whom it appears he has heard accused of a very avaricious disposition. Unwil-ling, however, to prejudice us against so near a relation, he afterwards endea-voured to palliate what seemed to have fallen from him through a friendly ap-prehension that she might not be much rejoiced at our appearance and preten-sions.
                  He even knows we expect, we wish for nothing. Contented with what my fa-ther has bequeathed us, thankfully would we relinquish every further claim, only to be considered as Lord Belmont's children, and favoured with his counte-nance. Fanny, however, who is fol-lowing

my pen, exclaims against this moderation, as she calls it, and protests she never will consent to the proposal. After having been so long buried in soli-tude she longs, she says, to make some figure in the world, (I give you her own words) to which our birth certainly en-titles us; and far from being contented with the mere notice of our family, she shall not think that Lord Belmont acts up to his character of rigid honour if he does not in all respects place us on a footing with our cousins.
                  However my wishes with regard to society may have at times coincided with Fanny's, yet I never could perfectly comprehend what delight figuring in the world, as she calls it, was likely to bestow. Most women, I believe, though educated in the most sequestered solitude, may comprehend with ease the gratifica-tion resulting from the devoirs of the agreeable part of the other sex; for this

vanity is probably inherent in our na-tures, and forms a part of our original construction; but habit has made retire-ment not only agreeable, but so entirely to my taste, that if ever I have it in my power to choose my own way of life, I shall undoubtedly fix in the country; where I would indeed wish my abode to be occasionally enlivened by the com-pany and conversation of a few amiable people of both sexes, (an advantage which we have been almost totally de-prived of hitherto); but no enjoyment can I conceive in a promiscuous inter-course, in which the heart has no share.
                  My ideas of life (is not that your phraze my Sophia? who was ever much offended at the seclusion in which we were retained), have been imbibed wholly from my dear father, who indeed found it a path strewed with briars, and who, to render us contented with the plan he had adopted, laboured to

represent the world in its least alluring point of view, as fraught with snares, treachery, and crimes, where innocence was continually exposed to danger, and where friendship was almost unknown. That I have not given implicit faith to this account is entirely owing to my So-phia's livelier picture of society; who, placed in a happier sphere, feels not nor dreaded the evils which have been per-petually placed before our eyes. The two years I spent in the convent, (the remembrance of which I ever bless, as it first introduced to my heart the know-ledge of these soft, interesting, and en-dearing ties of friendship, which never, my Sophia, shall time or absence dimi-nish) could not fail to assist my father's wishes on this head.
                  Is it not singular, however, that hav-ing been fostered by the same hand, and reared on the same plan, Fanny's ideas and mine should prove so little similar;

which have been intrusted to your care? have you yourself perused them? Tell me, for heaven's sake! are the contents too horrible—are they such as we shall be able to read and not expose.
               I will not attempt to conceal from you, said he, with the tenderest compassion, though not without hesitation, that they are of such a nature as must both hurt and affect you; yet there are mingled in this distressing narrative, so many al-leviating circumstances to soften censure and silence condemnation, that I hope the communication will shock neither of you too severely, when you are in a si-tuation to receive the information with more composure than it can be supposed you at present possess.
               Oh! cried Fanny, can any thing aug-ment our present misery? or if that were indeed possible, must not suspence more effectually add to it than any intelligence we can now receive? I was in hopes of

and that the prospect of leaving France and changing our mode of life, should operate so differently on our minds. What in her gives spirit to every motion, and life to every look, fills my eyes with tears, and my heart with despondency and alarm.
                  Oh! my Sophia, my dearest friend, your continued affection alone sustains me under the troubles which at present oppress my heart; and your journal is, after heaven, my chief, indeed my only consolation! Although all chance of meeting seems at present as distant as ever, I endeavour to support my sinking spirits with the hope that perhaps this blessing may be in wait for me sooner than I expect; and that though the pub-lic capacity in which your father acts at Naples, must render that court his usual residence, yet that unforeseen events may oblige him to visit England, which fate seems to have determined shall, be the

abode of our future days, and in which place, since the death of your aunt, I begin to imagine there is infinitely greater probability of seeing you than at B—, where you now possess no longer that venerable relation to induce your father to re-visit our neighbourhood.
               
               
                  
                     
                        OCT. 6.
                     
                  
                  I promise you faithfully, my dear, to write as you desire, minutely and sin-cerely, every event of my life, in the same style of journalizing which we have continued so long. With what trifling occurrences have my epistles hitherto been filled: the scene now begins to grow more interesting; Heaven grant that those which follow may be unmarked with any thing extraordinary. The mar-vellous ever produces agitation, and I am born (constitutionally at least) for

spending my days in what you would call an insipid tranquillity. It is only for tempers like my Sophia's to live in a court and enjoy its bustle; such as mine, are calculated only for the smooth un-ruffled paths of life. Fanny partakes so much of your turn of mind in this particular, that she is quite elated with all the, chimeras of a gay imagination; perpetually representing to herself in the liveliest colours the endless enjoyments of birth, affluence, and admiration: alas! never once does it occur to her the sad stigma which has deprived her of these advantages hitherto, and which must ever cast a cloud over them in future.
                  Adieu, my dear. I have an opportu-nity by a private hand of conveying to you this immense packet. 'Tis a friend of Mr. Howard's, who sets out for Na-ples from Marseilles in a few days. Oh how I envy the happy mortal who deli-vers it to my Sophia.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
                  
                     

                     
                        P. S. I have opened my packet to add a few words more. We have just re-ceived a second letter from our worthy guardian, who informs us of a very me-lancholy event—the death of our uncle, my father's younger brother. Alas! what severe wounds has Lord Belmont lived to endure! Heaven in mercy grant that I survive not those I passion-ately love; rather, ah! infinitely rather, may it please his gracious Providence to take me early in life to himself. Yet is not this a selfish wish? What is it indeed but desiring that my sufferings should be abridged at the expence of the feelings of my friends.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER III. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     OCT. 9.
                  
               
               YOU ask me several questions in your letter, which the number of informations I have had to give you, together with the many conjectures and reflections which our present situation naturally in-spires, have, by engrossing my pen, pre-vented me from answering: for as I am yet but weak, I am able to write but little at a time, though chatting with you is the only employment that interests me. I now sit down therefore to answer your queries.
               You ask me to tell you, in the first

place, what sort of man this Mr. Howard is, whom I have dignified so often with the epithets of amiable and worthy? you desire me to acquaint you with the fol-lowing particulars, viz. his age, fortune, manners, and appearance; and mean while you tell me you offer up your prayers for his turning out young, hand-some, rich, and agreeable; and last of all that he may possess un coeur tendre, in which case it must be out of nature, you say, for the youth to have spent near three months under the same roof with two such girls without becoming a slave to the charms of one of them.
               I am somewhat afraid that Mr. How-ard has really proved this same unnatural being: although he certainly is blessed with a very tender heart, and seems be-sides to have been prejudiced in our fa-vour from the commencement of our ac-quaintance, which was produced by an accident, of which I am going to inform

you, since I have neglected my accus-tomed minuteness in this particular.
               My father one evening, about three years ago, walking in the woods of B—, perceived a very fine horse, sad-dled, with all its accoutrements, grazing, with the bridle impending from its neck, without any appearance of an owner or attendant being near. Struck with the apprehension that he had probably thrown his master, my father traversed the dif-ferent paths of the forest, in order to give him assistance in case it was re-quired, and soon was led, by the sound of dismal groans, to the spot where the unfortunate traveller lay, supported by a footman, who was endeavouring, by his master's orders, to pull his arm into joint, which had been dislocated by his fall.
               My father addressing himself to the stranger, who proved to be an English-man, (a circumstance that perhaps gave

force to his natural humanity and bene-volence) informed him that his house was but a quarter of a league distant, and requested he would suffer himself to be removed to it, where a surgeon could be soon procured to set the bone.
               Mr. Howard, for he it was, after thanking my father for his fortunate as-sistance, gratefully accepted the offer, and sent his servant, by my father's de-sire, to order a carriage to convey him to the house, while another messenger was dispatched from B— for a neigh-bouring surgeon. The operation was happily performed, and I exerted myself (Fanny being then at the convent) to render the habitation of the poor invalid as comfortable as his situation would permit. He was soon able to quit his apartment, and loaded us with acknow-ledgments for this accidental service; and my father, who rarely admitted com-pany at B—, found himself insensibly

attached to our new acquaintance, and forgot his determination of flying the sight of his own countrymen in favour of Mr. Howard, who on his part soon conceived the warmest friendship for him.
               He acquainted us that bad health had obliged him to try the waters of Barrege; and never having visited the Continent before, he intended, finding himself per-fectly recovered, to make the tour of France and Italy before his return to England. He politely added, that he never should regret the interruption his plan had received from this accident, since it had been productive of an inti-macy that had given him so much satis-faction.
               My father's persuasions prevailed with him to lengthen his stay for several weeks after his confinement was at an end; and indeed he proved a most agreeable acqui-sition to our family party. He then de-parted, having faithfully promised on

his return to take B—in his way; and after an absence of a year and eight months, he fulfilled his intention, and had been for some time our guest when my dear father was taken from us.
               As to his character, our helpless situa-tion has developed it to us in the most amiable point of view. Steady and sin-cere in his attachment to my father, it has been productive of kindness and at-tention to us, beyond what we could have hoped for or claimed from so late an acquaintance: yet his friendship is testified by actions, not by protestations; for the modesty of Mr. Howard's nature is such, that our expressions of gratitude never fail to embarrass and distress him; and he seems to regard the trouble he receives, as a trust, the faithful discharge of which is a duty too indispensible to appear meritorious.
               His countenance—(you see I go regu-larly through the list of your interroga-tories)

having time granted me, said he, to sof-ten the communication by degrees; but since you are so violently alarmed, I be-lieve any certainty is almost preferable to your present state of suspence. I shall therefore bring you the packet; I only entreat that you will allow me, before you open it, the favour of one half hour's conversation, that I may be satis-fied I do not commit too great an im-prudence in venturing to intrust you with it.
               This worthy man then began to hint at its contents; but in spite of all his en-deavours to palliate and soften the sad recital, the shock entirely overpowered us; yet I insisted on knowing all; and breathless with terror, received the dread-ful manuscript from his hands.
               Let me make but one observation, cried he, on delivering it: the years of self reproach and anguish, which suc-ceeded to your father's errors, so pathe-tically

—without being what one can pronounce handsome, is sensible, manly, and interesting, with an air of mildness which prepossesses you at first sight in his favour, and an expression which of all others is the most desirable—the look of a worthy honest character. He would possess also much the appearance of a man of fashion, or rather of a man who has been accustomed to elegant and polished society, did not a certain degree of diffi-dence and modesty shew that he made not the grand tour early enough in life to acquire that ease which an introduction into foreign company at a youthful pe-riod generally bestows: but on this head I can only judge from comparing him with some of the Parisian beaux who oc-casionally frequented the chateau de Clarence, and who, however inferior to Mr. Howard in point of understanding, I must acknowledge were his superiors in address.
               
                  
Fortune has been, alas! as sparing as nature seems to have been prodigal of her gifts. Her avarice is by no means apparent in the figure Mr. Howard makes in this country; but he confessed to my father that frugality alone enabled him to conceal it. As to his age—(pray do you imagine that my father would have consigned us to the care of a man of five and twenty?) Mr. Howard adds, I dare say, twenty years more to that gay season of life. Time has not, it is true, imprinted any traces in his face which one could wish spared, for they denote benevolence rather than years: he looks considerably younger than he is; and retains that spirit in his eye which in his youth would have been probably termed fire, though blended with infinite sweet-ness. Thus our guardian, you find, is not a giddy insinuating youth, who might have one day made Fanny and I pull caps; but in fact a plain, worthy, mid-dle-aged

man, whose attachment is that of a parent not of an admirer.
               I will freely confess to you however I have sometimes been led to suspect, from, his behaviour, that he wished to render himself particularly agreeable to me, and that he originally distinguished me be-yond my sister; perhaps this was the mere suggestions of secret vanity: if so, it was however an error which I by no means wished realized; for so much ap-prehension did it give me, that I could not help avoiding his company; and when in it, my manner uniformly testified coldness and reserve, from the apprehen-sion that my father, (who always con-fessed that he could not insure the pro-tection of his family after his death, tho' all other particulars he carefully centered in his own bosom) might be induced to overlook the difference of years from the partiality he entertained for his friend, and might use all his influence to pre-vail

with me to accept of a legal protec-tion in that unfriended state to which his decease was ever liable 
                     •
                  o reduce us
               I now however condemn this absurd fancy, which I almost blush to confess to you, and which I perceive to have been merely a chimera of my own brain, adopted God knows how, for I think his preference is plainly in my sister's favour, whose innocence and simplicity of man-ners appear to have warmly interested him. During my illness, on Mr. How-ard Fanny naturally relied for support, as she had no other to whom she could fly; and his tender, compassionate at-tention seems to have cemented a sort of attachment between them; in her mere gratitude alone, and in him the kindness of a guardian—a penchant which from that gentleman's time of life and pru-dence can never be supposed to disturb the tranquillity of either party, but

which probably adds some strength to his kind activity in our affairs.
               As to money matters, about which in your last you are so kindly anxious, I really understand very little of them; but Mr. Benseley, who has ever had the ma-nagement of all pecuniary business hi-therto, undertakes to continue the charge. There is, I believe, the sum of twenty thousand pounds in the English funds, and above two hundred pistoles were found in my father's cabinet for present use. Debts there are none, beyond what a few Louis will discharge; so that you, see we are secured in affluence, and inde-pendence is my utmost wish.
               You ask me, Sophia, how Fanny, who was a pretty girl of thirteen when you last saw her, has turned out in point of beauty? When she used to visit us in the convent she was a sweet looking child in a stay coat, and I believe you have not since seen her: she is now quite formed;

and though not much, grown, for she is not tall, is extremely improved both in face and form. Her little clumsy figure has shot up, and she retains only an agreeable degree of en bon point, which it would not perhaps be an advantage for her to lose even for a finer shape. Her complexion is her principal charm, and that is much refined since you saw her, for her features are more pleasing than regular. I remember you used to ad-mire her blue eyes, and chesnut hair; but if any thing in her face deserves the pre-eminence, it is her teeth, which are exceedingly beautiful; and she still pre-serves that expression of sweetness and timidity which renders her appearance feminine and interesting.
               She was extremely admired during our last visit at the chateau, and was not a little gratified with the notice she ex-cited from several young men of fashion; the first time in her life that she had ever

been the object of the attentions of the other sex. After our return home, I could not help remarking that she com-plained of our seclusion with a vexation which was not however of above one day's continuance, but which had been prompted entirely by the young Chevalier, de Mer-ville's conversation, who had represented it to her as the height of cruelty and injustice in my father, and little better than being buried alive.
               Perhaps I myself, misled by vanity ex-cited in a similar manner by the flattery of our Parisian beaux, suffered a mo-mentary regret for being deprived of so many gay amusements, the attractions of which were painted in glowing colours by all who had enjoyed them. Alas! my heart is now thoroughly sensible of the folly of its wishes. In the season of affliction our eyes are opened to the va-nity of such fallacious ideas. What would I now give to be placed in the

very situation which in those moments I regretted. Blessed with my father's so-ciety, to no other would I aspire; and delighted would I look forward to the prospect of spending my future days for ever at B—. How wisely then did our dear parent judge in detaining us so constantly with him. Our minds, I now perceive, were unequal to the temp-tation of mixing with the world untainted by a desire for its follies, and never should we have felt a regret, transient as it was, on returning to a home enli-vened with his presence, had not his indulgence allowed us to join the gay party at the chateau.
               I feel my strength so greatly amended, that I think of removing to Madame de Clarence's in a few days. It is but two leagues distant: and severe as leaving B— must prove, that event is ever before my eyes; and since I am now able for it, the sooner it is over the bet-ter.

Mr. Howard will remain some time behind us; having kindly undertaken to settle every thing previous to our journey, in which he is himself to ac-company us. How fortunate it is for us that he returns at this juncture to Eng-land, and what a blessing from Provi-dence was this worthy friend's visit to B—. What else could two unpro-tected girls have done, totally unac-quainted with such transactions, ignorant of the world, and unused even in trifles to act for themselves. We must have been entirely dependant in this case upon Madam de Clarence; who, though ex-tremely kind, might have regarded the charge as rather too great a burthen for us to impose.
               
                  
                     
                        OCT. 18.
                     
                  
                  We yesterday bad adieu to our old

dwelling. How severely did I feel the pang of leaving it; and Fanny wept most bitterly at parting with our old domestics. Therese and Dubois have requested leave to attend us to England; and we must endeavour to requite their faithful attachment, which has prevailed with them to leave their own country. When the carriage drove down the ave-nue, I was almost suffocated with a va-riety of different sensations: the idea of our recent loss was so connected with every thing I left behind, that I felt as if the parting from my father had not till then completely taken place. A number of gloomy reflections assailed me likewise of another nature: we were em-barking upon a dangerous and uncertain undertaking; we were going to venture on new scenes, new friends, and to a new country; where we were ignorant of the fate that might await us, and dreaded the reception we might receive.
                  
                     

described by himself, more than atone for his faults. This penitence, his deep felt sense of every breach of duty, and the unerring rectitude of his mind and conduct the instant he was awakened from the delirium of passion, even con-vince me there was inherent in his bosom, a secret sentiment of superior virtue, which, however obscured and suppressed by the force of misguided feelings and the violence of temptation, required but the moment of remorse to expand and once more fully regain its influence over his actions.
               What misery my sister and I endured from the melancholy narration, and the tears we shed over it, you, my Sophia, when you have perused the packet tran-scribed by Mr. Howard, which accom-panies this, may be almost enabled to conceive: a tedious and severe illness, from which I am still but feebly reco-vered,
Late as is the season for travelling, we shall spend a fortnight with Madame de Clarence, who gave us the warmest re-ception, and as she perceived I was weak, depressed, and unfit for company, kindly insisted that I should take imme-diate possession of the apartment allotted me, where I indulged alone in many mournful reflections most part of the day; for I would not allow poor Fanny to at-tend me while there was a gay party be-low, though the dear girl left the saloon every quarter of an hour to enquire for me; equally divided between her anxiety on my account and the pleasing novelty of every thing that surrounded her.
                  On her part, the sad solemnity of quit-ting B— had made her cry most of the way hither; but the chearful air that reigns here, and the kindness which her youthful manners and appearance excited from all the company, have

chased away the vapours that hung over her.
                  Having no excuse to absent myself longer, I joined the company this day at breakfast, and was introduced by Ma-dame de Clarence to her friends. These consist of an English lady, who has taken up her-residence for some months past in the town of V—, a very lively agree-able little woman of about thirty two; and the Chevalier de Mertane and his brother, two young men of splendid for-tunes, nearly related to Monsieur de Cla-rence.
               
               
                  
                     
                        OCT. 19.
                     
                  
                  Mrs. Weldon, the English lady, pos-sesses a flow of spirits, which, were mine able to keep pace with hers, would amuse me extremely. She appears to have taken a strong partiality for Fanny,

and told her to-day what a world of con-quests such a figure as hers must gain in London. Fanny, on her part, was, as you may believe, willing enough to give credit to the flattering compliments, and almost immediately after asked me in a whisper if I did not think Mrs. Weldon the most agreeable woman in the world. I only answered by a smile, which Fanny perfectly understood, for she coloured while she laughed it off.
                  Mrs. Weldon afterwards attacked her on the gravity of my appearance. She seems never to have Known what grief or depression means. She did me the honour to say that she admired me ex-tremely; but your sister, said she, totally wants, the desire of being thought hand-some, which ever improves and often alone constitutes beauty in the eyes of the men. I was more gratified however with the defect she had remarked than with the approbation she expressed, how-ever

injudicious the remark might be, for a certain degree of vanity in pleasing is I believe natural to all of us. As for the Chevalier, he is about twenty-five, and rather good-looking, but finical in the most absurd degree, and so attentive, that his politeness fatigues instead of in-gratiates. If you but look round, he enquires with earnestness if there is any thing in which he can have the honour of serving you; if you move, he flies to execute your commands; at table, he teazes you with perpetual civilities, and stays at home with the ladies the whole morning to assist in holding their thread while they work, or to present his pair of scissors when required; in short he partakes so much of the female, that I cannot help wishing to see him dressed in petticoats.
                  He appears to have centered his whole ideas of happiness in the vanity of making himself agreeable to our sex:

a passion, which I am afraid the poor Chevalier can hardly ever find gratified, as his plan of pleasing is unfortunately founded on tormenting every one by unceasing assiduities. He absolutely stuns and overpowers one with compliments so outrè and absurd, that one is at a loss whether to laugh or be offended. Un-luckily he appears to have singled me out for the object of his present impor-tunities; and although I avoid him as much as is in my power, without being guilty of absolute rudeness, and almost never address my conversation to him, he contrives to engage my constant at-tention, and makes me such ridiculous speeches as attract the notice and often the mirth of the company, and put me extremely out of countenance. However, Madame de Clarence always talks of him, and behaves to him with particular regard: a respect which I should imagine is alone paid to his rank and immense

possessions. Mrs. Weldon sometimes cannot entirely conceal a little chagrin, at finding I engage an attention which, before my arrival she herself wholly en-grossed. Yet it is impossible for any mortal to think the Chavalier agreeable: but those women who are guided by a spirit for coquetry, possess, I have been told, an appetite for praise, which de-vours applause and admiration without distinction, wherever it can be procured; and, if I do not judge hardly, I should suspect this to be in some measure the case with our lively English acquaintance, whose gaiety is not perfectly untinctured with a degree of levity which strikes me as rather bordering on impropriety: but I am myself so ignorant of the freedom that custom authorises widows of a cer-tain age to take, that I ought not to decide so unfavourably upon her beha-viour, especially on so short an acquaint-ance.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        OCT. 28.
                     
                  
                  Yesterday produced an event that has proved extremely disagreeable. A party in the morning was proposed, to ramble through the woods, which have not yet lost their beauty; it consisted of the Chevalier, Fanny, myself, and Mrs. Weldon; who, piqued at the Chevalier's neglect, (if such a phrase was ever be-fore used by a Lady to the obsequious Chevalier), revenged herself by lavishing all her attentions on his brother, a weak but unassuming youth of twenty, who also attended us.
                  We soon reached a narrow path in the wood; which allowing only of two walking abreast, the Chevalier, who never quitted my side, and has been for some days past more insupportable than ever, contrived to detain me a little be-hind

the rest under pretence of pointing out to me an opening through the trees, which conveys a most delightful pros-pect: he then suddenly, in a low voice, besought me to listen to the most ardent, most tormenting, and most sincere passion which had ever agitated the human breast; and launched out before I could enough recover my sur-prize to answer him, into such a strain of far-fetched expressions of torture, hope, anguish and despair, eternal mi-sery and unspeakable transport, that had not the suddenness of this unexpected proposal confounded and embarrassed me, I should undoubtedly have had a diffi-culty in refraining from laughing in his face. Not well knowing what to reply, and not instantly recollecting myself sufficiently to remember that silence may in some cases be construed into ap-probation, I was redoubling my pace to

join the company, when he seized my hand to detain me, and kissed it with a violence that excited a disgust: so forcible, as enabled me to find instantly the use of my speech, and on his repeating these words—"There can be only one objection, my adorable Mademoiselle; but I hope you are not obstinate in the errors of your persuasion?"
                  I made haste to assure him there were innumerable obstacles, independant of the insuperable one at which he hinted; and that as they were all equally unsur-mountable, I entreated he would mention the subject no more.
                  Such a profusion of protestations, ac-companied with confused and hasty common-place arguments in favour of the Catholick Church, followed, that I almost ran, in my eagerness to get rid of him, and taking hold of Mrs. Wel-don's arm, he was constrained to be silent; the only time he has been so one

quarter of an hour together ever since our arrival here.
                  Mrs. Weldon observing his unusual taciturnity, rallied him on it without mercy; and asking him if I had been inexorable during our tete-à-tete, laughed so violently at his mortified countenance and hesitating answers, that the poor Chevalier even blushed; as for me, I was so extremely indifferent, that this subject, too delicate for a hint had another object been concerned, hardly embarrassed me; but Mrs. Weldon, perceiving that her teazing had all the effect she could wish, did not spare the Chevalier during the whole day.
               
               
                  
                     
                        OCT. 3O.
                     
                  
                  This morning Madam de Clarence, during breakfast, whispered me that she wished to talk with me alone; and as

            TO LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, PATRONS OF ENTERTAINING LITERATURE.
            
            THE great encouragement and support our Plan of a LITERARY MUSEUM, or NOVEL REPOSITORY, has received from a generous public, demands the utmost tribute of gratitude; and it is with pleasure announced, that since its commencement Manuscripts have been intro-duced receiving general approbation. The manner in which we have printed Works committed to our care will better speak our attention and praise than any eu-logium of language.
            Ladies and Gentlemen, from this specimen of our con-duct, will be sure to have the efforts of their genius and productions of their pen introduced to the world in a style of superiority: the printing will be executed with expedition, correctness, accuracy and elegance, and the paper equally correspondent; and we presume to assert that no pains, care, assiduity, or expence, shall be spared to merit the continuance of the approbation we have ob-tained; and we also affirm, that we have never intro-duced

was the natural and inevitable consequence of such a conflict of emotions.
               It is not, I own, without a sensation of repugnance, that I prevail with myself to send you this dismal tale; but alas! so public has been every circumstance of my father's misfortunes (those which greatly extenuate his errors excepted) that I have reason to believe even you, my dear, have often heard of the mise-rable fate of Lord Linrose, as a remark-able event that took place in a family of distinction, and made much noise in the world some time previous to your birth; but that my father was the unhappy source or such a train of calamities, oh! who could have conceived possible!— that astonishing fact never, never could you have divined.
               I consider this confidence, therefore, as a justification of his memory; and though the sad relation itself is a sacred trust to be reposed only in the faithful

soon as it was over led me to her dressing room, where she informed me, that the Chevalier de Mertane had applied to her on the subject of his passion.
                  I have observed with pleasure, said she, his growing attachment ever since your first arrival, and have inclined to give the Chevalier all opportunities of manifesting it to you, from the hope that an union so desirable and in every respect so honourable, may fix my dearest Hermione for ever in the country which has been so long her residence, and which she ought to consider as her own: how then was I hurt and disap-pointed, when he last night informed me of the success his first declaration had met with. But I know your ob-jection my dear, continued she, per-ceiving I was going to interrupt her; but that objection is not insuperable, and indeed is my principal motive for promoting this alliance. I can easily

enter into your feelings, prejudiced as you must be in favour of the persuasion in which you have been educated, nor will I suppose for a moment that any advantages of worldly prosperity could induce you to hazard, on this account alone, a perversion of principles; all I hope from this proposal of the Cheva-lier's is, that you will allow some of the worthy and learned fathers of the church to converse with you on the subject of religion, that you will hear their argu-ments in favour of the great truths of the Catholick faith, which carry instant conviction as soon as they are brought into light, and which in a mind so young, so candid, and unbiassed as yours, cannot fail of subduing all your scruples, and determining you to place implicit trust in them.
                  After expressing my gratitude to Ma-dame de Clarence for the kind impor-tunity and warmth with which she inte-rested herself in my spiritual as well as

temporal welfare, I assured her, in the most determined manner, that I was firmly and unalterably resolved to adhere to the Protestant religion. It was a religion, I said, which admitted to my mind neither doubt nor scruples: it had been my support in affliction, and was the anchor to which I leant for trust in every succeeding event of my life; and I added, that were this point entirely out of the question, the Chevalier's pro-posal, generous and disinterested as it was, would have met with the same reception.
                  Various were the pleas, arguments, and intreaties, used by this worthy friend to induce me to comply with her wish of admitting her confessor to converse with me on the subject; but I firmly and determinedly opposed it. This is a step Madam, said I, against which my fa-ther has particularly cautioned me, and to which I hope you will not think me

ungratefully obstinate if I protest I never willingly shall submit.
                  Obstinate, you force me to pronounce you, cried she with some heat, and in all respects unaccountable. What rea-sonable aversion can you have on the other hand to the Chevalier? perhaps you think he has been too presuming in confessing his wishes so early: but con-sider, he finds himself just on the eve of losing you, perhaps for ever. Your intended journey has accelerated his proposals; and they are of a nature that well deserve to be considered. He is of a noble family, splendid fortune, master of himself, and tenderly attached to you. Perhaps there may be some little errors in his manner which you might wish corrected; but they are the result of good nature, and of a wish to please: perhaps too you may imagine, and with reason, that his understanding is infe-rior to your own; but when you have

lived as long in the world and beheld as much of mankind as I have done, you will find this disadvantage greatly overbalanced by many other circum-stances in favour of this alliance—cir-cumstances on which I have as yet but lightly touched.
                  I answered Madame de Clarence with all the warmth of gratitude which the kind interest she takes in my concerns so well merits, but sincerely avowed that the Chevalier's little errors were such as blinded me to the advantages she had pointed out, and intreated that she would mention a subject no more, which very fortunately proved in all respects disagreeable to me; since the impediment of religion alone was a bar perfectly un-furmountable, even had I wished the union to take place.
                  Perhaps I spoke with a little too much heat; but my impatience had no effect on my amiable friend, who treated

all my arguments as the effusions of bigotry on the one hand, and of romance imbibed in retirement on the other. Finding all she said ineffectual, she dis-tressed me extremely by calling in her husband to her assistance, who joined, out of mere good breedings to torment me, by representing this odious match as splendid and desirable in the highest degree. What! cried Madame de Cla-rence, to settle for life in England? a foreign—at least an unknown country; where you confess you have but distant relations to receive you, and no certainty of finding friends; and to leave France, where an establishment so brilliant awaits you, and where you have it in your power to engage for yourself and your sister an honourable protector in the married state?
                  At this last phrase, though extremely harrassed by their expostulations and hurt at appearing so absurdly refined, I

could not help laughing heartily; in which both Monsieur and his lady joined me, in spite of their utmost efforts to preserve their gravity. This convinced me, that their opinion of their relation, in spite of their warmth, was pretty much on a footing with my own: in-deed, the thoughts of the Chevalier and protection, were two ideas which could not possibly be associated without exci-ting an inclination to smile, for his ap-pearance is beyond measure effeminate and insignificant.
                  Seeing me quite immovable in my determination, they at last gave over their importunities; which proceeding from disinterested friendship, at once gratified and oppressed me.
               
               
                  
                     
                        NOV. 1.
                     
                  
                  Mr. Howard, who is well acquainted

with the family here, paid us this day a visit from B—. Fanny and I re-joiced to see him. He tells us that he has entirely finished all the business which has hitherto detained him there, and adds, that if we have no particular de-sign of protracting our stay, he thinks we ought no longer to delay setting off, as the season is far advanced, and most of our baggage is already on its way. We agreed with him as to the necessity of our immediate departure; and in spite of our worthy friends entreaties, have fixed on the 5th, when we shall bid adieu to the hospitable chateau.
               
               
                  
                     
                        NOV. 2.
                     
                  
                  Yesterday Madame de Clarence, who is steady in her opinion that my ever-lasting good is intimately connected with my change of principles, and regards it

as a duty indispensible to leave no means untried to convert me, intreated me to allow her confessor, a venerable old man, who dined with us, and who I suppose had been invited for the purpose, to converse with me in private on the sub-ject of religion, but I excused myself, though not without difficulty; and as there was a large company of visitors, by attaching myself to several ladies and gentlemen, the poor priest could not find me one instant disengaged the whole day.
               
               
                  
                     
                        NOV. 3.
                     
                  
                  The poor Chevalier!—I really think, I ought to be sorry for him. My con-tinued coldness, and visible endeavours to avoid him, have at length had the desired effect: he even no longer teizes me with intreaties; but finding that those

with which for a day or two he inces-santly tormented me have gained no-thing but encreased reserve and constant disregard, he is now labouring to try if offended pride or pique will be of service to his cause; and lavishes all his attentions on Mrs. Weldon, who on her part receives them with an air of exulta-tion and triumph but ill concealed.
                  I fancy he hardly expected a refusal so mortifying from an inconsiderate country girl, whose alliance could nei-ther reflect lustre nor importance on his family; and really, according to the prevailing opinions of this quarter of the world, I cannot but admire the disinte-restedness of the Chevalier's proposal, however disagreeable it has proved in other respects: for a marriage made without eclat, high connections, and splendor, I find, by Madame de Cla-rence, is regarded by the enlightened part of the world as a weakness and

bosom of friendship, would to heaven all the world were as well acquainted with his remorse as with his faults; and that the knowledge of his sufferings could wholly obliterate the recollection of his errors. Adieu, my dearest friend.
               
                  Yours affectionately, H. SEYMOUR.
               
            
            
               TO MY DAUGHTERS.
               WHEN this packet is delivered to my dear girls, I shall not have, to blush for its contents: I shall be then no more: and as it is essentially requisite that they should one day be made acquainted with their real situation in life, I have for two reasons preferred that awful period for this painful communication: in the first place, the information I am about to dis-close, is attended with circumstances of a

folly, which subject those who are in-fluenced to adopt them to much ridicule and reproach: and those, you may be-lieve, who from an absurd refinement reject such fortunate contingencies when they present themselves, are laid open to censure ten times keener and more poignant.
               
               
                  
                     
                        NOV. 4.
                     
                  
                  The behaviour of the lively widow really confounds me. I, who am new to the world, and unacquainted with its customs, can no way reconcile myself to that levity which her behaviour, tho' sprightly and pleasing, so strongly indi-cates: yet there is something so insinua-ting in her address, that one loves and blames her in the same moment.
                  Mr. Howard has written me a line to-day, intimating that he will be here

to-morrow evening, and on the morning after we are to depart. He has received, he tells me, another letter from Mr. Benseley, expressing the utmost impa-tience for our arrival.
                  Adieu! my beloved friend; I shall not find opportunity to continue my journal regularly till we are actually in England; do not therefore expect another packet to follow so soon as usual, though I well know your kind anxiety will in-duce you to be more desirous of it than ever. This long, long journey! with what a weight does its oppress me! Would it were a joyful undertaking, or an event that promised comfort or plea-sure; but our prospects are at best un-satisfactory, and their issue wrapt in dark obscurity. Farewell my dear Sophia.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER IV. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  DOVER,
NOV. 29,—.
                  
               
               WE have accomplished our journey so far, though not without having expe-rienced the perils and alarms incident to travellers. The weather, till our arrival at Calais, was delightful for the season, and our journey on the whole infinitely more agreeable, from the beauty and variety of the scenes which so rapidly shifted before our eyes, than I could pos-sibly have expected. You may believe, my love, it was not without a bitter pang that we bad adieu to Languedoc, and quitted, probably for ever, the abode

of our early days; poor Madame de Cla-rence too mingled her tears with ours at parting, and charged us to remember her as a friend who should ever prove warmly and deeply interested in our hap-piness.
               When we arrived at Calais, Fanny having been affected with a slight cold, attended by a sore throat, Mr. Howard insisted on our remaining a day or two there, before we ventured on the water; and when we were ready to depart, we found no little difficulty in procuring a vessel, as, owing to adverse winds, they were all detained on the opposite shore, one excepted, which with some trouble Mr. Howard at length procured. Soon after, as we were preparing to get on board, our landlord entered, and in-formed us that a gentleman was that mo-ment arrived, who had travelled from Paris with the utmost expedition, and was in extreme haste to get over to Eng-land,

where business of real moment re-quired his presence, but that the cir-cumstance before mentioned must una-voidably detain him at Calais, unless we thought proper to offer him a convey-ance in our vessel.
               On this information Mr. Howard de-sired the landlord to present his best respects to the gentleman, and to acquaint him that we were about to depart imme-diately, and that if it was agreeable to him to accompany us, we should be ex-tremely happy to accommodate him and his attendants. The gentleman was then introduced by our host, and ex-pressed his thanks to us in the most po-lite manner, and without further delay we all went on board.
               We had scarce quitted Calais, when it began to blow with tremendous vio-lence, and from a quarter that equally opposed our getting to Dover or regain-ing the harbour we had just quitted,

which the seamen anxiously, tho' without success, laboured to effect. Mr. How-ard and our fellow traveller exerted them-selves to mitigate our apprehensions; assuring us, that as the vessel was in good condition, and had many able hands on board, our fears greatly magnified the danger. A new alarm however soon after occurred which rendered our situa-tion seriously critical: some part of the apparatus of the pump was found defec-tive; and a leak having been discovered, the water began to make way very ra-pidly. Upon this information, the coun-tenances of our comforters betrayed a sudden though but a momentary anxiety that wholly bereaved us of that support which their apparent ease and indifference had hitherto in some measure afforded us. Fanny, almost distracted, threw herself into the arms of Mr. Howard, as if for protection, and I, whose dismay, though not less severe was less audible, sat si-lently

offering up my prayers to heaven with a resolute composure, the mere ef-fects of hopeless despair, every moment expecting to be swallowed up in one of the frightful waves which were rising like mountains on all sides.
               Mr. Howard being occupied in vainly endeavouring to moderate Fanny's ter-rors, and our stranger companion gone to examine into the nature of our alarm, I was in a manner left to my own reflec-tions: and at length throwing my arms about my poor Fanny, who reclined her head almost lifeless upon Mr. Howard's shoulder—We are but going to rejoin our dear father, my love, cried I, nor is there any thing so very frightful in the idea. The Almighty might have been infinitely less merciful in his dispensations. We shall expire together, and at the same instant: one miserable survivor will not be preserved to mourn in a fo-reign country her irreparable loss; where

not a pitying friend might be found to console her under the severity of afflic-tion.
               Affected by these words, our fellow traveller, whose return I had not per-ceived, besought me in the most respect-ful manner to allow him the honour of assisting me; and throwing his arm round me, supported me as I sat, as far as was in his power, from the disagreeable ef-fects of the incessant rolling of the vessel. Stupified by fear, I attended only to my dear Fanny, who had turned and locked herself in my embraces, and whom I la-boured by various arguments to inspire with that fortitude and resignation which religion can alone dispense in a moment so replete with horror. No moment could indeed prove more dreadful. The oaths and execrations of one half of the seamen, whose profanity seemed too ha-bitual to desert them even on this awful occasion; the utter despondency of the

other, and the dismay of all our attend-ants, produced on the whole a scene of terror and confusion, on which I cannot reflect without horror inexpressible.
               Mr. Howard and our fellow traveller were the only persons on board who at this critical juncture preserved their usual composure. The danger, however ex-treme and immediate, could neither dis-tract their attentions nor wholly absorb their cares; while the former employed himself unceasingly to support the exhaust-ed spirits of my sister, the latter seemed to consider me as his peculiar charge; and his conversation, at once soothing, spi-rited, and insinuating, insensibly fortified my courage, and strengthened my mind.
               Gratified by the generous exertions made to sustain my drooping fortitude, I at length turned round to regard the person to whom I considered myself as so particularly indebted, and was not a little astonished to perceive, in the deport-ment

of this unknown young man, a striking and peculiar elegance, and in his countenance an interesting intelli-gence, which I was amazed I had not before more particularly distinguished.
               The serenity of his aspect at that for-midable instant struck me so forcibly, that I involuntarily exclaimed—oh with what superior resolution must God Al-mighty have endowed men, if you, Sir, are really as unconcerned as you appear at this tremendous moment.
               I believe this sally made him smile. Madam, said he, I have ever been of opinion that in natural courage the la-dies are infinitely our superiors. It must be owned, perhaps, that men are not quite so ingenious in apprehending or in foreseeing evil at a distance; but when it actually arrives, we seldom support its bitterness with more genuine greatness of mind than the gentler sex often testify in the most arduous and painful circum-stances.

nature so mortifying, humiliating, and severe, that at that solemn period only can I support the idea of presenting my-self to the astonished view of my children, in a light so different from that in which they have ever been accustomed to regard me; and secondly, when their soft and affectionate hearts are subdued by afflic-tion at their recent loss, only can I flatter myself they will look with candour and indulgence on errors—nay crimes—of which, till that instant, they had believed me incapable.
               Be not overwhelmed with horror, my beloved children, on perusing these words:—words, of an import so dreadful, and which you never could have con-ceived connected with your father's name. Heaven has, 
                     •
                   trust, accepted the tribute of sufferings, which heaven alone could have enabled me to endure; and ere these lines are submitted to your knowledge, as all my sorrows will be laid at rest, let

The composure and resolution, added he, which I have just been con-templating has but confirmed this idea, and augmented my admiration of female fortitude.
               As he pronounced these words, the sailors gave a loud huzza on having at length effected the re-adjustment of the pump. Fanny, unused to such rude de-monstrations of joy, imagined all was over, and that we were instantly going to the bottom; but Mr. Howard and our companion soon relieved her fears, by congratulating us on the safety which this transaction indicated, and as the storm now began to abate considerably, our apprehensions were less distressing. Still however it blew from an unfavoura-ble point, and the master told us he had no hopes of gaining Dover till next morning; but the security of which he assured us made us consider that delay as of little moment; and with revived

spirits my sister and I entered into con-versation with Mr. Howard and our agreeable new acquaintance, to whose compassionate support I owed in a great measure the composure for which he so eagerly applauded me.
               I now had leisure to observe him, and found, that prepossessing as had been his figure on a cursory view, it lost nothing of my admiration from being more mi-nutely considered. He seemed about twenty four, and I think I never beheld a countenance that possessed so large a portion of that expression, to which, from inability otherwise to define it, is usually given the appellation of je ne sçai quoi.
               
               Mr. Howard was delighted with his conversation, which seemed the result of a mind cultivated and enlightened, joined to an extensive knowledge of the world. The circumstances of our situation en-tirely discarded the formalities of a re-cent introduction, and seemed to pave

the way for intimacy. We conversed as old friends, who had been unexpectedly preserved by the mercy of Providence: nor did it, I believe, once occur to any of the party, till we had actually landed on shore, that this agreeable stranger was but the acquaintance of a night, and that we were even ignorant of his name.
               Mr. Howard invited him to breakfast with us at the inn, where we did not ar-rive till eleven in the morning; and he accepted it with evident marks of plea-sure. A slight refreshment was then brought in: of which, exhausted and fa-tigued as we were, my sister and I were unable to partake, and we all soon after retired to rest, which was, you may con-jecture, extremely requisite. A few hours however sufficed to refresh us; and awaking about six in the evening, we immediately arose, and on entering the parlour found the gentlemen impa-tiently expecting us to dinner.
               
                  
After many obliging enquiries, and hoping that we had not suffered from our fears and fatigues—I have been acknow-ledging to Mr. Howard, said our fellow traveller, both a failure in gallantry and a degree of selfishness which may in all probability subject me to the mortification of your censure; but it must be owned, notwithstanding the danger you two la-dies were exposed to and the severe ap-prehensions you underwent, for which I think none could feel more poignantly than I myself did, that it will never be in my power to reflect on that night without experiencing the most lively emotions of pleasure at the recollection; since it has procured me the honour of an acquaintance which I shall ever re-gard as one of the most fortunate events of my life.
               To this compliment, too flattering for a reply, we could only answer by an in-clination of our heads. Whether we

all prized our existence the more for having been so lately on the point of losing it I know not, but our recent dan-ger certainly bestowed an additional re-lish on our present security, and gave such a lightness to our hearts, as put all ceremony and constraint at defiance. My mind had not, ever since our irrepara-ble loss, felt so unburthened either from painful recollections or anticipated evils as it then did, and in blessing heaven for our safety I did not fail to lift up my soul in thankfulness that I was ena-bled to enjoy it from a flow of spirits which have been long a stranger to my bosom.
               Our agreeable companion partook of our gaiety; and joined in the conversa-tion with a polite vivacity which ani-mated and supported it. Ah! thought I, more than once during the evening, were all the English as amiable and ac-complished as this specimen seems to

indicate, little should I regret that fate has condemned me to reside among them.
               You may believe, Sophia, we were all not a little desirous of knowing the name of a person whose address and ap-pearance had prepossessed us so strongly in his favour, and with whom we had been conversing for hours on a footing of intimacy. He had greatly the advan-tage of us in this particular, had his cu-riosity been equally excited; for hearing Mr. Howard, my sister, and myself, mu-tually name each other, he was enabled to give us our proper appellations of distinction, while all we could discover in regard to him was, what occasionally dropt from him in the course of conver-sation, and that went no further than to inform us that he had been several years abroad, which time he had spent in residing at the different courts of Eu-rope, where he appeared intimately ac-quainted with several characters of emi-nence

not wholly unknown to Mr. How-ard.
               When Fanny and I got up to retire for the night, he approached to take leave of us, saying that family affairs required him to hasten his departure; but the happiness of your company, said he, has made me steal a few hours from my journey: but may I be allowed to flatter myself that you will permit me the fa-vour of enquiring after your healths in town, where I hope to be in a short time. I confess the boldness of this re-quest may justly induce you to accuse me of temerity; but after the good for-tune fate has conferred in this introduc-tion, I cannot prevail with myself to relinquish the unlooked for benefit that has been thrown in my way. May I then flatter myself you will favour me so far? We assured him we should be extremely happy to see him; and referred him to Mr. Howard for the knowledge

of our abode, which is unknown to our-selves. We are strangers and foreigners in England, said I, and shall certainly be much pleased to meet again with our first English acquaintance. We then wished him an agreeable journey, and left the room.
               When we had retired, this unknown expressed in warm terms to Mr. Howard his wishes for improving this accidental acquaintance, made many polite offers of service, and discovered his name at parting by presenting him with a card, on which was written the following ad-dress—the Honourable Charles Roats-ley, St. James's Square. He then set off in a carriage and four at half past two in the morning.
               Mr. Howard has persuaded us to re-main all this day at Dover, and perhaps to-morrow, in order to recruit our spirits af-ter our fatigue, and I have acquiesced be-cause my sister is rather indisposed; but the

day after we shall certainly pursue our journey. Adieu.
               
                  H. SEYMOUR.
               
            
            
               LETTER V. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  LONDON,
DEC. 2, —.
                  
               
               OH! my Sophia, how unfortunate have we been! Our friend, good Mr. Benseley is no more! he expired only two days ago of the gout, which had at-tacked his stomach, and here are we in London, this immense overgrown city, without one single human being, Mr. Howard excepted, who has the most dis-tant interest in us, or probably knows of our existence.
               
                  
Oh! what a burthen must we prove to that worthy man's mind, and how lit-tle claim, except from his friendship to my father, have we to give him so much trouble.
               This unfortunate and unforeseen cala-mity has overwhelmed us with affliction. It has broken all our measures, and in-terrupted all our plans. We feel as in a desert. This is indeed solitude, to be without friends and without protection, except what we receive from the kind-ness of compassion.
               Mr. Howard this morning (for we got hither last night, but unwilling to disturb Mr. Benseley's sober family at so late an hour, procured very good lodgings in a neighbouring street) went himself to in-form our worthy guardian of the arrival of his guests. You may easily conclude how much shocked he was on being in-formed by the footman who attended at the door that Mr. Benseley had expired

the consideration of that felicity which I humbly hope will be then my portion, console and sustain you under the shock your sensibility must receive from the tale of woe I am about to unfold. You must often have regretted, I am convinced, the solitude in which I have obliged you to live; and I make no doubt, in secret con-demned that averseness to all social inter-course, which I have uniformly testified as long as your remembrance can trace back. This, and many other particu-lars, which perhaps may have at times proved matter both of surprize and con-cern, I mean here fully to explain; and in particular that question will at length receive a satisfactory reply, which has been hitherto productive only of vague, evasive, and embarrassed answers, viz.— how I, an Englishman, apparently at-tached to my own nation, and partial to its customs, should have voluntarily ex-iled myself from my country, and seclud-ing

on Monday last: he returned instantly in great perturbation to inform us of this dismal intelligence.
               This is an accident extremely unfor-tunate, said he, as Mr. Benseley was undoubtedly the properest person to me-diate between you and your grand fa-ther; but I hope natural affection will plead for his son's offspring so power-fully as to induce him immediately to take you under his own protection, in which case no material inconvenience will accrue from the loss.
               Oh! in what unavoidable difficulties did your friendly kindness involve you, my dear Sir, cried I, when you under-took so troublesome a charge as we must prove.
               Talk not to me in this style, my dear Miss Seymour, cried he, interrupting me —the trifling assistance I had it in my power to offer you towards regulating your affairs at B—, was without a com-pliment

so greatly recompensed by the opportunity with which I was favoured of manifesting, however feebly, my friendship for your father, that it pains me to think you should imagine any thanks due to an occurrence which em-ployed agreeably a little idle time that must otherwise have lain heavy and lan-guid on my hands: as to the honour you did me in allowing me to attend you hi-ther, it was a favour as well as a grati-fication for which my thanks instead of yours are due.
               I believe that had Mr. Benseley's death taken place previous to your father's, he would have nominated me your guar-dian: as this event has followed, I owe it in duty to my deceased friend, as well as from my esteem for you, to take on me the care of your affairs; and as the first proof of your obedience, I exact an eternal silence on the subject, either of apology or gratitude. Let us consider

then, continued he in the same breath, to prevent our again interrupting him with apologies, what steps we ought next to pursue. I am of opinion that an application to Lord Belmont cannot too soon be made; and if I have your per-mission, shall undertake to write to him this very day.
               We instantly closed with the proposal, and he directly left us to set about the task; in the success of which he seems as anxious, and as deeply interested, as if we were his most intimate connections and our lives depended on the issue. The happiness of our lives at least cer-tainly hang on the event. Oh! my Sophia, think of our critical situation, and feel for the agitation of my mind at this moment. A few hours will decide all—will determine whether we are out-casts from our family, deserted and friend-less, or received with tender emotion to the bosom of a parent, to whom, though

unknown, my heart glows with the warm-est affection and most filial respect. My soul, melted by an eternal separation from one yet more dearly beloved, dissolves with the soft ideas which rush upon my mind. Imagination, never more busy than in the moments of agitation, perpe-tually represents some future scene of affecting delight, and while I weep the bitter loss of one father, I see myself every moment encircled in the arms of another —whom heaven yet preserves.
               
                  
                     
                        DEC. 3.
                     
                  
                  Fanny, whose heart is always full of soothing hopes, strives to recompence the disappointment we have suffered in the death of Mr. Benseley, by anticipa-ting happiness under the protection of Lord Belmont; but the painful uncer-tainty of what may be his Lordship's

determination, is, alas! rendered more acute by delay. Mr. Howard went out yesterday immediately after dinner, in-tending himself to deliver the letter he had written.
                  The servant who opened the door, on being asked if his Lordship was at home, returned for answer that he was not ex-pected till spring.
                  Is then my Lord in the country? said Mr. Howard.
                  No, Sir, he is still at Nice.
                  Mr. Howard was much disappointed at this information; and as he held the letter in his hand with a look of chagrin, the footman told him, that if he was anxious to have it sent safe he might leave it with his Lordship's steward, who lodged at present in the house, and who would take care to dispatch it with a proper direction. As he spoke these words, the steward himself passed the door; and hearing his name pronounced,

civilly advanced to know if Mr. How-ard had any commands for Lord Bel-mont in which he could assist him, and asked him to walk into the parlour.
                  Mr. Howard seized this opportunity for making some further enquiries; and was informed, that my Lord being thought in a declining state of health, had been ordered by his physicians abroad; that he had been absent almost a twelvemonth, attended by his grand-son, the present Lord Linrose, who was likewise advised to try a warmer climate for the recovery of a cough, which was apprehended to be consumptive. The death of his fa-ther, the late Lord, the steward added, had induced the family to expect the immediate return both of Lord Linrose and his grand-father; but the last dis-patches had entirely contradicted this idea, intimating that Lord Belmont had received such essential benefit from the salutary air of Nice, that he had deter-mined

to continue there till his disorder was wholly removed; and that Lord Linrose dared not venture as yet braving a chilly winter in England.
                  Mr. Howard then returned to us, not a little hurt at the intelligence he was constrained to communicate. Oh, So-phia, how unfortunate! Had we been made sooner acquainted with these par-ticulars, we might have remained in our peaceful retreat at B—, where, happy in the protection and friendship of Ma-dame de Clarence, we must have enjoyed comfort and contentment; but poor Mr. Benseley's death is an evil we dreaded not; and bequeathed to his care, we were left no choice as to our residence.
                  Nothing can prove more delicate, more embarrassing, than our present si-tuation. I am but ill versed, I own, in the customs which in this part of the world propriety prescribes; yet surely Mr. Howard, neither from age nor ap-pearance,

can be deemed a proper pro-tector, under the assumed appellation of guardian, for two young girls unfriended and unknown, particularly when he is himself conscious that he possesses not even that nominal title to remain con-stantly under the same roof with us. It must subject us to observation, and pro-bably may even provoke censure; yet so tender is the point, that I should blush but to hint it to him.
               
               
                  
                     
                        DEC. 4.
                     
                  
                  Mr. Howard, after appearing very thoughtful most part of yesterday even-ing, made an apology for absenting him-self for an hour or two, and left us.
                  We had indeed been extreme bad company. Fanny was sunk and disap-pointed. What a reverse from the gay chimeras that had taken possession of her

mind. Languid and dispirited, she had reclined, half asleep, upon a chair, leav-ing me to support a conversation with Mt. Howard which evidently interested neither party; but ashamed of the bur-then we are reduced to impose on that amiable man, and which (though from friendly anxiety alone) appeared to hang very heavily on his mind, I vainly ex-erted myself to appear in spirits in order to lighten his visible uneasiness, and af-fected to be unconscious that our situa-tion was either so awkward or so uncom-fortable as it in fact appeared to me.
                  The moment he was gone, however, my half suffocating emotions got vent; and suddenly giving way to the anguish that oppressed me, I threw my arms about my dearest Fanny's neck, and burst into a flood of tears, which flowed with profusion, from a variety of painful feelings.
                  Accustomed to the tender attentions

of paternal care, softened by the caresses and indulgence of paternal fondness, my heart felt—bitterly felt! the painful void of possessing none to whom I owed affection and duty—none from whom I could claim tenderness and regard.
                  Oh! my dearest Fanny! cried I, were we this instant to expire, who would shed one tear over us? My Sophia indeed, my kind, my affectionate Sophia, still remains to me; and possessed of such a friend, I ought not to repine: but who, in all this populous and extended coun-try, (Mr. Howard excepted) were we to lay down our heads and die before ano-ther day returned, would pay us even a tribute of passing regret. Every one else is blest with some tender relation who calls forth and returns the soothing sensations of interest and attachment, but we are unknown, unloved, and uncon-nected on the earth!
                  Having vented the first effusions of

myself from my family, my friends, and the world, formed the singular reso-lution of terminating my days in a retired spot in the South of France.
               I hasten therefore to inform you, that even your name has hitherto been a secret to you.
               My father, though my misconduct has cast a cloud over his days, I hope, and believe, is still alive;—at least, I had intelligence of his being in good health, within a few days from this date. He is Earl of Belmont, a nobleman of extensive interest in his own country; and I am the eldest of two sons, which, with one daughter, whose birth occa-sioned the death of her mother, is all the family he ever possessed.
               I pass over the early part of my life, which I spent at home, and generally in the country under the direction of a very worthy man, who presided as tutor over my brother and myself. My father,

my feelings, I grew more composed; and reproaching myself for this weak indul-gence, which had severely affected my poor Fanny, who, naturally sanguine, was not disposed for such deep depression had I not set her an example of dejec-tion, I dried my eyes and endeavoured all in my power to sooth and console her; but the task was not so easy as I had imagined. Grief and fear are often infectious; and I had pointed out the me-lancholy independence of our situation in terms so alarming as had intimidated and alarmed her. In attempting to give her comfort however I profitted by my own arguments, and began to perceive that we had not in fact that reason for despondency which the solitude of our situation had at first suggested. Letters would not be long in reaching Nice, and a short suspence would one way or other soon compose all our agitations.
                  These reflections produced a tolerable

degree of composure by the time Mr. Howard returned. I have been visiting my brother's family, said he, which I have not had an opportunity of doing till this evening, and have brought a message from his lady, requesting that you both would favour her with your company to-morrow to dinner. She in-tends to have the pleasure of waiting on you in the morning, and hopes to pro-cure you some little amusement by at-tending you to whatever appears curious to strangers in this metropolis.
                  We gratefully accepted the proposal. He afterwards told us that he had been paying another visit to Lord Belmont's steward. He tells me, said he, that Lady Linrose is still at her seat in Northamp-tonshire, where she has resided constantly since her Lord's death, and I mean, should you approve of it, by only mak-ing a few alterations, to address the let-ter

to her Ladyship which was intended for my Lord.
                  Mean time, continued he, my sister in law will be delighted to have the fa-vour of your company, not as occasional visitors only, but as inmates of her fa-mily. She entreated me with much ear-nestness to make this proposal to you; but I told her, although I felt a guar-dian's interest, I could not absolutely claim a guardian's authority, and must leave her to prevail with my charming wards by her own intercession when she is introduced to their acquaintance; I hope however you will find Mrs. Hin-don's house so agreeable as may induce you to oblige her by making it your abode till you are otherwise settled to your satisfaction.
                  With how much delicacy was this proposal made. The compliment of such an offer from an utter stranger could not but have been suggested from Mr. How-ard's

having represented in strong co-lours our helpless and unconnected situa-tion. The idea hurts and mortifies me; yet we cannot but feel gratified by Mr. Howard's endeavours to persuade us to regard this civility as a favour conferred upon his sister instead of being received from her hands.
                  While we remain in this uncertainty, in order to guard against curiosity, I have requested Mr. Howard to conceal our real situation and connections except from his brother's family, to whom he promises to enjoin secresy.
                  Mr. Howard's letter to Lady Linrose, briefly stating our situation and request-ing her mediation with Lord Belmont, was sent off by this day's post. He tells her Ladyship that we are at present in London, where the accident of Mr. Benseley's death leaves us (in our grand father's absence) entirely dependant on her Ladyship, whose countenance we ven-ture

to entreat, since we are unconscious of having in any way forfeited our right to the protection of our family; and whose good offices our friendless state leads us to solicit, as well from her be-nevolence and humanity as from the ties of consanguinity which subsist between us. It is directed to Northamptonshire, and we anxiously wait her Ladyship's re-ply.
                  Mrs. Hindon was so kind as to break-fast with us this morning, accompanied by her husband. She is a little plump woman, between thirty and forty, whose countenance is by no means plain, but whose address is far from possessing either polish or grace. What her manners wanted in elegance was however fully made up by kindness and attention. She overwhelmed both Fanny and me with expressions of civility and offers of friend-ship, and told us that she insisted on our becoming her guests, and making her

house our own as long as we should find it agreeable. She regretted extremely, she said, that a country cousin, who how ever would be otherwise disposed of in a few days, at present occupied the apartment, which afterwards would be heartily and entirely at our service: but as soon as she could get her trumpery removed, and things were put in proper order, she hoped we would favour her so far as to take immediate possession of it.
                  This hospitality, though rather rudely expressed, was so extremely benevolent, and so happily timed for our difficul-ties, that I knew not how to express in terms sufficiently fervent the gratitude it inspired.
                  Mrs. Hindon then carried us an airing in her coach, through several of the prin-cipal streets of the city, and appeared so kindly solicitous for our entertainment, that during our ride she was continually planning different parties of pleasure, or

describing different places of amusement, to which she promised to accompany us; and she regretted much that the morn-ing was too far advanced to admit of our seeing any of the sights and curiosi-ties which she said abounded in every quarter of the town.
                  On returning to set us down at our lodgings, she invited us to dine at her house, and insisted on sending her car-riage for us before her hour of dining.
                  Finding it near three o'clock, we set about dressing with the utmost expedi-tion; but so absurdly late are the hours in this part of the world, that though it is now past four in the afternoon, the coach has not yet made its appearance, and Mr. Howard tells me people here don't think of sitting down to dinner till the evening is far advanced.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        DEC. 5.
                     
                  
                  Our entertainment yesterday was splen-did, and the furniture of Mr. Hindon's house superb and expensive beyond what I should have expected in the abode of a man who owes his riches in a great measure to his own industry. Every thing in the family bespoke opulence. The appearance of the lady of the man-sion did not however, I must acknow-ledge, accord with the elegance that surrounded her; but she was so extremely kind and obliging, that it is ungrateful to lay an ungenerous stress on a fault which proceeds not from the heart, and which for that reason must be unseen by her friends though striking to the eyes of a stranger
                  The company consisted of a Sir Jona-than Farnford, his lady, and daughter, a

young lady of sixteen, just come from a boarding school, Captain Wilmot, ne-phew to Mrs. Hindon, and a modest looking girl, whose surname I heard not, as Mr. and Mrs. Hindon always spoke to her by the familiar appellation of Jenny, and who I conjectured was the country cousin before mentioned. In this idea I was confirmed from observing the unfeeling neglect with which she was treated, not only by the lady of the house, but by all her guests (our party excepted) who seemed to have taken a hint from that lady's behaviour to regard the poor girl as an inferior.
                  I could not help extremely pitying her situation, which was to the last de-gree mortifying, particularly as her dif-fidence and timidity appeared rather to ask for encouragement than to provoke rebuke. She evidently felt uncomforta-ble and ashamed; and sat silently negli-gent of what was passing, as if perfectly

unconcerned in the scene, and without once attempting to join in the conversa-tion.
                  The painful dependence of this young woman struck me the more forcibly as it was contrasted with that flow of ci-vility, warm and unbounded, which Mrs. Hindon abundantly lavished upon us, though utter strangers, and which, while it gained my innocent Fanny's heart, appeared to me so greatly beyond what an acquaintance of a few hours could either excite or authorize in a mind possessed of delicacy and refine-ment, that though charmed with it for the first half hour, and delighted with the flattering idea of having so early inspired a predilection so fortunate in our pre-sent circumstances, I began to consider, before the evening was over, that kind-ness bestowed so fervently, ere time had been given not only for investigation but even for common knowledge, must be

who was violent in prejudice and rigid in principle, allowed us few indulgen-cies; and had made choice of our pre-ceptor rather for the integrity of his heart, than on account of the superior abilities of his mind, which had been narrowed by the retirement of life, and total ignorance of the world: but my Lord, whose knowledge of men and manners had not rendered his notions less contracted, imagined we could no where so effectually imbibe the first sentiments of virtue, as under the tuition of a man, whose purity was such, that he seemed to know little difference be-tween an error and a crime. The system by which we were educated, was of course strict in the extreme; but the austere principles that had been early im-planted in our minds, our companions at College found it no difficult matter to extirpate; and a slight acquaintance with society, soon convinced us, that

too indiscriminate either to prove grati-fying or lasting, and seemed rather the effusions of the tongue than the overflow-ings of a heart warm and sincere. I con-fess indeed, that the visit of yesterday to Mrs. Hindon has not encreased my de-sire of residing in her house; yet as it is the only eligible scheme that presents it-self at present, and she is eager that we should accept of her repeated invitations, we have resolved for a short time to comply.
                  I was extremely astonished, during this visit, to observe the remarkable dif-ference between our manners (for still must I regard France as my own coun-try) and those of the English. I own I have been very little conversant in any society; yet when I have been at the chateau de Clarence, and while I was permitted at your aunt's earnest entrea-ties to spend that happy three weeks (never to be forgotten) in all the inno-cent

gaieties of M— with my beloved Sophy, I remember the gentlemen who occasionally visited at your house were all uniformly attentive and polite in the highest degree, and were ever so well bred as to appear gratified with our pre-sence and pleased with our conversation, whatever their private sentiments might be; but here, my dear, the behaviour of the men was not only indifferent and un-complaisant, but often rude and uncivil.
                  Captain Wilmot, though very gayly dressed, and in a style which betrayed no great dislike to the idea of attracting the notice of the other sex, yet endeavoured by various methods to discover his per-fect disregard of the ladies present, whom he did not seem to think deserving even of the common attentions usually paid them.
                  Mrs. Hindon, on our entering, intro-duced him to us; which having pro-duced a hasty bow, he afterwards reclined

with his back to the wall in a careless attitude, and then strolled about the room, occasionally joining the other gen-tlemen, who were chatting by themselves in a corner.
                  These airs had the effect (for which I make no doubt they were intended) of augmenting his importance in the eyes of Miss Farnford, who strove to attract his attention, and at last succeeded so far as to engage him in a tête à tête con-versation, if such it could be called, partly composed of tittering and whisper-ing, of which Fanny and I were evi-dently the objects. Lady Farnford and Mrs. Hindon however atoned for their incivility, by bestowing on us their whole attention. The former, with the most insatiable curiosity, endeavoured to penetrate into every circumstance re-lating to our situation abroad, with an avidity which could not have been ex-cited without some previous information.
                  
                     
I cautioned Mr. Howard on the sub-ject of secresy, and besought him to re-quest his brother and Mrs. Hindon not to communicate our affairs out of their own family; but I fear it has not been at all observed, for it was not difficult to perceive that we were regarded by the whole company with an eye of eager scrutiny, which denoted that we had been, according to a phrase of Mrs. Hin-don's, on the carpet before we entered.
                  At table, the conversation was gene-ral: that is to say, it consisted of those common-place topics which neither greatly amuse nor deeply interest, but which in a mixed company are taken up with seeming eagerness merely pour passer le tems.
                  
                  Mr. Hindon appears to be a good sort of bluff English character, who can al-low neither of merit nor talents out of his own country, nor conceive any sort of enjoyment out of this city, which he

says he never quits even in summer, though he has a very fine villa within six miles of town. He is a banker, and possessed of a large fortune, partly the fruits of his own industry, and partly brought him by his wife; from whom, being an heiress, according to an esta-blished form here, he also receives his name.
                  He seems to enjoy good cheer with an extraordinary relish: dinner serving equally for the purposes of conversation and refreshment. The former, it indeed furnished abundantly; only varied by a dissertation on the different dishes. I re-marked that Sir Jonathan, as well as Mr. Hindon, appeared to value themselves extremely on those qualities which more properly belonged to their cooks.
                  When the repast, which was sumptu-ous, was removed to make way for the desert, the younger part of the family, consisting of two girls under ten years

old and a boy about six, made their ap-pearance, and compleatly took place of the discourse on cookery. The delighted parents instantly shifting the topic to that of their children, related with eager sa-tisfaction their various improvements, accomplishments, and dispositions, not forgetting the infantine bon mots of little Billy, whom sleep deprived us of the pleasure of beholding.
                  I am myself so extremely fond of children, that this conversation, had I been the only person present, might have entertained and even interested me; but I could not help painfully feeling for its impropriety, which so evidently fa-tigued instead of amused the company on this occasion, that I pitied the blind-ness while I could not but admire the warmth of Mrs. Hindon's maternal ten-derness. Sir Jonathan indeed took little pains to conceal that he was heartily tired of the subject; but neither his repeated

yawnings, nor constant attempts to change it, could induce the gratified parents to wander from a point which they concluded gave almost equal plea-sure to their guests and themselves.
                  When the ladies retired to tea and coffee, Fanny and I were again subjected to the inquisitive interrogatories of Lady Farnford; which, as our situation is at present but in part revealed, extremely embarrassed me. That we had been edu-cated abroad, and never had visited England before, I wished not to con-ceal; but our reasons for leaving a spot which had been so long our home, and the solitude in which we had been reared, it was unnecessary to divulge, and for many reasons I chose not to acknowledge, especially to a person whom I had not been introduced to above a couple of hours before; yet Lady Farnford con-trived to penetrate into every circum-stance

with an eagerness which convinced me all was not perfectly new to her.
                  You received your education in a con-vent, I believe ladies? said she.
                  Yes, Madam.
                  Lord, cried the daughter, were you not afraid they would have made nuns of you?
                  We had no great reason to be alarmed as to that point, said I, for my father took infinite care to fortify us against all their attacks.
                  I fancy, resumed the mother, home would not be much more lively than the monastry, for I believe you lived re-tiredly enough. You saw very little company I should suppose.
                  Finding I only answered by a simple affirmative, without growing in the least communicative, she turned to Fanny— It must have been rather dull, I should imagine, to live in a manner so solitary, so out of the world, with no society but

merely that of the old gentleman your father?
                  Our governess, a most amiable and respectable woman, said Fanny, died only four years ago; and she was our constant companion while she lived.
                  But you must have been very young when you lost her?
                  Yes, Madam, my sister was not then fourteen and I was scarcely twelve.
                  You got some one, I should imagine, to supply her place?
                  None, Madam. My sister was soon after sent to the convent for two years, and I was left solely under my father's care till her return: for he took great pains himself in our improvement, and could not consent to deprive himself of both at one time.
                  It must have appeared very dis-mal, said Lady Farnford. To be always in the country and to see nobody, must

be gloomy indeed at your time of life, for you had no society I believe.
                  Oh! Madam, we never saw a human creature; my father had no visitors, and never went a visiting himself.
                  Knowing that this was a subject on which Fanny would innocently expatiate, without considering its imprudence, I mentioned my beloved Sophia and her aunt, who, I said, sometimes were so kind as to enliven our solitude with their visits, and in whose company my father had once been prevailed on to allow me to spend some weeks at the town of M—. I also spoke of Madame de Clarence, and did not forget Mr. Howard, who was indeed, though I did not own it, the only male visitor my father has had in my memory, Mr. Benseley excepted, whom I scarce recollect.
                  You, my Sophia, was a new source of investigation and curiosity. Who was this Miss Beaumont? where had I got

we were incapable of adhering to habits, absurb in themselves, and of no assis-tance either to religion or morality. Having once deviated from prejudices, however weak, which the mind has been accustomed to regard as sacred, to stop exactly at the proper limits of rectitude requires a portion of steady fortitude even superior to that which preserves us firm in our first impressions; the reformation is indeed but too often followed by a total revolution of principle, and even virtue herself is not unfrequently overturned under the appellation of confined ideas.— Such, at least, was in part the change my mind underwent after having resided some time at the university.
               When the part of my education to be there attained was completed, I set out on my travels; and immediately after my return from the Continent, that busy period of my life commenced, the bitter recollection of which almost

acquainted with her? When I answered that she had been my favorite friend at the convent, that we had received our education together, and that she was only daughter and heiress to Sir Edward Beaumont, whose name and public em-ployment could not be unknown to her, I assure you my importance seemed not a little encreased by the information.
                  The appearance of the gentlemen, I was in hopes, would have relieved me from this embarrassing conversation: but Lady Farnford was determined it should not drop so soon.
                  My dear, cried she to her husband, these ladies have been entertaining us mightily. They have been telling us all about their manner of living abroad; and that the old gentleman their father was of a most singular and extraordinary humour. He hardly ever allowed of the young ladies leaving home, and ne-ver permitted a man to enter his doors.
                  
                     
This speech, which implied that we had been complaining of this last circum-stance as a peculiar hardship, put me extremely out of countenance, and in-stantly drew the eyes of the gentlemen towards us: but Mr. Howard relieved my awkwardness by saying that Mr. Sey-mour was indeed uncommonly fond of retirement, yet at the same time so warmly attached and indulgent to his children, that he would most willingly have allowed them what society they chose, had not their duty and affection induced them with pleasure to conform to a way of life which they knew was agreeable to his taste.
                  What could his intention be Miss, said Sir Jonathan, addressing himself to me, in burying you alive in that manner? Certainly he never could expect to get you off his hands at that rate; at least his method was rather extraordinary. For my part I think it is a piece of in-justice

to shut up girls like birds in a cage. Let them see and be seen, and take their chance in the matrimonial lot-tery like others: one must not expect now-a-days that our daughters will be courted by proxy on the report of their beauty. There's Betsey now—I hope to live to see her happily settled; but I should not think I performed my duty to the girl, if I shut her up always at home, where she would have no oppor-tunity of making a good creditable set-tlement.
                  It was not easy to find an answer to this speech, which was entirely addressed to me, and I did not attempt it. I felt however for his daughter, who I con-cluded must be equally shocked with its rude indelicacy; you may then guess my astonishment, when I heard her say, in-wardly speaking, but without the least appearance of bashfulness—Indeed I should not think it at all fair.
                  
                     
The whole company staid supper; and as whist was the game, of which Fanny and I are entirely ignorant and we de-clined any other, Sir Jonathan and Lady Farnford and Mr. and Mrs. Hindon made a party; Miss Farnford, the Cap-tain, and Fanny, having seated them-selves on a sopha, soon after entered into chat together, in which Mr. Howard joined. As for me, I was placed by the card players; and though more in a con-templative than talkative humour, (for indeed I was anxiously revolving in my mind the success of the letter to Lady Linrose,) yet seeing Miss Jenny take up her work, and sit down at the farther end of the room as if unwilling to intrude on the conversation, I took that opportunity of testifying that I did not regard her in the mortifying point of view which seemed so unfeelingly to influence the rest of the company; and shifting my seat in order to join her, endeavoured to

conquer the distance and reserve with which she kept herself unconnected with those from whom she only expected in-delicacy and ill breeding.
                  She appeared much gratified with my attention, and received it with a degree of modesty which evinced she had not always been accustomed even to com-mon politeness. We conversed together till supper was announced; and I found something, both in her sentiments and manner of expressing them, superior to what I perceived in any of the rest of the party.
                  I am afraid my Sophia will conclude I am growing censorious upon entering the world; but to an eye unaccustomed to a mixture of characters, and where all the errors and absurdities of society are entirely new, a thousand faults and im-perfections must appear, which habit conceals and acquaintance renders too familiar for observation.
                  
                     
To this I make no doubt it is in a great measure owing, that I find myself so early disgusted by Mrs. Hindon's man-ners, for I own I am infinitely disap-pointed; probably the more poignantly from the sanguine disposition with which I first met her. We were strangers and unknown to her; and her benevolence in offering us an asylum bespoke such hu-manity and goodness of heart, that I in-stantly in my own mind adopted her for a friend, and received her first expressions of kindness with that gratitude and en-thusiasm, which her civility undoubtedly still merits, but which it is now no lon-ger in my power so warmly to bestow. First sight impressions I confess are ex-tremely fallacious; yet I am much mis-taken if Mrs. Hindon posseseses either that delicacy or good sense, which, if they in-habit the mind seldom fail to throw some lustre over the manners, however unpo-lished

by society or a knowledge of the polite world.
                  I was particularly shocked by her be-haviour to this poor girl. Nothing cer-tainly discovers littleness of mind so evi-dently as insolence to inferiors, or to those whom calamities have rendered dependent on us. As we sat together, I expressed my apprehensions that our intended visit was the occasion of hurrying her away from Mrs. Hindon's sooner than was her original intention; but before she could reply, Mrs. Hindon overhearing me, an-swered —Oh never think of that, Miss Seymour. I dare say Jenny herself would be very unwilling to stand in the way of my convenience. We can easily procure her an apartment at Mrs. Bret's the man-tua makers, for some weeks, and as we are at the expence of her lodgings, it is all one to her: besides it is just in the corner of the street, and she will eat here;

so that I give you my word the honour of your company will not occasion the slightest inconvenience. I only wish to have a day or two given me afterwards, that things may be made proper for your reception, and then I shall be quite af-fronted if you refuse to favour me so far.
                  The extreme grosness of this speech, which so unfeelingly discovered Miss Jenny's dependance, made her hang down her head in confusion; and I felt her mortification so severely, that I in-sisted on remaining in our present lodg-ings in preference to occasioning her re-moval.
                  Mrs. Hindon however soon contrived to carry her point by rendering me quite incapable of arguing on the subject. You don't consider, my dear Miss Seymour, cried she, how scandal flies in this town. What will not people say to see two fine young girls of your figure residing in lodgings, without the protection either

of a father, a husband, or a brother. I make no doubt but that Mr. Howard here would be exceedingly happy to act in the capacity of one of these relations; but till he proves his title, added she, (laughing immoderately at the confusion into which both her brother-in-law and we were thrown by this hint) you'll be charitably taken for a connection of a dif-ferent kind.
                  Mr. Howard even blushed at her inde-licacy; but said, with an air of mingled dignity and gravity, that he should be happy in performing any services to us which might manifest his friendship for my father, and the sense he should ever possess of the obligations he owed him.
                  There I don't doubt you, returned Mrs. Hindon, smiling with a sly look, and I hope the young ladies may rely on your good offices upon their own account as well as their father's.
                  I flatter myself they do, said he, with

reserve, though much embarrassed by his facetious sister in law's ill judged raillery.
                  Before we departed, Lady Farnford and her daughter came up, and expressed in warm terms their good fortune in hav-ing been introduced to our acquaintance, hoped it would prove the forerunner of a cordial intimacy, and assured us they should not fail to wait on us as soon as it was in their power.
                  Mrs. Hindon, who is indeed extreme-ly kind, tho' I could wish it were attend-ed with a little more softness, called a-gain this morning, and was hardly seated when Lady Farnford and her daughter were announced.
                  The latter on entering hastily brushed by her mother, and shaking both Fanny and I by the hand with the familiarity and freedom due to old acquaintances, exclaimed—I am quite happy to see you

incapacitates me from relating the many painful occurrences it produced.
               My brother had chosen a military life, and we had not met during three years which I spent abroad. We kept up a constant correspondence however; and he was with his regiment in Ireland at the time of my arrival in England. I received a letter from him soon after, intimating his having lately married a young lady, of whom he seemed passio-nately enamoured, but who did not possess any of those advantages, either of family or fortune, likely to reconcile my father to a step in which he had not been consulted. Conscious how tena-cious my Lord ever had been of his au-thority, added to an invincible prepos-session, which he had long entertained against the Irish nation, my brother, in the height of his nuptial felicity, could not avoid suffering the severest apprehensions for the consequences of

both. I assure you mama has done no-thing but praise you so as you can't think since last night, and we ordered the coach as soon as we had done breakfast, in order to wait on you, to request that you would favour us with your company to the play, if you are not engaged on Wednesday next. Mrs. Siddons is to appear in Belvidera. All the world will be there; and as we have engaged places, I hope you will certainly accompany us.
                  Lady Farnford joining in the request, we consented, altho' I do not much wish to appear in public, till we know on what footing we are to be introduced.
                  To-day we have spent at home, and entirely by ourselves, which the two la-dies regretted as a calamity their polite-ness would undoubtedly have prevented, had not previous engagements put it out of their power. Mr. Howard has been from home too most part of the day, em-ployed

I believe about our affairs with Mr. Benseley's executors.
               
               
                  
                     EIGHT IN THE EVENING.
                  
                  Mr. Howard is just come in. With his accustomed kindness, he has been making enquiries I find respecting the situations and dispositions of our nearest relations, with the view of being enabled to judge from which of them we are like-ly to receive the most cordial reception. But tho' he does not wish to raise a pre-judice in our minds against my uncle's family, he has been constrained to ac-knowledge, that with the exception of his second son, (who is high in the world's estimation,) they are not generally be-loved.
                  Tho' of acknowledged probity and honor, a vain passion for state and parade obscures their good qualities, and renders

their society so shackled with ostentatious ceremonials, that it is very little either courted or desired. Lady Linrose in particular exacts an homage on account of her rank, which is beheld with ridi-cule and granted with reluctance, of course out of a very general acquaintance she enjoys the blessing of but few friends.
                  My uncle and her Ladyship, it seems, had lived separate for some years previ-ous to his death. He was a man of a very violent, untractable disposition, and his lady possessed not that mild compli-ance of temper that could submit to the headstrong humour of her husband. Lord Belmont, it is said, approved of and even advised the separation, and has preserved for her Ladyship a respect and regard which leads the world to exculpate her from the share of blame that usually in similar instances involves in some mea-sure both parties.
                  Lady Ann Vere, my father's only sis-ter,

Mr. Howard is told died about a twelve month ago. She had buried her husband some years before, and has left no family. Her loss is particularly un-fortunate at this juncture, as she is said to have been of a very amiable character, was extremely attached to my father, and partially beloved by Lord Belmont.
               
            
            
               LETTER VI. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     DECEMBER 8.
                  
               
               HAVING dispatched my last packet, Fanny and I were preparing to leave the parlour the other night, it being late, and Mr. Howard having already retired to bed, when the door was suddenly opened

and two young men, seemingly intoxi-cated and disordered, hastily entered the room, as if quite at home. Upon seeing it occupied, they asked pardon for their intrusion. They did not however at-tempt to repair it, by leaving the apart-ment, but stood some minutes endeavour-ing to excuse themselves on the score of having mistaken it for another, which it seems one of them at present inhabits in this house.
               The wildness of their looks, and the elaborate length of their apology, led me instantly to suspect that the mistake was not unintentional, especially as the part of the house which we have taken is per-fectly distinct from that engaged by other lodgers. I recollected besides that I had more than once remarked, since our a-bode here, that as we passed on the stairs a face from the door of one of the rooms used to peep out as if anxious to get a sight of us, and concluded, from the be-haviour

of these gentlemen, that know-ing there were two young women under the same roof with them, they had been seized with curiosity to see us, and in a state of intoxication had ventured to in-troduce themselves in this rude and a-brupt manner.
               Frightened by the bold way in which they stared at us, I curtseyed with a very grave air, and told them the mistake was of no consequence, expecting them to depart. This however they had no in-tention of doing so immediately.
               Since Fortune has proved so kind, said one of them, who appeared the most in-toxicated, since Fortune, has so wonder-fully savoured us with the knowledge that two such angels exist, let us not fail to profit from the blest occasion. Per-mit me the honour ladies of introducing this gentleman to the happiness of your acquaintance, (pulling his friend by the arm, who, half ashamed of his situation,

had shrunk behind)—Tom Bradshaw, Ma'am, (bowing,) he is modest you may perceive, but as worthy a fellow as lives.
               My embarrassment and astonishment at this effrontery in an utter stranger may easily be conjectured. I knew not what reply to make to a speech and behaviour so unaccountably forward and presuming, but stood with a surprise and gravity in my countenance sufficient I hoped to have confounded them, had they been capable of confusion after such a frolic.
               Come Tom, continued he, do me the same favour with the ladies: introduce me to these divinities, who have kindly condescended to inhabit this our terres-trial abode.
               His companion however, whose facul-ties were either less impaired or who did not naturally possess that degree of happy assurance with which the other seemed blest, becoming now thoroughly sensible of the error he had committed, and hear-tily

ashamed of his friend's behaviour, exclaimed—This is too much, Jack; let us be gone. Ladies, I am perfectly athamed—I blush—to have—to have in-truded so rudely; and stammering out a very awkward apology, endeavourer to disengage himself from his friend, who held him by the arm, swearing that he would not suffer him to leave the ladies so abruptly.
               Terrified at the bustle they began to create, I hastily exclaimed, for heaven's sake gentlemen leave us. Consider we have not the pleasure of knowing you. I then looked around in vain for the bell, but perceived there was none in the room, and I was too much intimidated to dare acknowledge my fears, by mak-ing an attempt to escape, which would probably have proved fruitless, as they had shut the door and flood themselves almost before it.
               
                  
Fanny, tho' in general rather timid, could not witness this scene without feel-ing more entertained than frightened. The extreme absurdity of the two gen-tlemen's conduct, and the awkwardness of my astonishment, struck her so forci-bly, that in spite of her apprehensions she could not resist giving way to a violent and childish fit of laughing; the bad con-sequences of which soon appeared so evi-dent, as to put a speedy period to mirth so mal apropos.
               Nay if you are for a frolic ladies, cried the gentleman who, had hitherto preserv-ed the most decorum, suddenly turning round and joining heartily in the laugh, I'm your man.
               Oh! cried the other, I knew they were dear little kind devils, and advancing to Fanny, was going to throw his arms a-round her, when a sudden emotion of uncontroulable terror made us both utter atone instant a loud scream and fly to the

door, which the gentlemen were too much intimidated to prevent our opening; and the landlady, and Therese both appearing, they retired in haste to their own apart-ment, while Fanny and I, breathless with fear, did not for an hour recover our usual composure.
               Mrs. Brumpton, our landlady, who is a decent, sensible looking woman, then informed us that only one of the gentle-men lodged in her house, and the other, who by our account of his audacity she assured us could not be Captain Brad-shaw, was one of his friends who often visited him.
               Her lodger, she said, was a gentleman of the belt character, sweet tempered, and extremely generous, and had never been, guilty of such a riot in her house since he had lived with her; she therefore imagined his present freedom must have entirely proceeded from inebriety, as in-deed the other gentleman his friend was

his imprudence; and besought me to exert all my influence with my father, to soften his wrath at this unexpected intelligence.
               My endeavours, however, were on this head ineffectual; my Lord was overwhelmed with a rage that did not evaporate with its violence, but subsided into a determined, inflexible resentment; by which he allowed himself to be so completely governed, that he resolved never more to behold his disobedient son; who must have found himself ex-tremely embarrassed in his finances, had not my purse supplied his necessities to the utmost extent of my ability. In vain I represented to my father that the alliance, though neither splendid nor desirable, was equally removed from what could be deemed disgraceful: he silenced me with vehemence; and so-lemnly declared, that never more should my brother receive the shadow of his

but too much giVen to that fault, and might have led him into it, and she was certain Captain Bradshaw would be quite distressed when he reflected on his misbe-haviour to two such ladies.
               
               She afterwards added, that having got a glympse of us one day on the stairs, he had been so much struck, as she called it, that he had often entreated her to contrive some means of seeing us for a longer time, but that she had told him that was a favour he must owe to chance alone, as she could not presume to intro-duce him.
               I told Mrs. Brumpton that intoxica-tion, (a bad apology for any transgres-sion,) afforded no sort of justification for rudeness like his, and that I should most undoubtedly take effectual means to pre-vent a repetition of the same offence, by applying next day to Mr. Howard, who would talk to the young men on the sub-ject without delay.
               
                  
This was less my intention at the time than meant as a threat to be repeated from Mr. Brumpton's lips to her lodger; tho' I had resolved, in the heat of my resentment, not considering the conse-quences, to inform Mr. Howard of our affront and to request his interference: but a moment's reflection had changed this resolution; and the good woman re-presented so strongly the risque attending engaging two gentlemen in a quarrel, that I determined never to mention it to him unless I had reason to dread the con-tinuance of a similar conduct.
               Next morning our landlady brought us an apology couched in the most re-spectful terms, from the Captain, entreat-ing our forgiveness for our last night's alarm. As I was somewhat afraid of his encroachments after such audacious behaviour, we took no further notice of his message than to tell Mrs. Brumpton that while her lodger made no attempts

to force himself on our acquaintance we should think of the past no more.
               All yesterday and the day before Mrs. Hindon was confined with a bad cold, yet she was so kind as to request our com-pany; but we declined it, from the idea that politeness alone could have induced her when ill to solicit it.
               
                  Adieu my love. H. SEYMOUR.
               
            
            END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
         
      
   


countenance.—A resolution, alas! which my superior misconduct alone, persuaded him to relinquish.
               I passed the summer after my return at my father's country seat; and spent great part of my time in hunting—my favourite amusement. Returning one day from the chase, the weather being extremely sultry, my fatigue occasioned an extreme thirst, which induced me to dismount at the door of a farm-house possessed by one of my father's tenants, not many miles from the castle.
               As I knocked, the farmer himself appeared; and upon mentioning my name, and requesting a draught of something to refresh me, he conducted me with the utmost hurry of civility into a small rustic parlour, where were sitting his wife and daughter. The latter astonished me with her uncommon beauty; which was rendered still more interesting from having surprized her in

any subjects but such as are founded on the basis of Virtue, and have tended to improve the understanding and to amend the heart.—Our study shall be to please; as this will equally add to our interest as reflect to our honor.
            In addition to this proposal, Authors who wish to derive emolument from their studies, are informed, that five hundred pounds is placed at an eminent bankers, for the sole purpose of purchasing literary productions; and notwithstanding we are now unrivalled in the public estimation, for Novels, Tales, Romances, Adventures, &amp;c. yet, in this undertaking, works of a general na-ture, whether Originals, Translations, or Compilations, which can entertain or improve the mind, elucidate the sciences, or be of any utility, will here find an asylum.
            From the great encrease and general encouragement CIRCULATING LIBRARIES have received, and which are now established in all parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland, (an employ both respectable and lucrative,) such as are desirous of embarking in that line of business are informed that books suitable for that purpose are kept ready bound, in History, Voyages, Novels, Plays, &amp;c. containing from One Hundred to Five Thousand Volumes, which may he had at a few days notice, with a catalogue for their subscribers, and instructions and directions how to plan, systemize, and conduct the same.
            
               

tears: she allowed me no time however to contemplate her charms, for ashamed of being caught by a stranger in that situation, she made no return to my salutation, but ran hastily out of the room.
               I made a thousand apologies to the farmer's wife for my intrusion; and so greatly was I struck with the daughter's appearance, that I could not help ex-pressing my regret at beholding her in such affliction; which I intended as the least inquisitive method I could devise of enquiring the cause.
               Oh, nothing in the world, my Lord, said the farmer, your Lordship does her too much honour in observing her. It would be very far either from her mo-ther's wish or mine to vex her, if she would be persuaded to listen to her own interest; but girls are so wilful—
               From this I conjectured what I after-wards learnt was the case—that the old

people were teazing their daughter to dispose of her hand contrary to her in-clination. But though I felt myself unaccountably interested in what I had seen, it was necessary that my enquiries should immediately end, as the good woman came at that instant to supply me with what I had asked for, and I was constrained unwillingly to depart.
               This beautiful girl ran in my head the whole day: though I make no doubt but I should have forgotten that she existed in a week, had not my infant passion been nourished by several cir-cumstances which afterwards occurred.
               When I returned to dinner, I found a large party of neighbours who were paying visits of congratulation at the Castle on account of my sister Lady Ann's marriage with Mr. Vere, an event that had taken place a few weeks before. In the course of conversation at ta-ble, I mentioned my little adventure,

particularly dwelling on the extreme beauty and distress of the tenant's daughter.—Yes, cried the curate, who happened to be present, Fanny is the prettiest girl in the parish, and one of the best; but her parents have carried matters much too far, and have ren-dered her quite miserable, by insisting on the poor young woman's disposing of herself to fat Robin, your Lordship's gamekeeper. They have teazed and tormented her till they had almost driven her to venture on a very alarming step, to get rid of their importunities; she had privately determined to leave home, and take her chance of finding a service in town; but my wife suspecting her intention, deterred her from a scheme so fraught with danger, by representing the hazards attending such an exploit.
               The conversation shifted to other to-picks; but Fanny and her distress fre-quently occurred to my mind. I wished

much to deliver her from it; but I distrusted myself so little, as never once to suspect I was actuated in my wishes to relieve her by any other motive than that interest which youth and beauty, even without having produced any par-ticular predeliction, seldom fail to excite in hearts of common sensibility. She appeared so amiable and so innocent, that, free as were my notions on certain subjects, the idea of deriving any sinister advantage to myself by releasing her from her present persecutions, never entered my imagination.
               I contrived, as the best method of suc-ceeding I could devise, to interest Lady Ann in the affair; who during her walks called at the farmer's, and represented so strongly to his wife, who had been an old servant in the family, the cruelty and injustice of forcing her daughter into the arms of a man she detested, that the old woman was prevailed on to give up the point

herself, and faithfully promised to use all her influence with her husband to persuade him to relinquish the plan likewise. In this visit my sister was so much pleased with the bewitching sim-plicity of Fanny's manners and appear-ance, and the unbounded gratitude she expressed for this obligation, that she made her an offer of supplying the place of her maid, who was just leaving her. Fanny thankfully accepted the proposal; and the old people, happy in thinking their daughter settled under the pro-tection of Lady Ann, consented with eagerness to the measure; so that on my return from a short excursion I had made about that time, I found Fanny actually residing in the castle.
               The frequent opportunities I now enjoyed of seeing her, in a short time convinced me I was not proof against her charms. Far, however, from stifling this flame in its progress, I allowed it

every encouragement and indulgence. Some similar amours abroad, into which bad company and ungoverned passions led me, had already blunted, though not eradicated, my first feelings of re-pugnance at the idea of seduction; and I retained merely virtue sufficient to undergo that penance, which conscience, except where the heart is hardened in iniquity, never fails to exact from vice upon every new violation of her laws. But these transient scruples were not sufficiently powerful to enable me to listen to dictates so austere; I had little fear of being unsuccessful with a young country girl who had not as yet, I imagined, formed any attachment, and whose heart, I concluded, would easily yield to the vanity of having engaged mine. I therefore assailed this amiable and unfortunate girl, with all the warmth and force of the most persuasive passion; but I soon found that an innate love of

virtue, and sentiments of pride superior to her condition, induced her to reject my offers and advances with horror and disdain. I was not, however, repulsed: the success attending former pursuits made me still confident of prevailing in the end; but the resistance I met with so inflamed and augmented my affection, that from an insinuating inclination, which might have been in its infancy easily subdued, I found this attachment was become a violent and unmanageable passion, that, in its consequences, in-volved both its innocent object and my-self in misery and ruin.
               I became at last alarmed on perceiving how essential this affair was grown to my repose; that Fanny was every hour gaining ground in my heart and rising in my estimation, while I seemed as far as ever from making any progress in hers; and I began to think her worthy of a more honourable flame, and to

compassionate the uneasiness into which my solicitations had thrown her.
               I soon perceived that for my own happiness as well as hers, my importu-nities had been carried greatly too far, and I determined to make one great effort to restore my own tranquillity and her peace; but I did not consider how difficult the task would prove; unused to constraint, accustomed to give incli-nation full swing, to conquer at once a predilection so formidable, was an un-dertaking much too violent with which to begin my first essay of self-denial. I resolved, however, to try the effects of absence, a medicine of wonderful efficacy in diseases of the heart; and accordingly proposed to make an excursion of a few weeks, accompanied by some friends who were at that time my father's guests.
               On the evening previous to our de-parture, fatigued with the exertions which the attentions due to a large com-pany

of ladies exacted, exhausted by overacted endeavours to appear in spirits, and sick of a frivolous conversation, which amused minds at ease within them-selves, and who willingly laid hold for entertainment on every little trifle that occurred, I contrived to slip away in the height of their mirth, intending to stroll out towards the wood, to soothe my un-easiness by giving way to reflexions which oppressed and overpowered me.
               The night was uncommonly delight-ful, and the full moon shone with a clearness which reflected a pleasing sere-nity on every object around. I gave way to a train of ideas, that filled me not only with anguish but alarm; I found that my passion for a girl so every way beneath me possessed not only the power of destroying my peace, but even in some measure had weakened my reason: for so entirely had my heart surrendered to its influence, that the

thoughts of relinquishing every prospect of preferment and dignity in my future establishment, and the certainty of ruin-ing myself with my father, were less dreadful to my apprehension than the resolution of thwarting an attachment, to which seemed annexed every hope of hap-piness and enjoyment: in a word—that the possession of Fanny in a legal manner was more than a recompence for the many evils which I knew must follow such a step.
               I started from my reverie, when I found how unjustifiably far my imagina-tion had carried me; and endeavoured to represent to myself the weakness and folly, as well as the danger, attending the indulgence of such reflections. Per-ceiving how fatally solitude and musing enfeeble fortitude and nourish the foibles of the heart, I was about to return back to the house, when a voice which I heard at some distance, induced me to stop for
Such are the general outlines of this spirited under-taking: a plan founded on propriety, and sanctioned by the liberal approbation of the public; and we shall be happy farther to improve the same, so as to render it the Museum of Entertainment, and a Repository of Sciences, Arts, and Polite Literature.
            
               
                  MINERVA PRINTING OFFICE, Leadenhall-street.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            

a moment; and instantly recollecting it to be my dear Fanny's, my intention of returning was immediately converted into a resolution of approaching as softly as possible to the place where she sat, in order to overhear her conversation. This I effected with great caution; and found she was enjoying the cool of the evening in company with one of her companions, and that not fearing in-terruption from any of the family at that hour, they had ventured to seat them-selves at the side of some bushes in the shrubbery.
               I heard the friend, in a voice of com-passion, endeavouring to soothe Fanny in consequence of some complaint which I concluded she had been confiding to her, and to which the most mournful sighs were on her part the only replies. Her arguments of comfort were not in-deed the best calculated for consolation,

but they were designed for sympathy and expressed with much simplicity.
               Indeed my dear Fanny, said she, could you have been persuaded to have accepted of my cousin, you would have escaped all this trouble and vexation. Time goes a great way in conquering people's dislikes. What one likes at one time one can't abide at another; and the contrary is just as common. When once Mr. Robert was your hus-band, you would have been obliged to have loved him; and he loves you so well, you know, that it must have come of course. If all this had happened now, and I'm sure I always told you that you never would do so well elsewhere, there would have been no word of his young Lordship, and your heart would have been as light as mine is at this instant.
               Talk not to me of your cousin, cried Fanny in a tone of impatience mixed with despondency—I hate and detest him.

What have I not suffered, added she, melting into tears after a short pause, within these last six sad months: tor-mented by that hateful man, teized by my mother, terrified by my father; no sooner had I got rid of that persecution, than I came hither to endure another a thousand times more insupportable; and what course can I possibly now pursue, which is not loaded with difficulties and attended on all sides with danger. If I return home, I dread reviving the old story; if I remain here, then certain mi-sery awaits me; and oh! at times, my dear Jenny, at times I am almost ter-rified for myself; for though from my heart I abhor my Lord's insulting offers and proposals, yet alas! my heart is weak, and I find it is impossible to abhor him.
               
               I often wish, continued she, in the same mournful accents, that I had either died last year, when I was so ill and all

my friends were weeping round me— ah! what anguish had I been spared!— or that it had pleased God to have placed me in a situation less beneath the only man who ever made the slightest im-pression on my heart. But this is a wish which carries me so far, and softens me so sadly, that I dare not allow myself to dwell upon it. Yet, Jenny, I cannot re-sist some times indulging the idea of what unspeakable happiness must have been my lot, had the Almighty lessened the immense distance between us, and I had still possessed the blessing of being agree-able to him. Had it so happened; had I been placed in his station, and he been in mine, I'm certain I should have joy-fully overlooked every objection to have made him happy: and I often think, if his Lordship professes to love me so well now, when I use my utmost endeavours to conceal my fatal partiality, surely he would not have loved me less, when all

my happiness centered in the wish of being agreeable in his eyes: yet as mat-ters go with great people, he will proba-bly marry some rich lady, continued she, her tears flowing abundantly, who may regard nothing but his fine estate and splendid titles, and one besides whom he may not even himself love; for great people do not marry as we do.
               What a sad thing it is, that all great gentlemen are such rakes, cried the friend. But could you not contrive to give your lady warning. I'll warrant a few weeks absence will put all to rights.
               That is what I have often thought of, cried the other, and what I am afraid I shall be constrained to do at last; but oh! my dear Jenny! what will not such a step cost me? shall I be able to live, after I quit the castle? But to be sure quit it I must, and the sooner I die the better.
               Nay, for my part, I know nothing half so frightful as dying, I promise you,

cried the friend. How can you talk so wildly? But you'll think better of that, I trust, before long: you are not the first, God knows, that has been crossed in love, and people don't always die for all that.
               Melted beyond expression by what I overheard, I scarce breathed, from the fear of losing one word of this artless, interesting conversation. When the friend arose, and proposed returning home, I heard Fanny offer to accompany her part of the way to the village, say-ing she was not afraid, though alone and so late, as the moon shone bright, and she would return by a private gate which led from the park into the fields, and was a near cut. They immediately walked away, and I remained in a state of mind not to be conceived but in similar cir-cumstances.
               The discovery I had made of my gen-tle Fanny's amiable partiality, in the very moment that I was exhausting every

source of fortitude to enable me to re-nounce her, threw me into a state little short of distraction; and determined me at once to overleap all the ba
                     •
                  s that lay in the way, and to offer her my hand and heart in a legal manner. This reso-lution, the offspring of an overheated imagination, and of that impetuosity of temper which in a thousand instances I have had such cause to deplore, I resolved instantly to make known to her, and to wait her return at the little gate, in order to communicate it. During this inter-val, instead of recalling my reason to my aid, and maturely weighing the con-sequences of so imprudent a determina-tion, I gave way to the delirium, and indulged in a train of the most pleasing and flattering illusions: I imagined I was beginning to enjoy a foretaste of that happiness from which an absurd prejudice had too long pre-cluded me; and I carefully checked

every rising objection to a measure which already diffused such infinite satisfaction over my mind.
               I walked backwards and forwards, an-ticipating that delight in the possession of the dear object of my affections, which with such amiable simplicity she herself had described but the moment before, and dwelt with particular pleasure on the soothing idea of the height to which gratitude must raise her attachment when she came to know what proofs I meant to give her of mine.
               At last Fanny appeared in sight, and I flew towards her. I acknowledged the enchanting discovery I had made, and the effect that discovery had produced upon my heart, till wholly overpowered with my vows and protestations, she wept in my arms, and confessed that she loved me above all men. We were in this situation, when the supper bell obliged us to separate. Fanny, agitated

and bewildered by this unexpected event, and apprehensive of detection, at length prevailed with me, though not without difficulty, to leave her, having promised to meet me in the wood early next morn-ing.
               On my return to the company, I found my brother in law had received letters from town which required his immediate attendance there. As my sister of course accompanied him, I knew Fanny must be of the party; and to leave her now, was as far distant from my thoughts as it had been fixed in my determination three hours before. I therefore pre-tended to have had dispatches by the same post, which obliged me to visit London likewise; and without much difficulty got myself excused from the excursion which had originally been planned by myself.
               When I retired to rest, I had leisure to reflect on the events of the day. My

mind having time to cool, I began clearly to see that I was standing on the threshold of danger. Fanny's image however, which perpetually presented itself to my view, and the recollection of the scene which so lately had passed be-tween us, the vows that had proceeded from my lips, warm from my heart, and the soft gratitude she had expressed in terms so endearing, all fixed me immove-ably in my determination; though I per-ceived through the cloud which passion threw over my reason, a source of innu-merable troubles and objections; but these gloomy suggestions a lively imagi-nation and sanguine hopes, enabled me quickly to chase from my thoughts.
               I began at last to form a scheme to which I hoped my dear Fanny would easily be induced to consent: this was, to be united to her privately, and care-fully to conceal the connection till my father's death should leave me at liberty

            HERMIONE.
            
               LETTER I. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     
                        August—
                     
                  
               
               AFTER a dreadful interval of four dismal weeks, I am once more enabled to resume my pen. Your friendly letter of condolence reached me last night. How soothing, my Sophia, is the balm of sympathy to a mind wounded by af-fliction. Your kind expressions made me dissolve into tears; but they were tears of softness and relief, far different from those of bitterness and despair, of which lately I have shed so many.
               I admit of all you say, my dear; but reasoning, however solid and convincing, rarely makes any impression in the first

to avow my choice; and this, with ex-treme caution, I concluded might be effected.
               On meeting next morning, I commu-nicated my plan, which met with my dear girl's approbation: one circumstance alone gave her uneasiness and held her de-termination for some time suspended; this was, how she should conduct herself with regard to her parents, to whom she was tenderly attached, and who, she said, she well knew must receive a mortal wound were they to imagine her capable of consenting to any step prejudicial to her reputation. It was impossible for me to agree to their being informed of our private marriage, as so many reasons required it to be kept an inviolable se-cret; and there was so little probability that two old people of their condition would preserve concealed, what a due regard to the honour of their only child must prompt them to divulge, when her elopement and concealment should call

her fame in question. This was so ap-parent, that Fanny was easily convinced of the necessity, however disagreeable, of leaving them in ignorance. The idea however of embittering their days with the belief of her seduction drove her al-most to despair: yet it is not surprizing that my arguments and endearments, my promises and professions, should have gradually reconciled her to inflicting this blow; as I did not fail to suggest the triumph they would one day experience in the discovery of her exaltation and in-nocence; besides that I proposed to sof-ten their anxiety by dictating a letter, which Fanny actually wrote to her mo-ther, acquainting her that for reasons she was not at liberty to reveal, she was forced to conceal herself for a season from them and the world, but that a period would certainly arrive when she should again embrace them; adding many assurances that when she should have that happiness,

it would be without a blush for her past conduct, which ever had been, and ever should continue to be, conformable to the principles and instructions she had early imbibed from them. Fanny like-wise promised to give them intelligence of her welfare from time to time, if they would have the goodness still to interest themselves in their child's hap-piness, while appearances were so unfa-vourable to her. This method, together with an annual sum, which I promised to remit to them without a possibility of their tracing from whence it came, made my Fanny tolerably easy; or rather the softness of her nature conspiring with her tenderness, overcame her scruples, and she listened to a plan she knew not how to improve.
               Business at this time called my brother and sister to visit an estate lately left him in Scotland by a distant relation. I im-mediately proposed being of the party,

pretending an inclination to visit that part of the island, conscious that I could there compleat my scheme with the most security from suspicion.
               We accordingly set off; and on our arrival at Edinburgh, Fanny, who was innocence herself, allowed me to con-duct her to a private part of the town, where a clergyman, whom I had en-gaged to secrecy both by bribes and the most solemn oaths, performed the cere-mony which united her to me by laws both human and divine.
               I will confess to you, my children, humiliating as is the avowal, that the confidence placed in me more than once tempted me to betray it; and that the facility with which it was in my power to have deluded my artless bride with a false marriage, held the execution of my project for some time suspended: but though the whole transaction confessed

an unpardonable weakness, in this instance it was unstained with guilt.
               Our journey down gave me opportuni-ties of meeting with Fanny, and con-versing with her more unsuspectedly than I could otherwise have hoped for; yet I could perceive that my sister was not without her suspicions of my partiality for her maid, and very often rallied me on it, though she could not possibly have conceived the slightest idea of the impru-dence into which my fatal weakness had involved me.
               That my wife should continue a mo-ment in her present humble situation about my sister, was what I could by no means brook. Two days therefore after our union, which had taken place on the day of our arrival, by my contrivance she pretended to have received accounts of her mother's being dangerously ill, and requested leave to return home with all expedition, in order to give her the

necessary attendance. It was not with-out infinite reluctance that the dear girl was prevailed on to adopt this little artifice; and the tears she shed at part-ing from Lady Ann, to whom she was tenderly attached, must inevitably have excited some suspicion that she meant to return to her no more, had not the occa-sion of her departure furnished an appa-rent excuse for them.
               As I had time to digest my scheme before it was put into execution, I had provided a small house in a private street in London for the residence of my wife, under the name of Mrs. Smith. There I hoped to visit her frequently, unsus-pected by the world, and thither I was eager to follow her. Prudence however required that I should remain behind with my sister and her husband; but as they continued only a few weeks at their new estate, my impatience was soon gra-tified by our return to London, where I

met my lovely bride with all the ardour and impatience natural to my disposition.
               For some months my passion, far from suffering any abatement, rather seemed to encrease. At this time my father came up to town; and as I lodged with him, I was constrained to visit less often in the city, and with redoubled caution; but the difficulties which retarded our meetings, and their consequent infre-quency, gave them an unspeakable charm—a charm, alas! the warmth of which a short time diminished!
               The entire solitude in which my wife lived (for I was her only visitor) made my society and conversation her only happiness and amusement. Her educa-tion had totally unfitted her for mental entertainments; nor had she been taught those accomplishments which fill up agreeably the leisure hours of a woman of fashion, and from the unavoidable re-tirement in which she lived, little variety

of conversation was possible: when there-fore the mist of passion began to dissipate, I found her still lovely, amiable, and in-nocent; but unfortunately perceived that these alluring qualities were not in them-selves sufficient to retain my wandering affections. Her conversation soon be-came insipid to me; and the desire of embellishing her mind by directing her studies (at first my most pleasing amuse-ment) now ceased to interest me. The tenderness of her affection long pre-vented her from expressing even a murmur at my too apparent neglect; although I could not but perceive that her spirits were visibly affected by it: and she always re-ceived me, after a fortnight's solitary absence, with the most lively expressions of joy.
               It was not immediately however that this unhappy change took place: and your birth, my Hermione, which hap-pened not till three years after our mar-riage,

supplied your mother with a pleasing source of amusement, sufficiently inte-resting I hope to prevent her thoughts from brooding over the mortifying and painful alteration in my behaviour.
               At this period I became acquainted with a set of companions of the most dissipated character. My particular friends were two young men of agreeable and insinuating, but of profligate manners. In their company I led the most irregular life: and soon began to consider the hours I spent occasionally with my wife as a point of duty rather than of inclination, and with regard to the discharge of duties which in-terfered with my pleasures, I grew every day less solicitous: this therefore, among the rest, became extremely neglected; and I heartily regretted the indissoluble knot which had placed your mother in a situation that rendered my attentions absolutely necessary to her happiness: the seclusion of her life affected, but it

also chagrined me; and her dependance, once so pleasing, seemed now a burthen that I endeavoured to shake off, flatter-ing myself that her child would amply compensate for the loss of my society.
               Twelve or fourteen months passed on in this manner; till my wife, at length wounded to the soul, began to adopt the worst of all methods for recovering a lost attachment, by complaining of my cold-ness. This she did with her accustomed softness, and by tears rather than re-proaches; but it was a subject which embittered so extremely the short inter-vals I spent with her, that they grew less frequent than ever, although the birth of her second child (you, my dear Fanny) ought to have proved an addi-tional tie towards cementing my affection.
               My father, who regarded himself as exceedingly unfortunate in my brother's marriage, often proposed to me to marry, and had at different periods pointed out

stages of immoderate sorrow, and I ac-knowledge the justice without feeling the force of the consolation you would inspire. I know we have enjoyed our beloved parent to a more advanced pe-riod than, from his feeble constitution and emaciated frame, we had cause to hope, and that we ought not now to repine that it has pleased the Almighty to take him from us; since every year of the last three of his life, has appeared in the light of a lease from heaven hardly to be expected, and at certain seasons, almost hardly to be wished; but for some months previous to his death, he had been blessed with such unusual good health, that all our former fears were lulled into fatal security, and I cherished with delight the pleasing idea of pos-sessing him even in old age, and of de-voting my days to render the remainder of his life comfortable and happy.
               I do not however give uncontrouled

several advantageous connexions, among whom he wished me to choose; but as my heart was not interested, though the subject embarrassed, it did not wound me, and I evaded it with little difficulty.
               My sister, one evening at her house, introduced to me a young lady with whom she had been on a footing of the strictest intimacy whilst I was on my travels, but whom, till now, I had never seen, owing to her having accom-panied her father to the Court of Turin, where he resided in a public character, and from which place she was but just returned.
               Miss Marsdon was uncommonly beau-tiful; and her manners and address, though highly cultivated, preserved an interesting simplicity which rendered her perfectly irresistible: her conversation, refined by an admirable understanding, embellished by education, and polished by an early introduction into the most

polite company abroad, possessed an ease and delicacy of good breeding almost as striking, at first sight, as the charms of her figure.—I felt the full force of both, and was conquered at once. With the blind impetuosity which marked my character, instead of exerting my utmost efforts to resist and avoid a temptation I found too insinuating, I gave way to this seducing passion, and shut my eyes on its unhappy consequences, so fraught with misery, remorse, and guilt. It was then that I cursed my folly, and that infatuation which had before guided me. Ever violent and untractable, I was almost driven to despair at the re-collection of the weakness which had placed a bar so insuperable between me and my wishes. But there soon arose in my breast a ray of hope; the production of ungoverned passions, selfishness and treachery, which first suggested an action that has thrown the gloom of the

bitterest self-reproach on all the succeed-ing years of my life.
               The lovely Miss Marsdon, an only child, and heiress to an immense fortune, possessed a considerable estate which she had inherited from her mother, and which lay contiguous to Belmont Castle. This circumstance, though trivial in itself, had induced my father often to express his wishes that a marriage between the young lady and myself might take place. Her absence had hitherto entirely frusta-ted this plan, and given birth to other schemes; but her unexpected return at this juncture made him directly renew the old topic of matrimony, to which, hitherto, I had never been prevailed on to listen. Far from being averse to this match, he said he saw with pleasure it was an union into which I would enter with avidity; and that as the young lady herself seemed, if he might judge from appearances, to receive my atten-tions

with all the modest approbation I could wish, he thought the next step was to apply to his old friend Lord Emb-don for his sanction and consent.
               The mention of such a transaction made my blood run cold, and I received it with an embarrassment which not only astonished but extremely displeased my father; though, at the very moment that I half declined what my heart panted to obtain, I was revolving in my mind the means of bringing such a scheme to bear. The success hitherto attending my attempt of concealment, encouraged me, and I began to flatter myself that my engagements with your mother might remain an eternal secret to the world, which would leave me at liberty to form what new ones I pleased with the amiable object of my present affections; this, I imagined, might for many years remain unknown to my real wife, who saw only her own servants,

none of whom had been informed of my name, and who, being perfectly unac-quainted even with the meaning of the word politics, had ever declared that newspapers were the dullest of all read-ing; and I knew she received none of the daily prints into her family. All these circumstances induced me to hope that she might long continue in ignorance; and that when the fatal in-telligence, that I had connected myself with another, should at length reach her ears, and she knew my heart was totally alienated from her, I believed, or rather I forced myself to believe, that the gen-tleness of her nature would never allow her to plunge me at once into infamy and contempt by detection, but that she might without difficulty be persuaded, as the calamity was without remedy, to rest satisfied in obscurity, with conscious innocence and affluence, all that had hitherto been her solitary portion. This

certainly was a design which a thousand unforeseen accidents might disclose to the world, and, at best, extremely im-probable to effect; but I was willingly blind to the future, and solicitous only for the gratification of the present mo-ment. I considered also, that should your mother's just resentment prompt her to divulge the truth, the measures I had taken, though not with that in-tention at the time, had all conspired to prevent any credit from being given to her assertions: the ceremony had been performed in Scotland; the clergyman's abode she knew not, nor was she ac-quainted with his name but from the certificate of our marriage, which indeed still remained in her hands, and which I regarded as the only bar. I often there-fore revolved on the means of getting it into my possession; and most un-doubtedly should one day or other have effected it, but conscious guilt prevented

me at the time from venturing on any steps towards this end, terrified to awaken suspicion while my plot was but in agitation.
               It was not without extreme anguish that I considered the felicity I was pur-chasing for myself must be at the ex-pence of an amiable young creature's happiness, who had once been the object of my warmest affections, and who still loved me passionately; who regarded me as her guardian and protector, who lived in a manner on my smiles, whose countenance ever betrayed dejection on the slightest appearance in mine either of indifference or ill humour, and who had brought me two lovely infants, pledges of her tenderness and of my treachery. But I quickly chased away those painful suggestions of conscience; drowned them in wine, or forgot them entirely at the first glance of my beloved Julia.
               
                  
In a word, I made my addresses to Miss Marsden, and was accepted. My Lord, overjoyed at finding me willing at last to close with his wishes, hastened the preliminaries; and Lord Embdon, happy in settling his daughter to his satisfaction, (as there had ever subsisted the strictest friendship between him and my father) insisted on celebrating our marriage at his country seat in the most sumptuous manner, where a number of relations on both sides were to be present.
               During the preparations, my heart, though so near enjoying its utmost wish, was weighed down with a burthen of guilt, the sensation of which let none call themselves miserable till they have endured; for perfect misery cannot subsist without the feelings of remorse. As the time approached, my agitation be-came more violent; in the presence of

my lovely Julia they were annihilated, but alone they were insupportable.
               Miss Marsdon and her friends had al-ready left town, and I was to follow the next day, and the ensuing one was to determine my fate. On the evening previous to my departure, being uneasy in my mind, I resolved to pay your mo-ther a visit, while I had not as yet actu-ally injured her: you will imagine this a strange step in such circumstances, when on the eve of inflicting a wound which must for ever destroy her tranquillity; but in fact I was so oppressed with a load of secret sufferings, that it fell to me like the discharge of a duty to which was attached some degree of merit from the pain it occasioned me. I found her low spirited and indisposed; shall I add another circumstance calculated to have awakened every sentiment of tenderness and compassion, had not my heart been hardened and every feeling warped in

selfishness—she was with child, and had suffered much from the attendant cir-cumstances of her situation: this, toge-ther with the air of sombre seclusion which every thing wore, and which had never before struck me so forcibly, softened and affected me. Your mother was ill and alone; no parents to soothe, no friends to attend her; all was gloomy and dejected around her; it was I that was the occasion of what she now felt, and what she had further to endure; yet —yet—I was villain enough to persist in my intention to destroy her! not but that a violent though transient remorse made me hesitate for a moment; but I pre-sently laboured to satisfy my conscience with this sophistry, that I had gone too far now to retract, and that as I had probably engaged the affections both of my wife and of my mistress, and ren-dered their felicity dependant on mine, since one must suffer, it was at least al-lowable

scope to my grief, as you tell me you are convinced is the case: I do not complain that the sudden shock of this sad stroke made it perhaps overpower us with redoubled violence; on the con-trary, I bless heaven that the sufferings were ours not my dear father's, and that his transition to a better world seemed to all appearance unattended by those painful struggles and agonies which in general render the awful close of life still more dreadful, both to those who endure and to those who behold it.
               Oh my beloved friend! it is not his loss (though God only knows how se-vere) that lies with such a weight of mi-sery on our minds: ah no, Sophia; to the inevitable stroke of death our dearest interests remain every instant ex-posed; and dreadful as is the blow, re-signation, assisted by time, especially in the sanguine season of youth, seldom I be-lieve fails in restoring tranquillity. Long

that I should spare regret and disappointment from being the portion of her who had it in her power to con-fer unspeakable happiness on me.
               As to your mother, the joy of seeing me, and the unusual tenderness with which her situation inspired me, made her dissolve into tears that silently re-proached my perfidy. I pleaded an ex-cursion from town in excuse for my long absence, and informed her of an unavoid-able journey I was on the eve of taking which must deprive me of the pleasure of seeing her for a still longer time. She did not utter a complaint; but drying up her tears, you have deprived yourself of much pleasure, my dear Lord, said she; and instantly ordering the maid to bring the children to me began, with all the tenderness of a mother, to repeat the improvements you had both made since my last visit, which was about three months before, with many innocent ex-pressions

of anxiety to see me, and won-der at my absence, that had fallen from the infant lips of you, my dear Her-mione, then scarce three years old.
               My children are my only consolation in your absence, my Lord, said your mo-ther, tenderly pressing my hand; but I thank heaven I have them. To be sure I cannot expect, in our present situation, to enjoy much of your company; but I live in the hope that the day will arrive—
               The entrance of the maid, with Fanny in her arms and leading in Hermione, left the sentence unfinished which was a dagger to my heart. I think I was hardly ever more affected than when you, my Hermione, rejected my caresses, and seeing your mother's eyes red with weep-ing, asked me, with a resentment which was immediately after followed by tears, why I made mama cry? This innocent reproach, under which lurked a meaning conscious only to myself, made me heap

expressions of tenderness on both the mo-ther and child, while I was preparing a blow for the former that laid her in the dust.
               I left the house in a state of mind not to be expressed. I spent the first part of the night in misery: but the idea of what next morning was to bestow, re-moved the image of your mother in tears, and presented to me that of a lovely and beloved bride ready to give herself to my wishes.
               I accordingly set out next day with a large suite of friends, was married im-mediately on my arrival at the Hall, and had all my conscientious scruples soon drowned in an intoxication of happiness.
               After spending some weeks in great gaiety, I carried my amiable bride to my father's country seat, to which place we were accompanied by most of the party; and here we continued the same round of amusements for a fortnight longer. My

soul however was soon to awaken from this dream of joy, and to receive the due reward of its crime in the shame and remorse which succeeded.
               The company had just returned one evening from an agreeable excursion on the water, and the ladies being in high spirits, had insisted on fiddles being sent for, so that a kind of ball was going for-ward on the lawn before the house, the weather being uncommonly delightful, when my servant, calling me aside, deli-vered into my hands a letter, the super-scription of which made me tremble. I hastened instantly to my own apart-ment; where, securing myself from in-terruption, I found it, as I suspected, from your mother, and the contents as follows:
               
                  
                     TO THE RIGHT HON. LORD LINROSE.
                     If your heart ever felt for one instant the affection you have a thousand times

sworn to me, if during the whole course of your life it has once been awakened by compassion, think what she who writes to you feels at this moment; think, that to the ruin of that same which you have clouded with seeming guilt, and to the total alienation of that affection which has cost me so dear, is superadded the insupportable misery of knowing you to be treacherous and inhuman. Ah! my Lord! if your bosom still retains one vulnerable spot, where pity is not de-barred an entrance, come to me instantly. The Almighty has lent a gracious ear to my petitions, and shortly shall you be relieved from the infamy of your present state. My fatigues and agitations have accelerated my pangs; I am even already ill; deny me not therefore this last sad dying request, and deny not yourself the satisfaction of receiving my forgiveness; a circumstance to which you will one day most assuredly attach

some degree of importance. Think of me as the mother of your children: come at least and contemplate your own work, and behold me, in this dismal cot-tage, expire in giving birth to an infant whose premature existence must throw an eternal stain upon its father's name.
                     I will not pretend to describe my ago-nies on perusing this pathetic letter, every word of which gave me a mortal wound. All the terrors of my perfidy (till that instant too fatally lulled by opposite pas-sions) at once assailed me. The misery in which my crimes had involved her who had once been the object of my ten-derest affections, the despair into which I was about to plunge her who at present engrossed them with so much fervour, the grief and astonishment of my family, my treachery exposed, my character blasted for ever, altogether excited such

sentiments of horror as overpowered my senses, and almost bereaved me of reason.
                     Having fortunately secured myself from interruption, I had a little time, after the first shock was over, to consider what steps I ought to pursue in a moment so replete with alarm. In the present exi-gency no time was to be lost. I there-fore determined to write a short billet in answer by the return of your mother's messenger. It was not an easy task: to offer any thing like an apology, especially on paper, was impossible; to work on the softness of her nature was all my trust, and the only circumstance on which I could build the slightest foundation for hope. I made no attempt therefore to-wards vindicating myself; but reserving that till I should see her, I only intimated in a few lines the anguish her note had given me, confessed appearances were against me, but faithfully promised to pay her a visit next morning, at which

time I should exert my utmost endea-vours to satisfy and relieve her; con-cluding with the most earnest prayers and entreaties that she would preserve as a profound secret, her name, her abode, and her connexion with me, which I added would plunge us both into imme-diate ruin and destruction, were they to reach my father's knowledge.
                     I then enquired, though not without much perturbation, for the person who had brought the letter, and was told that a country girl had given it into the hands of the housekeeper early that morning, but the party in which I had been en-gaged had prevented my receiving it till the evening, and the girl had left no message to what place an answer might be sent.
                     I was grieved to the soul at this in-formation; for as it was impossible for me, without exciting surprise and per-haps suspicion, to quit the house at so

late an hour, I was constrained to leave your unfortunate mother in the dismal suspence of fruitless expectation.
                     My answer indeed, had she received it, was little calculated to have afforded her consolation; and my visit could only have confirmed her despair. I caught eagerly however at a faint ray of hope, which I cherished even against reason and conviction, to prevent me from absolute frenzy, and I could not help resting with some slight degree of comfort on the mildness of this letter, though writ-ten in the heat of a resentment so justly excited. Her gentle bosom thought not of revenge: on the contrary, her visit to see me seemed prompted by the desire of according me forgiveness.
                     But before I proceed in the recital of my own sufferings, and the horrid scene that awaited me on the dreadful day that succeeded to this miserable evening, let me previously inform you, with as much

composure as I can assume, of the hope-less fate of your innocent, your injured mother, whose calamities I shall ever, with the bitterest remorse, to my latest moment deplore; and the relation of which recalls feelings so acute as to tear my bosom while I transmit them to paper.
                     In what manner she became acquainted with the circumstance of my marriage, I have never been able to discover. The person to whom I owe the following par-ticulars, which, however horrible, I was afterwards anxious to learn, and which, as a just and penitential humiliation, I force myself minutely to relate, had not informed himself in that point; but the fact a thousand ways was ever liable to detection. The instant the report reached your mother's ears, the cold neglect of my past behaviour gave it an apparent credulity that distracted her. Deter-mined to be at once either plunged into

and deeply must we have mourned our irreparable misfortune: yet I know I am not formed different from the rest of mankind, and what millions are doomed to endure, I am conscious I might have been enabled to support; but our dis-tresses are accumulated, and beyond measure severe: not merely have we been deprived of a parent tender and revered, but to this calamity, of itself almost suf-ficient to overpower human nature, is superadded the agonizing aggravation of knowing that his best days have been overclouded by secret and acute suffer-ings —sufferings which have corroded his mind, undermined his constitution, and to which he has at length yielded himself a prey; yes, my Sophia, that ever honoured parent, whom we reve-renced with enthusiastic affection, was a victim to remorse, and died of that most painful of all distempers—that dis-temper which admits of no cure, and

despair by the confirmation of my guilt, or relieved from the agonizing suspicions of her mind, she left London and set off for Netwall, from which place Belmont is but three miles distant.
                     Afraid to be recognized so near the abode of her youthful and happier days, she borrowed of the woman of the inn a large cloak and hood to disguise her; and terrified to intrust a messenger, or-dered a chaise to convey her within half a mile of the castle; where having dis-charged it, she walked forward with a note in her hand, intimating that she waited for me in the wood, where she entreated me, in the most earnest man-ner, by all my vows of unabating tender-ness and by every motive of humanity and compassion, to meet her immediately.
                     These few lines she meant herself to deliver to any of the servants she might meet; but what, alas! were her emo-tions, when on approaching the park

gate with timid and hesitating steps, she perceived from behind some bushes, where she hastily concealed herself, a train of carriages, among which she instantly singled me out, seated in my phaeton with a lady whose appearance at the first glance confirmed all her apprehensions.
                     Some little interruption (for she after-wards related every particular to her mo-ther, who in the bitterness of despair re-capitulated them minutely to my infor-mer) obliged me to stop so near, that she observed, or fancied she observed me, ad-dress my companion with a look of af-fection; I even kept her hand for an instant; and my voice, which reached her ears, though imperfectly, seemed softened by tenderness; while that sound, which hitherto had ever conveyed joy and exultation to your mother's bosom, produced now on her heart the effect of a sudden stroke of lightning.
                     My countenance, however, wore a

look of gaiety which accorded so ill with the consciousness of secret guilt, that the next moment she condemned the injury she imagined her suspicions did me, and even endeavoured to accuse her own hasty jealousy, which had inflicted such misery without any foundation for actual despair. Momentary alas! was this illu-sion; for as the equipages, attended by several gentlemen on horseback, passed the spot where she had concealed herself, she plainly overheard one of them say to his friend, how divinely handsome Lady Linrose looks to-day. Her heart died within her at these words, and she sunk insensible on the ground.
                     Her senses were quickly restored: but returning recollection brought with it such a weight of anguish and despair, as made her lament the tediousness of death, from whence alone she could now hope for relief to her wretchedness.
                     She endeavoured however to suggest

a feeble hope almost against conviction, to enable her to exist till my return should explain all: for having heard one of the footmen mention that the company would be home to dinner, she concluded we were upon an excursion of pleasure.
                     Her health having been declining for some months, had much impaired her strength; and it would have been im-possible for her to have undergone the fatigues she had that day endured, had not the agitations of her mind supplied a false power of exertion, not unlike the delusive support of a fever, which bestows for a moment an additional but destructive vigour; for she perceived not that she was feeble and exhausted while her spirits and her feelings were all in conflict.
                     At length she formed a plan to wait my return on the spot where she was, and to seize the opportunity of giving her note to one of my attendants after I

should have passed on, with injunctions to deliver it privately into my own hands. Finding she had probably several hours to wait, she endeavoured to compose her mind: and employed herself in offering up prayers to the Almighty to avert her misfortunes, or to enable her to en-dure them with humble and becoming submission; and that if it pleased his gracious Providence that she must live and suffer, that her reason might not prove a sacrifice to the agonies she might be doomed to sustain.
                     Long and tediously the hours rolled on: but at length the carriages came in sight once more, and your unfortunate mother resumed her concealed post. My phaeton accidentally stopping to allow a chariot to pass, she heard more distinctly than before the merriment of the whole party, and perceived the criminal author of her miseries with a voice of pleasure pointing out to his beautiful companion

the romantic charms of the surrounding prospect. The instant we were gone, she besought one of my servants to take charge of her note: but this the fellow refused, declaring with an oath that his Lordship was not to be troubled with petitions at present.
                     Wound up almost to a pitch of dis-traction, she then followed me even to the gate of the castle, her fears, or ra-ther her frenzy, having arisen to a height that gave defiance to her apprehension of being known, though such was her disguise, that it must have concealed her effectually. Unfortunately she again en-countered the same inhuman footman, and again entreated him to deliver her letter; but her solicitations only pro-duced some brutal jokes; and she was about to crawl from the door, when the anguish she betrayed induced a maid ser-vant, who accidentally passed at that moment, to enquire into the cause of her

distress; and who, reproving the foot-man's indelicacy, compassionately under-took to take charge of it. The fellow pulling it from her hand, it was torn in pieces in the girl's struggle to recover it; but delivering the fragments to your mother, she faithfully engaged to pre-sent any other she should write. I shall give it, said she, to her Ladyship's maid, who will deliver it into my Lord's own hands. What lady? cried the disconso-late Fanny. Why Lady Linrose to be sure, said the girl; my Lord's new-mar-ried lady.
                     Is then my Lord married? returned she, in feeble accents.
                     Oh! several weeks ago, answered the other; who from her uneasiness, and the situation in which she beheld her, began to suspect that she was some poor deluded creature;—but his Lordship is very generous; and if he has injured

you, he will make it up beyond your ex-pectation.
                     Though your mother's apprehensions had before almost amounted to certainty, yet to hear the truth pronounced be-yond a flattering possibility of doubt, made her fall senseless into the arms of the humane girl, who instantly called some of the female servants to her as-sistance; and when your mother opened her eyes, she found herself in the house-keeper's parlour, whither she had been conveyed. On looking round, and per-ceiving her situation in the very room where every object was as familiar to her as if it had been her own apartment when she resided in the castle, the recol-lection of what she had suffered since that period wholly overpowered her; and to know herself surrounded by my domes-tics, and under the same roof with her husband, yet not daring to solicit that support and protection from his care

and tenderness, to which, particularly in her present situation, she had so just a claim, she found at that instant that shame predominated in her bosom even over despair; and terrified every instant lest accident should present some of her old companions to her view, she thanked her charitable assistants, and made a fee-ble effort to rise as soon as she had swal-lowed a few drops that had been given her.
                     The housekeeper, however, insisted that she should remain till she was some-what more recovered; and a general sym-pathy and curiosity having been excited, she was almost stunned with interrogato-ries: but all she could be prevailed on to acknowledge was, that she brought a bill for Lord Linrose to discharge; and being liable to fits, had been suddenly attacked with one just as she was deli-vering it to the maid.
                     Her too apparent distress, her hesita-ting and embarrassed replies to many

distressing enquiries, and her tears, which now began to yield a mournful relief to agitations her utmost efforts could not conceal, made little credit be given to this assertion; and the circumstances of her situation could not fail to suggest suspicions of a nature the most injurious: yet their compassion left no room for con-tempt; and the good housekeeper per-ceiving her scarce able to answer the flow of questions that poured in upon her from every quarter, had the human-ity to send away all those whom curi-osity had drawn round her, and promised to deliver privately any letter she should confide to her care.
                     Your unfortunate mother then de-parted with fatigued steps from the cas-tle, her mind torn by inward struggles and distraction, and her exhausted limbs unable to convey her farther, than to a cottage just without the extremity of the park, whose charitable owner allowed

bids defiance to human skill—a broken heart.
               His death, ever to be lamented, has brought to light a fatal, fatal story; but I shall endeavour to enter upon it with what composure I can summon to my aid; and from the soothing relief of con-fidential communication, perhaps my sorrows may derive some alleviation.
               After being seized with the fit which proved, in its consequences, so dreadful, a short interval of ease succeeded, which my sister and I, unused to scenes of this alarming nature, vainly regarded as the certain symptom of recovery; but my father, who felt himself inwardly gone, perceived with pain our delusive error. My dear girls, said he, in a voice, ah! how exhausted! you must endeavour to recon-cile yourselves to the shock which awaits you: the will of heaven must not only be obeyed, in that we have neither choice nor merit, but it must be obeyed

her under its roof to court that repose which fled equally from her eye lids and her bosom.
                     She instantly enquired of the good woman if she knew farmer Williams and his wife, and how they kept on in their old days? To this she was answered, that they were in tolerable health; but that they had received a shock some years before from the misconduct of an only and beloved daughter, which it seemed too probable they never would recover.
                     My dear Fanny burst into an agony of grief at these words, which instantly infused a suspicion into the country wo-man that her guest was in fact the de-luded daughter of the farmer, whose elopement had occasioned such various reports and conjectures among her re-lations. The situation in which she be-held her, on the eve of bringing an in-fant into the world, confirmed this idea;

yet though that circumstance was but ill calculated to invalidate the unfavourable rumours circulated at her expence, the too evident distress she endured made her appear so just an object of compassion, that the woman proffered her every as-sistance in her power: your unfortunate mother however, whose only consolation lay in the free indulgence of sorrow, having asked for pen, ink, and paper, which fortunately were to be had, re-quested to be left alone; and passed the night in tears, and in writing that me-lancholy letter, which so pathetically implored my pity instead of breathing the vengeance due to my crimes.
                     It was yet unfinished; when finding herself taken violently ill, she hastened to conclude it, and enquired for a mes-senger, to whom she intrusted it under cover to the house-keeper. Though not within some weeks of her expected time, fatigue and agitation soon brought on

the pangs of child birth; and having only received what assistance the country woman could bestow, she was delivered of a boy a few hours after, without one friend to support or console her, at a period when the agonies of her mind surpassed what nature has allotted the fe-male frame to sustain in these severe cir-cumstances.
                     No answer having been returned to her letter (owing to the cause I have al-ready mentioned) she immediately con-cluded herself totally abandoned; and began most fervently to hope she should not long endure that accumulation of woes under which she laboured: an un-common sensation of weakness, border-ing almost on a state of infancy, con-vinced her of her approaching dissolution; and she regarded her release not only without dismay, but with eagerness and satisfaction.
                     In this situation her most earnest wish

was to embrace her parents before her death; to explain whatever appeared criminal and unaccountable in her con-duct; and, having committed her chil-dren to their care, from whom alone she now expected justice and protection for them, to breathe her last sigh in their arms.
                     She therefore besought the country-woman to carry a message to her father and mother, imploring them to deign to visit her before she expired: to this woman she likewise confessed all the particulars of her unhappy story, and besought her to tell them, that could she accuse herself of one crime, excepting that of having deserted them in their old age, for which she hoped she had been sufficiently punished, she should not have dared to request that satisfaction, the only one she would probably live to enjoy; and entreated them to believe, that the infant she had just brought into

the world, owed its existence to an event neither criminal nor disgraceful.
                     The old people, stunned with this unexpected intelligence, knew not what to determine. They had long concluded their daughter lost and deluded; but their grief for her elopement was not unmixed with resentment at her mis-conduct. The circumstances in which she was restored to them, were far from arguing her innocence, and their first resolution was to abandon her to the fate they concluded she had merited; but parental tenderness almost instantly converted this unnatural intention into the most earnest desire of seeing her once more. To her protestations of purity, they gave little credit. But guilty as she is, said the old man, she is still our child, and her present misery obliterates her past crimes:—miserable have been our days since her fall—the sufferings are now become her own.
                     
                        
Nature, however, pleaded so power-fully for their daughter in the breasts of the good couple, that as they hastened to the cottage, they could not help indulging some faint hopes, that, though appearances were so much against her, some alleviating circumstances might turn out in her favour.
                     It may not then be difficult to imagine what must have been their feelings, when, on being ushered to the side of the bed where she lay, their beloved child, unable to see them after a separa-tion so melancholy for almost six years, gave a feeble shriek, and fainted away.
                     In this state of insensibility she con-tinued so long that they gave her up for gone; but having sent for a neighbouring surgeon, who administered every assis-tance possible, they had at length the satisfaction of seeing her open her eyes once more. They immediately found, however, that though life was restored,

it was not in human power to recover her from a violent delirium with which she was instantly seized. The doctor declared her in a high fever, which being attended with mortal symptoms, gave the most alarming cause for appre-hending the worst.
                     The situation of the unfortunate parents, who saw themselves on the point of losing their daughter almost in the very instant that they had recovered her, cannot possibly be described. She was perfectly insensible to them and all about her, during the whole day; and raved with a frantic wildness which it was horrible to witness; often calling on my name and imploring my compassion in the most piteous manner. Her father having at one time approached her, the disorder of her imagination made her instantly conceive it to be the accursed author of all her miseries, and throwing herself suddenly out of bed, in spite of

every opposition, she fell at his feet, imploring him not to murder her nor her infant: her angelic temper never once breathed an expression of resent-ment nor revenge, but her lips muttered unceasing complaints, and she perpetually repeated, I am just going to die, my Lord, wont that satisfy you? Ah spare my children!
                     The woman of the house being unable to manage her, and her weeping parents totally disabled by grief from assisting, she was obliged to call in some of the neighbours, who could only constrain her by force to remain in bed.
                     Nature could not long sustain a conflict so violent; nor can I, my children, force myself to dwell upon a scene, the idea of which inflicts unmitigated torture.
                     A few hours wore entirely out what little strength remained; and after having lain some time quiet, her senses were restored to her. She recollected the

message she had dispatched to her parents, and enquired composedly, tho' with a voice almost exhausted, what answer had been delivered.
                     They, who were no farther than at the foot of the bed, could not any longer re-strain themselves from rushing into her arms, and embracing her as she lay. Their tears prevented them from articulating; but their daughter, who approached her last hour, was too feeble even to weep.
                     Oh, my beloved parents! cried she, with a hollow voice, which her breathing often rendered interrupted, I shall now die contented, since I have the satis-faction of expiring in your arms. I hope God will forgive my undutiful conduct towards you. Alas! you see how I have suffered for it. But I hope —may I trust you never could believe that I had thrown a stain on the virtuous education I received from your care. Indeed—indeed—I am innocent, and

really married. My asserting it at a moment so solemn, ought alone to con-vince you of the truth of this assurance; but, if more is necessary, I am in posses-sion of the most certain and convincing proofs.
                     She then ordered the country-woman to deliver to her parents a packet which she had sealed, and committed to her charge, on being first taken ill: it con-tained the certificate of our marriage, and several letters written and signed by my own hand, which plainly proved that I regarded her as my wife.
                     I trusted him because I loved him, continued she; but in spite of the strictest ties, you see he has abandoned and de-serted me, and I am going to atone with my life for the anguish my rash step must have given you in your old days. Indeed the idea of your uneasiness wholly embittered any short gleams of comfort I might otherwise have enjoyed;

            HERMIONE, OR THE ORPHAN SISTERS.
            A NOVEL.
            IN FOUR VOLUMES.
            VOL. II.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE, AT THE Minerva, LEADENHALL-STREET. M.DCC.XCI.
         
      
      
         
            

informing us of her abode, and request-ing that we would take immediate ad-vantage of the information. Delighted with this intelligence, so unexpected too, as Mrs. Weldon, when at the cha-teau, had not once dropped any hint of an intention to re-visit England, we re-quested Mrs. Hindon to set us down at her house. She gave us the kindest re-ception possible: and on our part, we felt as if we had met one in whom we were warmly interested, and who was nearly connected with us. She informed us that business relative to a legacy lately bequeathed her had obliged her to come over at a sudden call, and that she had left our much respected friends in good health.
                  How strangely do circumstances, ap-parently the most trifling, alter our opi-nions and prepossessions: this Mrs. Weldon, whom I thought at best but an agreeable coquet, and whose friendship

hope and consolation which she herself equally required at a moment so tremen-dous. Struck with her uncommon beauty, I took advantage of her situation to offer her those little attentions which any woman in similar circumstances would have claimed from me, but which in performing to this unknown fair, gra-tified me beyond expression. Her fears, so unaffected, so severe, yet so little in-dulged, rendered her at once the object of my admiration and tendered compas-sion. There were a thousand charms in every word, in every look; and a certain slight degree of a foreign accent, which in another might have appeared a defect, gave a peculiar softness to the tone of her voice, the force of which I felt without being able to define it.
               The alarming situation in which I be-held her, gave birth to a thousand cir-cumstances that all conspired to delight and interest me. Nor did the evening I

spent in her company at Dover, fail to heighten and augment my first impres-sions in her favour. Her manner possessed a polished simplicity, and her conversa-tion a refined good sense, which diffused a mutual lustre on each other, and which insinuated her into my heart beyond all power of resistance; and although I was obliged to get to the Abbey by the day I had mentioned to my mother, and had hardly time sufficient to fulfil my pro-mise, yet I allowed many hours to elapse before I could prevail with myself to quit the inn where the lovely Miss Seymour was.
               Is it then me at last—me indeed—cried I to myself, out of breath with expecta-tion and wholly exhausted with agitation.
               During the preceding speech, it is not easy to describe what were my perturba-tions. At one time elated with hopes, which at another sunk into apprehen-sions, I feared to flatter myself delusively;

nor till I heard my name distinctly pro-nounced could I be persuaded that the woman he had been describing with all the exaggerated encomiums of an impas-sioned heart, could indeed be myself.
               The sensations of pleasure which rushed into my mind, were soon however mixed with a bitterness that poisoned every ri-sing satisfaction.
               When I call to mind her behaviour, continued he, both during that evening and every succeeding one when I have been so fortunate as to converse with her; when I recollect her manner, so soft, so unaffected, so inexpressibly engaging, how is it possible to reconcile all this with the account which the woman here gives of the whole party. I cannot recollect one instance of the slightest appearance of le-vity either in Miss Seymour or her sister, who is the very picture of innocence it-self, nor would it have been in the power of any person on earth to have made me

for one instant give credit to the asper-sion on her character, had not my eyes witnessed that she can forgive an insult which a delicate woman never could have pardoned.
               After all, said Captain Bradshaw, Mrs. Brumpton does not absolutely aver that they are abandoned girls, though it must be owned she seems to insinuate more than she chuses to divulge; and last night when I questioned her again according to your desire, she told me that when under the eye of their Argus, no girls can be-have with greater propriety, but that the instant his back is turned they do not appear the same creatures.
               What I at this moment heard affected me so violently that I became incapable for some minutes of at ending to what they said; on renewing my attention I found Roatsley was speaking.
               You may conclude then, said he, how shocked I must be to learn that there were

a variety of rumours to the disadvantage of this family, with which I was so much charmed. I was indeed inexpressibly hurt to find any mortal dared to think disrespectfully of any one of them; yet I disbelieved every syllable that was ut-tered. I could not discredit the evidence of my eyes, which traced every amiable quality and every sentiment of female dignity in the countenance and manner of Miss Seymour. As for her sister, she is also very lovely, and the innocent youthfulness of her appearance accords ill with your report. Mr. Howard I have enquired after; and find he is esteemed a man of sense and character, neither given to vice nor even accused of excess; I must therefore repeat, that I think the notion of their being his wards is infinitely more probable (even setting aside the ap-pearance of the ladies, which indeed ren-ders any other opinion absolutely impos-sible,) than that there should be any

illicit connection in the case. That part of the story I am therefore thoroughly convinced is an infamous slander.
               Wounded to the soul by this dreadful, this inconceivable explanation of the mo-tives of Mr. Roatsley's late behaviour, oh! Sophia, what were my pangs, what was my mortification, during a recital which sunk my spirits from the highest elevation to the lowest despondency. Scarce could I keep myself from faint-ing at the cruel and painful conclusion of encomiums which had excited such infi-nite pride and pleasure. My heart died within me; yet I anxiously listened to what should follow, while my eyes were drowned in tears of vexation and regret.
               The girl may be thoughtless and in-considerate, returned Bradshaw, without being absolutely void of delicacy; and their being with Lady Farnford certainly argues in favour of their reputation. The idea of their being French courte-zans

is not by any means probable: but should they turn out so you have still less reason to sigh Roatsley, for your fair one will not prove cruel.
               It is utterly impossible! cried Roatsley with warmth. I am perfectly convinced of the abominable falshood of that insi-nuation. Miss Seymour may be weak, vain, and volatile, (though even in these points I am unconvinced,) for I will not pretend to aver that first sight impressions, especially where an interesting figure is in question, are always to be taken as proof; but to attack her moral character is an aspersion which one look must compleatly and sufficiently confute. I own I am hurt and confounded at the variety of reports which pour in upon me from more quarters than one: they have even reached the ears of my mother, though she never saw either of them in her life, nor could have heard even their names repeated till within these few days. Miss

Seymour has fallen I acknowledge from the high ideas I had conceived of her character, but never for an instant can I do her so material an injury as to suspect her reputation.
               There are men, said Mr. Bradshaw, who in your situation would not regret if that point continued doubtful.
               No, cried his friend, the woman who has once possessed the power of inspiring me with a passion [almost equally com-pounded of tenderness and esteem, can-not preserve the first while she loses all claim to the latter. My love for Miss Seymour could not subsist independent of that delicacy which gives it a charm refined and inexpressible; nor would I enjoy if I might the fruits of a fall which I should ever lament. But I am con-scious I am injuring her in mentioning her name under such a surmise. Pray what says your watch? This subject car-ries me too far; and I have an engage-ment at four.
               
                  
'Tis almost that hour, cried the other; and both the gentlemen rose to go.
               I trembled from head to foot as they passed the door of the parlour, lest any accident should have discovered me; but I was soon rid of my fears as they left the house directly.
               What do you think, my dear Sophia, of this conversation, so wholly incon-ceivable? Scarce have I preserved reso-lution and patience sufficient for relating it minutely, without often interrupting my narration by the silent ejaculations and the different emotions to which at the time it gave rise. To delineate my various feelings of mortification, disdain and vexation, would be perfectly impos-sible. I think however you may in some measure suggest to yourself what they must have been. Terror was no incon-siderable ingredient towards rendering the situation of my mind still more dread-ful; and what motive Mrs. Brumpton

could possibly have had for representing us to others in a light in which I am cer-tain she never could herself have regarded us, plunged me into consternation and affright.
               The instant Mr. Roatsley and his friend were out of the house, I deter-mined to fly from a spot in which I dreaded one moment longer to remain; and was hastening to the door, when it suddenly opened, and Mrs. Brumpton appeared, quite out of breath, followed by—the wretch Farnford.
               Ten thousand pardons Madam, cried she, for the trouble you have had in wait-ing. A poor sick relation sent to intreat I would give her the consolation of one half hour's conversation, having some af-fairs to impart which lay heavy on her mind, and thinking as you mentioned two o'clock that you would not be here for some time, I ventured to give my poor dying cousin the comfort she so much required.
               
                  

I had in Languedoc no sort of desire to cultivate, now scarcely appears to me the person she was, except in her powers of pleasing, which are if possible augmented. The change is not however entirely ow-ing to the partiality with which I could not but regard an acquaintance formed under the roof of our worthy friend; the alteration is in herself; and I now per-ceive how illiberal and injudicious are often the sentiments and impressions in-spired by an imperfect knowledge. Mrs. Weldon, in her own house, and in pri-vate, possesses not merely the gaiety which amuses, but that good sense and know-ledge of the world which must charm and improve all who are admitted to an intimacy with her. These good qualities are blended with a flow of spirits uncom-monly elevated, which diffuses a vivacity over her manner and appearance that on a superficial acquaintance may be mistaken for levity, but which, on a
While she pronounced these words, in a whining hypocritical tone, Farnford ad-vanced, and making me a profound bow, endeavoured to convey a look of contri-tion and reverence into his countenance, as if he concluded it must at once molify and subdue my resentment: but I en-tirely disregarded his salutation. The sight of him so unexpectedly threw me in-to the utmost terror, and a crowd of con-fused apprehensions rushed instantly on my mind. I exerted myself however to assume an appearance of unconcerned in-difference.
               I am sorry Madam, said I, with an air of gravity and composure under which I strove to conceal the fears which almost overpowered me, that you should have been so unluckily from home, as I have an indispensible engagement that prevents my remaining a moment longer. I shall settle matters at a more convenient time; at present it is impossible; and I walked

composedly towards the door, which she had shut.
               The woman seemed at a loss, and stam-mered out—'Tis really extremely un-lucky indeed Ma'am: but if you could just sit down a little bit Ma'am—perhaps you might find time to give me directions about that large trunk, Ma'am—which has remained in my back room ever since you quitted it. Would you choose that it should remain in my custody, where it is very safe, or shall it be sent to Mrs. Hindon's in the Square Ma'am.
               All this time she kept her hand on the lock of the door, as if she intended me the civility of opening it, but evidently with the design of detaining me. This movement redoubled my emotions; yet I answered as coolly as possible—Let it be sent to Mrs. Hindon's Madam; but I am in extreme haste, and beg I may not be detained.
               For heaven's sake, cried Farnford, who

all this while stood in evident embarrass-ment, his eyes fixed with a most impu-dent stare on my face—Spare a few mo-ments I beseech you from your engage-ment, and permit an unhappy man, who has undesignedly and unfortunately of-fended you, to plead his cause at your feet; and falling on his knees, he seized my hand, which all my endeavours could not wrest from him. But indeed I was too much intimidated to dare to make much resistance; for the woman still held the door; and though conscious that I was in fact a prisoner, I was anxious to keep measures with them as long as pos-sible, which I imagined might preserve me from indignity.
               Only hear me for one moment, conti-nued he, and you will be conscious that you have no just cause for offence. The first glance I had of such superlative charms, compleated the conquest of my heart: a heart, which has long remained

unmoved, unsubdued, by the attractions of the most amiable and most accom-plished of your sex—
               Sir, cried I, interrupting him with a resolution which pride and resentment in-spired, it is perfectly immaterial to me what are your sentiments. I am not at leisure at present to listen to your dis-course, and I desire you would instantly release me.
               The whole world and all the powers it contains, cried he with frightful vehe-mence, shall not tear you from me till you have heard me out. I own I did you injustice. I heartily deplore it. What can I say more? What can I do more to testify to you the sincerity of my regret and repentance? Undoubtedly the most confounded prudery can alone induce you so violently to resent a free-dom of behaviour into which intoxication and a false idea of your character inad-vertently led me. The moment I disco-vered

my error I should have flown to have acknowledged and renounced it at your feet, but you have constantly frus-trated all my attempts to obtain an in-terview. I am therefore constrained to make the most of fortune, and since she has at length propitiously favoured my wishes, how can you imagine I will not take advantage of her gifts. Angelic creature, continued he, for heaven's sake hear me with some degree of softness and pity. I adore you: I would with delight undergo the severests torments to gain the slightest hopes of forgiveness. Tell me only that you will forget a conduct which I heartily lament—tell me that you will admit of my visits at Mrs. Hin-don's, where all the family are favourably disposed towards me—and I will torture my own soul by permitting you to leave me.
               I will not grant a permission, cried I with spirit, which would lead to a perse-cution

I never will undergo and to hopes I never will encourage. You vainly flat-ter yourself, Sir, if you imagine you will even extort such a consent. I desire you will allow me to go. I insist upon it. What title have you to presume to detain me against my inclination, (and I spoke with undissembled heat) you will oblige me to call up my footman for assistance.
               He is not within call, I give you my word, so that is a resource to which you cannot apply.
               Pray Mrs. Brumpton, cried I to the wicked woman, do you allow of such violence being practised in your house?
               All the Captain asks is forgiveness, Madam, replied she. Were he to at-tempt any incivility, I should be the first to condemn him. I never have counte-nanced such proceedings in my house I assure you, Ma'am; but all the gentle-man asks is to be allowed to hope.
               All I wish by G—, interrupted he,

all I kneel for is, that you would forget what has displeased you in my conduct, and by admitting my visits, flatter me with the hope that time and assiduity may soften that dear, that inflexible heart in my favour.
               Never, never, cried I with firmness.
               Never! Madam, answered he, sud-denly throwing aside that appearance of humility and respect which notwithstand-ing his violence he had hitherto pre-served, and assuming a look that terri-fied me—Do you persist in this deter-mination? do you tell me never to hope for pardon, Madam? Since then I find I gain no ground by submission, since you continue thus resolute and unmoved to all my entreaties, since all my pro-testations only feed a pride, stern and un-relenting, permit me to assure you, that if you do not condescend to grant me some chance for future favour, most cer-tainly I shall not prove so much my own

enemy as—as to allow you to leave me, said he hesitating—without obtaining it.
               What do you ask, said I, almost sink-ing with terror from the alarming warmth with which he uttered these words, and from the wildness of his looks, while he not only grasped my hand but kissed it several times in a passionate manner.
               I only desire, replied he, that you will never mention to any person whatever this interview, that you will endeavour to forget I ever offended you, and that you will deign to allow of my visits, nor scrupulously avoid my sight, under those false pretences of engagements and in-disposition which have hitherto baffled all my attempts to meet with you.
               Well, Sir, cried I, for my courage had now entirely failed me, since you can stoop to accept of an extorted compli-ance, I will see you at Mrs. Hindon's when you occasionally call; but I shall certainly keep my own apartment, and

follow my own engagements when I see proper; nor shall I ever give my consent to conceal any part of your behaviour from those to whom I may choose to di-vulge it, but you may conclude I shall not be eager to expose it on my own ac-count.
               At least promise me, said he, promise me, loveliest of human beings! that you will not publish this day's interview ei-ther to my mother, to Mrs. Hindon, or to Mr. Howard; on this condition, and this only will I suffer my charming pri-soner to depart.
               You ought to blush Sir to call me by that name; but since you are determined, to these three exceptions I shall unwil-lingly submit. Do not imagine, how-ever, that you have it in your power to in-timidate me to grant greater concessions; for here I solemnly protest that nothing shall induce me to go further; nor would a generous mind be capable of frighten-ing

me into promises which may be above my ability to perform.
               No, cried he, I ask no more. I build my future hopes on the opportunities I shall enjoy of pleading my cause when you are less disturbed; and I hope you will allow something for the generosity of my present behaviour when you are entirely in my power.
               Wretch! where was the generosity he boasted of? to intimidate—to terrify me —and to force me into every measure he dared wish to adopt.
               Then let me depart, cried I, for he still held my hand.
               Madam, said the woman, may I take the liberty of adding one word? As the part I have acted in this matter was out of pure good will to the Captain, I hope you will not misinterpret my permitting this meeting, which the young gentle-man has solicited times without number before I could be brought to consent to it.
               
                  

nearer view, I find proves merely the natural result of a sprightly turn of mind, added to an early introduction into life; circumstances that in general arive defiance to bashfulness, at least to that painful degree of it that accompa-nies awkwardness.
                  She was so kind as to insist on our re-maining with her the whole day, and at her earnest request an apology was dis-patched to Mrs. Hindon; indeed I have not spent one so entirely to my satisfac-tion since my arrival. Mrs. Weldon was equally amusing, whether we con-versed on gay or serious subjects; and uninterrupted by company, we chatted over affairs that mutually interested us.
                  I was extremely sorry however to find that she did not regard Madame de Cla-rence with that cordial esteem which I imagined every one must be disposed to feel for a character so amiable; and she let us into some little circumstances re-lating
No more conditions, said I, with a haughty air; and after Farnford's odious lips had dwelt almost a minute on my hand, he led me to my chair, which still remained in waiting though he had used the precaution to send away Dubois, as if with orders from me to return home.
               Do you not think, my Sophia, that during this morning I had suffered an-guish and mortifications sufficient: ah no, my dear! a more cruel, a more se-vere pang than any I had endured yet remained, and wholly overpowered me: at that painful moment when the horrid Farnford was putting me into my chair at the bottom of the stairs, Mr. Roatsley passed me. I involuntarily started on perceiving him, and he suddenly changed colour; but without deigning to pay me the usual compliments, he contented him-self with slightly touching his hat, and with a careless but dejected air hastily passing me, walked on.
               
                  
I followed him with my eyes, and ob-served he looked behind; though in-stantly on seeing that I remarked it, he turned away, and I thought I could distinguish an appearance of chagrin on his countenance that made me regard the audacious Farnford (who just at that in-stant bad me farewell) with augmented horror and disgust.
               Oh heavens! said I to myself, as the chair moved along, what has this morn-ing revealed to me. That I'm loved by Roatsley, yet am the object of his contempt. If some hours ago he seemed inclined to think even better of me than I appeared to deserve, now—now—every unfavourable suspicion must have received full confirmation; and the vexation of my heart drew tears of bitterness from my eyes. Happily I got unobserved in-to my own apartment, where Fanny im-mediately joined me; and I found some small alleviation to my distress in relating

to her all that variety of singular occur-rences which had befallen me in the course of a few hours; but a call to din-ner soon obliged me to dry my eyes, and appear with dissembled ease at table, where there were, as usual, two or three friends besides the family.
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 21.
                     
                  
                  Fatigued with writing, I laid down my pen to reflect on the transactions of a day, which, were I to live a thousand years, I shall ever remember with pain. Oh! Sophia! have I not cause to be wounded to the soul. The man on earth who appears the most amiable in my eyes, has conceived perhaps an equal partiality for me; yet a false and inju-rious suspicion must soon, nay must al-ready, have entirely obliterated and de-stroyed every favourable prepossession,

and substituted in their room the lowest and most contemptuous sentiments. Have I not indeed cause to be hurt in the ten-derest part. No method can I devise for clearing my reputation in Mr. Roats-ley's opinion. I am under a fatal pro-mise to conceal the whole affair from Mr. Howard, who is the only person that could have explained with delicacy and propriety any doubts that were to my disadvantage, and I have little hopes Roatsley will henceforth feel the slightest solicitude about me, after the flagrant proof he has this day beheld of my defi-ciency in that point on which he justly rests an importance so material. How can I now flatter myself, even should I meet him in public, which is my sole chance of encountering him, that he will give me an opportunity, by con-versing with him, to testify how sincerely my soul abhors the wretch whose con-duct merits my scorn and detestation,

and that my mind is far, far above those vile and unaccountable suspicions which he has been led, heaven knows how, to entertain against me.
                  But how on earth, my dear, have re-ports so infamous, so inconceivable, been circulated at our expence? who could have any interest in propagating them, and who could have been so infernally wicked as to invent such injurious fals-hoods, without some strong and power-ful motive? Is it then possible to create secret and treacherous enemies, without performing or wishing ill to any one? The wretch Brumpton, you may per-ceive, is not alone at the bottom of these mortifying aspersions; from various quarters it seems they have reached Mr. Roatsley's ears; even from the lips of his mother he says, though heaven is my witness I scarce knew till this moment that she existed; and no sooner, it is pro-bable, has she been made acquainted with

the same fact in regard to us, than a thousand infamous calumnies have at-tended the information. A variety of conjectures crowd upon my mind: but the only particular I can rest on with any degree of conviction, is, that Mr. How-ard must not have arrived at a period of life enough advanced to allow with pro-priety of two female companions of our age; and this circumstance, to slander-ous dispositions, has most undoubtedly given rise to these abominable suspicions, yet how tainted with vice must that heart be, who from an accident so simple and natural, could infer and propagate accu-sations so scandalous. If this is the world, Sophia, ten thousand times better it had been for us had we never quitted our peaceful solitude.
                  Yesterday evening, being what Mrs. Hindon calls her assembly night, we had a crowd of visitors, who played at cards or conversed as they were inclined. Most

of them, however, did not remain long enough for either; but, as if satisfied with having testified their politeness by shew-ing themselves, departed a few minutes after they entered.
                  Mrs. Hindon, who, to do her justice, never fails in attention towards my sister and me, introduced to us a number of her friends; but an introduction in Eng-land, seldom or never, I find, is produc-tive of an acquaintance; it serves merely as a pretext that may be laid hold of at pleasure for that purpose, but which, if disinclined, obliges the parties only to the formality of a distant curtsey on their next meeting; a ceremony that is often dropped on succeeding interviews.
                  You may conclude I was not a little confused on hearing Captain Farnford's name announced among the first who ap-peared. He walked directly to the so-pha on which I was seated, and very con-fidentially began to enter into conversa-tion

with me upon general topics with the ease and familiarity of the most per-fect intimacy; but though constrained to remain in his company, I thought it by no means necessary to punish myself by attending to his discourse, which soon overflowed with the most bombast and absurd expressions of admiration; I there-fore turned from him with unfeigned disgust, and addressing myself to some ladies with whom I have contracted a transient acquaintance, pretended to be engrossed with what had scarce the power of fixing my wandering thoughts. I found escaping from him, however, was quite impracticable, for he followed me for some time wherever I went with the most obtrusive perseverance, without seeming to remark the repugnance I did not attempt to conceal, nor the con-temptuous silence with which I listened to him.
                  I flatter myself my behaviour at length

had the desired effect. He began to look proudly displeased, and could no longer conceal the painful mortification his va-nity suffered from the cold neglect I dis-covered to the display of his accomplish-ments. Indeed there is a secret self-ap-probation and conceit diffused over his manner, which, independent of any other consideration, would have alone rendered him disagreeable to me; though I could perceive he was by no means regarded in this unfavourable point of view by the rest of the company; on the contrary, the younger female part of it seemed to consider him as a real fine gentleman, whose notice was solicited with an eager-ness that soothed his pride and softened his mortification.
                  A small party being invited to stay supper, I was rejoiced to find that dur-ing the latter part of the evening he had changed his plan of operations, and in-stead of tormenting me with unceasing

persecution, had transferred his atten-tion to a young lady in company, who indeed received it with all the satisfaction he could wish. He seemed to aim at the old attempt of engaging interest by ex-citing jealousy; from the idea that the sex cannot with patience submit to the mortification of being rivalled even in the admiration of those for whom they have no value. Heaven grant his scheme may continue for some time, or rather that it may last for ever.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 22.
                     
                  
                  How busy, my Sophia, is our present way of life, and how various the scenes in which we are engaged. I need now no longer repeat, as I used so frequently to do, when my journal was dated from our quiet retreat in Languedoc, that it is deficient in interest and incident.
                  
                     

to family dissentions, which I ne-ver should have suspected to have oc-curred between a couple who always be-have, at least in company, with the utmost apparent good humour and politeness to each other. Mrs. Weldon even told us, that poor Madame de Clarence has an unfortunate failing in her temper, which renders herself and her husband equally miserable: she possesses, it seems, an un-happy degree of jealousy, that leads her to conclude almost every young woman, whose visits are frequent in the family, the object of Monsieur de Clarence's af-fections; and no sooner is she convinced of her error in one place, than her sus-picions are turned to another quarter, however improbable and extraordinary.
                  This is a most unfortunate disposition, and sincerely to be lamented; for I fear, according to Mrs. Weldon's account, it is quite incurable. She gave me innu-merable instances of her weakness in this
More events, my beloved friend, but none of a very pleasing nature.
                  We have hitherto left the regulation of our finances wholly to Mr. Howard's care; who, more accustomed to matters of this kind than it is to be supposed my sister or I could be, with his usual good-ness undertook to manage all our busi-ness of this nature; being in possession of a large sum for present use, which is not yet exhausted, and concluding our fortunes secure in the funds under the inspection of Mr. Benseley's executors, we imagined ourselves certain of inde-pendence.
                  Mr. Howard has been under some ap-prehensions, I believe, about this money ever since our arrival here, though he forbore alarming us till the truth could be no longer concealed. The sum is twenty thousand pounds; all my father ever possessed; and for which he so-lemnly relinquished all further claims or

expectations from his father's bounty (a precaution I find which was unnecessary). This Mr. Benseley had originally placed in the stocks; but a few days previous to his demise, some change in public credit unfortunately induced him to sell out at a very great price, no doubt with the intention of laying out the money to more advantage. His death, however, unluckily taking place in the interim, no paper can be found by which the real proprietors of that money are ascertained. A note alone has been discovered, in which Mr. Benseley acknowledges a debt to my father of four thousand pounds; and it is but too probable that Fanny and I must content ourselves with this small portion of that affluence of which we always concluded ourselves secure. What is worse, Mr. Benseley's affairs are in such embarrassment and confusion, that we shall not enjoy this little pittance till all is cleared; and as there are a

number of creditors, it is likely that even this may be considerably reduced.
                  Mr. Howard strives to persuade us that things may turn out better, and that it is not impossible but some lights may yet appear to prove our claims. He has consulted lawyers on the occasion, but he confesses they are not sanguine, having given it as their opinion that unless wri-tings are found which plainly evince our right, a lawsuit would be an expensive and ineffectual expedient; and it is evi-dent, from the friendly chagrin with which he just now divulged this disa-greeable intelligence, that he thinks only part of this debt will be recovered. As to our fortune, that is irretrievably gone.
                  It has been justly observed, that the pecuniary disappointments inflicted by Fortune never produce a lasting or pain-ful wound except to minds tainted with avarice: if we are enabled to live with decency and independence, though with

the strictest oeconomy, on what still re-mains to us, I should blush to repine at our loss, though manifold are the advan-tages resulting from affluence, and grate-ful the pleasure which dispensing it pro-cures to the heart.
                  If our grandfather should prove in-exorable, Sophia, the prospect now is not a comfortable one: but I will not allow an unnecessary anxiety about the future to add one moment's uneasiness to my present vexations: Lord Belmont never can permit us to remain in abso-lute poverty: at all events, if we are re-jected by him, obscurity must be our portion; and then a little—a very little will enable us to subsist with comfort and decency.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XI. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JAN. 23.
                  
               
               OH! my Sophia! how infinitely am I shocked with a discovery I have made.
               Yesterday, when I went to Mrs. Wel-don's, I found her alone. Her friend, she told me, had sent an apology, being a little indisposed; but as you are so so-ber, said she, I hope you will be almost as well pleased to sit and chat tete à tete with me, for I expect nobody else.
               I told her she paid herself a bad com-pliment, if she imagined I did not prefer her company to that of her friends, and that I could not avoid enjoying the lady's

detention. Soon after a hand organ in the street attracted our attention, and several well known French opera tunes were played very agreeably by a Savoy-ard, whose wife and child made a rude but not unpleasant accompanyment upon instruments that seemed to have been invented in the very infancy of music. The effect altogether was delightful; and the sound of airs which had been taught me in my own country recalling a thou-sand soft and affecting recollections, con-veyed me in imagination to dear Lan-guedoc, and threw me into a reverie that wholly absorbed me.
               An intention of rewarding the per-former the more liberally perhaps from considering him in some measure as my countryman, induced me to pull up the sash to throw him some money; and just at that instant I perceived Mr. Roatsley pass the window. He was walking with another gentleman; but on beholding

me suddenly started, and bowing slightly, with an air of extreme embarrassment and confusion hastily walked away.
               The sight of him threw me into a per-turbation not to be conceived. I felt myself colour violently; and was scarcely able to stand. Mrs. Weldon, who from attentively listening to the music had not observed the gentlemen, though she was standing at the window by me, exclaimed, Good heavens, my dear, what can be the matter? You are all over crimson. A-fraid of her raillery, I chose not to reveal the real truth, and gave her an evasive answer, expressed with such awkward-ness that it would by no means answer the purpose intended; but on the con-trary, by exciting her curiosity induced her to look out of the window. I knew there must be something at the bottom, cried she laughing. Upon my word two very handsome youths, though I can only see their backs, for they are almost

at the end of the street. However I in-sist on being informed which of the two it is, the mere sight of whom has dis-composed you so prodigiously.
               After this attack, you may believe I did not chuse to afford her a subject for teizing me by confessing the cause of my agitation; as I well knew how delighted she always is with a topic on which to display her wit and vivacity. The infor-mation that it was Mr. Roatsley was little calculated to make her spare me; and besides of necessity must have led to a communication which I did not wish. I therefore evaded her enquiries in the best manner I could contrive, though not without difficulty, under pretence of an indisposition which I knew she did not credit.
               Oh! Sophia! the expressive manner in which Roatsley regarded me, was so striking, that it must have made the most forcible impression on my mind had I

even received no hints to guide me to unravel its meaning; but after the dread-ful intelligence which accident has brought to my knowledge, too well, alas! am I enabled to interpret the gravity and melancholy that was strongly pictured in his countenance. But I must hasten to other particulars—particulars that have shocked me beyond expression.
               Just as Mrs. Weldon and I had fi-nished a tete à tete meal, a thundering rap announced visitors, and the instant after Sir Edward, (for I know not his other name,) entered.
               I was somewhat discomposed at his ap-pearance, after the freedom of his be-haviour the evening I had been in his company; though to do him justice, he had treated me with more respect than seemed to influence the rest of his com-panions. I therefore assumed a look of grave reserve, and took no part in a very lively discourse which instantly com-menced

between him and Mrs. Weldon, though they often severally addressed themselves to me, and made many at-tempts to engage me in it.
               After sitting a quarter of an hour, Mrs. Weldon left the room to bring some drawings for the animadversion of Sir Edward, who professed himself a connois-seur; and concluding she would imme-diately return, I kept my seat, with the intention of remaining till Mrs. Hindon and Fanny should call for me in their way to an assembly, whither I meant to accompany them. But scarce was she gone, when Sir Edward, advancing, re-sumed the stile of address with which I had been so much importuned the last time I had been in his company; and throwing himself at my feet, with a pro-fusion of the most extravagant compli-ments swore he had adored me ever since he had enjoyed the happiness of seeing me, and that he had been the most mi-serable

particular; and added, that as she had been for some time an inmate of her fa-mily, she had not failed herself to expe-rience the effects of her temper in this point.
                  I expressed my surprize that this un-lucky foible should never have been hinted to me till now, nor the slightest suspicion of a turn of mind so adverse to her tranquillity ever occur to my mind during the whole period of my acquaint-ance with Madame de Clarence.
                  You was the last person, said she, to whom such an information was likely to be suggested. The strict intimacy that subsisted between you was sufficiently known to deter all malicious or officious disposed persons from entertaining you with a topic so little agreeable as the errors of your friend; and the circle you ranged in was ever so limited, that large as is the proportion of the world which comes under these descriptions, I believe

of men, and must remain so, unless I would discard the cold and cruel re-serve with which I received all his atten-tions.
               I was petrified with astonishment; and rising in order to leave him, assured him I never discovered either distance or re-pugnance, but in company which natu-rally inspired those feelings.
               Loveliest of women! cried he, where-in can I have been so wretched as to dis-please you? How can I have inadver-tently fallen into an error which is the fault on earth I should most deplore, and which were it necessary I would expiate with my life. Do not imagine, all divine as you are, that your charms can be heightened or your beauty rendered more irresistible from that air of haughtiness and disdain, which would destroy the power of any features but your own, nor conclude that you will augment the num-ber of your slaves from the severity and

cruelty of the chains with which you must bind all hearts that behold you.
               Sir, cried I, confounded at this speech, and a great many others in the same strain which succeeded, and still more by the manner in which they were pronounced, while he stood between me and the door with the intention of preventing me from escaping—for heaven's sake allow me to depart. I flattered myself the disappro-bation I testified so lately at a similar be-haviour, would have entirely put an end to compliments and a conversation which confounds and bewilders me; and I also hoped that the regret you expressed for having alarmed and shocked me, would not have been so soon followed by the same inhumanity. I thought myself un-der obligations to you then Sir, for re-lieving me from another gentleman's persecution; let me, I entreat you, have reason to express my thanks once more for delivering me from your own.
               
                  
The earnestness with which I uttered these words seemed to strike him; yet for some time he went on in the same in-comprehensible stile, till at length I ex-claimed—What on earth Sir does all this mean? I am perplexed and bewildered. I know not what to make of your dis-course.
               Madam, said he, with an evident change in his countenance and some he-sitation, my conversation cannot have confounded and bewildered you more than yours astonishes me. If such are your real sentiments, why do I behold you here?
               At this question, pronounced so seri-ously, I felt as if I was thunderstruck. A thousand suspicions, confused and terri-fying, rushed upon my mind.
               Tell me, cried I with terror, tell me why I ought not to be here.
               Miss Seymour, answered he with en-creasing earnestness, I blush for myself.

I perceive I have been egregiously de-ceived, and my confusion deprives me of power to apologize for my behaviour. All that I now can do to atone for my offence is, to inform you that this house is by no means a proper place, nor is its owner a safe companion, for a young lady of your appearance.
               My God! exclaimed I in horror, for at that instant he who had been but a moment before the object of my dislike and apprehension, seemed now my sole dependance and only security from insult and despair—My God! what shall I do?
               Be not alarmed I beseech you, cried he, and be assured that as certainly as I have warned you of your danger I shall myself secure you from it. You have nothing to fear.
               I was very near fainting, from the shock of this dreadful information; and anxious as was my desire of quitting in-stantly the house, I had not power to

move. At last, when I had a little re-covered myself, I entreated Sir Edward to order a chair. He instantly complied; and having pulled the bell, desired the footman to make haste.
               The short interval which passed till the chair was ready, was the most awk-ward that can be imagined. My un-speakable impatience rendered it an age; and to my agitation and terror was super-added the most painful confusion. I could hardly look Sir Edward in the face after the explanation he had made of my situation, and he himself seemed equally at a loss. My distress was not, you may conceive, much abated, by an expression which inadvertently dropt from him upon my confessing my apprehensions for Mrs. Weldon's return before I had left the house. Be assured 
                     
                   Madam, said he, she will take particular care not to interrupt us. This speech at once finished her character and informed me that she had

I perceive I have been egregiously de-ceived, and my confusion deprives me of power to apologize for my behaviour. All that I now can do to atone for my offence is, to inform you that this house is by no means a proper place, nor is its owner a safe companion, for a young lady of your appearance.
               My God! exclaimed I in horror, for at that instant he who had been but a moment before the object of my dislike and apprehension, seemed now my sole dependance and only security from insult and despair—My God! what shall I do?
               Be not alarmed I beseech you, cried he, and be assured that as certainly as I have warned you of your danger I shall myself secure you from it. You have nothing to fear.
               I was very near fainting, from the shock of this dreadful information; and anxious as was my desire of quitting in-stantly the house, I had not power to

move. At last, when I had a little re-covered myself, I entreated Sir Edward to order a chair. He instantly complied; and having pulled the bell, desired the footman to make haste.
               The short interval which passed till the chair was ready, was the most awk-ward that can be imagined. My un-speakable impatience rendered it an age; and to my agitation and terror was super-added the most painful confusion. I could hardly look Sir Edward in the face after the explanation he had made of my situation, and he himself seemed equally at a loss. My distress was not, you may conceive, much abated, by an expression which inadvertently dropt from him upon my confessing my apprehensions for Mrs. Weldon's return before I had left the house. Be assured 
                     
                   Madam, said he, she will take particular care not to interrupt us. This speech at once finished her character and informed me that she had

planned the interview; in procuring which she probably pursued her own in-terest.
               Good heavens, Sophia, is it possible that this woman, to whom nature has been so bountiful, so prodigal of her gifts; who possesses so abundantly the insinu-ating power of pleasing and whose con-versation is in general as refinedly delicate as it is judicious and agreeable—is it pos-sible that she is the most infamous and abandoned of her sex: she who enjoys the talent of engaging admiration and affection almost in the very moment that her conduct cannot but excite disappro-bation? Good heavens! into what a gulph of misery might I not have been plunged, had not the hand of Providence been held forth to extri
                     •••
                  e me from the labyrinth of destruction in which I had been entangled.
               The instant the chair arrived, Sir Ed-ward supported me into it, for I could

scarce move; having first procured me a glass of water, which my impatience suffered me only just to put to my lips. Having no attendant, Sir Edward was so obliging as to walk by the side of the chair to see me safe home; where I found Mrs. Hindon and Fanny drest for their visit; but perceiving me so ill and disor-dered, I could prevail with neither to fulfil their intention, my sister positively refusing to leave me, and Mrs. Hindon imagining herself obliged in politeness to appear equally anxious.
               As that lady's love of talking renders her often imprudently communicative, I did not choose to confess the private cause of my indisposition, but retiring to my apartment, poured out the fulness of my heart to my dear Fanny, who lifted up her hands and eyes to heaven in astonish-ment that such a character existed on earth.
               When I recall to mind the address with

which Mrs. Weldon contrived to impose upon me, and the ingenious methods by which she inspired me with the best opi-nion of her heart, I am lost in astonish-ment and horror to think that such a character lives. Here then is the infa-mous and secret cause brought to light of that warm attachment which me testi-fied with so much fervour to us both, but chiefly to me, and which stole so imper-ceptibly upon my affections, that she was every day gaining ground in our esteem, in spite of several little improprieties of behaviour, that served however only as foils to her other good qualities, and to which she possessed the art of giving what turn she pleased. Under pretence of business, I now recollect she never would consent to visit at Mr. Hindon's, though I carried repeated messages from his lady assuring her she should be happy to see any of our friends, that morning ex-cepted when she ventured to call for the

there were very few of either class that could be ranked among the number of your acquaintance.
                  But pray, added she, had you never occasion to remark, during your last visit, that Madame behaved to me with a distance wholly unaccountable, and which must, I think, have provoked both your observation and surprize? The real truth of the matter was, that as my ac-quaintance with the family originated through Monsieur, who lived in terms of the strictest friendship with poor Mr. Weldon, and to whom I was in some measure given in charge by my husband in his last moments, the lady never re-garded me with much kindness; but conscious she herself possesses not address sufficient to preserve her husband's affec-tions, she suspects every pretty woman she sees to be more in favour than herself, and charitably accuses her of the theft.
                  That Madame de Clarence disapproved

purpose of soliciting my forgiveness in order to further the barbarous purpose of engaging me to meet Sir Edward. He no doubt had bribed her to his purpose. Let me not blame him however, whate-ver were the steps he took to obtain the interview, since the artfu
                     •
                   woman no doubt represented me to him in a false point of view, and the delicacy of his be-haviour on this occasion has laid me un-der obligations to him which I can never recall without gratitude. So sacred must I hold the fame of a woman, how-ever infamous, whom I once called my friend, that I will not confess even to Mr. Howard what dupes we have been to her artifice and duplicity. As for Mrs. Hindon, my terror and escape would to her appear just the counterpart of the good story of my alarm before, and would I make no doubt prove equally the sub-ject of her mirth and diversion. I there-fore resolved to say nothing of an event

which has shocked me severely, farther than to acknowledge that some reports of her conduct have reached my ears which have induced me no longer to con-tinue our intimacy.
               Poor Madame de Clarence! Much, much, I fear, she has had sufficient rea-son for her jealousy; and I accuse myself most severely for having given credit to the vile ridicule thrown on her by Mrs. Weldon.
               I slept little all night; and to-day I really feel more uncomfortable than can be conceived. I have not only lost a friend and an agreeable companion, which of itself in our situation is irrepa-rable, but I have found her to be crimi-nal and unworthy. I fear I shall grow suspicious in future; for never could I have been more compleatly deceived than with regard to Mrs. Weldon, whose greatest fault I imagined consisted in a love of admiration and a passion for co-quetry,

which is said in some degree to pervade the whole sex, and often subsists in the most innocent hearts.
               But oh! can you guess the circum-stance which of all others tortures me the most painfully, and dwells perpetually in my thoughts? What must Mr. Roats-ley's ideas have been, how must his sus-picions have received confirmation, from beholding me standing with a woman of this character, at the window of her re-sidence. No wonder that he started and changed colour. No doubt he had heard of her before; and I can now partly trace the cause of those calumnies, to account for which puzzled and perplexed me so extremely. Our intimacy with Mrs. Wel-don must have been the origin of all the defamatory reports that have reached his ears. But oh! Sophia! how will he be undeceived—and when? Is there any thing so tender, so delicate, so irretrieva-ble, as the reputation of a young woman?

and when once wounded in the slightest manner, however injudiciously and un-justly, how difficult does it prove wholly to obliterate the stain and to efface the false impression. This dreadful reflec-tion hurts me to the soul, and for some time was quite intolerable. But a few hours consideration have abated in some measure its acute force; and I have been calling up the assistance of conscious in-nocence and dignity to my assistance, which tells me it is weakness to allow ca-lumny to poison that repose which has never been embittered from vice.
               Mrs. Hindon insists on our attending her this evening to the Opera, an enter-tainment at which we have not yet been present; for as I agree with Lady Lin-rose in opinion that till we are properly introduced we ought not often to appear in public, I have hitherto resisted all her intreaties, though it is the amusement, if of any, from which I promise myself

most pleasure. You may believe I was never less disposed for being entertained than at this moment. Indeed the utmost gratification I could receive, would be to indulge my serious humour at home. But for that very reason I have forced myself to consent to go. It is a duty I think to be chearful when one is unconscious of meriting self-reproach, and can raise our hearts in gratitude to heaven that no vi-sible calamity hangs over us.
               
                  
                     FOUR O'CLOCK.
                  
                  About an hour ago, while I was en-gaged writing in my dressing room, I was informed by Therese that Sir Edward Sudbury was below, and requested the honour of seeing me if not particularly engaged; and on entering the parlour, I perceived my new acquaintance, who po-litely apologized for the liberty he had

taken of enquiring after my health; but the situation in which I left you last night, Madam, said he, gave me so much un-easiness, that my desire of making perso-nal enquiries was not to be resisted.
                  I found myself at first a little embar-rassed; but summoned courage to tell him that his visit required no sort of apo-logy, as I should ever regard myself as particularly indebted to him for an ex-planation which might not otherwise for some time have reached my ears. This speech, short as it was, alluded to recol-lections which wounded me so severely, that my cheeks were dyed with blushes; and I hesitated more than once before I came to the conclusion. Sir Edward himself seemed almost in equal confusion; and his manner appeared so modest, mild, and respectful, that I could scarce recog-nize him for the man who had joined with his riotous companions in giving me such pain and mortification. But large

allowances ought certainly to be made for his behaviour where his freedom was neither suspected to occasion pain nor ap-prehended to be considered as an insult.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 24.
                     
                  
                  Y
                        •
                     sterday evening we accompanied Mrs. Hindon to the Opera, the amuse-ment of all others the most suited to my taste; indeed in the state my spirits then were, it was the only one for which I could have felt the slightest relish. A faint hope which I had entertained, that chance might carry Roatsley there also, conquered my reluctance at going, and supported me with courage and spirits for the exertion.
                  The instant I was seated, I cast my eyes around the house in hopes of seeing him, though I well knew the confusion the sight of him must have given me, but

without success, for he was no where to be found.
                  Sunk and disappointed, I tried to at-tend to the music; and endeavoured to forget my dejection by participating in the general gaiety that sat on every coun-tenance but mine. My attempts were however fruitless. The songs, which in private used to charm me, now, though improved to the highest pitch of perfec-tion by the most admirable vocal per-formers and the most excellent accom-panyment, could not even fix my wan-dering attention; and Mrs. Hindon's re-marks, by interrupting a train of ideas that absorbed me, proved extremely fa-tigueing. Her incessant talking, poor woman, indeed almost exhausted me, and I felt as a severe talk the share I was constrained to take in a conversation so little interesting. Oh! how painful it is, Sophia, to cover a heavy heart under the mask of chearfulness.
                  
                     
Melico had at length began one of his most melting songs; and it accorded so well "with my soul's sadness" at that moment, that not only my attention was unavoidably engaged, but my inquietude soothed and lulled into composure. At this moment I accidentally discovered the face I had so anxiously sought in one of the side boxes, not very far distant from that part of the pit where I was placed. I felt my face glow and my heart beat with great violence. He did not however observe me; but stood be-hind a young lady, who was indeed un-commonly beautiful, and with whom he conversed with infinite eagerness and ani-mation. I thought I could perceive that their discourse was equally interesting to both. They smiled delighted to each other, at particular passages of the song that seemed to enchant them, and though surrounded by several persons of both

sexes, appeared wholly engrossed with each other.
                  At last, however, he looked round; and on discovering us bowed with po-liteness, which instantly carried the eyes of the young lady towards our party; and the moment after I saw that she was en-quiring of him who we were. The ideas which this little circumstance produced, and my conjectures what answer he could give to her interrogatories, added to my pain and confusion. Soon after I ob-served that he had quitted her; and while I was watching with anxiety to find in what part of the house he meant to place himself, guess my perturbation on find-ing that he had actually seated himself on the bench immediately behind me, where there happened to be a spare place. His face was overspread with a deep colour while he paid me his compliments; and there was an air of gravity and penetra-tion in his countenance, as if he sought

of Mrs. Weldon's behaviour I well knew, nor was I ignorant that she was no great favourite with that lady; but as I could not myself avoid joining in the censure which her coquetry incurred, it made no impression on my mind at the time, nor could excite either surprize or suspi-cion: our lively little friend, mean while, happy in the possession of unbounded spirits, dreamt not of this severe judg-ment on her gaiety till after Fanny and I left the chateau, when the augmented re-serve and solemn deportment of Madame de Clarence soon gave place to an open manifestation of her repugnance and dis-like.
                  Her sententious harangues, said Mrs. Weldon, (who always expresses herself with force, and on this occasion may be forgiven the exaggeration of resentment) and thread bare lectures on the dignity of a proper retinue in the sex, were sud-denly converted into plain invectives

in mine the refutation or confirmation of his doubts, while this suspicion mortified and wounded me so cruelly, that I was apprehensive of raising the same commo-tion I had done at the play.
                  He perceived I looked disturbed; and attributing it to the extreme heat, en-quired with such evident softness if I was not ill, that the tender and unexpected anxiety he manifested on this occasion gave an instant revival to my spirits.
                  He then regretted his bad fortune, he said, in having so unluckily missed seeing us when he had called at Mr. Hindon's both that day and the evening before; this, through the negligence of that gen-tleman's servants, had never come to our knowledge; and oh! what uneasiness would it not have spared me to have known that Mr. Roatsley had taken this step towards having his unjust surmises confuted. I assured him the favour he had done us had been entirely unknown

to Mr. Howard, who undoubtedly would have immediately acknowledged his at-tention. He then began to talk of our accidental rencontre in the packet boat, and paid me a number of unmerited com-pliments on the composure of my be-haviour; for although I did not, like my poor Fanny, allow my terrors to dis-tract me, I was very far from deserving the encomiums he lavished on me. Pray my Sophia does not his exaggerations on this occasion betray— But I see you smile. I will however be perfectly un-reserved.—Does it not manifest something like partiality? and may I not draw this inference from it, that he will be open to conviction. O
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     his I may surely be confident; that although to the eye of a man so penetrating, so intelligent as Roats-ley, many errors and defects in my man-ner and conversation must be apparent, new as I am to the world and ignorant of its forms and etiquettes, yet no real im-propriety,

nothing below the dignity of the female character, can possibly be dis-covered by a candid and well disposed mind; and this little pride, my dear, en-abled me, after my first flutters were over, to acquit myself during the remain-der of the evening with tolerable ease. Supported by conscious rectitude, I de-termined not to yield to the bashfulness and constraint which were stealing upon me; but in justice to my own character to shew myself to him such as I really was, and leave him to repent and blush for the injury he had done me.
                  He often recurred to the accident that had produced our acquaintance, and called it the most fortunate of his life The most fortunate of your life, cried Fanny, who is extremely literal: that is strange indeed. Sure there can be no sort of pleasure in being frightened out of one's wits, and very near being drowned into

the bargain? for my own part I never reflect on it without horror.
                  This return to his compliment, ut-tered with such naivité, made him smile. Nay, said she, the storm was so violent that I think the most courageous of men needed not have blushed to have owned themselves terrified.
                  Had I been in danger of losing my cou-rage on that occasion, said he, Miss Sey-mour would have taught me my duty.
                  Mr. Howard at this moment joined us. Mr. Roatsley and he seemed mutu-ally pleased at meeting; and soon after the latter whispered that Lady Linrose was in the house, and pointed her out to us in the box which Roatsley had just quitted.
                  Our curiosity to see her was inexpres-sible: she seems under fifty, and possesses an air of majestic dignity in her appear-ance, blended however with a cold se-verity of aspect that destroys the admira-tion

her figure excites, and renders her countenance harsh and unamiable. It is indeed wholly devoid of that affability of expression which denotes a disposition to be pleased, and which ever confers pleasure on the beholder. The instant I had studied her features, I could not persuade myself I should ever recognize either the kind relation or tender friend in Lady Linrose.
                  From having observed Mr. Roatsley of her party, I naturally conjectured he must be of her acquaintance, and began to flatter myself that through this unex-pected channel of intelligence I might be able to learn some particulars relating to a family, with whom, in spite of our present prepossessions, we may one day become as intimately connected by af-fection as we are at present from consan-guinity. I therefore demanded if he was acquainted with that lady in black, point-ing

to the part of the house where she was placed.
                  What lady pray? said he.
                  That lady, cried Fanny: she who sits to the right in the box you were just now seated in. Don't you think she is the most severe, disagreeable-looking woman you ever beheld.
                  What lady do you talk of? repeated he, astonished no doubt at Fanny's in-considerate warmth of expression.
                  Lady Linrose, returned she. You have been of her party all this time. Sure you must know her?
                  As Mr. Roatsley was silent, and did not seem inclined to give the slightest en-couragement to Fanny's thoughtless im-prudence, who, unacquainted with the etiquette of society, perpetually disre-gards the little artifices which common politeness demands, and never once con-sidered that Lady Linrose might be, for any thing she knew, one of the most inti-mate

of his friends, I endeavoured to check her from proceeding farther, but in vain. Lord, continued she, inatten-tive to the coldness with which he listened to her remarks, don't you think she looks cross and ill-natured? I have not once observed her smile or look pleased all the while I have been watching her countenance: besides Hermione, turning to me, is it not very strange for a widow to make a public appearance so early. I thought nobody had done so in Eng-land till at least six months after their husband's decease; did not Mrs. Hindon say so the other evening, when we were on this subject? Oh! but I had forgot that they did not live together, and my Lord was so ill-humoured, I suppose, her Ladyship considered him as no great loss, though I think she might have shewn a little more regard to his me-mory though only for the sake of decency.
                  I tried by a look to stop her volubility:

though in fact my own sentiments of her Ladyship's conduct in this last instance were similar to my sister's. Her prudence has not impressed us, you may believe, with the most favourable opinion of her heart; and this procedure, which I am told is unusual, was not calculated, for improving it.
                  Mr. Roatsley's gravity deterred me, however, from avowing my secret thoughts. Pray, said he to Fanny, after a short pause, with a half smile—has Lady Linrose the honour of your ac-quaintance?
                  Oh! Lord! no, cried she, without considering how unaccountable this vio-lent prepossession against an utter stranger must appear, I never beheld her in my life till this moment.
                  Then how, pray, has she been so un-lucky as to fall under your displeasure.
                  My displeasure! cried she, embar-rassed; oh not at all. I merely dislike

her appearance. She looks sulky and proud, and I hate those sort of people.
                  She is very unfortunate indeed, re-turned he. I then contrived to put a period to the subject by calling Fanny's attention to another object; for I dreaded the suspicion and curiosity her simplicity might excite in Mr. Roatsley, who seemed both amused and astonished at her conversation.
                  Not for a moment during the remain-der of the evening did he leave us; and by the vivacity of his discourse, and the amiable gentleness of his manner, he in-sensibly restored my tranquillity, dissipated my confusion, and inspired me with a flow of spirits almost equal to what ap-pears natural to himself.
                  When all was concluded, he attended us to Mrs. Hindon's carriage; and re-quested leave, in polite terms, to indem-nify himself, he said, for his late disap-pointment by waiting on us again.
                  
                     
I have not spent an evening so agree-ably since that we passed at Dover. In-deed I even give last night greatly the preference, it having all the advantages of a most painful contrast to enhance its value. My sufferings in the early part of the evening conferred a double relish on the satisfaction of the succeeding.
                  I feel myself now relieved from a load of uneasiness which I supported with much anxiety; for I am convinced from Roatsley's behaviour last night, nay from the very expression of his countenance, that we are completely justified in his opinion, at least with regard to the vile aspersions so cruelly circulated against us.
                  Sir Edward Sudbury, who did not observe us till near the conclusion of the last dance, joined us before we left the house, and requested me to introduce him to Mrs. Hindon; which, as I wished that lady to remain ignorant of the cir-cumstances of our acquaintance, was ra-ther

against the licentiousness of the present age, and the unprincipled levity of all its daughters, whether maids, wives, or widows; those of the latter denomina-tion had, you may believe, sufficient justice done them; till at last it was im-possible for me any longer to mistake my own resemblance in the pictures me con-tinually drew of those profligate females, who having buried the man, either agreeable or otherwise, who had once received their vows, dared to be happy, and presumed to confess it too after they had regained their freedom.
                  For my own part, continued she, united by my friends early in life to a man twice my age, I am satisfied with having performed my duty to him when alive, without considering myself as obliged to mourn his loss when gone; and blessed with conscious innocence, I allow myself those liberties in which a mind free and at ease is glad to rejoice

disagreeable to me; however I had no choice, and fortunately contrived to evade her enquiries by informing her of my own accord that I had been in com-pany with him at Mrs. Weldon's.
                  We are beginning to grow extremely impatient for dispatches from Nice. Mr. Howard tells us that by course of post we ought to have received letters before this time; and surely on this sub-ject little time for consideration is re-quired. Why then does Lord Belmont retain us in suspence.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 25.
                     
                  
                  Mrs. Hindon being rather indisposed to-day, she kept her room all the morn-ing, and taking my work, I went to sit with her, Fanny having gone to call upon Lady Farnford, whose repeated ci-vilities

demanded or rather extort some return on our part.
                  Mrs. Hindon was very pressing with me to accompany her; but you may be-lieve her entreaties had no sort of effect: as the sight of Captain Farnford was absolutely disagreeable to me, it would be strange indeed, I said, if I threw my-self in his way when it was in my power so easily to avoid it.
                  This visit naturally led the subject to that family, upon which Mrs. Hindon began to lavish a thousand encomiums. Lady Farnford is her relation; and there has ever subsisted between them from in-fancy a very intimate friendship. They are extremely opposite in point of ap-pearance; Lady Farnford being a little lean figure, with a very cold and dry ad-dress; but they are both equally prying and inquisitive, which is I suppose their chief bond of union, though Lady Farn-ford does not talk so much in a week as her friend does in one day.
                  
                     
Captain Farnford, Mrs. Hindon said, had always been reckoned a young man of very shining parts, and his figure and address were singularly elegant. He was a little wild to be sure; but what of that? few young ladies regarded that error as a material fault at his time of life, and in him it seemed more the effects of life and gaiety than of any inclination to vice. Some people, it was true, thought him a little extravagant; but this was the foi-ble of a generous mind. For her part, to see a young man too near, was of all things what most disgusted her; besides, continued she, as he is not yet burthened with a wife and family, no doubt he has not turned his mind towards oecono-my; but when he is once fairly settled, I'll answer for it it will be the study of his life in all respects to render the wo-man of his choice compleatly happy.
                  I began now to suspect to what all this tended. I tried, however, to ward off

an explanation, by coldly acquiescing in her sentiments as a person uninterested in the cause; but my plan would not suc-ceed.
                  I am glad you think so, Miss Sey-mour, cried she, for indeed, to tell you the real truth of the matter, the poor Captain is quite in despair at your distant and frigid manner towards him; and my Lady, whose heart is wrapt up in her son's happiness, and who herself admires you above all women, desires nothing on earth so fervently as that he may render himself acceptable to you. Many a good match has been proposed to Captain Farnford, I assure you; but till he saw you he hated the very idea of matrimo-ny, to which now he annexes every hope of happiness.
                  I am extremely sorry Madam, an-swered I, to receive this information. I flattered myself my behaviour had suffi-ciently explained to Captain Farnford that

my sentiments were fixed and immovea-ble on this head, and I imagined, if he still deceived himself, you was able to have convinced him how little successful this application could ever be. If how-ever you Madam have been commissioned to talk with me on the subject, I entreat you will no longer delay acquainting him at once from me, that there is not the slightest chance—there is not even a pos-sibility of my altering my resolution. I hope you will excuse me when I acknow-ledge, added I, that there is hardly any proposal could be made to me at which I should feel a more invincible repug-nance, and I earnestly beg you will men-tion a subject no more which is disagree-able to me even to think of.
                  Poh, poh, Miss Seymour; upon my word you are absolutely cruel. However I assure you I won't carry this message, which I know would be a death warrant to the Captain's hopes. I have known

many a young lady change her mind after declaring herself ten times more violently determined than you are, and I hope to see you alter your resolution one day in his favour. Indeed if you persist in pre-cluding him from all chance of seeing you, how can the young man find op-portunity to plead his cause. I really think I must assist him. I assure you he importunes me incessantly for only ten minutes conversation with you, as if it was more than life to him, and though your heart is hardened, mine is quite melted at his sufferings.
                  If ten minutes conversation would rid me of his solicitations for ever, said I, I would certainly punish myself so far as to give him that satisfaction; but as I have reason to imagine it would rather feed than extinguish his hopes, I think it would be as unfair to him as painful to myself.
                  Nay but till you bid him despair your-self,

you may be convinced what I say will have little effect; and I hope when you see so fine a young man at your feet, you will find yourself softened in his fa-vour in spite of your present opposition.
                  I assured her again and again that my dislike and prepossession against him were insurmountable; but she went on with-out the slightest regard to all I said, re-peating time when we met, I should not be able to adhere to my inflexibility.
                  The return of Fanny relieved me from this fatiguing conversation. Lady Farn-ford had loaded her with civilities, and almost forced her to promise to go back to dinner: Miss Farnford, on her part, was equally kind, and indeed seems re-solved to become Fanny's intimate friend, without any sort of interchange of affec-tions between them; taking every op-portunity of getting her aside; and quite unsolicited, with the communicative im-prudence of a boarding school girl, mak-ing

her the confidant of a thousand little trifling love affairs, or, as she terms them, flirtations. The equality of their ages, and the flattery which Miss Farn-ford so lavishly employs to gain Fanny's confidence, have cemented a sort of inti-macy between them, though they are too dissimilar in disposition even to receive any real gratification from the society of each other.
                  In the evening Mrs. Hindon being almost well, and able to walk into the drawing room, one or two of her female friends came in, and were prevailed with to remain to make up a party at whist. Fanny having got half through a favou-rite novel, took this opportunity of slip-ping up stairs to finish it; and as I was opening my work box to take out my netting, Mr. Howard drew me aside from the company. I have got some-thing to say to you, Miss Seymour, said he, and placed himself by me on the sopha.
                  
                     
You must know, proceeded he, that your acquaintance Mr. Roatsley, (I co-loured at the name) told me last night at the opera that if I was at leisure this morning he would call about twelve, as he wished extremely to have a few mi-nutes conversation with me in private, and this day he kept his appointment.
                  Oh Sophia! how your Hermione's heart beat at this information, Mr. Howard too looked earnest and grave. The lights however were at some distance, and I hope my confusion was unobserved.
                  Mr. Roatsley, continued Mr. How-ard, with the politeness natural to him apologized with some little embarrass-ment for the liberty he said he was about to take.
                  Do you think, Sophia, that I was not embarrassed at this preamble. Indeed I dare not acknowledge even to myself what absurd notions were at that instant crouding into my thoughts.
                  
                     
Mr. Howard went on. He then ex-plained to me, said he, a very intricate series of iniquity, with which I would not shock your ears, did I not conceive it as absolutely necessary to put you on your guard.
                  Good heavens, cried I, what are you going to tell me?
                  You have no reason thank God, an-swered he, to suffer now any apprehen-sions, as the danger is at an end; but I cannot call to mind that my own impru-dence was the original cause of the inju-rious reports, without the utmost self-re-proach. I think no man can be more sensible than myself of the value and im-portance of my charge, yet I own I com-mitted the most unpardonable oversight in allowing you and your sister to remain for a week under the roof of a woman of whose character I was not perfectly in-formed.
                  Her appearance indeed was so plausi-ble, and your stay to be so short, that I

after a tedious bondage. However, find-ing Madame de Clarence was always grave when I laughed, and sorrowful when I was gay, I began to suspect that I had worn out her patience by too long a visit, and under this notion was pre-paring to take a civil departure, when one day, in the little arbour, (you may remember it I believe, it is at the en-trance into the wood) in the little arbour, where I had taken refuge in a fine even-ing, to avoid exciting a rudeness of be-haviour for which I could assign no ade-quate motive, I was unexpectedly joined by Monsieur; who seeing me seated, na-turally enough, you know, placed him-self by me and entered into conversation.
                  On mentioning my intentions of leav-ing the chateau next morning, he con-fessed, with an ingenuity which our friendship of long standing fully autho-rized, that he could not but approve of the prudence which dictated this step,

took it on trust, nor once harboured a suspicion of her being what she has proved—one of the most abandoned and profligate of her sex: a wretch entirely divested of honour and conscience, who has had the audacity and wickedness to traffic with your reputation, and who perceiving you had kindled the presump-tuous wishes of a libertine, dared to re-present you to him in the most doubtful, nay in the most infamous light, in order, by flattering his licentious hopes, to reap the lucrative fruits of his folly and pro-digality.
                  Oh! my dear Sir, interrupted I in a tone of impatient vexation, let us return to solitude and obscurity, where, though listlesness may intrude and languor invade our quiet, danger and mortification never can molest us. How unjust have I not been to the cautious experience of my dear father, in sometimes suspecting he had represented the world and its falla-cious

charms through that medium with which calamity and disappointment ever invest the face of nature. I am now fa-tally convinced that the pleasures of so-ciety fade and disappear when opposed to the snares, anxieties, and disgusts, which sour and taint all its enjoyments.
                  You are too young, and much too amiable, returned Mr. Howard, smiling at my impetuosity, to become a cynic so early upon those whom nature has formed to adorn society as well as to improve it. The world has powerful claims; and Miss Seymour must not talk of disgust because a temporary mortification ob-scures for a moment the many rational enjoyments which it offers to every well-regulated mind. But you must allow me to go on with my story.
                  Mr. Roatsley, after expressing himself in the warmest and most respectful terms of both the amiable sisters, confessed that he had been infinitely shocked and asto-nished

to learn, immediately almost on his arrival in town, that they were re-garded in a very injurious light by his friend Captain Bradshaw, who from re-siding under the same roof had apparently access to proper information, and had received his from the woman of the house.
                  Mr. Roatsley confidently asserted the falshood of these defamatory suspicions, and requested his friend to be more par-ticular in his enquiries, and to talk again with the landlady, who when interrogated still continued to insinuate that you were not altogether what you appeared. Mr. Roatsley however was not so weak as to allow his judgment to be biassed by this report, nor was he lead for a moment to do you injustice, although he found that rumours to your disadvantage were pressed on him from more quarters than one; all originating no doubt from the same source; till one evening at the play, when he confessed—
                  
                     
Oh! repeat it not to me, dear Sir, cried I; I know too well that it was quite natural for him to think me light, thought-less, and imprudent, when he beheld me at Drury lane attended by the wretch, whom I then found out to be Captain Farnford, and to all appearance volunta-rily receiving his attentions: an accident which my indisposition alone occasioned; for you may believe no inducement on earth, had I been in a situation to have repulsed him, should have forced me to have granted him the shadow of my no-tice.
                  Well, Miss Seymour, thoughtless and imprudent I really believe he might con-clude you to be, nor could he possibly think otherwise, ignorant as he was of the circumstances that produced Farnford's attendance, and conscious of the just cause he had given you for repugnance and disdain. He saw you together in the fame party, and it seems supported by him

when you left the box. He could not but imagine you had permitted all this, and of course must have supposed your resentment neither so lasting nor so severe as in strict delicacy he thought it ought to have been. Yet Mr. Roatsley solemnly swore, that to the disadvantage of your reputation a doubt or suspicion never once found place in his breast; and tho' wholly ignorant myself of the circum-stances of the fact, I easily convinced him that in a point of delicacy Miss Sey-mour could not possibly be found in the slightest degree deficient.
                  That interest, however, which youth and beauty seldom fail to excite in the heart of a young man, (a sentiment, added he with a half smile, which Mr. Roatsley seems formed to feel with en-thusiastic force) made him undergo no little disappointment I conjecture in per-ceiving you had so ill answered the expec-tation to which your acquaintance, inte-resting

tho' short, had given birth; for he confessed that he had been indefati-gable in his enquiries about you, tho' very fruitless you may believe they must have proved; and tho' I understood the hint in this avowal; I did not think myself at liberty to satisfy his curiosity, and there-fore let it pass unnoticed.
                  He owns, however, that these unjust surmizes received some degree of credi-bility from meeting you a few days after, accompanied by this same audacious young man, who put you into a chair, unattended by your servant, at the door of your former lodgings; but this part of his information I persisted in averring was impossible, and that he must have mistaken some other person for you.
                  Oh it was me indeed, cried I, and the rencontre you may be certain gave me equal pain and terror: nor should I have concealed it for a moment, had not the wretch extorted a promise which fear

alone persuaded me to grant him never to divulge it to you.
                  Good heaven! how did the scoundrel contrive to meet with you?
                  Through the connivance of that wicked woman, said I. But as my pro-mise, tho' constrained, remains still in force, except as to that part of it which chance has informed you, I am not at liberty to give you the particulars, nei-ther are they at all necessary; since I hope in God, as the wretch is quite undeceived in regard to my character, I have nothing now to alarm me except the persecution of solicitation, which I hope by sedu-lously avoiding him to escape.
                  Mr. Howard's mild countenance red-dened with indignation at this account, which quickly infused an apprehension into my mind, that under the character of our guardian he might think it neces-sary to resent my affronts. The instant this idea struck me, I softened as much

as possible what I had just been acknow-ledging, and assured him that during our last interview Farnford had appeared so much piqued and offended at my uncon-querable reserve, that I had reason to flat-ter myself I should be tormented by him no more; and added, that when I was entirely in his power, all he had asked was forgiveness, and permission to visit me, having repeatedly sworn that an in-jurious suspicion of my character had alone given rise to a conduct which he now sincerely abjured, and of which he heartily repented.
                  Let him then testify his concern and regret as he ought, by avoiding your pre-sence, said Mr. Howard. Had I known the other day that I was at the same table with the man who had dared subject you to insult, I should most assuredly—
                  Then thank heaven you did not, inter-rupted I. Indeed the less this affair is mentioned or remembered the better;

and before you leave me I insist on your promise never even to hint to Captain Farnford your knowledge of these parti-culars. I ask it as a favour, the grant of which is essential to my peace. You need not, I am sure, be told how deli-cate an interference of this kind must prove, where my fame and my repose are so deeply interested. Let me beseech you therefore to give me your word ne-ver to take notice to Captain Farnford of what you have been informed.
                  I need not at least be told, said he with gravity, that the title by which I should in that case act might be justly called in question; but as I have the happiness at present of considering you as being under my particular protection, tho' I hope that you will soon experience a parent's care, you must not insist on binding me from acting as circumstances may in fu-ture require. I agree so entirely in your sentiments however, as to the delicacy

of this matter, that you may rest assured while the wretch molests you no more I shall not interfere, though I should have the most perfect satisfaction in chas-tising him for his impudence.
                  But I have not done with my disagree-able explanation, Miss Seymour, conti-nued Mr. Howard, and your acute sen-sibility almost intimidates me from con-fessing all to you, since I am afraid what I am going to add must wound in a still more vulnerable part; for I am well aware that to a youthful and enthusiastic heart, no blow is so painful, no pang is so severe, as to be told it has bestowed its affections unworthily.
                  These words threw me into a state of confused consternation not to be described, and dyed my cheeks with blushes: for indeed my imagination hurried me in an instant into a thousand wild conjectures; the truth however after a moment rushed upon my mind. You need not fear to

and acknowledged to me that a jealousy of temper, which formed, he said, the misery of both their lives, had so encreased instead of abating with his wife's years, that it was grown quite insupportable: it is then no wonder, added he, in a friendly manner, that you should at last become the object of her suspicions, since fifty women, fifty times your inferior, have by turns excited them.
                  This I allow, continued Mrs. Weldon, must have sounded somewhat compli-mentary to an ear, the organs of which were disordered by jealousy; and just at that instant who should we see gliding by the trees but Madame herself, who had been without doubt listening to a sketch of her own character, not much either softened or embellished from the lips of her husband, and done perhaps rather a little in caracatura. But one must pardon him some degree of exag-geration

alarm me as to this part of your infor-mation, cried I, for it is no secret to me; and the shock, tho' at first extremely dis-tressing, received its cure in the resent-ment and indignation which treatment so abominable excited. It is of Mrs. Wel-don I perceive you are going to speak; but tho' I am in part acquainted with the artifice and duplicity of her character, a mystery surrounds her situation through which I have not been able to penetrate. I then briefly related the alarming situa-tion into which that horrid woman had so artfully drawn me, and the fortunate circumstances that had relieved me from my danger. Mr. Howard was lost in astonishment at my recital, and shuddered on reflecting how critical the snare might have proved in which this infamous wo-man had so inhumanly entrapped me.
                  Mr. Roatsley, said he, has let me into the particulars of her history, which are well known, and have made no small

of this matter, that you may rest assured while the wretch molests you no more I shall not interfere, though I should have the most perfect satisfaction in chas-tising him for his impudence.
                  But I have not done with my disagree-able explanation, Miss Seymour, conti-nued Mr. Howard, and your acute sen-sibility almost intimidates me from con-fessing all to you, since I am afraid what I am going to add must wound in a still more vulnerable part; for I am well aware that to a youthful and enthusiastic heart, no blow is so painful, no pang is so severe, as to be told it has bestowed its affections unworthily.
                  These words threw me into a state of confused consternation not to be described, and dyed my cheeks with blushes: for indeed my imagination hurried me in an instant into a thousand wild conjectures; the truth however after a moment rushed upon my mind. You need not fear to

alarm me as to this part of your infor-mation, cried I, for it is no secret to me; and the shock, tho' at first extremely dis-tressing, received its cure in the resent-ment and indignation which treatment so abominable excited. It is of Mrs. Wel-don I perceive you are going to speak; but tho' I am in part acquainted with the artifice and duplicity of her character, a mystery surrounds her situation through which I have not been able to penetrate. I then briefly related the alarming situa-tion into which that horrid woman had so artfully drawn me, and the fortunate circumstances that had relieved me from my danger. Mr. Howard was lost in astonishment at my recital, and shuddered on reflecting how critical the snare might have proved in which this infamous wo-man had so inhumanly entrapped me.
                  Mr. Roatsley, said he, has let me into the particulars of her history, which are well known, and have made no small

noise; tho' from her change of name I never could have suspected that Mrs. Weldon was the famous Mrs. Brereton, whose imprudence has long been no secret to the world.
                  Good heavens! cried I, how then could such a woman find admittance to the a-bode of Madame de Clarence. Has she too been deceived by her artifices?
                  I believe it is not unknown to you, re-turned he, that among the number of Monsieur de Clarence's good qualities, those of attachment to his amiable lady, and a proper discharge of domestic du-ties, are not to be enumerated. Mrs. Weldon appeared at the chateau as his friend, nor did Madame suspect that un-der that specious character, she had har-boured her most invidious enemy; till about the time of your departure from Languedoc, or immediately after it.
                  Mr. Howard then informed me more particularly of this profligate woman's

real history. She was, it seems, origi-nally a girl of low birth, whose name was Ware, and whose uncommon beauty induced Colonel Brereton, at the age of sixty five, to pay his addresses to her, having become violently enamoured from accidentally meeting with her at an as-sembly while his regiment was quartered at York. This gentleman, though of a very limited understanding, as may be concluded from his conduct on this im-prudent occasion, possessed an affluent fortune, and was nearly related to Lord Belmont. His lady's taste for gallantry became soon suspected, and at last grew so notorious, that finding herself gradu-ally deserted by that brilliant circle to which her marriage had introduced her, and to charm and embellish which she possessed so powerfully every talent, she persuaded her husband, ever blind to his dishonour and infatuated by her insinua-ting address, to carry her over to France,

where her amours, though well known, were less prejudicial to her gay career, because unproductive of the world's con-tempt, at least the fashionable part of it, and unattended by its desertion.
                  Her husband, dying about a twelve-month after, bequeathed her his whole fortune, the greatest part of which had already fallen a sacrifice to her unbounded extravagance. Mr. Brereton's natural heir, however, at present disputes at law the portion of it that remains, alledging that from some private entail he was not empowered to dispose of it at pleasure; and it is thought the lady will be legally deprived of an inheritance which she so little deserves, and which she gained merely by the effects of her artful ma-nagement, and the powerful influence she possessed over her superannuated husband.
                  After Mr. Brereton's death, his wife's conduct became so flagrant as to force those who had been hitherto willingly

blind to her infamy no longer to shut their eyes, and as a proper regard to the rules of propriety is a tax which virtue never more rigorously exacts from vice than where her genuine and intrinsic va-lue is least admitted, she soon found her stay in France could not enable her to continue in that brilliant society where she had been accustomed to shine with such eclat. At this period, her ac-quaintance with Monsieur de Clarence commenced while he spent some time at the city of M— for the recovery of his health, whither his lady had not accom-panied him.
                  He soon became enslaved by the charms of Mrs. Brereton, and weakly consented to her request of being invited to the residence of his lady at the Chateau de Clarence, on the footing of a friend recommended to his peculiar care by her deceased husband. Madame de Cla-rence was easily deceived; and without

difficulty consented to entreat the favour of a visit from his agreeable English ac-quaintance, who on her part regarding it as an ingenious stroke of policy to re-gain in some measure the good opinion of the world, to whom she might boast being still admitted into an intimacy so respectable, complied with eagerness and satisfaction. The company of the Che-valier de Mertane soon, however, inter-rupted the harmony which subsisted be-tween Monsieur de Clarence and Mrs. Weldon, (for such was the name she now chose to assume, probably from an ap-prehension that the imprudence of Mrs. Brereton might not be wholly unknown even to Madame de Clarence, whilst un-der a borrowed name she might be easily imposed on.) The youth and weakness of the Chevalier almost instantly sug-gested to that abandoned woman the hopes of repairing her injured reputation and her exhausted finances, by an union,

the rank and opulence of which offered both to her vanity and profusion the most ample gratification.
                  This explanation fully accounts for the mortification and displeasure, too painful for concealment, which she so evidently discovered on perceiving the Chevalier's partiality for me. He was not however proof against her powers of fascination; and after my determined rejection, accepted with great cordiality the consolation which Mrs. Weldon's kindness afforded. He was indeed almost involved in this perilous snare, when the fortunate jealousy of Monsieur de Cla-rence happily relieved him from his dan-ger. That gentleman, influenced either by pique or principle, or perhaps by both, suddenly informed the Chevalier's father of the son's matrimonial intentions, as also with some particulars relating to the lady's character, which induced the old gentleman to appear unexpectedly

one morning at the chateau, from whence he carried off the Chevalier without al-lowing him the ceremonial of a private farewell conference with his mistress.
                  From more circumstances than one both Mr. Howard and I perceived that this affair must have been in agitation during the time of our abode in the fa-mily; for the poor Chevalier's depar-ture succeeded ours but a few days, and it seems a thorough reconciliation having immediately taken place between Mrs. Weldon and Monsieur de Clarence, their mutual imprudence soon infused suspi-cions into Madame which induced her to insist upon that lady's instant dismis-sion. To this demand the husband, unwilling to come to an open rupture with Madame, whose family and con-nections demand peculiar respect, con-sented; and Mrs. Weldon's lawsuit re-quiring her presence in England, she set off directly for this country.
                  
                     

            HERMIONE.
            
               LETTER VI. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     DEC. 12.
                  
               
               WE removed to Mrs. Hindon's yes-terday, who received us with a profusion of civilities. They had company all the day; but my spirits were weak, and I supported no part in the conversation. Mrs. Hindon, however, would not allow me to indulge my contemplative hu-mour in peace, but enquired repeatedly what made me look so grave, and if I found myself indisposed, till I was obliged to plead a head ach in excuse for being so dull a companion. This happened really to be the case; and no sooner was she informed of it, than in spite of all

from a just exasperation at her unceasing and teazing importunities.
                  After this little adventure, you may suppose it was time for me to be gone. Madame pretended indisposition, and kept her room the rest of the evening; breakfasted next morning chez elle; and I left the chateau, having received only a message that she was sorry she could not see me before I went.
                  Poor Madame de Clarence! I pity her from my soul: it was indeed impossible to hear that my worthy friend was un-happy, even though owing to her own unfortunate weakness, without sincerely deploring that fault which is attended, I am convinced, by no other in her bo-som: but what a number of great and amiable qualities will not this single er-ror obscure in a husband's eyes.
                  Till now, I always concluded Mon-sieur in fault; and that to the cold civi-lity of his manner, those clouds were
I was actually frozen with horror on learning this account. Good heavens! exclaimed I, does such a character of vice and duplicity exist, and can it belong to woman?
                  Oh! Miss Seymour, returned Mr. Howard, a mind like yours, delicate and pure, blessed with conscious innocence and fortified with intuitive integrity, can form no ideas adequate to that degrada-tion to which licentiousness and profligacy often reduce the female mind; but to dwell no longer on a theme so melan-choly, I must inform you, that after having related these particulars, which Mr. Roatsley had received from a friend lately arrived from the Continent, and intimately acquainted with the parties concerned, he confessed how inexpressibly confounded and astonished he had been on perceiving you the morning before last standing at the window of a house which he had been told was occupied by

his unworthy relation; and still more was he shocked, when at a second glance, he recollected Mrs. Brereton herself, whose features he instantly recognized, though it is many years since he beheld her. Scarcely could he credit his senses. Yet so strongly did the dignity and innocence of your countenance contradict this con-firmation of your levity, that instead of convincing it awakened him from his error. Imprudent he might believe you, but infamous it was impossible he could for an instant suspect you to be; and upon revolving the circumstances in his mind, it instantaneously struck him that the daring Farnford must have bribed that infamous woman to entrap you to her house. This idea no sooner occurred, than a thousand circumstances seemed to enforce its conviction. Farnford's cha-racter, which though unstained by actual villany, is loose and unprincipled, assured him he would not be scrupulous in ef-fecting

his ends by whatever means in his power. He knew besides that the woman was in his pay, and to lay him under further contributions, she might be induced to misrepresent your beha-viour, conscious that the knowledge of your being a woman of rank and charac-ter must have checked his hopes and re-strained his liberality to herself. Mr. Roatsley began to suspect that your ac-quaintance with Mrs. Weldon might have originated also from some such ma-chinations, and he instantly determined to acquaint me with his suspicions; and having enquired at our old lodgings for our present residence with the eagerness of a man of honour anxious to secure virtue and innocence from destruction, he hastened to this house without loss of time; for me only he enquired, for to me only could so delicate an explanation be made, but I was unluckily from home. Next morning he repeated his visit, but

being engaged in business, he was denied admittance. On his return home, how-ever, he encountered a gentleman with whom he is particularly intimate, and who in the confidence of friendship con-fessed to him how amazed he had been to meet with a young lady not only of the most elegant but of the most innocent and amiable appearance at the house of his profligate relation, Mrs. Weldon, who from being now notoriously infamous, was wholly excluded all honourable so-ciety: his friend added, that this aban-doned woman had represented the young lady, whose name was Seymour, as a girl of light character and dependant for-tune, but having been more than once in her company, this injurious error had appeared to him so apparent, that he had thought it incumbent on him to atone for it by representing to her the hazards of her situation, an information that had operated so violently on her spirits as

fully convinced him how entirely she must have been deceived as to the character of her companion.
                  Amiable, generous Roatsley! May not I call the man so, my Sophia, who has so humanely interested himself in my affairs. How many, in a similar situa-tion, would have contented themselves with leaving me to my fate, especially after that perplexed series of unfortunate events, which might have too justly led him to regard me with contempt; how few would have given themselves the trouble of investigating this matter to the foundation, and exerted themselves in a manner so nobly, to extricate a young woman whose conduct he had so much reason to contemn, and who had been represented to him in a light so unwor-thy. Surely gratitude at least may be allowed me after this striking instance of a benevolence of which I have reaped so largely the fruit: yet heaven grant that

this dangerous sentiment lead not my heart too far. Vexatious it has in-deed proved; but ah! Sophia, had not heaven directed and preserved me, this intelligence had arrived greatly too late.
                  The whist party breaking up, and sup-per being announced, Mr. Howard seized an opportunity, while we were on the stairs, to whisper that Mr. Roatsley re-gretted extremely not having seen my sister and me this morning, when he had called, particularly as he leaves town to-morrow, and is engaged by business the early part of the day. Mr. Howard how-ever, who was not sufficiently acquainted with many of the unaccountable facts to which Mr. Roatsley's story alluded, and was only enabled, from his knowledge of my disposition and character, to pro-nounce that some mysterious appearances must have involved my actions in ob-scurity, had of his own accord offered

him a short visit before his departure, to explain from my own information what had seemed either extraordinary or im-prudent in my conduct, and is actually to meet him at the British Coffee-house for that purpose.
                  I hope, added that worthy friend, with a penetrating smile, as he entered the supper room, that Mr. Roatsley, in his return to town, will find the disagreeable air of secrecy and mystery, which must confound all his enquiries respecting you and your sister, completely removed by the approbation and public countenance of Lord Belmont.
                  I took no notice of this little hint; but walked on with a mind ah! how enlight-ened! how relieved! to find myself re-instated in Mr. Roatsley's good opinion; to know that he had shewn himself so anxious, so deeply concerned in an affair in which I alone was interested, gave a spirit to my countenance, and a gaiety

to my heart, not to be enjoyed but when contrasted by previous uneasiness and depression.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 28.
                     
                  
                  Ah! my dear Sophia! how infinitely am I shocked. Poor Madame de Cla-rence! alas! she is no more! A short letter from her husband, which I received last night, announces this melancholy in-telligence. An epidemic fever carried her off after a week's illness, and Fanny and I have been weeping her irreparable loss with tears of bitter affliction. A friend—a maternal friend! respected and beloved, is a blessing which heaven sends but once in our lives, and to us can ne-ver be supplied. In our present situation, this blow cannot fail to be felt with re-doubled poignancy. There now remains not to us one single friend of our own

sex, (my Sophia, my invaluable Sophia excepted) who excites or returns to us the tender interest of affection. What a dismal, what a solitary state. That wretch, Mrs. Weldon! how I detest her, for troubling with suspicion and uneasiness the mind of that amiable, that respecta-ble woman, so near the close of her days. Oh were she capable of remorse, how must it wring her bosom at this moment.
                  I am inexpressibly anxious to learn a thousand particulars relating to this dear friend's last illness: for her husband's letter is extremely concise, and merely informs us, in terms of unfeigned afflic-tion, of the melancholy event. Doubtless he must be overwhelmed with the most poignant distress; that distress which re-sults from the reflection of a misconduct he preserves no longer the power of re-pairing.
                  We inclined much to indulge our sadness in our own apartments but Mrs.

Hindon soon drove us from solitude by insisting upon sitting with us in order to comfort us: and the poor woman talked so incessantly of the delicacy and acute-ness of her feelings, and repeated such various instances of the excess of her own unfortunate sensibility, that we were glad to accompany, her down stairs to the gentlemen, as some relief from her te-dious conversation.
               
               
                  
                     
                        FEB. 1.
                     
                  
                  Sir Edward called again this morning. He really appears to be an amiable man, and possesses somewhat in his appear-ance so mild and unpresuming, that he prepossesses one at first sight in his fa-vour.
                  I forgot to tell you that Mr. Roatsley and Mr. Howard met the other morning according to appointment; and after an

owing which during our last visit I some-times observed hanging on his lady's brow. He was always indeed scrupu-lously polite in his attentions to her; but his behaviour seemed the studied effu-sions of good breeding and propriety, to which, from her rank in life, and the splendid fortune she brought him, she justly lays claim. I heartily lament however, that she should have carried her suspicions to lengths so blameable: lengths which must operate towards aug-menting the alienation she deplores.
                  This unexpected and delightful ren-contre, together with the agreeable alter-ation in Mrs. Weldon's manners, entirely discarded the reserve with which I used formerly to converse with her; and upon her talking openly of her affairs, which are at present somewhat embarrassed, I made no scruple of acquainting her with the circumstances of our situation, so re-plete

explanatory conversation, which the for-mer assured Mr. Howard was wholly un-necessary, as not a doubt could remain on his mind after having been favoured with an opportunity of being in Miss Seymour's company at the Opera, he set out on his excursion.
               
               
                  
                     
                        FEB. 2.
                     
                  
                  Sir Edward supped with us this even-ing. Mrs. Hindon, delighted with an acquaintance of his figure and address, has given him a general invitation to her house, which he seems well disposed to accept, and repays her civilities with abundant marks of attention.
               
               
                  
                     
                        FEB. 6.
                     
                  
                  Captain Wilmot had been, as usual, in earnest conversation yesterday evening

with Fanny, who while she pretends to laugh at his absurdities always appears pleased with his assiduities. He had been repeating to her a number of verses, all on the soft subject of love, which he informed her were the effusions of his own passion that had inspired him with a poetical ardour. Of one of these Fanny inconsiderately requested a copy, not re-flecting that to demand a poem, of which she was herself the theme, confessed no little satisfaction at the compliment. Wilmot told her he had it in his pocket book, which he hastily produced; and anxious to avoid observation, privately delivered to her a paper without himself looking into it.
                  Fanny having no opportunity to pe-ruse the stanzas, slipped them into her pocket, from whence she drew them the moment we retired after supper: when conceive her astonishment on finding the copy of verses converted into a letter di-rected

to Captain Wilmot. Hastily throwing her eyes over it, she was struck with the words—"your old flame Jenny Parsons," and suddenly yielding to a cu-riosity which cannot be defended, she took advantage of the poor youth's un-fortunate blunder, and read as follows:
                  
                     
                        TO CAPTAIN WILMOT.
                        
                           DEAR WILMOT,
                        
                        Your epistle arrived very opportunely to rouse me from a stupor that has con-gealed and benumbed all my faculties ever since we were ordered to this con-founded quarter, which is undoubtedly the dullest spot under heaven, and which Providence seems to have stamped with an impression of gloom, and lassitude not to be expressed. There is not a soul in the town with whom one can associate with any degree of satisfaction. The very girls are as ugly as devils; and

what is still worse, as most of the offi-cers are either on furlow or absent on recruiting duty, there are none here ex-cept Wilson and the Major; and the latter is so constantly immured amidst a library of musty old folios, that it is merely at mess hours we ever set eyes upon him.
                        I am extremely happy to learn, from your letter, that the time which hung so heavily on my hands, you have been employing so much to your satisfaction and advantage. From the account you give me of your Dulcinea, I agree with you in opinion that she will not hold out the siege much l
                              •
                           nger, when to your own assiduities are superadded the assist-ance and solicitations of your aunt, who being a discreet matron may give an air of credit and propriety to a step which, with all due deference, you must allow me to call imprudent, as I suspect the fortune of the beautiful Seymour is no

less necessary to the rapacious demands of your creditors, than the possession of the young lady herself is to the claims of your passion; but I sincerely hope, thro' the prudent management of Mrs. Hin-don, she has no chance of being made acquainted with these disagreeable and unnecessary particulars till the information can be attended with no alarming conse-quences.
                        It must be confessed, Wilmot, that for one so deeply enamoured you talk very reasonably on the topic of your mistress; and though you tell me she is divine, you evidently prefer expatiating on her more substantial attractions. You retail, indeed, her prospects and possessions with the accuracy of an army agent.
                        I hope, by this time, you have brought matters to a happy conclusion. Indeed, as your affairs are at present situated, no time is to be lost. Fortune does not throw a gift of ten thousand pounds into

the arms of a soldier every day; and you may reasonably conclude that the grand-father will not be so easily melted to compliance, as you tell me the girl her-self has been, nor can you flatter your-self his Lordship will prove so wholly influenced by disinterested sentiments as to remain contentedly ignorant of your situation respecting pecuniary matters. His interference would effectually blow up the whole scheme; and if your point is not settled past redemption before his return, you may hang yourself on the first willow you meet with between Lon-don and Coventry.
                        I can't help laughing at the difficul-ties you must have to encounter in court-ing your fair one under the eye of your old flame Jenny Parsons. This untoward circumstance must throw a constraint over your behaviour and address, by no means favourable to your desire of pleas-ing: yet to have fulfilled your engage-ments

in that quarter must have proved unmitigated ruin to both; and she is so soft, poor gentle soul, that if ever a de-serted mistress was to be trusted where retaliation was in her power, I dare say Miss Parsons might be the woman. Consider it entirely rests with her to overturn the whole machine of your in-genious scheme. You tell me you have been so prudent that you are convinced she does not even suspect your intentions; and that your management could not have been discernable even to the eye of jealousy. Remember, however, that re-venge is a ruling passion in the sex; nor are they ever to be trusted where offended pride must stimulate to vengeance.
                        Heartily wishing you all the success you can wish, and requesting to be im-mediately made acquainted with it, I conclude, with my caution, as above; and remain, dear Wilmot,
                        
                           wholly your's, F. HARLOW.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
You may easily judge how confounded Fanny must be to perceive by this letter, so wonderfully presented to her know-ledge, that with all his timidity and dif-fident desire of ingratiating himself, Wil-mot regarded his solicitations as certain of success, and had communicated his expectations to his friend with all the vanity of a man who did not allow him-self even to doubt.
                  I was employed last night pretty late, and was still reading in my dressing room, when my sister, who I concluded was gone to bed, flew to me with the epistle in her hand, with a countenance as pale as death, in which mortification, anger, and astonishment were strongly painted. She informed me of the accident; and as tears are a relief which Fanny has ever at hand, her gentle disposition al-lowing of no other vent to her indigna-tion, she could not help crying from

vexation, while she entreated me to read it.
                  The part of it, however, which pro-voked her most, was that humiliating sentence where Wilmot appears to have boasted to his correspondent that she had been very easily melted to compliance, a phraze that severely wounded her pride. You see, cried she, he has never once mentioned me. I dare say he never thought about me. 'Tis my fortune alone about which he is so anxious. No doubt it would have been of some ser-vice in advancing him in his profession; but God knows, had he been informed how matters stand, he never would have paid me his addresses on account of an advantage which no longer exists, and he is both weak and vain if he concludes I have been so easily melted as he flattered himself, or that I have listened with pleasure to solicitations which have fa-tigued

and tormented me ever since our residence in this house.
                  Solicitations, Fanny, cried I; I never knew till this moment that Wilmot had made any advances that could go under the name of solicitations. Strange in-deed, if I have continued thus long ig-norant of any part of his behaviour, yet certain I am you have never once hinted to me any thing which could be construed into that meaning.
                  Oh! my dear Hermione! exclaimed she, burning into a fresh flood of tears, I will tell you all.
                  All! cried I, terrified at the expres-sion, what is the all of which you are to inform me? for indeed I suspected some frightful imprudence from the agitation in which I beheld her.
                  She could not, however, immediately relieve my fears, and tears of mortifica-tion choaked her utterance.
                  Oh! cried she at length, how can I

with difficulties, so singularly per-plexing and uncomfortable.
                  She entered kindly and with interest into all our anxieties, and told us that some years ago Lady Linrose and her family were not unknown to her. That was before she separated from her hus-band, said she; but she never was a wo-man by any means to my taste; for though her Ladyship can make herself extremely agreeable where she pleases, she is intolerably proud, exceedingly fond of money, and as artful as the devil. I dare to say she was more to blame than her Lord, though she has been cun-ning enough to persuade the world, and even Lord Belmont, that his peevish humour rendered her life a burthen to her. No doubt he was a very capricious, ill tempered man; but I believe he had provocation sufficient. I ask pardon, however, my dears, for talking of your

tell you; you, that are older and so much wiser than I, you will think meanly of me, and I would sooner lose the good opinion of the whole world than be de-spised by you.
                  My dearest Fanny, said I in the ten-derest accents, you may assure yourself that is impossible. My knowledge of your heart must ever conceal and exte-nuate all your little errors, and it is un-kind in you to imagine that mine could for an instant harbour a sentiment so in-jurious of which you were the object.
                  She then confessed to me that about ten days ago Wilmot had declared his passion in the warmest and most affecting terms; and though I did not love him, cried she, at least I am certain it gave me no pain to reject him on my own ac-count, yet I could not be wholly unmoved at prayers and entreaties which seemed the result of the most ardent affection; an affection, repeated she, which I now

plainly perceive my fortune alone in-spired. All however that he desired, re-mitting his hopes of success to time and assiduity, was that you, whom he appre-hended and whom I well knew not to be in his interest, should not for some time be made acquainted with his proposals; and to this request, softened by his ap-parent distress, I was weak enough un-willingly to consent; though it shocked me extremely that you, who are my only friend and advizer, and to whom every thought of my heart has ever been known, should continue ignorant of an affair which but for this fortunate disco-very might have interested it too much.
                  As she finished speaking, she sobbed on my bosom most bitterly. You may believe I embraced and soothed her ten-derly. But tell me, my dear, said I, what further lengths you have been pre-vailed with to go. There are no engage-ments in the case I hope.
                  
                     
No, thank God, cried she, though heaven knows how I have been perse-cuted and tormented, not only by Wil-mot himself but by Mrs. Hindon, who has warmly espoused his cause and pri-vately pleaded his passion on every occa-sion when she could get me by myself; and not having my beloved Hermione to direct me, for they both kept me stea-dily to my rash promise of secrecy, though I often desired permission to disclose this affair to you, into what an abyss of mi-sery might I not have been plunged from my folly and inexperience; bewildered by Mrs. Hindon's partial representation of this imprudent step, and softened by the continual assiduities and despair of a man who seemed to adore me.
                  Artful wretches! can I give them, So-phia, a milder appellation? What a plan was here to entrap my amiable, inno-cent, unsuspecting Fanny. And because my eyes were supposed to be open to

the thousand objections against a match, in favour of which not one single advan-tage can be presented, I was to be kept out of the secret till too late effectually to interfere; whilst my dear and only sister was to prove a victim to the need and prodigality of the one, and to the absurd and destructive vanity of the other.
                  What a despicable character does this letter plainly prove Wilmot's to be. I am amazed, on looking back, that the whole affair did not occur to my suspi-cion. But the art of the one, and the low cunning of the other, added to my trust in Fanny's confidence in my advice, all conspired to deceive me. You see too, there is a hint of a previous engage-ment. Poor Miss Parsons! her dejec-tion and depression are now fully ac-counted for. How hard has been her fate. Deprived of her parents at a pe-riod of life when the feelings are most acutely sensible to the shafts of misfor-tune,

constrained to endure a haughty and indelicate dependance, her affections and her pride had yet a wound more painful to receive, a sting more corroding to undergo. Her sufferings, and her patient forbearance of complaint, endear her to me in the most affecting point of view, and I shall now more anxiously than ever exert myself to soften her an-guish, by every kindness and attention in my power to bestow.
                  As to my dear Fanny, though this pro-vidential discovery produced a tempo-rary mortification, and drew some tears of vexation from her eyes, her heart, slightly if at all touched, had nothing deeply to hurt or painfully to interest it; and as she was thoroughly sensible of the risques from which she had just escaped, she beheld with horror the precipice on which she had been standing, and re-quired not either argument or persuasion (though by way of caution I bestowed

both very lavishly) to convince her how fortunate this accident had proved. Her innocent mind, unacquainted with dis-guise and unused to concealment, felt relieved of a painful weight by the con-fession which her first agitation had ex-torted from her; yet I had no little dif-ficulty in reconciling her to herself on account of having forfeited her promise, which indeed she had falsified almost unconsciously in the height of her emo-tions.
                  Since I have done so, said she, though I think I have been to blame, do not ex-pose me to Mrs. Hindon. Dishonoura-bly as she has acted towards me, I ought not to have receded from the promise I gave. I ought indeed to have possessed both sense and resolution sufficient for acting without counsel; but you may rest assured never, never, shall I risque my peace by granting another promise to the same purport. I have suffered too

severely from this ill judged concealment, and shall take the first opportunity of informing Mrs. Hindon that I am deter-mined in my resolution never again to listen to her nephew on the subject, of his passion—never indeed shall he have an opportunity of tormenting me more.
                  To calm her, I gave her my word I should not mention one syllable of the matter to Mrs. Hindon. Yet I was somewhat at a loss how to proceed. To apply to Mr. Howard, was to hazard engaging him in a quarrel with his sister in law; nor could I myself resent her behaviour while we were partaking of her civilities. I resolved therefore to be silent on the subject; and by never quit-ting Fanny's side, who herself wished to avoid any intercourse with Wilmot, so to regulate her manner in future as en-tirely to destroy the hopes to which his vanity and her imprudence had given rise. Yet I could hardly talk to the art-ful

woman this morning at breakfast with any degree of temper.
               
               
                  
                     
                        FEB. 14.
                     
                  
                  Sir Edward spent yesterday evening here; and really grows so very particu-lar, both in his attentions and conversa-tion, that I begin to feel the necessity of a reserve, which his modesty, and the obligations I owe him, render very un-pleasant. Adieu! my Sophia. I have just received your delightful packet. Ah my love! are there no hopes, now you are so near as Paris, that your father may be prevailed with to pay England a visit. Oh that I were with you to solicit this favour on my knees.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     FEB. 15.
                  
               
               WELL, Sophia, our doom is at last determined. My grandfather's answer is arrived. Yet not addressed to us: that would have been a condescension too great. He has not even deigned to ac-knowledge my letter; but has ordered Lady Linrose to inform us. But let her Ladyship's letter speak for itself.
               
                  
                     TO LAURENCE HOWARD, ESQ.
                     
                        SIR,
                     
                     I was this day favored with an answer from Nice, and I delay not a moment in

acquainting you with the result of your application, although I am extremely sorry to premise that it is not of a nature that can either prove agreeable to your own wishes or to those of the young la-dies committed to your charge.
                     In spite of the indefatigable trouble I have taken, and the persuasive arguments I have used in more than one letter, to represent their situation in a light the most dismal and affecting, his Lordship remains quite inexorable to all my en-treaties. He tells me that the revival of recollections so bitter, as this subject re-calls to his memory, has given a mortal stab to that repose which time had in some measure restored, and he desires, as he is not at liberty himself to address the la-dies, that through the medium of my pen they may be informed, that when the conduct of their unhappy parent forced him to renounce him, he bound himself by a solemn resolution it should

aunt with so little ceremony; though to own the truth, when you come to know her as well as I do, your opinion will probably coincide with mine.
                  I assured Mrs. Weldon she might use all manner of freedom, and eagerly en-quired if all the family exhibited portraits equally unfavourable.
                  The eldest daughter, said she, is as proud to the full as her mother, and still more deficient in good humour; but the second, who was scarce twelve years old when I left England, was the sweetest, most enchanting little girl in the world; and I really think resembled you, Miss Seymour, extremely. There was always some person in my head, when I saw you in Languedoc, that you struck me with having a likeness to, and now I recollect it is your cousin, Miss Lucy Dudley. There is another daughter, but she was then quite a child; and there are two sons; the eldest is a very good young

be for ever; nor that any consideration should prevail on him through life, to see, countenance, or hold the slightest in-tercourse with the offspring of a calamity which has loaded his days with mortifi-cation and misery. His Lordship con-cludes by laying his commands upon me, under pain of his perpetual displeasure, strictly to observe a similar conduct, and expresses himself with a sternness and force which constrains me, with all the disposition imaginable to serve the young ladies, to give up all thoughts of mak-ing myself or family known to them. I hope therefore, after this disagreeable in-formation, which with infinite pain to myself I am obliged to divulge, they will neither be surprised nor offended when I acknowledge that a firm adherence to Lord Belmont's prohibition is the una-voidable consequence of its having been made known; and that I think myself obliged, after requesting the favor of one

line more on this subject, to decline even all further correspondence upon it.
                     As I cannot but feel warmly interested in two young persons, who suffer so un-fortunately for errors for which in strict justice they cannot be esteemed account-able, I was extremely happy Sir, to un-derstand from you, that your wards la-boured under no difficulties in regard to fortune. I take it for granted therefore that they possess that sum which Lord Linrose received from the generosity of his father, and which I know was reck-oned a very noble stipulation in Lord Belmont to grant after a conduct so weak, dishonourable, and irritating to all his friends. Had any pecuniary assistance been required, I should certainly have risqued my Lord's displeasure by contri-buting from my own private purse what might have been of service for their ease and comfort; but as this is by no means necessary, and the ladies are in possession

of an affluence which allows them to pur-sue what plan of life they chuse, and to settle wherever they may incline, if I might be allowed to interfere with my advice on this head, I would take the li-berty of suggesting that France, which may in a manner be called their native country, must to them undoubtedly prove a more eligible, as well as a more agree-able residence than England is ever likely to become. A hint must convince them that where the stain of their father's faults is unknown they certainly enjoy a better chance of being respected, than where remembrance must ever subject them to the impertinence of curiosity, and per-haps, however unjustly, to unmerited contempt.
                     I approve highly of the modesty and prudence they have testified in not assum-ing a name, the renunciation of which was the consequence of family dishonor; and I make no doubt they will equally

support their claim to those virtues in fu-ture, by carefully concealing their ti-tle to it. Any attempt to the contrary would but produce the disagreeable ef-fect of renewing the recollection of a fate which must discredit it, and never can be of service to them in the world's opinion, and which, from the great length of time that has elapsed since those cir-cumstances engaged in so great a de-gree the public attention, is now wholly sunk into oblivion.
                     I should be happy. Sir, to learn, if you would for once favor me with a line for that purpose, what the determination of your wards is likely to be; tho' after this communication I am unwillingly con-strained to ask no farther, compassion com-pels me to be anxiously solicitous in re-gard to the fate of two young persons, whom, in spite of the restrictions which

paternal authority imposes, I shall ever consider as nearly allied to my family.
                     I remain, with esteem. Sir, your most obedient servant,
CAROLINE LINROSE.
                     
                  
               
               Well, Sophia, what do you think of this letter? All our absurd and romantic hopes, hitherto supported by the chimeras of a sanguine and delusive imagination, are at one blow finally crushed. No re-dress you find. A solemn resolution de-prives us even of a flattering possibility that Lord Belmont, (alas! I dare not give him the tender appellation of grand-father,) may allow nature and compassion to plead for us in his bosom. He forbids our claims, denies our title to his pro-tection, and breaks with us for ever. Oh! my Sophia, my dear and only friend! our hearts are deeply wounded

by this stroke. Fanny and I have been weeping the loss of our last parent in each other's arms; and on this occasion I have been faithfully acting up to the enco-mium once bestowed on me, of instilling consolation at a moment when I could not myself imbibe comfort from my own arguments.
               We were sitting at table with some company after dinner, when this cruel letter was put into Mr. Howard's hands. He asked leave to break the seal; and upon hastily perusing the first lines, changed colour and left the room. My apprehensions instantly told me from whence it came, and what were the con-tents; yet I kept my seat in seeming composure till Mrs. Hindon withdrew with the ladies to the drawing room.
               My impatience then left me no longer resolution to remain in this anxious in-quietude; and unwilling to make Fanny a sharer in my uneasiness, I stole softly

to Mr. Hindon's study, where I con-cluded Mr. Howard would be, and tap-ping at the door, asked permission to en-ter. He opened it immediately. The disappointment which your countenance cannot conceal, said I, too evidently ex-plains all I want to know.
               Pressing my hand—Here is the letter, answered he. I can say nothing to miti-gate its unwelcome contents. Yet what bosom can boast superior fortitude to Miss Seymour's, whose mind suggests more powerful and alleviating consola-tions for a misfortune in which neither imprudence nor misconduct involves her. He then gave me the letter, and walked up stairs to send down Fanny to receive the news.
               She found me drowned in tears, which this complete disappointment to all our hopes could not but at first produce: but soon that mixture of indelicacy and pre-tended compassion which the letter con-tained,

by exciting my resentment forti-fied my spirits. Narrow-minded woman! Does she suppose all the world influenced by sentiments of equal meanness with her own? does she conclude that reproach and contempt must be our portion, be-cause our parent erred and was unhappy. He suffered, alas, suffciently for his faults, without entailing their miserable consequences on his offspring, and hea-ven I trust has accepted the tribute of his remorse.
               Pecuniary assistance; oh! may it please a wise and gracious Providence to avert a calamity so insupportable, so degrad-ing as dependence on Lady Linrose would prove. Rather, iny Sophia, let us owe the mere necessaries of existence to the honest labour of our hands. Ah! rake not up the ashes of the dead! Cruel woman; why does she write with a shew of sympathy she feels not, and of pity which borders on insult, while such bit-ter

expressions drop from her pen, (ex-pressions which she well knew must recall the most distressing reflections) for errors that long since were expiated and for-given.
               Poor Fanny's sanguine expectations were so cruelly dashed, and her spirits so sunk by this blow, that I found it doubly incumbent on me to exert my own in order to support hers. I reflected that this disappointment, as suggested by Mr. Howard, was not the consequence either of our folly or our faults: it was an event I had ever believed possible, and often feared was probable, nor could it ever have depended on our own conduct to have averted or escaped it. Pride inter-mixed itself in many motives of conso-lation; and in such circumstances the assistance of that sentiment (in many cases the error of our nature) is perhaps the most salutary source from which com-fort can flow.
               
                  
My grandfather's vow, (for still will I call him so) if it cannot be recalled, yet surely extends not to Lady Linrose. Were she possessed of a mind noble and en-larged were it not selfish, little, and in-terested, never would she have given im-plicit obedience to a measure so unfeeling and unjust as that of renouncing two friendless girls, in a foreign country, where they have no claims for kindness or protection except on those whom be-nevolence and humanity induce to be the friends of the unfortunate.
               Mr. Howard soon joined us. I was quite composed when he entered, and as-sisted his arguments so effectually, that Fanny became at length more composed; We remained together a considerable time in conversation; till at length we were interrupted by the appearance of Mrs. Hindon.
               Good stars! in tears my dear ladies, cried she. What on earth can be the

man I am told, but his talents I believe are not shining; the youngest, however, when I last saw him, was a blooming youth of eighteen, captivating as an Adonis, and in all respects amiable and engaging. I hear he has by no means disappointed the hopes inspired by his juvenile perfections, either in point of mind or person, for he is by all accounts a very extraordinary young man, and I have been informed possesses a degree of influence over Lord Belmont, with whom he is at present abroad, which I think you must regard as a favourable circumstance in your situation; for a single glance from either of you must interest him in your cause.
                  Mrs. Hindon's carriage being at this time announced, we took our leave, and on our return found a card of invitation from Lady Farnford to accompany her to the play to-morrow evening.
               
               
                  

matter? for God's sake tell me what has distressed you in this manner? Brother, what can it be?
               On being informed—God Almighty! cried she, renounce you! Lord Belmont renounce you! What on earth will then become of you, for to my certain know-ledge you will never see one shilling of the money that was lodged in Mr. Bens-ley's hands.
               Pardon me, Madam, cried Mr. How-ard with evident displeasure, I hope part of it will certainly be recovered.
               Part of it—what perhaps one paltry thousand, or it may be two, out of the twenty-four. That's part of it with a vengeance. What will two thousand be to them, who have been accustomed to want for nothing, and to have things al-ways handsome and genteel about them. Indeed it is most deplorable. But pray Miss Seymour if you was yourself to write to Lady Linrose, for you know you are

extremely clever at your pen, and was to represent your destitute condition in the most moving terms, don't you think she might be prevailed on to intercede with Lord Belmont to allow you something yearly, or in case that failed to grant it herself.
               Not for a thousand worlds! cried I. If our afffirs are in this dismal situation, we must accustom ourselves to conform to our finances. It is a duty to live within the limits of what one possesses; the discharge of which is I think as es-sential as that of almost any other. To apply to any of our family after this re-nunciation, is what I never will for an instant think of.
               And why not pray? cried she. Fine talking indeed, of living like scrubs on fifty pounds a year, after having been brought up to forty times that sum, when a step so natural and simple might bestow affluence and comfort instead of

penury and want. Tis nothing but pride, mere pride, which prevents you fronn following my advice, and indeed you must allow me to tell you so; be-sides, as you have such certain proofs by which to ascertain your birth, if you make but bustle enough, I dare say his Lordship will be glad to compound mat-ters from the dread of your reviving the old story by going to law with him; or if he won't be brought to hear reason, what do you think of actually commenc-ing a process. I'll warrant the bare idea of such a proceeding will bring him to act as he ought to do. What say you brother to the scheme?
               I would rather starve, cried I with a warmth which her indelicacy made irre-pressible.
               Starve! Fine talking to be sure. I'll wager Mr. Howard agrees with me, if people wont be persuaded to behave pro-perly why they must be compelled to it if possible.
               
                  
I cannot agree wich you in this mea-sure, indeed Madam, said Mr. Howard, who seemed to have been lost in thought ever since her entrance, for I cannot pos-sibly conceive what advantage could re-sult from Lord Belmont's being con-strained to acknowledge his grandchil-dren: but it is impossible immediately to determine what steps ought to be pur-sued.
               Oh to be sure one ought to consider certainly, and I make no doubt you will agree with me in opinion that some sort of application ought immediately to be made to Lady Linrose. But I have lest my company below. Will you make your appearance ladies; or if you are not sufficiently composed I shall send up Jenny wich tea, for Lady Farnford and her daughter are just come in and will be sur-prised at my absence.
               She then lest us: and I besought Mr. Howard no longer to conceal any circum-stances

relating to our affairs, which it was necessary we should be made ac-quainted with. Mrs. Hindon's infor-mation is but too true, I perceive, added I; but on what we possess we must con-trive to subsist, and you need not be afraid to confess the worst, for this disappoint-ment to my hopes has inured me to mor-tification.
               I must acknowledge, answered he, that I am afraid Mrs. Hindon has authority but too good for the abrupt discovery she has made of your affairs. As I flattered myself that pecuniary misfortunes would neither have been felt nor regarded while you enjoyed the affection and prorection of Lord Belmont, I wished not to disturb you with the apprehension of an evil which might never arrive; but sorry I am to confess the claims of Mr. Bense-ley's creditors are become so great, that it is much to be feared your fortune will be reduced to pretty near what Mrs. Hin-don

mentioned—two thousand pounds, or about that sum. There is no saying however how things may turn out, as no-thing is yet settled; but I wish not to flatter you, while I observe and admire that fortitude and strength of mind that rises superior to disappointments under which the bulk of mankind would sink into despondency.
               Well, my dear Sir, cried I, there is no help for this misfortune. Thank heaven a little yet remains. We must immediately think of some private abode, where we may live peaceably and tran-quilly, no longer agitated with the wishes nor tormented by the expectations which have kept our minds ever since we left Languedoc in a state of tumult and sus-pense. All expectation is at an end; for we have nothing now to hope, but that we may enjoy enough out of the wreck of our fortune to exist with decency and comfort in obscurity. What is it but re-turning

to a retirement that experience has convinced us we are capable of en-joying, and that habit and education have both conspired to render even agreeable to us. We shall soon forget this busy aera of our lives, or regard it but as an uneasy, troublesome dream, which we shall be delighted to find has vanished away.
               Upon you, my dear Sir, continued I, who have so faithfully and conscientiously fulfilled the fatigueing and disagreeable charge imposed on you by my dear fa-ther, we must still lean for further direc-tion and assistance. Your goodness and zeal must expect still further trouble in seeking out for us some humble residence. Our abode must be as simple as is con-sistent with neatness and decency, in some retired spot in a cheap country.
               And would you have the barbarity to exclude me from your dwelling, cried he, with a sudden eagerness which he seemed

incapable of repressing, but which, as if conscious of having gone too far, he in-stantly checked, and added in a softened tone tho' with visible emotion, will my dear and amiable wards allow me as their guardian, warmly interested in their hap-piness, to propose a scheme—a scheme, repeated he hesitating, which I have been for some time revolving in my mind lest things should take this unfavorable turn. It is indeed a plan which no other circum-stances could have justified—and even now requires—But I shall lay hold of some other opportunity of presenting it to your consideration, when I have more clearly weighed it and considered it's con-sequences.
               Oh tell it us now, my dear Sir, cried Fanny with impatience. What would become of us if we had not so good, so kind, and so able a friend to advise us.
               Mr. Howard, affected at these words, could hardly disperse a tear which rushed

into his eye, and unable to answer, took advantage of Miss Parsons entering to leave us hastily. The softness of that amiable girl's nature made Fanny's ap-parent grief infectious; and without ut-tering a syllable, she gave way to a sud-den burst of tears; which tender sympa-thy, had I not been before prepossessed in her favour, would alone have endeared her to me. I was obliged to become her comforter likewise; and assured her we were weeping a disappointment, not a calamity; and indulging in tears, which after the first shock it was weakness to allow to flow, and therefore merited not the kind compassion they had excited.
               I was not a little surprised to discover that she was perfectly informed not only of the subject of our present distress but with every circumstance relating to our present situation, which she told us Mrs. Hindon, oppressed with the secret, had been so eager to divulge, that not only

herself, but Lady Farnford and several of her friends below had been already partakers of it.
               Mrs. Hindon must look upon her word as nothing, said I, for she promised se-crecy.
               Ah, Madam! if you knew all, cried she, and shook her head emphatically— and indeed I have more than once thought of mentioning it to you; but as I saw little danger of your being led into diffi-culties, and beheld you possessed of pru-dence sufficient to secure you from dan-ger, I thought it needless to hazard my aunt's displeasure, should my conduct ever have become suspected.
               You mean with regard to Captain Wil-mot, cried Fanny, but thank God the discovery you hint at has been already made, time enough to prevent any ill consequences from his duplicity. Indeed had his fortune been splendid to my wish, and his affection as sincere as I be-lieve

                  
                     
                        DEC. 23.
                     
                  
                  We were delighted beyond expression last night. The inimitable Mrs. Siddons surpasses all that can either be conceived or described. Added to the most exqui-site taste and feeling, she possesses a coun-tenance the most expressive, over which she enjoys a command the most incon-ceivable.
                  However pleasing to a person unaccus-tomed to the glare of a public exhibition, the effect of the company, the various decorations, and the disposition of the different lights, must at first prove, yet the instant the curtain drew up my eyes were immoveably fixed on the stage, nor would it, I imagined, have been in the power of any other object for a moment to have engaged my attention.
                  I soon found however that Mrs. Sid-dons,

it pretended, to pity alone, not at-tachment, would he have owed the suc-cess which Mrs. Hindon's artful repre-sentations and my simple inexperience might perhaps have led me to bestow.
               I am afraid indeed Madam, answered she, that my cousin merits not the honor of your good opinion. But as to that plan, though I have long suspected it I never once dreamt of interfering, as I concluded till this moment it had not only the approbation of your own heart, but likewise of Miss Seymour's judg-ment.
               Far from it indeed, cried I. My opi-nion of Captain Wilmot has ever been such, that independent of the embarrass-ment of his fortune, this step never should have received my concurrence while I knew my sister's heart was not deeply in-terested.
               You amaze me Madam, for indeed Mrs. Hindon long since gave me to un-derstand

that it was a match where no material objections on either side could possibly be opposed to obstruct its pro-gress.
               Mrs. Hindon then spoke from her wishes, not her conviction, for from the beginning I am convinced she dreaded its success.
               Well, Madam, said Miss Parsons, I heartily congratulate you on having escaped the snare; for it is a secret to few that Captain Wilmot, from a de-structive passion for play, has mortgaged his estate, at no time considerable, to very near its full value, and if he has not already wholly ruined himself, his extra-vagance, unsubdued by experience, suffi-ciently proves that such a termination must soon take place. But on this head having received false intelligence, I con-cluded you acted from the dictates of affection; an idea which was sufficient to deter me from interfering by an ex-planation

that might have been but indif-ferently received, and which at all events I could not have been justified for bring-ing to light.
               I thought, cried I, you had begun by indirectly proposing to reveal all. If se-crecy was your determined resolution how was this in your power?
               I meant all that concerned you, Ma-dam, not what regarded your sister. Of her affairs I was informed, and in divulg-ing my cousin's real situation, from the charges of treachery, however innocent my intention and however beneficial the consequences, I could not have been wholly exculpated, while confidence alone had put it in my power to betray.
               Miss Parsons then hastened to inform us, that on the very evening which suc-ceeded that of our arrival in England, Mr. Howard having on his visit to his brother and sister disclosed our situation, and acquainted them with our real name

and splendid connection under the tie of secrecy, and likewise with the amount of our fortune, Mrs. Hindon seized the ear-liest opportunity of making a confidant of her friend Lady Farnford.
               The two ladies were seated in Mrs. Hindon's dressing-room, which is mere-ly divided by a thin partition from the apartment we at present occupy, and which was then inhabited by Miss Par-sons. She happened to be quietly placed at her book, when her studies were in-terrupted by the conversation of the next room, and her attention so unavoidably attracted by the eager vociferation of this confidential tete a tete, that contrary ei-ther to her inclination or design, she found herself in possession of all their se-crets.
               The two friends, after pondering, won-dering, and gossiping, began to reflect that with ten thousand in possession, and at least double that sum in expectation,

with the advantages of a splendid family connection, Fanny and I presented no in-considerable gratification to the avarice or vanity of any needy pretenders.
               From these particulars they soon be-gan to form wishes that prizes so consi-derable could be secured to their own families, by means of whatever males of their house should be matrimonially dis-posed: and Captain Wilmot, the nephew of the one, and Farnford, the son of the other, instantly occurred to the active and fertile imaginations of these busy in-termedling old women. Those two gen-tlemen, in whom the ladies felt a mutual interest, were at once indigent and extra-vagant, good looking and showy, cir-cumstances which rendered the success of their schemes both essential and probable. They resolved however carefully to con-ceal their plan till ripe for execution; doubting not but occasional meetings and frequent intercourse would gradually fa-cilitate

its progress and insure it a fortu-nate conclusion. It was in consequence of this that you two ladies were entreated with a display so oftentatious of hospita-ble civility to take up your abode in Mrs. Hindon's family.
               Fanny and I both warmly thanked Miss Parsons for this information, dicta-ted by the keenness of her feelings and by that gratitude which a little kindness and a few trivial attentions had excited: attentions that no delicate mind could have withheld testifying even for a person less amiable, in a situation so humiliating as hers.
               Good heavens! cried I, and was I too the object of a project? We have un-doubtedly made a sufficient return to Mrs. Hindon for all her civilities in fur-nishing such amusing and interesting sub-jects for her active spirit to work on. I think, however, as our fortune was the secret spring of all these intrigues, we

have little reason now to apprehend either art or contrivances. The primary mo-tive for all these speculations has va-nished, and I shrewdly suspect the un-conquerable and violent passion which has occasioned such ravages in the bo-soms of the two gentlemen, being de-prived of this nourishment, will quietly sink into neglect and indifference; the only advantage it must be confessed that results from this change in our prospects.
               This intelligence at another time might have occasioned me uneasiness; but at the moment it was communicated the information was attended by a number of others so much more distressing, that I hardly gave it any attention. It only encreased the dislike which resentment at Mrs. Hindon's behaviour with regard to Fanny had before excited, and which, as this clue to her conduct deprived her even of the merit her hospitality and ci-vilities

had before claimed, now almost amounted to repugnance and contempt.
               The motive of her advice, indelicate and unfeeling, to apply to Lady Linrose, not merely for her mediation but even for her assistance, is now fully explained, as also the secret cause of that frigid chagrin too potent either for concealment or re-pression, which diffused itself over both her manner and countenance on receiv-ing the news of our cruel disappointment.
               Perhaps I am a little severe in my ex-pressions: for after all, her disappoint-ment, poor woman, might prove little inferior to ours. Her designs and ex-pectations are compleatly frustrated by the same unlucky event that puts ours to flight; and perhaps in some minds the desires suggested by pride are as power-ful as those which reason, nature, and feeling excite. To lose the hopes of an alliance that flatters her vanity, may to Mrs. Hindon prove a blow as severe as

the shock which deprives us at once of a parent and the pleasing comforts of fa-mily connections.
            
            
               LETTER XIII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     FEB. 15, TWELVE AT NIGHT.
                  
               
               MRS. Hindon's company not having left her till late, I had some hours leisure to pursue my journal. We then went down to supper, which proved a dull and comfortless repast. Mrs. Hindon was cold and out of humour; her hus-band sleepy and fatigued, Fanny dejected, Mr. Howard thoughtful, and for myself I was grave and silent. Miss Jenny was indeed the only person in company who

retained her usual behaviour; at all times soft, humble, and melancholy.
               The change our situation had under-gone in the eyes of Mrs. Hindon since the morning, shone conspicuous in her manner, and produced an alteration hard-ly to be credited. That flattering civi-lity, bordering often almost upon servility, those professions of unalterable esteem, friendship, and regard, that used some times, from our utter inability to make adequate returns, absolutely to over-power us, were this evening converted into frigid reserve, mixed with a displea-sure which seemed to avow that she could hardly forgive herself for having hitherto lavished upon us so much unnecessary re-spect and attention, and for which morti-fication she meant to indemnify herself in the season of our humiliation, by making all proper reprisals. Poor woman! she is infinitely mistaken if she imagines I am in the least humbled by this reverse. It

all powerful as she is, could not wholly engross it; for on casting my eyes round the house, I discovered Mr. Roats-ley in the adjoining box. As he sat a-lone, I could not avoid flattering myself that he would join us as he had done the week before, and Fanny and I could have easily contrived room for him, although the house was extremely crouded; but to my no small regret he did not appear to have the most distant thought of ap-proaching. On perceiving us he indeed instantly bowed; but with a degree of coldness and reserve which almost discon-certed me; and though from the acci-dental change of places there was a spare seat by us most part of the evening, far from wishing to take possession of it, he never once came near the box.
                  Astonished at a change really striking, as well as unaccountable after the flow of civility with which he had before attended us at the same place, I tried in vain to

is not, thank heaven, in the power of for-tune to produce an effect so degrading on my mind. I looked down on her with a degree of pity which softened my contempt, on witnessing the littleness of mind her conduct betrayed.
               We were not long in separating for the night: and as I have too much anx-iety on my spirits to hope for rest, here am I retired to pass an hour in chat with my dearest Sophia, while poor Fanny is forgetting the busy occurrences of this disagreeable day in the soothing arms of sleep.
               Amidst all the difficulties and mortifi-cations we have encountered, and which at our time of life, when the feelings are all tremblingly alive and the passions ea-ger and unsubdued, are endured with double anguish, how alleviating, how grateful to my heart is the conviction of my beloved Sophia's never failing sym-pathy and affection. There yet remains

to us heaven's first and choicest blessing— a dear and tender friend, who feels for our embarrassments and enters into all our distresses with the kindest interest and warmest commiseration. Oh! my So-phia! ought I then to complain?
               Yet, yet, my dear, I indeed require your friendly sympathy; for at this in-stant, without labouring, thank God, un-der any heavy affliction, (for in my opi-nion to the stings of guilt, or to the heart rending despair of losing a friend tried and beloved, alone belongs that ex-pression), our situation is as comfortless, as disagreeable as possible. How are we to dispose of ourselves? Mrs. Hindon's House is no longer a residence for us. You will easily perceive the necessity of our quitting it in all haste; and I make no doubt may likewise conjecture, that after the vexatious adventure into which our residence in lodgings so lately in-volved us, I must feel no small degree

of reluctance at the idea of venturing into others, without the protection of Mr. Howard, whose attendance must now of course cease, when the title, though merely nominal, of our guardian is at an end; neither can I think without repug-nance of remaining in town, cooped up in small, confined, unwholesome apart-ments, and of such only will our finances allow; while a neat rustic habitation in the country can be procured perhaps at less expence.
               Another motive no less powerful, con-spires to give additional force to my de-sire of leaving London as soon as conve-nience will permit, and settling as far from it as possible; I will confess my vanity, for surely it is a natural pride— I cannot think of being recognized by Mr. Roatsley, after this change in our appearance, without pain. Were he like Mrs. Hindon, to discover by his beha-viour that from our apparent fall we were

sunk in his estimation, I should with ease cast him from my heart for ever: but of this mean weakness, incident only to common minds, I cannot suspect him. I fear only to be the object of his pity! Oh! Sophia! pity from Roatsley would mortify me more severely than unmerited contempt from the rest of the world.
               How few are there who do not allow themselves, perhaps unconsciously, to be more influenced by appearances than they suspect. Miss Seymour, while moving in a sphere, if not splendid at least cre-ditable, is no longer the same person when reduced to exist only through the efforts of her own industry; and though still entitled to the respect of the unpre-judiced, nay perhaps to their esteem, yet being sunk, to her intrinsic value, and de-prived of a thousand little adventitious circumstances that give life and alacrity to an infant passion, how can it be sup-posed to combat and struggle against

those dangerous mortifications which are the greatest foes to its progress.
               No, Sophia, I sincerely hope I shall see him no more. To you, I divulge every thought that oppresses my heart, for from your sympathy alone I can hope to derive the slightest alleviation. To you then, my dear, I will acknowledge, that the severest wound my grandfather's renunciation has inflicted, is its having awakened me from a pleasing delusive dream, on the idea of which I have al-most existed ever since I overheard Roats-ley's acknowledgment to his friend of his partiality in my favour. I confess it was weak, it was unpardonable, to allow my mind to indulge in such reveries; yet they stole on me imperceptibly, and I could not resist giving way to the flat-tering hopes, that had he beheld me in that advantageous point of view in which rank and fortune ever place their vota-ries, had he seen me in the circle to

which my birth entitles me—in short, my dear, as we live not in the age of ro-mance, where the splendors of life are wholly disregarded, it is probable his rising attachment would not have been greatly damped by the knowledge of my being Lord Belmont's grandchild, and possessed of a considerable fortune. Had this been the sole motive, or even the chief one, little should I have prized the flame: but remember he loved me when these particulars were unknown, and la-boured for my welfare when a veil of doubtful obscurity was thrown over my situation. These are circumstances to give weight and value to his passion. But these chimeras are now no more. I must drive them from my thoughts for ever; and instead of confessing and indulging, check and conquer them with all the for-titude I can summon to my assistance.
               
                  

                  
                     
                        FEB. 16.
                     
                  
                  Going down this morning to break-fast, I was surprised when I entered to find Lady Farnford and Mrs. Hindon tete a tete, and seemingly in earnest conversa-tion. Good morning, Miss Seymour, cried the latter with a smiling air, the traces of last night's hauteur being en-tirely vanished from her brow. Lady Farnford likewise accosted me with abun-dance of civility and kindness, and they insisted on placing me between them.
                  Come, cried Mrs. Hindon, after a short pause, which she appeared to have em-ployed in considering how she should in-troduce without abruptness what she in-tended to say—Why should there be such distance among friends? To tell the plain truth Miss Seymour, I could not shut my eyes all night for thinking in what a destitute and dismal way you and Miss Fanny must live if you are not ruled and persuaded by those who are interested

in you. Here is Lady Farnford, who de-clares herself as anxious for your welfare as if you were her own children, and who protests that if you were so in fact she should be the first to advise an immediate application to my Lord Belmont. His Lordship cannot see his grandchildren starve, or what is scarcely preferable, justle through life neglected and forgot-ten, for want of that little which his af-fluent fortune can spare with ease. Con-sider he is unacquainted with your mis-fortune. He concludes you possessed of twenty thousand pounds; and tho' that is but a trifle to what you might reason-ably expect, yet no doubt he might ima-gine it enough to support you genteelly. I assure you in your case, with such just claims, I would not content myself even with a little; and if he finds you mean to make a piece of work about it, take my word for it he will alter his tone as they say. Mr. Howard told us t'other day,

talking of your father, that if he had chosen to refuse the compromise offered him by my Lord, he might have been in possession of one of Lord Belmont's estates of three thousand per annum; and tho' he gave away his own money, he had undoubtedly no right to mar the in-heritance of his children. That alone would surely make a good law suit; and the simple apprehension of it would cer-tainly be sufficient to frighten my Lord into terms. Come, Miss Seymour, I'm sure a young lady of your sense must see clearly that rather than have such distur-bance and noise created, your grandfather would easily be induced to settle hand-somely on you, were it only for hush money.
                  Allow me to assure you once for all, Madam, answered I, that nothing on earth shall ever prevail with me to at-tempt such a measure. I am confident you must have wholly misunderstood Mr.

Howard on this point; for such are the unhappy circumstances of the case, that my father preserved no sort of claim upon Lord Belmont's fortune, and was tho-roughly satisfied and contented with the stipulation. Tho' this sum is now great-ly reduced, we have reason to hope a lit-tle still remains, and on that little I trust we shall be able to subsist independant of these cruel relations, who have so unna-turally renounced us. To have recourse to law, (were there even a probability of success,) is a plan at which delicacy and pride equally revolt.
                  Pride and nonsense, cried she. Indeed Miss Seymour I cannot conceive for my part the meaning of all this delicacy and refinement. 'Tis past my comprehension I confess.
                  Perhaps, cried Lady Farnford, who had not as yet been able to speak for the volubility of her friend—perhaps Miss Seymour is deterred by the hopelesness of

discover what could possibly have occa-sioned the alteration; but I could only rest my conclusions on that fickleness and caprice of which all his sex have been so vehemently accused by ours, and of which, though I have seen nothing, I have read and heard much.
                  Possessed with this idea, I endeavoured to satisfy myself; but another soon ac-companied it, which partook perhaps not a little of the weakness attributed to our sex: I suspected that we did not improve upon intimacy; and that disappointed in the expectations which at first induced him to cultivate the acquaintance, he wished to let it drop. Soon after the first act was concluded, I took notice that we were evidently the subject of his conversation with another gentleman who had joined him; an idea which you may believe did not lessen my perplexity.
                  Roatsley seemed to regard me with looks of anxious gravity; while the coun-tenance

success. All the world esteems Lord Belmont irrevocable in his determina-tions. He is indeed a very obstinate, whimsical old man. Lady Linrose too is generally disliked; being haughty, proud, and inflexible.
                  Yes, and no doubt her Ladyship finds her own advantage, cried Mrs. Hindon, in keeping her nieces at a distance from their grandfather.
                  We have no reason to accuse her La-dyship of any such intention, said I. Per-haps, had she possessed either sensibility or benevolence equal to our wishes, we might have expected a little more kindness (tho' ever so privately offered,) to two un-friended relations; who, divided from their friends, and in a manner alone in the universe, lay claim, from her at least, to the good offices of humanity: but tho' she has not proved warmly our friend and protectress, I am thoroughly convinced she is far from having injured the cause

intrusted to her care. She is not gene-rally beloved; but is allowed to be a woman of principle and honour; and a trifling portion of these qualities must prove sufficient to deter her from a con-duct so unworthy.
                  Well, Miss Seymour, resumed Lady Farnford, Lady Linrose is not a woman easily melted by sentiments of pity. But pride may extort where charity fails; and the desire of preventing a revival of—of the unlucky story, may perhaps prevail with her to intercede with my Lord Bel-mont to allow you a pretty round sum to be quiet.
                  To Lady Linrose, cried I with firm-ness, never will I apply.
                  Why then, returned Lady Farnford, what I mean to propose is, applying to their son. The idea occurred to me last night, on hearing Mr. Roatsley talked of in the highest terms by some friends we had to sup with us.
                  
                     
Mr. Roatsley! exclaimed I.
                  Yes, Mr. Roatsley. It seems his elec-tion to the borough of—took place the day before yesterday. Some of the company had been warmly his friends on that occasion, which naturally led them to talk of him, and they spoke in such high terms of his character, that I could not avoid at the time concluding what probability of success an application of this kind must have to a young man of his disposition.
                  What connection has Mr. Roatsley with Lady Linrose? cried I in a tremor.
                  Lord don't you know, Miss Seymour, that he is their son, and of course your first cousin.
                  Their son! Good heavens! exclaimed I, quite out of breath.
                  Good stars, said Mrs. Hindon, is not that the young man who accompanied you in your passage from Calais, and of whom my brother talks so highly?
                  
                     
I know not, Madam.—But I hope not.
                  And pray why do you hope so? For my part I think it is the most agreeable intelligence at this juncture you could wish to hear: for I assure you my brother Howard told me that he seemed much struck, and indeed no wonder, by the elegance of your appearance; and be-sides, was it not he who attended you so assiduously at the Opera house. Oh! I make no doubt he knew perfectly well how nearly you were connected, though perhaps a prohibition from her Ladyship deterred him from acknowledging the re-lationship. And so you never once sus-pected that he was the late Lord Linrose's son all the while? well that is the drollest affair I have heard this age.
                  I dare say Madam, cried I, there may be some mistake in this, else we should have been sooner informed. How comes the son of Lady Linrose to appear under a borrowed name?
                  
                     
O as to that point, said Lady Farnford, in this country nothing is more common. Mr. Roatsley assumed his present name because it was accompanied by the inhe-ritance of an estate in Ireland, left him by an uncle of his mother's, who died a few months ago.
                  How shall I convey to you, Sophia, an idea of the variety of emotions that agi-tated my heart at this moment. Oh! it is wholly impossible! This intelligence, so unexpected, so extraordinary, and oh! shall I add, so mortifying, (for a mixture of humiliation rendered my feelings at this moment still more intolerable, ac-tually drew tears from my eyes:—tears, the source of which I could not abso-lutely define, but which, to my compa-nions, appeared merely the natural effects of uncertainty and vexation.
                  Oh! Sophia! how long have we re-mained in ignorance with regard to a point so infinitely interesting. But I now

find that this inheritance, and conse-quently this change of name, took place immediately before our arrival in Eng-land. Indeed, on investigating the mat-ter, Mr. Howard has discovered that Mr. Roatsley's return was occasioned by that event. Mr. Howard therefore, in his enquiries relative to our family, heard often of a Mr. Dudley, but was informed he was abroad with his brother and Lord Belmont, and never received the slightest hint to lead him to conclude that our agreeable fellow traveller, Mr. Roatsley, was in fact the second son of the late Lord Linrose, whose character, even from the lips of Mrs. Weldon, does so much honour to his family. Indeed, had these enquiries been made of late, no doubt we must have been immediately acquain-ted with the truth; but the society in which he ranges is totally distinct from that in which chance has placed us, and you may recollect it was directly on our

arrival that Mr. Howard exerted himself to satisfy our anxious desire of being in-formed of every circumstance concerning our relations. At that time Mr, Roats-ley was himself but just arrived at his mother's country seat. His return was not generally known; and as we have not been once in any private company with him, excepting one half hour in our own lodgings, no opportunity for a dis-covery could possibly have occurred. Not but that a secret solicitude has in-duced me more than once to ask several ladies who have been at different times visitors here if they were acquainted with Roatsley; but a negative reply was al-ways given, and I make no doubt he is wholly unknown to most of Mrs. Hin-don's friends.
                  I will not, however, comment on this interesting discovery till I have concluded my fatiguing conversation with these of-ficious advisers.
                  
                     
You must know, resumed Lady Farn-ford, that this young man has one of the best characters in the kingdom. To him therefore, Miss Seymour, I would advise you to apply by letter without loss of time, or perhaps Mr. Howard might transact the business better in person. Mr. Roatsley is adored by his family; and possesses, I am told, an influence over the mind of Lord Belmont which would in-sure success. If the old Lord thinks his vow binding, why he may keep it if he pleases, only let him act with justice, and support you in the line of life to which you were born.
                  Good God, my dear Sophia, what a proposal? It entirely divested me of the patience and temper with which I had hitherto listened to advice so selfish, so indelicate, so perfectly unfeeling. I there-fore put a final period to a persecution that was grown intolerable, by expressing

myself with a cold and determined dig-nity, bordering perhaps a little on hauteur.
                  I must beg leave, said I when I could contrive to be heard, entirely to act for myself and from my own sentiments, in a point in which myself and sister only are concerned; and tho' we must con-sider ourselves as under obligations to those friends who wish to alter a resolu-tion they may deem absurd and prejudi-cial to our interest, yet I must use the freedom to acknowledge that we partake so much of our grandfather's firmness as to be quite immoveable in our determi-nations, when convinced there is nothing in them contrary to reason and rectitude.
                  The gravity with which I pronounced this, disconcerted them; and they both in a breath began to apologize for the liberty they had taken in an affair in which they said our interest alone could be supposed to influence them. I could not resist smiling at the expression. I have

some reason to apprehend, however, that I should not so soon have got rid of im-portunities equally troublesome and of-ficious, had not the rest of the family made their appearance to breakfast, which happily interrupted the eager volubility of the ladies.
                  Oh, my Sophia, what a discovery! It has engrossed and absorbed me ever since I was made acquainted with it. Is it in-deed possible that the ties of blood as well as those of affection have united me with this amiable young man. I blush to make this confession in terms so strong, so explanatory; but the agitation of the present moment gives defiance to diffi-dence and shame, and conquers the reluc-tance with which such an avowal must ever be accompanied.
                  I have pondered and considered every circumstance of Mr. Roatsley's conduct since the beginning of our acquaintance, and indeed there are a number of circum-stances

of his companion, whom to my no small surprize I recollected to be our late fellow lodger, Captain Bradshaw, manifested nothing but satisfaction.
                  Just as the fourth act was concluded, Lady Farnford beckoned to a lady be-hind, desiring her to inform her son, who could not get admittance for the croud, that a seat was kept for him on the bench on which I was sitting.
                  Way was therefore made for the gen-tleman: but guess my astonishment and regret, when I found that this son of Lady Farnford's was the profligate and audacious young man who had terrified me at Mrs. Brumpton's. I was shocked on seeing him; nor was my perturbation abated, you may believe, from finding that his mother meant to place him by me.
                  Without having time to consider, I determined that no degree of ill-judged bashfulness should prevent me from ma-nifesting

explained by this information, which hurt and displease me.
                  After thinking and reflecting on the whole tenour of his behaviour, I am con-vinced that duty and obedience to his fa-mily have enrolled him a party in their determinations. How flattering, how humane were his attentions during our passage, while ignorant of our secret claims to his good offices: yet how easily was he impressed with the most injurious sus-picions to our disadvantage immediately afterwards: suspicions, to which he must have submitted with hardly an attempt towards being undeceived; for what con-fidence was to be reposed in the repre-sentations of a woman to whose character and principles, even by the confession of his friend Captain Bradshaw, neither trust nor credit were to be given. Oh! So-phia! I am afraid he would have re-mained at ease under this false opinion, had not Mr. Howard's letter to Lady

Linrose discovered us to him as a connec-tion, in whose infamy and disgrace a slight degree of delicacy must have ren-dered him concerned. It was the know-ledge of this circumstance, I now plainly perceive, that induced him to make known to Mr. Howard his fears for my safety, and which prevailed on him to discover an anxiety that wore the engag-ing aspect of disinterested humanity, whilst supposed to have actuated the bo-som of a stranger, but which in Mr. Roatsley was but giving way to natural feelings.
                  I express myself perhaps with acrimo-ny; indeed on reading over what I have written I am confounded at my warmth of expression. It is not easy, however, wholly to divest ones self of prejudice in a point dear and interesting to the heart. I am severely wounded and disappointed at one part of his conduct, which leads me perhaps to view it in other particu-lars

through a false and unjust medium. His behaviour after all, in regard to me, has been amiable, nay noble in the highest degree: but ah! did he possess the mind, the soul, the feelings which I have been blind enough to attribute to him, never could he have stooped to countenance a transaction so cruel and unnatural as that of renouncing us. He would not have passed himself upon us for a stranger, con-cealed the relationship of which he was ashamed, and courted our acquaintance under a borrowed form while he possessed a title so indisputable to our notice, had he chosen to have claimed it.
                  Perhaps indeed his mother had laid her injunctions on him to remain neuter in this affair till Lord Belmont's intentions were made known. But am I blinded by prepossession when I assert that to desert us after our accidental rencontre, and that profusion of professions of which it was productive, to withdraw his attention and

regard only when from the renunciation of his family and from the peculiarity of our circumstances he knew it was become essential to us, is a step which even pa-rental duty can by no means justify. Common minds may argue in that man-ner, may in that manner act from mo-tives of cold obedience, but if his heart is composed of materials so frigid, so cor-rect, it is a loss little to be regretted. I am offended Sophia, and perhaps unjust-ly; but I had weakly flattered myself our sentiments were in some measure con-genial; and his conduct has proved so opposite from what I am certain mine in similar circumstances would have been, that I am severely wounded.
                  But my warmth may perhaps have led my conclusions too far. Lord Belmont's resolution relative to us, must have ar-rived during his grandson's absence at his election, in which case he can hardly as yet have been informed of it, nor conse-quently

have determined how he will in future conduct himself. His return to town, which will probably happen in the course of a few days, must therefore ex-plain whether or not I have done him injustice. If he yet shews himself in the light of our relation, and disavows his part of the family compact, I shall confess him wholly entitled to the too favourable opinion I have hitherto entertained of him.
                  I wish things may not be still worse with regard to Mr. Benseley's affairs than Mr. Howard has acknowledged; for that worthy friend is extremely thought-ful; and altho' I wished exceedingly to have a little private conversation with him in order to consult about our future plans, I could find no opportunity, for he left the parlour immediately after he had done breakfast, and has been abroad all the morning. No time however is to be lost in deciding. I am now doubly

anxious that our country scheme may take place; and am labouring to become ea-ger for it; endeavouring to represent it to myself in the gaiest colours, as the ru-ral abode of peace, innocence, and har-mony, where no agitations shall in future ruffle, nor painful mortifications disturb the calm serenity of our lives. But it is in vain. My busy imagination perpetu-ally places it in a different point of view, as a state of peacefulness, where tho' no-thing wounds us nothing shall interest; and as a retirement, where tho' we enjoy tranquillity we shall not be able to taste happiness; and tho' tranquillity is per-haps in this fluctuating state the sole point attainable, and that to which, all our wishes ought to be directed, yet at our time of life it is not easy to resist the flat-tering hope that days of real enjoyment are yet in store for us. If this is a delu-sion, yet oh may I ever cherish it as a support in every distress and a prop un-der

every difficulty; without which sooth-ing consolation life would be a burthen and sorrow unsupportable.
                  I forgot to mention that Fanny has not seen Wilmot since the discovery of the letter. His absence, which is unusual, must either be attributed to the conscious-ness of his schemes having been detected by his mistake, or to the change in our affairs, which took place immediately after that event. No doubt his aunt has warned him to keep out of the way till our future expectations are clearly ascer-tained. Fanny, whose latent spirit has been roused by his duplicity, took the earliest opportunity to inform Mrs. Hin-don of her unalterable resolution to break off all connection with her nephew. The lady received this determination with some appearance of surprise, but with much less opposition than would have fol-lowed such a step some days ago.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        FEB. 17.
                     
                  
                  Mr. Howard did not appear yesterday till dinner was announced, I had it there-fore in my power only to hint to him that I requested he would not attempt from friendly compassion to conceal any addi-tional disappointments that were yet to be told us. He assured me that nothing decisive had taken place; Mr. Benseley's affairs continuing in the confusion and uncertainty in which, he had before re-presented them. This passed in a large company who dined here and staid the evening; by which means it was not pos-sible for me to request a private confe-rence with him. Mr. Howard seems, with his usual goodness, to participate in our chagrin; for I never observed him before so grave and thoughtful as he has been since the arrival of Lord Belmont's

letter. I began to suspect that some pri-vate uneasiness might have affected his spirits; but a peculiar softness in his ad-dress, both to Fanny and myself, now convinces me that to his heart the dis-tresses of his friends and those more par-ticularly his own, convey almost equal pain.
                  I have had a long conversation this morning with Miss Parsons. My heart, softened by my own disappointments, sympathizes in her's with augmented commiseration; and as she perceives that I, who was so lately the happy object of her envy and admiration, as created for the enjoyment of affluence, prosperity, and social happiness, am now her com-panion in suffering, she returns my at-tentions by redoubling her endeavours to soothe and amuse me, while she finds, that tho' born to so many advantages, I am no less open than herself to the attacks of fortune.
                  
                     
You imagine. Miss Seymour, said she this morning as we sat together at work in my dressing room, (for Mrs. Hindon was gone out and I had insisted on Fan-ny's accompanying her in hopes that a little variety might dissipate the chagrin of her spirits,) you imagine, and with reason that your mortifications and dis-tresses have been severe: yet what have your sufferings proved when compared with mine: hardly had I closed the eyes of one beloved parent, when the other claimed the same sad duty. These are however misfortunes which by the course of nature we must all expect. Heart-rending and acute as is the wound that such calamities inflict. Time's lenient hand generally bestows the balm to close it. That loss, heavy and irretrievable, did not come alone: the severities of de-pendance, insignificance, and contempt, were the miserable consequences of a blow in itself scarce supportable. Nor

a resentment so justly incurred; I therefore hastily entreated a lady who sat on the bench behind, to allow me to change places with her, as I wished to speak with my sister; and having by this little artifice contrived to place myself at some distance from him, I pretended to be earnestly engaged in conversation with Fanny. Lady Farnford however soon tapped me with her fan, and asked leave to introduce her son. I was then abso-lutely obliged to turn round, and per-ceived in his countenance an astonish-ment and confusion which ought indeed to have wholly overpowered him; but he seemed to recover himself very speed-ily, at least he obtained sufficient com-mand over his feelings to pay me the usual compliments, though I believe, for I hardly deigned to look at him, not without embarrasment. As for me, I scarcely bowed my head, and instantly

was this all. She stopped, and hiding her face with her hands, suddenly gave way to a violent burst of tears, which seemed to have been irrepressible and wholly overcame her.
                  I know well, cried I, you have suffered the rigours of fate, and Heaven knows what yet may remain for our portion, should it please Almighty Providence to deprive us of independence, by taking away the remnant of our scanty fortune. All we shall have for it, my amiable friend, is to endeavour to profit from your laud-able example, and to suffer unrepiningly those ills, which from trust in the unerring justice of Heaven, we may rest assured must in the end work for our good.
                  Ah! Madam! cried she, but there is one blow, cruel, biting, and acute, which the Almighty has not inflicted on you, and indeed it appears impossible you should ever experience. You may behold yourself abandoned by the world, regarded

with disdain, and treated with indelicacy; but this you may bear, and from the conscious superiority of your mind, may bear perhaps with indifference; but ah! Miss Seymour, there are wounds yet more bitter, feelings yet more keen, which I have endured, and which I heartily pray you may never know.
                  Heaven only knows, thought I to my-self, whether these bitter, keen, and heart-felt sufferings, may not yet prove mine.
                  Yes cried I, to the amiable, unhappy girl, taking hold of her hand with unfeig-ned compassion, I am sensible you claim too justly the superiority in affliction. My heart feels sincerely for what yours has endured. You have my warmest sympa-thy; and if the demand is not importu-nate, and the recital will not prove a probe rather than a relief, will you gra-tify me so far as to unburthen your mind to me.
                  It is long, long, cried she, softened

at my request, since my heart has experi-enced the solace of confidence. The world turns wich disgust from the oppress-ed; it flies distress as if contagious; and prosperity beholds it as a frightfull pic-ture presented to its view to check dissi-pation and to frown on enjoyment.
                  She then told me that when she was yet at school, Captain Wilmot, at that time a young Ensign, and nearly related to her, used frequently to spend some weeks at her father's vicarage for the amusement of shooting; and that during the holidays, when she always returned home, he constantly paid her the most flattering attention, till she confessed he made some impression on her heart. Be-ing however hardly fifteen, and little of her age, she looked upon herself as a mere girl, and the school duties gene-rally drove her cousin from her thoughts and conquered her attachment.
                  At seventeen she quitted school entirely.

It was then that the abovementioned di-version furnished a pretence for the Cap-tain's spending almost the whole shooting season at their house; a circumstance that the young lady suspected proceeded from a tenderer motive. In fact he had been but a short time there, when he took an opportunity to disclose his passion, which met with all the success he could have wished.
                  Gained by his early and continued par-tiality, accustomed as her near relation to see him in the most favourable light and to hear him favourably spoken of by others, she was blind to the insipidity and conceited folly of his character. Ha-bit and affection equally conspired to con-ceal his errors from her view; and if she caught occasionally a transient glimpse of his imperfections, his unbounded pro-fessions of love, added to her tenderness for him, cast a partial veil over his de-fects. She acknowledged to her lover,

that her heart had not been proof against his assiduities, and that were her parents to agree to their union, her consent should follow.
                  Mr. Parsons's illness however, which soon after followed, prevented the sub-ject from being mentioned either to him or his lady. Miss Parsons, from almost never quitting the bed side of her father, had few opportunities of entertaining her lover. The family was become anxious and gloomy, and the Captain not finding his residence so agreeable as formerly, soon left them to join his regiment.
                  Mr. Parsons's death, which happened a few days after the lover departed, bringing the embarrassment of his affairs to light, informed the Captain too soon that instead of a very comfortable settle-ment, (for some previous windfalls to the family had induced him to conclude that Miss Parsons would be left in affluent circumstances,) he should not receive a shilling with his bride.
                  
                     
I hope, Madam, you will do me the justice to believe, said she, that in such circumstances I was not girl enough to remain blind to the many obstacles which then appeared against my union with a young soldier, who had little more than his commission to subsist on; and fear-ing that from motives of delicacy he might be under difficulties how to act, I wrote to him as soon as grief would al-low me, and laying briefly before him the disadvantages of fulfilling our wishes at that time, since my mother and I ex-isted merely upon a small precarious pen-sion, which depended on her life, added, with many assurances of unalterable af-fection, that till things wore a more fa-vourable aspect, our engagements must be suspended.
                  Would you believe it, Madam! my letter for six weeks remained unanswered, tho' surely my dismal situation demanded at least the sympathy of a man who had so

lately professed himself my lover: and when at length it arrived, it was some time before I could comprehend the con-tents. It was dated ten days after the receipt of mine; though undoubtedly it could not have taken above a month to come from Liverpool, where his regi-ment was quartered. But this artifice, I afterwards found, was intended to deceive me into an opinion, that it had been written previous to a succession to six hundred a year, which had fallen to him by the death of a distant relation.
                  In this epistle, written with the most phlegmatic indifference, he pretends, to regard my letter as intended to cancel all our engagements; to which he implicit-ly submits with many feigned expressions of regret.
                  My conduct, he said, induced him sincerely to wish that he might never be-hold me more. He called me insensible, unfeeling, and ungrateful; and after be-stowing

a number of other appellations equally false and deceitful, concluded with praying that time and absence might enable him to conquer a passion, which every line of his letter proved existed no more.
                  On a first perusal, I really imagined that some meaning misconstrued, or some phraze misunderstood, had given umbrage to my cousin, and in the height of my uneasiness instantly again wrote to him. I assured him solemnly that I should ever regard as sacred the engagement into which I had entered with my whole heart, and to fulfil which was it's first wish; and that all I desired was to postpone an event that seemed at present mutually imprudent.
                  This however he thought proper never to acknowledge; and I was soon convin-ced that he had joyfully laid hold of this opportunity to regain his freedom. The conviction of his infidelity cost me many

sighs; but the death of my dear and re-spected mother soon awakened me to new affliction.
                  Having been in her last moments re-commended by her to my aunt, and left solely dependent on her care, I was in-vited, soon after the last sad duties were performed, to take up my residence in her family, and began immediately to experience that cruel reverse which has embittered every succeeding hour. You cannot but have perceived, my dear Miss Seymour, that my misfortunes have re-duced me almost to a level with the do-mestics in this house. Mrs. Hindon evi-dently regards me, and uniformly treats me as a menial dependent, instead of cherishing me with that care which my connexion with her claims and which her solemn promise to my mother to take charge of me seemed to imply and led me to expect. In lieu of those caresses, and that admirarion which in my hap-pier

days any little advantages I pos-sessed never failed to excite, and which made me think with pleasure on spending my days under her protection, I found my aunt was one of those who are wholly influenced by situation and appearances. Seeing me destitute and forlorn, she now regarded me as an orphan whom an ostentation of charity induced her to retain, and who, though entitled as her relation to subsistence, its unavoidable attendants were contempt and degrada-tion.
                  You will easily imagine, that in my humiliation I met the eyes of my cousin with additional pain. The day on which you dined here, immediately after your arrival, was that on which I saw him for the first time: and though I am certain he must have felt embarrassed and dis-concerted at the rencontre, he behaved with a degree of insolence and effrontery which converted my expiring regret (for

my resistance she fairly forced me to go to rest at a very early hour, long before any of her guests thought of taking leave. To this piece of kindness, though rather officious (for poor Mrs. Hindon's civilities are unfortunately sometimes ra-ther obtrusive) I was not sorry to con-sent; and retiring to bed, though not to sleep, I passed the hours more at ease than I could have done in the midst of a large circle where I was constrained to assume an appearance of gaiety foreign to my feelings. Lady Farnford was of the party last night; and to-morrow evening we propose accompanying her Ladyship to Drury-lane Theatre. She has a weekly box, to which we have re-ceived a general invitation whenever we incline to go.
               Fanny, who as yet has not been pre-sent at an entertainment of this kind, is half wild with eagerness and expectation; and for myself, never having seen a dra-matic

turned from him with unfeigned indig-nation.
                  I believe his mother was not a little confounded at the rudeness of my beha-viour; but without giving myself the trouble of considering what interpretation she might put on it, I continued to talk with Fanny, who was almost equally vexed at this rencontre.
                  I saw Roatsley's eyes were fixed on our party, and perceived him whisper his friend. Overcome with a variety of emo-tions, added to the intense heat, I felt myself now suddenly extremely sick, and apprehensive of fainting, immediate arose. You may conjecture the bustle which en-sued: I was carried out almost insensible, supported in the arms of the odious Farnford, who ventured to assist me while I was unable to repulse him, and attended by his mother and Fanny.
                  They stopped in the passage to give me air and administer eau de luce,

it is not easy wholly to eradicate a first and strong impression) into self congra-tulation and gratitude to heaven that I had been spared a fate so miserable as that of being connected with a human being capable of such meanness and in-delicacy.
                  I was now in company with Captain Wilmot every day; but we mutually avoided being so without witnesses; and some time elapsed, though probably you never remarked it, before we even exchanged words. The custom of see-ing me has however so entirely con-quered all embarrassment or shame on his part, (if he was ever capable of any) that he has more than once presumed to treat me with the familiarity due only to an inferior, calling me his pretty Jenny with the impertinent ease of a man who imagines that in my situation even his freedoms must be well received and dare not be resented. In such cir-cumstances,

days any little advantages I pos-sessed never failed to excite, and which made me think with pleasure on spending my days under her protection, I found my aunt was one of those who are wholly influenced by situation and appearances. Seeing me destitute and forlorn, she now regarded me as an orphan whom an ostentation of charity induced her to retain, and who, though entitled as her relation to subsistence, its unavoidable attendants were contempt and degrada-tion.
                  You will easily imagine, that in my humiliation I met the eyes of my cousin with additional pain. The day on which you dined here, immediately after your arrival, was that on which I saw him for the first time: and though I am certain he must have felt embarrassed and dis-concerted at the rencontre, he behaved with a degree of insolence and effrontery which converted my expiring regret (for

it is not easy wholly to eradicate a first and strong impression) into self congra-tulation and gratitude to heaven that I had been spared a fate so miserable as that of being connected with a human being capable of such meanness and in-delicacy.
                  I was now in company with Captain Wilmot every day; but we mutually avoided being so without witnesses; and some time elapsed, though probably you never remarked it, before we even exchanged words. The custom of see-ing me has however so entirely con-quered all embarrassment or shame on his part, (if he was ever capable of any) that he has more than once presumed to treat me with the familiarity due only to an inferior, calling me his pretty Jenny with the impertinent ease of a man who imagines that in my situation even his freedoms must be well received and dare not be resented. In such cir-cumstances,

where pride and delicacy are liable every moment to the severest wounds, with no enjoyment in the pre-sent and no chearing expectations for the future; happiness is a phantom which flies me, and which I have no prospect of overtaking on this side of the grave.
                  The unfortunate girl concluded her story with tears, in which compassion made me heartily join. I think, my Sophia, my distresses seem nothing when compared with the burthen she has sup-ported so long, and from which there appears so little prospect of relief. How should I have rejoiced had more pros-perous circumstances allowed me to place this amiable young woman be-yond the reach of 
                        
                      pride and poverty, and ena
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        
                      to pre-serve an honourable independence.
               
            
            END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
            

where pride and delicacy are liable every moment to the severest wounds, with no enjoyment in the pre-sent and no chearing expectations for the future; happiness is a phantom which flies me, and which I have no prospect of overtaking on this side of the grave.
                  The unfortunate girl concluded her story with tears, in which compassion made me heartily join. I think, my Sophia, my distresses seem nothing when compared with the burthen she has sup-ported so long, and from which there appears so little prospect of relief. How should I have rejoiced had more pros-perous circumstances allowed me to place this amiable young woman be-yond the reach of 
                        
                      pride and poverty, and ena
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        
                      to pre-serve an honourable independence.
               
            
            END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
            

salts, &amp;c. before they ventured to call a chair, and just at that instant Roatsley and his friend came up. The former, hoping I was recovering from the bad effects of the heat, walked on with a for-mal bow; and the other giving Farnford a significant smile, said to him in a loud whisper as he passed—I give you joy Farnford; there is no need of my intro-duction now I perceive.
                  Shocked to the soul, I exerted all my returning strength, and disengaging my-self entirely from Farnford, who had pre-sumed to support me with his arm, I told Lady Farnford I was much better, and wished instantly to go home in a chair, as Mrs. Hindon's carriage could not have arrived so early.
                  If you think there is no danger of a relapse, answered she, in my opinion Miss Seymour you had better return to your place till my son enquires if my coach, which shall obey your commands, is in waiting.
                  
                     
I insisted however upon going directly; and her son, who seemed to aim at co-vering the awkwardness he could not avoid feeling under an appearance of rude indifference, said, with an air of uncon-cern, O you can easily have a couple of chairs if you will go, and walked away to order them.
                  I suppose he was glad of an opportu-nity of leaving us; for to my great joy instead of returning himself he sent a boxkeeper to inform us that chairs were procured.
                  Where is my son? cried Lady Farn-ford. But happily no son appeared; and desiring that her footman might be or-dered to see us safe home, she wished us good night.
                  When we came to the door, we found Farnford standing with Mr. Roatsley and Captain Bradshaw. Will you give me leave to see you through the crowd? said Farnford to me with the most perfect

ease. I replied only by withdrawing the hand he had seized, and by an air (I can-not call it a look for I had scarce courage to look at him) of aversion and con-tempt. He was disconcerted I believe; but covering it with a smile of effrontery, stepped back, and instantly Mr. Roatsley advancing, offered his services with a po-liteness and respect which gave me the only sensation of satisfaction I had felt that evening. I curtseyed in silence; and accepting his hand, he conducted me to my chair, after which he left me to per-form the same office to Fanny.
                  Fortunately Mr. and Mrs. Hindon were both engaged abroad, so that I in-stantly went to bed; where instead of sleeping I ruminated most part of the night on the disagreeable occurrences of the preceding day.
                  My reflections were not indeed of the most comfortable nature. My dear fa-ther's loss, attended, alas! by a multi-tude

of circumstances additionally pain-ful and perplexing, have kept my mind for some months past in a state of unceas-ing agitation; and the suspence in which we continue at present, from the unac-countable silence of Lady Linrose to Mr. Howard's letter, conspires to give me unspeakable uneasiness. My past suffer-ings, as well as present anxieties, by weakening my mind and exhausting my spirits, render me doubly susceptible of every slight vexation; the probability therefore, nay almost certainty, in spite of my most vigilant precautions, of meet-ing frequently with Captain Farnford while I reside in a family who are upon a footing of intimacy with his, distresses me prodigiously, and I must also confess, although I am sensible how absurd be-yond measure it is to allow myself to be hurt from the caprice of others, that I cannot help regretting the change in Mr. Roatsley's behaviour, because he appears

so extremely opposite from a man who would permit himself to be governed by mere whim. My thoughts are constantly employed in conjecturing what could pos-sibly have occasioned an alteration so ap-parent. It is however of little importance in itself; but it is so different from his former behaviour that some prejudice must have excited him to this conduct; and there is not I believe a more painful sensation than that occasioned by having unjustly lost the good opinion of those we esteem.
                  Is it not astonishing that we hear no-thing of Lady Linrose? We begin to fear the letter cannot have found its way to her Ladyship. Adieu!
               
            
            
               

               LETTER VII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     DEC. 26.
                  
               
               YESTERDAY morning, Mrs. Hin-don, whom as yet I had not let into any particulars relating to the odious Farn-ford, informed me that Sir Jonathan's family were that day to take a Christmas dinner with us. You have hardly seen the best part of it, said she. Their son, the Captain, is a mighty pretty young man, and extremely clever and agreea-ble. He wishes of all things in the world to be introduced to you; and her Lady-ship told me he has absolutely raved about Miss Seymour since he saw her two nights

ago at the play. He swears there was nobody there to be compared with her either for grace or beauty. He has been out of town lately, or you should have seen him before now. I assure you, ladies, continued she, before I had time to reply, he is no contemptible conquest. Besides his father's fortune, which to be sure is not so good as it has been, he has expectations from a rich relation, and is an only son, with the incumbrance of but one sister's fortune, and she you see is a puny, poor thing. Lady Farnford brought a good fifteen hundred per an-num with her. Sir Jonathan's estate was originally as much more; and al-though no doubt some of it is gone, there are still excellent pickings left. They have been some years on a frugal plan too; so that I dare say things are almost clear by this time. Indeed, Miss Sey-mour, I wish with all my heart this may turn out a match. You know the young

man is my cousin; and I should be happy to have the honour of being related to you. Come, Miss Fanny, don't you think it would do charmingly.
               I am not acquainted with him, said Fanny drily.
               Well, I hope you'll both become bet-ter acquainted with him in time. But Lord look how Miss Seymour blushes: well things will come about, I'll lay a good wager, cried she, laughing immo-derately at the confusion which the sound of the wretches name unavoidably occa-sioned me. Come, continued she, with her usual volubility, you saw him at the play I know; well tell truth honestly, is he not extremely handsome?
               Indeed, Madam, answered I, I am sorrow to differ from you; but I don't think he has the slightest pretensions to it.
               Nay this is downright coquetry. I'm certain you cannot think as you speak.

You are afraid I'll tell; but I promise you I shall keep the secret.
               I hope then you will allow me to entrust you with it, cried I much pro-voked and in the midst of a long ha-rangue, for when eager on a subject Mrs. Hindon never allows any one but herself to talk. I interrupted her by ex-plaining the too just occasion her cousin had given me for the most determined repugnance and dislike. I soon how-ever regretted the confidence I had placed in her, when I found that instead of being shocked at the recital, she appeared so highly entertained that I thought she would have fallen from her chair, she laughed so violently.
               Oh! cried she at length, I never heard such a good story in my life. And so he really mistook you for a woman of the town? How confounded then he must have been to find you in his mo-ther's party, and placed on the same

performance since that gay and happy period when I accompanied my dearest Sophia and her worthy aunt to several of the different diversions at M—, the idea of my beloved friend is so inti-mately connected with the thoughts of an amusement of this kind that I sigh at the melancholy reflection how distant we are at present, and recollect with redou-bled anguish how delightful were the sen-sations of that pleasing aera of my life to those which have succeeded.
               
                  
                     
                        DEC. 14.
                     
                  
                  Well, my dear Sophia, we were both much delighted at the play; although there was somewhat very gloomy in a reflection which could not but occur on first entering, that in so large an audi-ence, where half the world seemed met together, not one friendly countenance

bench with her at Drury-lane. I should have been quite delighted to have seen his astonishment and confusion: he must have looked so droll.
               There could not have been much con-fusion in the case, said I, since he wishes to throw himself again in my way.
               No doubt he is sensible of his error, and desires to be received into favour.
               I then very seriously told her that I was determined not to see Captain Farn-ford if I possibly could avoid it, and would be infinitely obliged to her if she would be so kind as to inform me when she knew of his visits, entreating that she would permit me to keep my apart-ment on such occasions. To this, after some remonstrances, she unwilling con-sented; though I could easily perceive she thought my behaviour an unnecessary refinement of delicacy, which I had im-posed on myself out of an absurd idea of propriety.
               
                  
After the company were gone, Mrs. Hindon returned to relieve me, she said, from my imprisonment, and entertained me the whole remaining part of the even-ing with the Captain's accomplishments: he was the most agreeable young man— so like a man of fashion—so much at his ease—so lively—indeed, Miss Seymour, you must have been quite molified had you seen how dismal and mortified he looked during dinner.
               What, Madam, cried I, after being so lively.
               Oh I mean when your indisposition was mentioned: and indeed I could scarcely talk of it without laughing; to think you was above stairs in perfect health all the while he was regretting your illness as so great a misfortune. However I whispered the truth to her Ladyship.
               I am indeed extremely sorry you did, Madam, cried I. I thought you had promised me not to mention to any per-son

an adventure in which I blush ever to have been involved.
               Oh! there was no harm, you know, in telling it to Lady Farnford. I assure you she blamed her son very much, and said she did not wonder at your resent-ment; only she hoped it would not be carried too far; for that he was most passionately in love with you, and tho' he had been too much penetrated with his behaviour to confess it to her when his first meeting with you took place, she was certain he was thoroughly vexed at the accident, which must have entirely resulted from intoxication and his mistak-ing you for one of those ladies who appear in such crowds in the dusk of the even-ing; for nothing on earth Captain Farn-ford wished so anxiously as to render himself agreeable to you: and indeed, Miss Seymour, I must own, that to make too much fuss about this affair is bestow-ing an importance on it greater than it

deserves. It would be better, I should imagine, after having testified your dis-pleasure as you have now sufficiently done, to appear as if you had forgot it.
               Forgot it, Madam! cried I. I must possess a very slight memory indeed if I am capable of forgetting behaviour like his. I do not intend to make any fuss about it; all I wish is to avoid him; and if chance should introduce him where I am, all the resentment I should discover would be to regard him as an utter stranger. I have seen enough of his character to cure me of all desire for his acquaintance; and as to the passion you tell me he has conceived for me, and which must be altogether imaginary, give me leave to say that had I never beheld him in a point of view so disa-greeable, it would have been equally unsuccessful.
               I pronounced this in a tone so grave

and determined, that Mrs. Hindon looked surprized.
               Well, well, Miss Seymour, I had no commission to carry the Captain's pro-posals, so have no intention to be the bearer of his refusal; and soon after Mr. Hindon coming in, the conversation shifted to other topics.
               This morning a card arrived from Sir Jonathan and Lady Farnford, enquiring after my health, and adding, that they hoped it would not prevent me from ac-companying my sister and this family to dinner with them on Thursday. Mrs. Hindon distressed me exceedingly by obstinately persisting in a resolution to remain at home if we would not consent to go; and though I was both teized and vexed at her ill-judged civility, I was constrained to make her suffer for her complaisance. A polite apology was therefore dispatched.
               
                  

                  
                     
                        DEC. 27.
                     
                  
                  This moment, Sophia, a card is brought from Lady Linrose. She is in town, and writes as follows:
                  Lady Linrose presents her compli-ments to Mr. Howard, and requests he would take the trouble to call in St. James's Square this evening about six o'clock, as Lady Linrose wishes to con-verse with him on the subject of the let-ter she received some time since.
                  Oh! Sophia! how infinitely interest-ing are these few lines. The agitation they have given us is unspeakable. I believe Fanny has read them over fifty times, and examined with eagerness and curiosity the formation of every letter. She draws a favourable interpretation from Lady Linrose being arrived in town,

and is so extremely sanguine, that she has infected me with expectations which I can hardly conceive myself so happy as to find realized.
                  Adieu till the evening, when you shall know the result of all this perturbation.
               
               
                  
                     
                        DEC. 28.
                     
                  
                  Well, my dear—But I will not antici-pate. Mr. Howard, whose friendly anxiety equalled if not surpassed our own, went to St. James's Square, a few mi-nutes before six, and was ushered into the drawing room, where her Ladyship allowed him to wait a full hour before she made her appearance.
                  She then entered. He described her to us (for you may believe we were mi-nute in our enquiries) as a woman of a very majestic figure, but whose address, imperious and disdainful, freezes the

beholder at first sight, and inspires only distance and reserve.
                  I had the favour of a letter from you some time ago, Sir, said she, but as I imagined the subject of which it treated would be better discussed by an inter-view than by writing, I delayed an an-swer till it was in my power to come to town. You tell me Sir, continued she, that two daughters of the late unfortu-nate Lord Linrose are come over from his retreat in France, under the idea that my Lord Belmont will be induced to countenance and acknowledge them. This, admitting that they really are his children, was surely a very strange and unaccountable step. It is indeed extra-ordinary to suppose that his Lordship, so justly irritated against their father, whose ill conduct, not to say crimes, have been the destruction of his peace and the ruin of his constitution, will be easily if ever prevailed with to fa-vour

with his notice, two girls who are the pledges of family dishonour, and the offspring of a calamity which has loaded his declining years with affliction. I think it would have been at least prudent in their friends to have advised them to sound my Lord's inten-tions before they ventured on a proceed-ing so rash as that of leaving the Conti-nent without his permission.
                  Mr. Howard then explained that our journey was in consequence of the com-mands of a gentleman who had been left our guardian, but who on our arri-val we found had unfortunately expired a few days before.
                  I am much surprised, said she, that any gentleman should take upon him to act in such intricate circumstances without my Lord Belmont's approbation, who alone was empowered to fix their resi-dence where he pleased.
                  Mr. Benseley could not be certain,

Madam, said Mr. Howard, that my Lord would at all concern himself about his grand children, after the unhappy event which had so long excluded them from his knowledge: it was therefore natural in him to propose what plan he thought most conducive to their advantage, de-ferring an application to his Lordship till the arrival of the young ladies in England; when he doubted not they would sufficiently plead their own cause the moment they were presented to his sight.
                  Indeed the assistance of natural affec-tion, continued Mr. Howard, would have been, I am persuaded, hardly necessary to subdue his Lordship's feelings on this occasion; however irritated they might prove, a heart like Lord Belmont's could not have beheld unmoved, two lovely young women, blest with every amiable quality of the heart and every insinuating grace of the form, kneeling

was to be found on which we had ever looked before, Lady Farnford and her daughter excepted (for Mr. Howard as well as Mrs. Hindon, were engaged to a lady's assembly, and Mr. Hindon seldom goes to places of public amusement.) There is something extremely dismal in the thoughts of being an unconnected and solitary being, about whom no one is either solicitous or interested; nor does the idea ever strike more poignantly than when you behold all around you in the full enjoyment of the blessings of friend-ship and society. Miss Farnford, in particular, appeared to possess, if not friends, such variety of intimate ac-quaintances, that I could not avoid en-vying her in my heart the many kind salutations she gave and returned from different parts of the house. This was however but a passing idea; for most fortunately in the midst of the musing to which it gave birth, and which in spite

at his feet for favour; and I am con-vinced when your Ladyship has once seen them, an instantaneous prepossession must inevitably follow.
                  His Lordship, had he been in Eng-land, replied she with coldness, would doubtless have acted in that case as he thought proper. I perceive however, Sir, that you appear much too sanguine in your expectations. None of Lord Belmont's friends have ever dared for many years to revive the recollection of the unhappy transactions relating to the late Lord, by any mention of him or his family; a subject which must have given an infinite shock to a frame so ex-hausted and reduced as my Lord's now is; nor is it my own private opinion, founded on a perfect knowledge of the inflexibility of his temper, that he will ever be persuaded to bestow his favour or countenance on his unfortunate son's children.
                  
                     
My endeavours, however, shall not be wanting, Sir, to prevail with him, if pos-sible, to perform what certainly would be an act of humanity; and as the young ladies are probably anxious to know their destiny, shall not only write to Lord Belmont to enforce their claims, but shall take courage to assail him with all the rhetoric in my power. He is at pre-sent at Nice, and his answer cannot be long in finding its way hither.
                  Mr. Howard thanked her Ladyship in warm terms for this offer, which in some measure softened the harsh severity of her preceding discourse, and kindly added a thousand circumstances and recommenda-tions calculated to animate and encourage the dawning interest she began to testify in the cause.
                  There is however one thing I must premise Sir, added she; the young la-dies may perhaps be led to expect that I will invite them to my house, and give

them my notice and protection; but till my Lord's resolution is known, I must be excused from venturing on a conduct which I have reason to apprehend may meet with his disapprobation. The hour that brings me his Lordship's permission, I shall receive my nieces with all the cordiality and satisfaction imaginable; till that arrives, I must needs say that I think the more private they remain, and the less they are beheld in public, the better; and I should advise their friends to persuade them into this mea-sure.
                  Mr. Howard, who by the expression their friends knew was meant only him-self, replied—your Ladyship cannot ima-gine that in this country, where the young ladies arrived so lately, they pos-sess many friends; but I hope, as they are perfectly deserving of those given them by nature, a prejudice, which you must allow me to call unjust, will not

deprive them of one day possessing their regard. I make no doubt but that till Lord Belmont's answer arrives, or till their relations choose to introduce them, they will not of themselves incline either to assume the family name, which they have not yet borne, or to appear in the world as his grand children.
                  In this particular I approve extremely of their prudence and delicacy, answered her Ladyship, and sincerely wish them the success their conduct in this point so justly merits. Indeed it would be the height of impropriety to let the world into those family secrets, till they can with propriety be disclosed; and they ought undoubtedly to continue under the name of Seymour till Lord Belmont al-lows of the change; and in the interim I shall most willingly undertake to con-vey any letter or packet the young la-dies may be inclined to transmit to my Lord Belmont.
                  
                     
Well, my dear Sir, cried Fanny, who had watched his return at the window, what success?
                  I am not much pleased with the intelli-gence your countenance divulges, cried I.
                  My face is not then to be trusted, said he, for at this moment I scarce know whether to be pleased or not. Lady Linrose has dissatisfied me without giv-ing me any just grounds for complaint. She expresses herself in your favour, and assures me she will back your claims with all her interest, yet her manner, uninterested and cold, contradicts what her tongue avers, and though rectitude may compel her to be your advocate, generosity will not, I fear, induce her warmly to become your friend.
                  He then related minutely and cir-cumstantially all that had passed between them. I think, said he, when he had concluded, you ought undoubtedly to address your grand father in your own

name, nor trust to the pen of another a cause of so much moment. A letter, warm from the heart, and breathing the genuine sentiments of duty and affection, cannot fail to soften and interest him.
                  I agreed perfectly in this opinion, and instantly retired to set about the task. You will perhaps imagine that it would not prove an easy one: but I found it attended with no sort of difficulty. To write forcibly, little more is necessary than to be animated thoroughly with your subject. In this case, a thousand expressions of energy and warmth give a strength and eloquence to your style not to be attained by an unimpassioned wri-ter; and as I did not affect what my heart did not feel, my epistle was ex-tremely simple, though my tears, by blotting several, obliged me to write more than one copy.
                  
                     
                        

                        TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF BELMONT.
                        Will my Lord Belmont permit his grand children to address him by the tender appellation which the ties of blood, and the most fervent sentiments of duty and veneration, equally prompt them to use. Alas! it is but lately we knew there yet existed a parent to whom these feelings were still due; and the same instant that bestowed an information, so unthought of, so fraught with wonder and perplexity, overwhelmed us with the sudden knowledge of a thousand cruel circumstances to poison and embit-ter the pleasing intelligence.
                        Among these, not the least dreadful is the apprehension—an apprehension which sinks us to the lowest ebb of despondency —that this venerable parent may forbid our claims, and remain, as he has hi-ther done, a stranger and unknown to us.
                        
                           
Oh! my Lord! can your heart always continue unmoved to the gentle and in-sinuating voice of nature; or in a bo-som, where rectitude is said to hold its empire, can resentment so long retain its violence, and prejudice its inflexibility. Ah! no! one day I trust I shall blush for having for an instant encouraged a sus-picion so unworthy, so contrary to that justice which forms, we are told, the ba-sis of Lord Belmont's character. We shall not mourn a second father, more cruelly torn from us than by the hands of death, while the traces of those tears which flowed for the first are hardly ef-faced from our eyes.
                        We are in England, my Lord, by the advice of a gentleman who was left our guardian, and who I believe was once not unknown to you. We arrived about three weeks ago, and had the inexpressi-ble mortification to find that Mr. Bense-ley had expired but a few days before.

To add to this misfortune, we were told your Lordship was abroad; and informed that till you condescended to acknow-ledge us, those of our family who re-mained could not venture to afford us even their notice.
                        I think I need insist on no further particulars in order to enforce to your Lordship how uncomfortable, how pain-fully depressing, the situation of two young women must prove, who find themselves in a foreign and unknown country, unconnected in the midst of their numerous relations, and strangers, tho' surrounded by their natural friends.
                        Till your Lordship's resolution with regard to us is made known, we must continue in this obscure, this miserable state, unacknowledged, unnoticed, and deserted, whilst unconscious of meriting repulse, or of deserving this contempt and desertion.
                        The favour of a few lines from your

Lordship's hand, directed under cover to Laurence Howard, Esq. British Coffee House, a gentleman to whom, we are un-der infinite obligations, and with whose sister we at present reside, will either re-lieve our minds from a cruel load of pain-ful suspense or finally put a period to those expectations, the uncertainty of which have deprived us for some months of comfort and rest.
                        
                           We remain, with unfeigned respect, your Lordship's most dutiful children, HERMIONE AND FRANCES DUDLEY.
                        
                     
                  
                  I made Fanny join in the signature. It appeared very strange to us to add a name so entirely new, nor could I hardly per-suade myself I had any right to claim it.
                  When the letter was finished, I car-ried it down stairs in order to submit it to Mr. Howard's perusal, who was for-tunately alone. He was affected with the warmth with which I had expressed

of the novelty of the surrounding scene almost wholly engrossed me, I was sud-denly roused from my melancholy con-templations by the sight of Mr. Roatsley, who had entered the next box, but in-stantly on perceiving us removed to ours, and paid us his compliments with his usual grace and politeness.
                  The train of recollections that had preceded his entrance made me view him with redoubled pleasure. Luckily there was a place vacant between Fanny and me, of which he took immediate possession; nor did he think of quitting it till the inimitable comedy of the Jour-ney to London was concluded, for from some particular circumstances the play had been changed. I was almost equally delighted with the representation itself, and with the admirable and amusing ob-servations it drew from Mr. Roatsley, who was if possible still more agreeable than when we passed the day with him at

myself: but my words were faint when compared with my feelings while I trans-mitted them to paper. Melted with the tender idea that I was yet allowed to address myself to a surviving parent, I effaced the writing with my tears. A tear dropped down the cheek of Mr. Howard while he read. If Lord Bel-mont can indeed remain deaf to the voice of nature, said he, when she pleads in such language as this, his heart cannot have been composed of those flexible ma-terials of which those of other men are formed.
                  He undertook himself to give it this day to Lady Linrose, that it might ac-company her dispatches for Nice.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER VIII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JAN. 12.
                  
               
               THIS presuming wretch Farnford, instead of avoiding me, as I flattered my-self he would have done, after the repug-nance I have testified towards the slightest intercourse with him, this morning called while we were at breakfast.
               It was both painful and awkward for me to find myself in the same room with him; and in spite of all Mrs. Hindon's attempts to draw me into conversation, I maintained a profound silence, looked grave and reserved, and the moment I had done breakfast, left the parlour.
               
                  
Mrs. Hindon, with all her civility, shews very little complaisance in this particular. Though she well knew the reluctance I felt to seeing him, she had undoubtedly invited him to supper; for soon after he was gone she came up stairs and informed me that the poor Captain found himself so miserable when at a distance from me, that he had asked leave to return in the evening.
               I said nothing, for certainly I had no right to prescribe to Mrs. Hindon what company she should admit to her house; but the moment she left me, I took a chair to Mrs. Weldon's, and in the Captain's stile asked leave to spend the evening with her. She willingly con-sented; and told me with her usual kind-ness that there were to be a few friends with her, who would be equally pleased with an addition so agreeable to their party.
               This is prudence with a witness, cried

Mrs. Hindon, when I carelessly in-formed her that I was engaged to sup abroad. 'Tis all I suppose to avoid the poor Captain; but indeed Miss Seymour when you have seen as much of the world as I have done, you'll have a little more indulgence for the frolics of twenty-five.
               That I might run no chance of being caught by Farnford, I went early to Mrs. Weldon's: but indeed my dear Sophia I heartily regret I went at all.
               The guests she had mentioned, con-sisted of three gentlemen, who were ex-tremely gay and excessively free in their manner. Their vivacity was indeed un-bounded; and their behaviour so noisy, not to say riotous, that I should have imagined they could have inspired only the most impenetrable gravity, in any fe-male companion. Instead of this, how-ever, their mirth produced in Mrs. Wel-don a flow of spirits so unrestrained, that I could not avoid feeling to the last de-gree

uncomfortable, and I would have given the world more than once for a pretence to have left the table.
               I had not sufficient courage however to betray so pointedly my disapprobation; I therefore kept my seat, determining in my own mind to refuse in future all Mrs. Weldon's invitations except to a tete à tete, when she always appears in a point of view both amiable and respect-able. But I took no part in the surround-ing merriment, and very little in the con-versation, although the gentlemen on each side addressed themselves to me in a style of complimentary adoration perfectly new and almost incomprehensible.
               The moment the cloth was removed, I ordered a chair; resolving not to wait for Mrs. Hindon's carriage, which was to attend me at a later hour; and told Mrs. Weldon that as that family were extremely regular, I should be obliged to leave her sooner than I wished.
               
                  
Indeed, cried the gentleman who sat on my right hand, and who had been par-ticularly violent in his expressions of ad-miration, we shall not permit you to be so cruel; and he seized my hand with an impetuosity which terrified me.
               It is not indeed in my power to stay, cried I, with no little resentment in my voice. Mrs. Weldon joined earnestly in entreating me not to break up the party; and the other gentlemen insisted so strongly, that I was absolutely constrained to sit on, from the mere shame of disco-vering a degree of apprehension for I knew not what.
               The gentlemen now began to sing a number of drinking, or as they termed it jovial songs; many of which, if I might judge from the manner they were received, were by no means adapted for female ears; and the glass circulated so freely, that my situation every instant grew more disagreeable. I was assailed

on each side with the most extravagant flattery; and all my attempts to rise were received with such violent opposition, that I had not resolution to undergo them, and therefore forced myself to remain till it was near twelve. I then got up, and declared I was determined to go.
               There is but one way of putting a pe-riod to so barbarous a determination, cried one of the gentlemen, and springing forward to the door, he turned the key, and put it with an air of gay triumph into his pocket.
               My consternation at this manoeuvre was beyond conception, and I turned to Mrs. Weldon with a look of astonish-ment for which I could not find words. It was, you may conclude, not much abated from observing that instead of openly avowing her displeasure, she laughed extremely at my apparent dis-tress. Come my dear, cried she, since you are kept prisoner, tis in vain to resist.

Let us all sit down for an hour longer at least, and Sir Edward will favour us with another song.
               No, Madam, cried I much provoked, tis my intention to be gone, and go I will. I beg and entreat Sir, turning to the gentleman, you will open the door and allow me to be gone. I ask it as a favour Sir.
               Why then Madam, cried he gayly, with the grant of another you shall pur-chase this favour with all my soul.
               What must I do then? cried I.
               Pay the door keeper, Madam, advanc-ing with an air of the most impertinent effrontery.
               Nay that's but just by G— called out the others, bursting into a loud laugh.
               I was so confounded with this auda-cious behaviour, that I could not utter a syllable; but retiring to my seat, I turned suddenly sick, and grew so pale that they all concluded I was going to faint.
               
                  
Mrs. Weldon's mirth, on observing this change, was converted into appre-hension. You have carried your wit greatly too far, Gentlemen, cried she; and Sir Edward instantly procuring the key from the other, uttered a thousand protestations of grief and regret for hav-ing given me a moment's uneasiness.
               Mrs. Weldon then led me to her dres-sing room, from whence a servant was ordered to call a chair. She made me a thousand apologies for having allowed me to be so severely tormented; but con-cluded, she said, I would not mind the innocent frolic of a party of gay-hearted young men who were not quite sober.
               I do not think them proper company for either of us, Madam, in such a situa-tion, cried I, nor can I call a frolic inno-cent which was in my opinion to the last degree impudent to attempt and humilia-ting to receive.
               I spoke with warmth, for indeed the

party altogether had shocked and con-founded me extremely.
               Oh the pretty little prude, cried she in a tone of ironical vivacity; indeed, my dear, you must expect on entering the world to behold a number of things which will appear equally strange and unaccountable to you. Pray do you imagine that all men are as grave as your father, or as sententious as Mr. Howard? Young men will be gay, and sometimes forget themselves. I disapprove of any flagrant breach of propriety as much as you or any one else can do, but to be sometimes absurd gives a gust to life.
               The chair being now come, I bad her coldly adieu, and returned home ex-tremely hurt to perceive the notions of a person, for whom I really feel an af-fection, so dissimilar to my own, and grieved to find that her unfortunate spi-rit of coquetry obscured and concealed a thousand good qualities.
               
                  

Dover. There is indeed a certain mix-ture of sweetness and vivacity blended both in his countenance and manners, that renders his conversation uncommonly pleasing. I was much charmed to per-ceive that the denouement of the piece, which, though defective I think in point of delicacy, is exceedingly affecting, brought a tear of feeling into his eye: there is indeed something so amiable in any unaffected symptoms of softness and sensibility in a manly countenance, and it forms a contrast so attractive from that roughness and austerity which is in gene-ral seated upon their faces, that in my opinion it is the most insinuating of all prepossessions; and as it gives you in a manner an insight into the mind, ren-ders the figure itself infinitely more inte-resting. I suppose it was owing to this observation that Mr. Roatsley never struck me with being so incomparably handsome as he did this evening.
                  
                     
Adieu! my Sophia. My desire to hear from you augments every hour. Your delightful journal, which used for-merly to constitute my chief amusement, will now prove my consolation in all my troubles, as your friendship is my sup-port in every difficulty. The anxiety in which we must some time longer remain, wears out in some measure my spirits, though I do not allow myself to brood over vexations that have not actually ar-rived; on the contrary, I am beginning to prepare for the worst, that is to say, for Lord Belmont's inflexibility, and of-ten say to myself—if my family should persist in deserting me, I still possess my dear Fanny and my invaluable Sophia, and these two blessings, when put in the scale against all the comforts and advan-tages resulting from being cordially re-ceived into the family of my grand fa-ther, desirable as is that event, make

them appear lighter than air. Adieu, my love.
               
                  H. SEYMOUR.
               
            
            
               LETTER IX. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JAN. 15.
                  
               
               YOUR kind packet was brought me this morning. A thousand, thousand thanks to my beloved Sophia, for the warm friendship and affection which breathes in every line. Such a friend, at all times an invaluable treasure, is in our present situation if possible still more unspeakably precious: for when we now look around us, there remains not one other person, Madame de Clarence ex-cepted,

to whom that tender appellation is due; and even she is not a Sophia.
               One part of your letter actually dyed my cheeks with blushes, although I read it in private. How can you rally me so unmercifully because I described our fel-low traveller to be what he really is—a very agreeable man. I did not tell you he was an Adonis, nor did I express myself, if I recollect, in terms of greater warmth than the politeness of his atten-tions merited from me. That he is handsome, and uncommonly engaging in his manner, is no more than you your-self must have acknowledged had you also been of the party. I confess however I have been several times a lit-tle apprehensive of your animadversions upon different parts of my journal, tho' I did not imagine you would have taken such strange notions so early into your head.
               If you have become already suspicious,

how much elated will you prove, and how vain of your sagacity, when you re-ceive the latter part of my journal, where you find I have again met with my hero, as you call him. I am conscious I have laid myself still more open to ridicule in some of my last packets than even when you took the hint with so much avidity from nothing.
               I freely acknowledge, however, that the natural eagerness of my temper may have led me to express myself with an energy which was perhaps absurd enough; but I am accustomed, to my Sophia, to think on paper; I give every idea full la-titude, and never once reflect how ridi-culous I may often appear.
               You command me, you say, on my allegiance, to confess faithfully if I do not find myself inclined to be a little more solicitous about this Oroondates than I ever was about the Chevalier de Mer-tane, or any other man? Indeed, my

dear, this is by no means putting the matter to a fair trial; for to compare Mr. Roatsley with the Chevalier argues nothing in the world in favour of your opinion, the latter being determinedly disagreeable to me; and there is a ma-terial difference I hope between acknow-ledging that a man is agreeable and be-ing in love with him. That I think Mr. Roatsley the most agreeable man I have yet met with, I sincerely confess; but I can think him so, and even in-dulge a wish for further intimacy, with-out concluding myself in the slightest danger.
               I will confess to you, however, my sweet friend, and let the openness of my heart put a final period to your raillery on this subject, that since the night of the play, when I think I must have given him cause for thinking meanly of me, I have suffered more uneasiness than such a trifle ought to have occasioned; and the

recollection that this change in his beha-viour was antecedent to Farnford's ap-pearance in the party, adds to my per-plexity and encreases my regret.
               As he appears to be intimate with Captain Bradshaw, perhaps the latter has hinted suspicions of my prudence and thus overturned the favourable senti-ments which at Dover Roatsley seemed inclined to feel for his new acquaint-ances; yet his polite and attentive be-haviour when I met with him at Drury-lane Theatre, entirely contradicts this idea, and was indeed totally different from the cold distance and civil reserve with which his manner was impressed the last time I saw him at the theatre. He did not appear the same man, at least he certainly was not actuated by the same feelings.
               This confession may lead you to sus-pect the weakness of my heart, and I have severely condemned myself for al-lowing

the opinion of a stranger to in-fluence me so far: yet I really believe pride alone is at the bottom of my un-easiness. I am hurt to have fallen in the esteem of a man, who, in spite of your raillery, appears superior to most of his sex. I formed no wishes from his acquaintance, but that he might prove an agreeable acquisition to our society; therefore I could experience, I imagined, but a slight disappointment. Yet I al-low that I have permitted his behaviour to interest me too much; and since it has been so remarkable as to excite your observation even so early, I give you my word I will exert myself to think of it no more.
               
                  
                     
                        JAN. 16.
                     
                  
                  Were it not for the uneasy suspense in which we must remain till Lord Bel-mont's

resolution is known, our residence here would not be so uncomfortable as I at first concluded it would prove. Mr. Hindon is a good natured man, and of a very sociable disposition. He keeps an hospitable table, to which he generally brings home two or three guests every day, and these he treats with ease and benevolence without ostentation. They are not, to be sure, men of very bril-liant manners, or whose society can be deemed extremely desirable; being usu-ally friends from Change, about his own age; men who have spent their lives in the plodding pursuits of gain, to the ac-quisition of which all their talents have been invariably exerted—I had almost said exhausted, for their conversation sel-dom displays either knowledge of arts or taste for attainments that lead not to the great end of becoming rich. They claim, however, the merit of industry; and though sometimes I am confounded

with their vulgarity, in men passed the middle of life one is less shocked with that roughness which proceeds from plain dealing than with the smart and forward attempts made by some of the beaux of this line to appear degagè men of the world against nature and education.
                  Mrs. Hindon, though far short of my sanguine expectations, is a well-meaning woman, and by no means deficient in several good qualities. These are in-deed often obscured by the want of one which bestows lustre on every other, I mean delicacy. She would not willingly inflict a wound, if she was conscious of its poignancy; but she is totally desti-tute of those feelings which tell when anothers are hurt. Without being ge-nerous, she does not fail in point of charity; I mean that branch of the duty that consists in giving alms. She keeps excellent order in her family, piques herself upon being an active oeconomist,

goes seldom into public, and is not given to dissipation. Our hours are early and regular, at least when compared with those which prevail in this country, and our evenings are generally spent at home, where now and then an easy friend joins the family party.
                  I have discovered one striking fea-ture in Mrs. Hindon's character, to which perhaps may be attributed her unbounded civility to us. Yet I own it is unfair to place her kindness in a light that de-prives it of all its merit. She was her-self of very low extraction, and probably for that reason has attached an idea of importance to rank and family, which induces her to attend with the most sedu-lous regard and respect to all who have the slightest claim to distinction. Since our abode here, I have suspected a scheme, which repeated observation now convinces me is not without foundation. Captain Wilmot, Mrs. Hindon's nephew,
Had I even enjoyed less pleasure at the representation of a piece which I have so often read with repeated satis-faction, I should have been sufficiently amused and delighted from observing the effect it produced on my dear Fanny, who was charmed beyond measure by an exhibition so entirely new, and of which my description could have given her but a faint notion. Roatsley seemed both pleased and entertained with the innocent naivetè of her expressions of wonder at all she saw, and with great goodness of heart enjoyed the entertainment she drew from every object.
                  When the play was finished, he left us for a few moments to pay his respects to a lady in another box; and so comfort-able was the idea of possessing at least one acquaintance amidst so many faces totally new, for we were placed at a distance from either Lady Farnford or her daughter, that I could not avoid being

in a manner lives in her house; and ex-cept at the seasons of sleeping or dressing, makes constantly one of the family. He is become of late extremely particular in his attentions to Fanny, and conti-nually entertains her in a sort of half whisper, which gives their conversation the air of a tete à tete. He is good-looking, though extremely vacant and insipid; but having received the polish of a military education, is enabled to hold forth with ease and fluency in a complimentary style to which Fanny has no sort of aversion. I have been a good deal alarmed, lest, as she is young and completely inexperienced, les petits soins de Monsieur le Capitaine, should prove more successful than were to be wished. I have not failed therefore, in talking of him in private, to throw a degree of ridicule upon his behaviour and appear-ance, of all weapons the most dangerous against which a lover can contend, and

as Fanny is not extremely susceptible, I think my plan will prove the destruction of Mrs. Hindon's; for that she is at the bottom of the Captain's passion, and has bestowed the proper supplies of fuel to blow it into a flame, I have no manner of doubt. Indeed her desire of aggran-dizing her family by an alliance with Lord Belmont's, might alone have in-duced her to promote a match between Fanny and her nephew; but I make no doubt that besides this motive, to a young man who is not in affluent circumstances, Fanny's ten thousand pounds, added to the expectations which Mrs. Hindon often insinuates we may justly form from our grand father's liberality, would be an addition extremely desirable. After all, he may be sincerely enamoured, for Fanny possesses charms capable of in-teresting more refined sentiments than I suspect the Captain to possess; yet I re-collect we were some time here before he seemed to know she was even in the same

room with him, and his solicitude took its rise all of a sudden, without any ap-parent cause for the alteration, after an appearance of the most frigid indiffer-ence.
                  My suspicions that the scheme was first suggested to him by his aunt, have been confirmed from remarking that Mrs. Hindon takes every opportunity of la-vishing the most exaggerated encomiums on her nephew. He is the very best young man in the world; given to no vice; always kept himself out of the mad frolics of his military companions; and so good a son, that she made no doubt he would make a figure equally respec-table in every other department of life.
                  Besides, don't you think him extremely handsome, Miss Fanny? I'm sure if you had been within hearing of what he said of you last night, you must have been flattered, though there was not one word of flattery in the case. He de-clared

you was in his opinion—you must excuse me, Miss Seymour—by far the handsomest of the two, and so amiable, and so elegant, and so like a young lady of the first quality. However I give you my word, Miss Seymour, he allows you to be what all the world must ac-knowledge—compleatly lovely; but Miss Fanny, he says, is an angel, and I think he is fairly caught at last.
                  You see, my dear, by this little trait, that Mrs. Hindon, with all her errors, is not in the least artful. Indeed I be-lieve this plan no sooner occurred to her-self, than, though without intending it, she contrived to communicate it to me. She is indeed incapable even of a pru-dent concealment; and when she ima-gines her designs (for she has a very active turn of mind) are cunningly hidden from every eye, a slight degree of penetration only is required to pierce through the thin disguise. She does not spare flat-tery

you may perceive on this occasion; and as she knows the influence which two years seniority, added to the warmest attachment, have given me over Fanny's mind, you see I get my share of it, as a person whom it is necessary to bring over to her interest.
                  I think Mr. Howard has likewise made a discovery of the scheme, which evi-dently meets with his disapprobation; for he always appears chagrined and dis-pleased when Wilmot joins us, and re-gards him with a scrutinizing eye when he whispers soft nonsense into Fanny's ear.
                  Indeed to a mind like his, so fraught with rectitude and good sense, the utter impropriety of such a step must appear in full force; and I make no doubt that considering himself at present in the light of our guardian, he holds himself re-sponsible to Lord Belmont for our con-duct. While under his immediate, his sole direction, were this affair to involve

Fanny in a marriage so imprudent, it must reflect extremely even on Mr. How-ard's character; since from his connection with Wilmot, it would undoubtedly ap-pear to Lord Belmont as having received his secret concurrence and approbation.
                  Of such a conduct, I am convinced Mr. Howard is incapable, even were he to draw from the event the most desira-ble consequenses to himself: but inde-pendent of this idea, I am mistaken if a more forcible motive does not give ad-ditional weight to the repugnance with which he beholds Wilmot's assiduities.
                  I believe I once hinted to you, that Mr. Howard, during the infancy of our acquaintance, was extremely particular in his attentions to me. He was ever solicitous for my company, and sought my conversation with eagerness and se-dulity. His behaviour at length alarmed me, and mine plainly told him how un-successful any application beyond the

limits of friendship would prove; for though I esteem, I admire his merits, and there is none of his sex for whose character I have a higher respect; though his manners bespeak his mind, and con-vey the mild benevolence of his nature into every look and motion; and though his years would not have been with me a material objection, yet, yet, Sophia, I could not have loved him. You will call me romantic perhaps; but never could Mr. Howard have enjoyed that tender interest in my heart which my lover must possess ere he becomes my husband. My sentiments partake of those a daughter feels for her parent. They are those of confidence, depend-ence, and gratitude; but they are far removed from those soft, cordial, and insinuating ties which make the duties of a wife her first happiness, and enable her almost to exist but for the man to whom she has given her hand.
                  
                     
When Fanny returned from the con-vent, (for it was during her abode there that our acquaintance with Mr. Howard commenced) he was struck with her ap-pearance: but he regarded her as a beau-tiful child, and was more delighted with her naivetè than her conversation; and though he often entered into chat, he never discoursed with her: till our mis-fortune in losing our dear parent, by throwing us entirely under his care, made him feel Fanny's dependence, which at the period of my illness rested solely on him, as a peculiar charm that seemed to soften and affect him.
                  While we travelled, she leant on him for support in every difficulty or alarm. To him every enquiry was made, and from him every explanation was expected; and there are few men, I believe, in whom the idea of protection, exerted to-wards a young and pleasing object, will not create a tender interest, which if it

is not love, partakes extremely of the same sentiment.
                  As for me, my spirits oppressed and my temper independent, I trusted a little more to myself, nor consulted Mr. How-ard but when circumstances called for counsel and assistance. To me therefore he ever behaves with respect and the most flattering regard; but to Fanny, his ad-dress has still more softness; he appears as if he considered her peculiarly his charge, and to gratify her in any little wish, however whimsical, evidently con-fers pleasure on himself.
                  Yet if my suspicions of his secret par-tiality are founded on truth, (for I will not pretend to be certain whether my surmizes are not partly the chimeras of my own imagination) he is acting on this occasion like a man of honour, and as I should have expected from his cha-racter. His attentions are those which may be felt, but except by myself, I am

certain never have been remarked; nor has he once betrayed a wish to insinuate himself into her good graces. No doubt he is conscious that a man of moderate fortune cannot be considered by Lord Belmont as a match for his grand child; who, if he means to acknowledge her, must possess a variety of advantages, ac-cording to the world's opinion, sufficient to carry a grandfather's views infinitely higher; neither is he insensible, I dare say, to the inequality of their years.
                  A girl of sixteen, with all the thought-lessness incident to her time of life, en-creased perhaps by the retirement of her education, cannot appear to sober reason an elligible choice for a grave, sedate man of forty three, whose prospects of happiness have probably been centered in expecting an amiable companion rather than a beloved mistress, in the woman whom he makes the partner of his life. Yet probably those very men, Sophia,

apprehensive least he should not again return; but in a short time he made his appearance, and resumed his place, where he continued till we left the house.
               
               
                  
                     
                        DEC. 21.
                     
                  
                  This day produced an event which has charmed both Fanny and me beyond measure. We have unexpectedly met with an old friend, (for such in this part of the world we should deem almost any person whom we had known in our own country); and as such we cordially wel-comed our lively acquaintance, Mrs. Weldon, who arrived in town only the evening before last.
                  Fortunately she had taken lodgings in the next street; and perceiving us in Mrs. Hindon's carriage pass her window in our way to church, she made her foot-man watch our return, with a message

may not prove less liable than others to be caught by the charms of youth; and when that is the case, partiality no doubt persuades them they have discovered the mistress and companion in one, and that they may be able to mould a young and innocent mind as they please.
                  I am mistaken if Mr. Howard's ima-gination has not sometimes secretly sug-gested some such ideas; though further than concealed wishes, I am confident 
                        •
                     hey never will proceed.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER X. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JANUARY 20.
                  
               
               THIS interval of some days has pro-duced occurrences of the most distressing nature. Oh! my Sophia, why was I ever prevailed on to quit our quiet retreat in Languedoc? why has fate condemned me to visit a country, where, since the moment of my arrival, I have encoun-tered only disappointments, against which I must struggle, and difficulties with which I must contend.
               Yesterday morning Mrs. Hindon pro-posed carrying us to the sale of a noble-man's furniture and effects, who had lately

ruined himself by extravagance and a fatal passion for play. Curiosity, she told us, had brought the whole town together on this occasion: numbers, who never thought of becoming purchasers flocking to the auction to behold the splendor and elegance of the articles exposed to view.
               This not being an amusement for which I imagined I should have much relish, I declined being of the party; and soon after Fanny and she were gone, Mrs. Weldon called. She was so extremely agreeable, and made so many apologies for the behaviour of herself and company the evening I spent at her house, that I could not help cordially forgiving, tho' in my heart I could not thoroughly excuse her.
               You must consider my dear, said she, that your ideas and mine on certain points cannot fail to be extremely opposite. You have been educated in absolute soli-tude, and must have taken your opinions

either from reading, which is a very er-roneous guide to form your sentiments upon, and one that ever leads to narrow prejudices and contracted notions, or have imbibed your rules of manners from the conversation of your father, who lived in the last age, at least in times that did not allow of those freedoms that the present fully authorize. As for me, besides the sanction which matrimony at a very early period of life gave to the natural gaiety of my temper, I have seen a good deal of the world; my character therefore is established. I fear not the voice of cen-sure; and those gentlemen whose mirth offended you so much, were men I have long known; two of them were my re-lations; and you must allow that in the midst of their life and spirit no real im-propriety was thought of.
               Though I did not exactly agree in this opinion, I allowed it to pass without en-deavouring to confute it; and after sit-ting

an hour, during which Mrs. Wel-don conversed so rationally and agreeably that she made me entirely forget my re-sentment, she took leave, being engaged she said with her lawyers at a certain hour; having first made me promise to dine with her two days hence, when she assured me there should be no company except a female relation, with whom she was certain I should be much pleased.
               As Mrs. Weldon's company is at all times really delightful, for she possesses the art of rendering the most trifling oc-currences interesting from the insinuat-ing gaiety with which she relates them, I consented; having first confessed that I hoped none of the gentlemen of her last party would join us. If any of them call, cried she laughing, I promise you I shall give orders to be denied, since the pretty little prude will have it so.
               After she was gone, having a little time to myself, which is not often the

case, I recollected that I had some trif-ling business to transact with Mrs. Brump-ton, my late landlady, relating to part of our baggage, which still remained at her house; and as I wished to make Mrs. Hindon a trifling present of a very pretty work box which was packed in one of the trunks under Mrs. Brumpton's care, I sent Dubois across the square, for it is not much further, to ask if she was at home, and to let her know I should call some time that morning to speak with her; and half an hour after I ordered my chair and went.
               The maid conducted me into a small parlour, saying indispensible business had carried her mistress out for a few mo-ments, but that she had left orders if I came to beg the favour of me to wait her return. I confess I thought this rather a freedom in the woman; however I sat down, expecting she would soon appear.
               My attention was in a short time

roused by hearing a gentleman give or-ders to his servant, so near, that I found only a thin partition separated the room in which I was placed from that occu-pied by our late fellow lodger, Captain Bradshaw. He appeared employed in assisting the packing of some guns, and other shooting implements, about which he seemed as anxiously careful as if his life had depended on their arriving un-damaged at the end of their destined journey. He was extremely busy, and whistled with great vociferation several little cotillion tunes at present in vogue.
               Some time after I heard the door of his apartment open, and a gentleman en-ter.—Well Tom, cried a voice which I instantly knew to be Mr. Roatsley's, you are preparing to be gone I find.
               Yes, I am sending off all my shooting apparatus, in hopes that since I must go I may find some amusement in making havock among the partridges. I am told

there is excellent sport on Sir Edward's grounds; and I may as well take ten days of it as not.
               There is a vast quantity of game about that part of the country, answered Mr. Roatsley. Perhaps I may take it into my head to pay you a visit at your quar-ters, after my election business is con-cluded.
               I wish to God you would. But for my own part the devil take me if any thing under heaven should drive me from town at this season, while I had a full purse, and leave from the regiment to spend it where I pleased.
               Heaven knows what my feelings by that time may be, said the other, but at present I find myself equally incapable of relishing the pleasures of the town or the amusements of the country.
               Yes you are fairly caught at last, cried Bradshaw, laughing heartily: Cupid has revenged himself with a vengeance; and

you know I always told you he would one day prove doubly severe. She is divinely handsome it must be confessed, and I believe the little god never aimed his darts from brighter eyes than those of your Dulcinea. They would alone con-stitute a beauty without the assistance of any other perfect feature.
               There is at least, replied his friend, a character—an expression—a something about her altogether that interests me beyond what any other woman was ever capable of effecting.
               A character! replied the other re-doubling his mirth. But indeed we have always been told that love is blind.
               Think, my dearest Sophia, if your sus-picions had any real foundation, and much I fear there was more cause in your raillery than I ever dreaded, think what I felt at this instant. From the time of Roatsley's entering, I had suf-fered agitation unspeakable, and had lis-tened

with eager anxiety to this discourse; but at the last sentence my heart beat with augmented violence, and I waited with inexpressible impatience to learn the name of that happy woman whom at this painful moment I scrupled not to confess I envied. Breathless with expectation, I heard Mr. Roatsley after a short pause reply—Well, Bradshaw, in spite of ap-pearances, which I acknowledge are by no means in her favour, I cannot for my soul think of her for an instant in a disre-spectful point of view. When I reflect on her behaviour during the short period of our acquaintance, it seemed to evince a superior turn of mind; far from giving way to her fears in a storm which might justly have excused the most immoderate and well grounded apprehensions, she ex-erted herself in the most amiable manner to calm and allay the weaker terrors of her sister, who sunk under her alarm; incessantly endeavouring to inspire that

            HERMIONE, OR THE ORPHAN SISTERS.
            A NOVEL.
            IN FOUR VOLUMES.
            VOL. IV.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE, AT THE Minerva, LEADENHALL-STREET.
            M.DCC.XCI.
         
      
      
         
            

requesting me to follow him into my sis-ter's dressing room.
               Impatient beyond measure to learn the substance of last night's conversation, I flew rather than run into the room, where I found Fanny almost as eager as myself.
               Mr. Howard then related circumstan-tially and minutely every word that had passed.
               The moment we had left the parlour, Roatsley addressing himself to Mr. How-ard, said—to you, my dear Sir, I think it must be wholly unnecessary to observe that to be but once in company with the amiable Mrs. Howard and her sister without feeling the warmest interest in their happiness and the most anxi-ous solicitude to promote it to the utmost, is scarce possible; that I have experienced the truth of this remark, I hope you do me the justice to believe, and—
               
                  
She begins to fear an approaching consumption; though I have assured her my lungs are made of adamant, and never were suspected of weakness in my life. This day she has actually con-sulted Doctor Elton, who has partly re-lieved her by declaring a journey to Bristol wholly unnecessary. He says my complaints are nervous, and advises me to try the effects of change of air and amusement—in other words that he don't know what to make of them: and Lady Aubrey has resolved that we shall set off in all haste upon a visit to Sir Ashton and Lady Hilbury; the latter of whom is sister to Sir William Mere-dith. Lady Aubrey has repeatedly re-jected a number of pressing invitations from this family, as she had no intention of visiting at such a distance from home; but the notion of travelling, which she imagines will be of service to me, has determined her on going. There is a

vast resort of company at Hilbury Lodge; and she kindly flatters herself I shall be amused. But the very idea of leaving this place is disagreeable to me; and the prospect of a journey feels like an exertion that fatigues my spirits.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               LETTER XXII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  HILBURY LODGE,
JULY 1.
                  
               
               WE arrived here last night after a pleasant journey. The weather was very favourable, and the country thro' which we passed so beautiful, that I was much more pleased than I expected to have been. I am considerably stronger

since we set out, and but for a languor and depression which still hang upon me, would think myself quite well.
               The family here consists of Sir Ashton, his lady, and a large party of visitors. They reside constantly in the country, and live in what is called the style of old English hospitality. They received us with much kindness and cordiality, and we sat down to supper twenty in num-ber in a large hall, the walls of which are decorated with family portraits of ancient grandmothers and maiden aunts, dressed in the fashions of their days, with a rose in the hand and a smirk on the countenance of each.
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 2.
                     
                  
                  A servant who was ordered to remain behind on some business of Lady Au-brey's and to join us here to-day, has

brought me another letter from Fanny which arrived the day I left the Castle. I besought her to write to me frequently, and she has most conscientiously per-formed her promise. She tells me that Lord Linrose, as he must now be called, paid them that morning a visit. He seems much affected by his brother's death, she says, and looks extremely melancholy and depressed. He expressed in strong terms his disappointment at my absence, and informed them he was to set off for Calais on the 12th of July, where he expected by that time to find Lord Belmont already arrived; if not, his Lordship had so settled his route that he should probably meet with him a stage or two further on.
                  Lady Linrose and the young ladies were next day to leave Holtenham Ab-bey. My sister adds a circumstance, for she is very minute, which was be-fore unknown to me: I always imagined

that Roatsley had made one of the fa-mily at Lady Mary's, but she mentions that he has merely visited there from time to time during the distress of his mother and sisters, having lodged at the house of his steward (his own mansion not yet being ready for his reception) who has a small farm on his estate. I suppose some punctilio relating to his situation with Lady Elizabeth occasions this distance and formality.
                  This letter was accompanied by one from Mr. Howard, dated the day after, in which he informs me that the evening before Sir Edward Sudbury had paid him a visit. A compliment, says he, which is entirely to be laid to your ac-count; for nothing could exceed his evident disappointment and regret on finding you were from home. After expressing it in terms sufficiently plain, he demanded a private conference with me, entreated my interest with you in

his favour, and requested permission on your return to repeat his visits as your declared admirer. I told him, conti-nues Mr. Howard, that all I could pro-mise him was my good wishes, as I was wholly ignorant of your sentiments in regard to him; nor could I undertake to further his suit in any other manner than that of paving the way for his pro-posal by preparing you for it. I likewise told him you was not expected home for many weeks, and perhaps might even remain absent for a much longer period. Sir Edward eagerly caught at this proposal; requesting I would lose no time in executing it, and desiring me to acquaint you that he earnestly entreats permission to attend you at Aubrey Cas-tle.
                  Regarding myself as Sir Edward's agent, concludes Mr. Howard, I cannot avoid adding, that possessed of an excel-lent character, an affluent fortune, and a

good figure and address, any woman, whose affections are not otherwise en-gaged, must enjoy a fair prospect of hap-piness in an union with him.
                  I had scarce finished reading this let-ter, when the bell summoned me to din-ner. Our party, large as it was, had gained the addition of several fox hunt-ing gentlemen, who sat down to table in their boots, with their cropped hair quite free from powder, and in a dress that would have disgraced their footmen. Being the first of this class I have seen, I was so much astonished by their appear-ance, that I could not credit my ears, when Lady Hilbury, introducing one of them to me, called him Sir John something or other, for I have forgot his surname.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        JULY 3.
                     
                  
                  The moment I was alone with Lady Aubrey last night, I mentioned to her the substance of Mr. Howard's letter. Well, my love, said she, and pray what are the objections to the match? Are there any deficiencies in point of for-tune? If so, easily can these be removed; for is not my Hermione my own child; the child of my bosom; and she embraced me affectionately.
                  I instantly satisfied her that the ob-stacles against it resulted merely from the feelings of my heart, which were wholly repugnant to the union; and a thousand times I thanked her for the kind adoption; a tye which I told her, and told her with sincerity, I had nei-ther wish nor intention of weakening by any other that might divide my affections.
                  I am much mistaken, said she smiling,

and looking me earnestly in the face, if my Hermione's heart is formed for the reception of no warmer sentiments than those a fond mother can hope to excite.
                  A blush of conscious confession tinged my cheeks. I replied that Sir Edward, at least, never would rival that dear mo-ther in my heart; nor could I persuade myself that any attachment, however violent, would for an instant diminish or interfere with that servent affection for her which constituted almost the first happiness of my existence: and indeed, Sophia, I did not exaggerate my feelings in expressing them thus warmly; for my unexpected intimacy with this angelic woman has produced an interest that supports my sinking spirits and feels like the acquisition of a new sense that gives life and energy to all the others.
                  Well, my love, said she, I live in hopes of one day witnessing that you make good your promise. If I lose your
                     

regard I lose all that attaches me to my present state of being. But I am not so selfish as to desire to engross it wholly. Your felicity is my first and dearest wish; and I would not secure my own at the price of diminishing yours. I hope therefore to see you happily settled, in that state which undoubtedly is capable of producing, and often does bestow, the highest degree of comfort.
                  I have written in the strongest terms to Mr. Howard, requesting him to inform Sir Edward that it is impossible for me to grant permission for a visit which would put him to the trouble of a fruit-less and unnecessary journey.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 6.
                     
                  
                  This house is by much too gay for an invalid. Different visitors succeed each other daily; and the same observation is
Your conduct, Sir, interrupted Mr. Howard (to whom I had hinted the task that was likely to devolve upon him) fully evinces the warmth of your bene-volence, and claims the just gratitude of all this family.
               Talk not of gratitude, I entreat, cried he. If through the interest of my family I have been so fortunate as to render a slight service to Miss Seymour, damp not the pleasure it gives me by attaching to it an idea of obligation it so little me-rits; or if (for you will find I am willing to make the very most of the favour) if I can flatter myself with having enjoyed the happiness either of obliging Miss Seymour, or on her account of having gratified your wishes, will you give me leave to point out to you how you may cancel the obligation at once and make me most sincerely regard myself as your debtor.
               If I have the power, Mr. Roatsley, re-turned

repeatedly made—"I'm afraid, Ma'am, you a'nt well." I am quite teazed with it. Lady Aubrey has consulted an able physician here, who has assured her there is nothing in the least alarming in my complaint, and has prescribed early hours, regularity of living, and asses milk, which restoratives are to be pro-cured with much greater ease and conve-nience at Aubrey Castle, than in this hos-pitable family; where the constant bustle of a number of people, and the necessity of submitting to the established hours, prevents that composure and quiet so sa-lutary to weak health. Lady Aubrey I am sure finds it equally uncomfortable, and has readily agreed to my request of shortening our visit
               
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 7.
                     
                  
                  After sundry remonstrances, and innu-merable pressing intreaties to prolong our

stay, Lady Aubrey has at length made her point good, and we are to depart on Monday.
                  Were I in better spirits, I might divert you not a little with an account of the different people I have met with since our abode here, particularly with this fox hunting baronet, Sir John Bennet, who professes himself my admirer, tho' our acquaintance has not been of above a few days standing, and who makes down-right love to Lady Aubrey, in hopes she will give him an invitation to Aubrey Castle. I wonder any man can think of me, when Lady Aubrey is present. It is amazing that every man who sees her is not distractedly in love with her. She is not yet thirty six; and tho' the stile of dress in which she indulges, indicates a more advanced period, her countenance is uncommonly youthful.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        JULY 9.
                     
                  
                  I was quite astonished to-day on enter-ing the drawing room to find Sir Edward Sudbury. As it was scarce possible he could have been made acquainted with the contents of my reply to Mr. How-ard's letter, which was only sent away on Friday last, I knew not what to make of this visit, which he soon took an oppor-tunity of insinuating had been the sudden consequence of his being accidentally in-formed that I was at Hilbury Lodge, with which family he is intimately ac-quainted. I suppose he must have con-sidered permission to wait on me at Au-brey Castle at least as very precarious; and I imagine regarded this circumstance as a favourable opportunity for urging his suit without unpoliteness or impropri-ety.
                  
                     
I endeavoured, by the gravity and re-serve with which I attended to him, to explain what reception his proposal was likely to receive, and if possible to deter him from a pursuit that could only be succeeded by mortification and uneasi-ness; but Sir Edward was in unbounded spirits, and would take no hint that seemed repugnant to his wishes. When our departure to-morrow however was accidentally mentioned by Lady Hilbury in the course of the evening, a cloud suddenly overcast poor Sir Edward's countenance, his vivacity forsook him, and with a very submissive but melan-choly countenance he seized a moment while the company were settling their card parties, to request leave to have the honour of attending us, and besought that I would allow him to entreat Lady Aubrey's permission.
                  I told him gravely that it was wholly out of my power to grant his request.

The apprehension of deceiving him, and the desire of putting a speedy period to hopes which deluded only to render the disappointment more painful, made me pronounce these few words in a voice so determined, that my heart instantly re-proached me for the pain I was constrain-ed to inflict; while it's secret feelings explained to me so powerfully what Sir Edward's must prove. I therefore added, tho' with equal steadiness, that I should always remain sensible of the favour he intended me.
                  Having forced myself to be thus ex-plicit, distressing as it was, I hastily turned away; and Sir Edward, thunder-struck at my prohibition, instantly left the room. He did not appear for some hours; and during the whole evening repeated enquiries of where he could be, and expressions of wonder what he could have done with himself, were made by the whole company.
                  
                     
Sir Edward at length entered; but not till we were all seated at supper. He supported the general attack with much embarrassment; and said in excuse for his absence, that he had been enjoying this delightful evening along the side of the canal. This occasioned much mirth. The refinement of his taste was admired, his neglect of the ladies at the card party heartily laughed at, and finally it was de-termined that, as the sole excuse his fail-ure in politeness would admit of, he must make a formal acknowledgment to the company that he was deeply involved in a hopeless passion, in which case only the ladies agreed to accord him their forgive-ness.
                  How Sir Edward looked, on this rail-lery, I know not, for I was little less confused than himself, and did not once dare to throw my eyes that way. His awkwardness was matter of additional entertainment; and since he would not

make a verbal confession, Lady Hilbury told him his silence should be taken as proof positive.
                  Lady Aubrey, with her usual huma-nity, distressed at this persecution, fortu-nately relieved poor Sir Edward by hint-ing a wish to retire early on account of our journey to-morrow; and we separa-ted at least an hour sooner than usual.
                  I attended her to her dressing room▪ where dismissing her maid—I cannot help being rather surprised, my dear, said she. This Sir Edward appears a very amiable young man, and his behaviour this even-ing convinces me that he is tenderly at-tached to you. Is your determination still to reject him? does your heart say nothing in his favour?
                  Oh! nothing, nothing indeed, cried I. I pity and feel for his disappoint-ment; but to be his wife would render me miserable for ever.
                  I spoke with such unnecessary warmth, when I had been listening to no argu-ments

that could have roused my oppo-sition, and had no solicitations to appre-hend from the tenderness of my dear La-dy Aubrey, that she looked at me some moments with a face of perplexity. Then heaven forbid you should be his wife, my love. I do not mean to become the ad-vocate of a man of whom I have seen so little. I am too conscious of the inesti-mable value of my Hermione's heart, not to be as nice in my choice of the man on whom she is to bestow it, as she can possibly be for herself. I am only surprised that a heart, young, warm, and enthusiastic, which has been in a manner secluded from intercourse with mankind, and which cannot for that reason have been either tainted with the vanity of general admiration or deluded with the destructive idea that in high birth and titles a gratification is to be sought, un-attainable in a more moderate sphere: I am surprised, I repeat, that a heart like

yours should have remained unmoved by the assiduities of a man, whose outward appearance speaks so highly in his favor, and whose character you allow to be esti-mable and even amiable.
                  To this observation I could make no answer. To a friend so dear, so respect-able, so kindly and warmly interested in my felicity, to have given an evasive and disingenuous reply, was impossible. Gra-titude and affection condemned the very idea. Yet to make a confession of the state of my affections, to avow that a se-cret and hopeless attachment devoured my peace, destroyed my health, and steeled my heart against the solicitations of all men but one, was equally impracti-cable. Oh Sophia! such an avowal must have been so humiliating, so pain-fully severe, it must have led besides to a train of particulars so interwoven with Lady Aubrey's misfortunes, that this act of confidence might have given no less pain to her feelings than it must have

conveyed to mine. After hesitating therefore for a moment, whether from respect due to the beloved friend who honoured me with the name of daughter, I should not throw myself into her arms and instantly confess my weakness, I found that love was to her a subject I could not force myself to mention.
                  These ideas, which passed with the ve-locity of lightning through my mind, sealed up my lips; and Lady Aubrey perceiving that I was embarrassed, ex-pressed a desire to go to rest, and kindly wished me a good night, which afforded me an opportunity of retiring. I am convinced however, that painful as might have been the communication, I should undoubtedly have avowed all at that mo-ment had not the above mentioned ap-prehension deterred me.
                  On entering my chamber, I perceived a letter directed for me; which I found was the fruits of Sir Edward's moonlight

Mr. Howard smiling, be assured the will is not wanting.
               The power of granting my request, I must conclude you are in full possession of, since it is by permission of Miss Sey-mour I venture to make it; and allow me to premise, that without the sanction of her approbation and consent I cer-tainly should not have had the presump-tion (however anxious) to demand par-ticulars into which I have no title but from her indulgence and your's to pene-trate. Will you however favour me so far as to inform me of such circumstances of her present and past situation, as may enable me to judge in what manner I may perhaps one day have it in my power really and essentially to serve.
               If your present enquiry reaches only to pecuniary matters, Sir, returned Mr. Howard, I have the pleasure of assuring you that in regard to that circumstance, Miss Seymour's situation has never been

meditations, and must have considerably shortened his walk. I suppose he had bribed one of the maids to lay it on my toilet.
                  Adieu, my dear, dear Sophia. My eyes are quite sunk with sleep.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               LETTER XXIII. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  AUBREY CASTLE, JULY 13.
                  
               
               WE are returned here, to my inex-pressible satisfaction; and if the pertur-bation of my spirits will allow of any kind of method or connexion in my nar-rative, pray receive the particulars which occurred immediately on our arrival.
               We set off early on Monday last. Poor

Sir Edward! his uneasiness at seeing us depart was very apparent. But as I must hasten to more interesting circumstances, I shall merely tell you, that having in his letter desired leave to receive his sentence, as he called it, from Lady Aubrey's lips, I intreated her at once to put a final period to his suit; which she accordingly contrived to do during a short walk on the terrace after breakfast. He was much shocked, she said, but seemed to regard his dismission as positive and un-alterable.
               We arrived pretty late at the castle. Lady Aubrey, after ordering tea, of which she is particularly fond, left the room to give some family orders, and soon after the housekeeper entered and pre-sented to me a letter, which she told me had been brought three days after my departure, by a servant, who finding I was from home, enquired when I was ex-pected to return; and being informed

that our absence was only designed for a week at most, he left it in strict charge to the housekeeper, telling her it must be given into Miss Seymour's own hands, and requesting particular care might be taken of it.
               This appearance of precaution con-veyed an idea into the good woman that probably the letter contained bills for money; which suspicion induced her, in-stead of sending it by post to Hilbury Lodge, on finding our stay prolonged, to lock it carefully in her drawer till our ar-rival should put it in her power to dis-charge her trust faithfully.
               A gentleman, she added, had called that very morning, and having enquired for the housekeeper, had asked what was become of the letter given into her hands by a servant a fortnight before; and finding we were that day expected, had requested her to present it to me imme-diately on my arrival.
               
                  
This prelude alarmed me, tho' I knew not why. The woman withdrew: I open-ed it in trepidation: and what was my astonishment and agitation on perceiving the signature of Linrose. I sunk breath-less into a chair, and scarce credited the sense which enabled me to peruse the following lines.
               
                  
                     When I consider that perhaps at this moment▪ Miss Seymour does me the in-justice to imagine me the most insensible, the most ungrateful of mankind, I trem-ble to address her; and when I reflect, that from an unhappy fatality of events it is not impossible but that to these ac-cusations, cruel and injurious, may be superadded those of inconsistency and duplicity, I am wholly bereft of the composure with which I should wish to enter on an explanation of my conduct.
                     Ah! Madam, is it then possible that

you suspect not only the tenderness of my heart but its honour and integrity; that you conclude me so devoid of prin-ciple, so lost to shame, as to offer vows to you which are the right of another. Ah! loveliest, most amiable of women! sink me not in my own estimation by acknowledging I was ever for an instant depraved so low in your's. Believe me not capable of a deed so base; a deed— for which violence of passion and force of temptation, even of such temptation as in that case I must have had to en-counter, afford but impotent and feeble palliations. No, Madam, had I been fet-tered by the slightest ties, had my heart sought to insinuate itself into the bosom of sensibility, and success afterwards un-gratefully sickened me at the pursuit, my love, my adoration of Miss Seymour, might have tortured my bosom, but ne-ver should it have passed my lips.
                     A chain of particulars, too intricate,

too tedious for distant discussion, has led to the unfortunate and mistaken no-tion of my approaching union—particu-lars which, when I have the honour of seeing you, I hope you will have the goodness to allow me to explain; in the mean while, for the sake of heaven, per-mit me to exist by the flattering hope, that the cruel and sudden reverse in your behaviour, from softness the most cap-tivating, the most angelic, to the coldest severity and most barbarous reserve, owed its source solely to this perplexing report. Forgive me, Miss Seymour, for recalling your thoughts to recollections, which, dashed as they are with bitterness, dwell on my memory with sensations of de-light, gratitude, and exultation, that ne-ver, but with my last expiring sigh can be erased from my heart: yet what a painful allay succeeded to this moment of happiness! your downcast look, and silent haste to escape from me, were not

the blushing effects of the timid and dif-fident regret with which you reflected on the softness you could not wholly and cruelly disguise from the man who adored you, and who, supplicating at your feet, claimed surely some little sensibility to a passion that has so long proved the de-struction of his peace. Ah no! these amiable sufferings had already inflicted too much pain, had already encreased if possible my enthusiastic admiration, even while I lamented their poignancy and partook of the uneasiness they occasioned you. No! you suspected my honour, you believed me unworthy of your slightest regard; and a rigour the most inflexible taking place of softer emotions, barred every avenue to your heart and rendered it inaccessible to all my prayers and entreaties.
                     Why this vindication was not earlier attempted may probably surprise you. But while your behaviour perplexed and

tormented me, this explanation of its severity never once occurred to my ima-gination; till it was this day happily suggested, from having been informed that the rumours respecting my engage-ments were so serious and so current as to gain universal credit.
                     Miss Seymour may believe, that after par
                           •
                        ing from her at a moment so arduous, I did not mean to allow twenty four hours to elapse without imploring her to acquaint me wherein I had had the misfortune to offend her: on the con-trary I intended to have written from Holtenham Abbey, where I was engaged to spend the day, to have demanded my accusation and justified myself in her opinion; but on my arrival there, which was not till late, what a scene awaited me—my mother and sisters had just re-ceived the account of my brother's death; and in the first moments of de-spair, were weeping over the letter that

had announced this fatal intelligence. To Miss Seymour, I am not afraid to confess, that this severe stroke drove for some time all other ideas from my thoughts; even her beloved image was obscured, and every tender recollection supplanted by grief: but reflections so long cherished, so dear to the heart, cannot long lie dormant in the mind; and I soon found that the amiable source of all my hopes and expectations of hap-piness in life, could alone heal the wounds which death had inflicted.
                     In acquainting my friends at Hubert Hill with this misfortune, I imagined I offered a sufficient apology both for my silence and my absence: but what was my concern this day, upon visiting them, to find that at near fifty miles distance, you must have remained for several days ignorant of the melancholy event that had rendered me incapable of paying you my devoirs. Ah! Madam, what must

your opinion of me have been during this interval? and how must this appa-rent neglect have augmented and con-firmed every suspicion of my guilt.
                     Forgive me, I entreat you, for having thus long trespassed on your time and patience. But at present, alas! I have no other means of approaching you. My mother I cannot leave in her deep, heart-felt distress, till my journey to Dover, where I must be by the 12th, obliges me to depart. Yet have I a thousand things to trouble you with. Will you allow me, in my way thither, to pay you my respects? Will you condescend to in-troduce me to the inestimable Lady Aubrey, the contemplation of whose character elevates my mind? and will you deign to hear me at your feet im-plore the continuance of your favour to him who has the honour of subscribing himself
                     
                        your most obedient and devoted servant, LINROSE.
                        HILTON FARM,
JUNE 28.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  

so extremely uncomfortable as I have rea-son to believe was suggested to you. My wife's fortune, and her sister's, amounted originally to twenty four thousand pounds; but the sudden death of their guardian, who had the sole management of this money, and who has left his affairs in the most embarrassed and involved situa-tion, in all human probability will reduce the sum to one tenth of its value. This certainly is a reverse to be lamented; but the mind that is wholly untinctured with avarice, seldom allows such morti-fications to inflict a pang either deep or of long continuance, and I am certain it has never proved the source of more than a transient regret to either. Alas! human life is replete with distresses and anxieties which reach nearer to the heart, which pierce it in its tenderest feelings, and wound it where it is most open to the attack; and disappointments of this na-ture, against which both my wife and sister
The tumult of my mind on perusing this astonishing letter was unutterable. My senses were almost annihilated; and a sensation of distrust and consternation half persuaded me to doubt if what I read really came from the hands of Lord Linrose.
               In this state of perturbation I was sur-prised by Lady Aubrey, who entered the drawing room while I was so wholly absorbed in secret gratitude and delight, that unconscious of observation, I re-peated aloud, clasping my hands toge-ther, good God! is it possible?
               My dear, cried she, approaching in haste, surprised at the situation in which she beheld me—for heaven's sake tell me what is the matter?
               This question awakened me from the confusion that had seized all my facul-ties. But unable to reply, I could only answer by pressing the hand that had so kindly seized mine.
               
                  
My agitation astonished and alarmed her: for the two extremes of pleasure and distress, are upon a cursory view very similar in their effects. She imagined some sudden calamity had overwhelmed me; and pressing me with sympathetic tenderness to her bosom, entreated me to tell her what had given me so much pain.
               I could not avoid smiling at the ex-pression; and hastened to acquaint her that I had no subject for uneasiness. I blush for myself, dearest Madam, said I; but you I well know will be all indul-gence to the weakness which in a mo-ment of such unspeakable agitation I am unable to overcome. I have a long, long tale to disclose to you. My heart has been humbled, mortified, and op-pressed; and I am certain your goodness will allow of some excuse in the sudden, soothing relief it has so unexpectedly re-ceived.
               That tale can never appear long to me,

of which my Hermione is the heroine. But do sit down and compose yourself. I believe I can almost guess the most material points of the story. Is there not a hero in the tale, my love? at least so I have long suspected; though I for-bore giving you the pain of soliciting your confidence, which I was certain would not have been denied me but for particular reasons that must have ren-dered the communication distressing.
               Oh! Madam, I will tell you all, cried I, penetrated with her goodness; and be assured no ungrateful doubt of your kind sympathy and indulgence induced me to lock up my secret pangs in my own bo-som. Ah! no! diffidence and bashful-ness alone at first deterred me from en-tering upon so awkward a subject; and afterwards, since my residence here, I have not only anxiously wished that all the world might remain in ignorance of what has passed, but that if possible I

might banish it for ever from my own remembrance.
               But as your past uneasiness seems, if I may judge from the intelligence of your countenanance, to have given way to happier prospects, I hope you are going to have the goodness to satisfy my cu-riosity. The man who has created such ravages in the bosom of my Hermione has no little reason to be vain, and I am convinced must merit the distinction, else he would not have enjoyed it; but pray tell me who is he? I cannot possibly have seen him, yet I feel I am already in his interests.
               He is one of my relations, Madam, answered I, hesitating. He is my cou-sin; and the grandson—
               Of Lord Belmont, interrupted Lady Aubrey. I have frequently heard of the young man while abroad, and his friends talked loudly in his favour; and though my connection with the family has been

long laid aside, I have ever retained se-cretly in my heart a strong and lively partiality for the good old man and all his children. A tear rushed into her eye as she spoke. The husband of Hermi-one, continued she, must ever have pos-sessed my warmest regard, but I shall not love him less, for the many recollec-tions—
               Oh! Madam! cried I, sobbing in her arms, for the sake of heaven banish all painful recollections. Let the past be sunk in oblivion. Look only forward. Think of nothing but the consolation, the salutary comfort which a heart like your's is formed to experience from the unalterable duty, gratitude, and affec-tion of those highly favoured children of your adoption, who honour you with filial piety and love you with enthusiastic fervour.
               Be not distressed, my dear, said she, recovering her sedate composure; my

heart is far from sad at this moment. How indeed should it be so at a moment when my daughter's countenance bright-ens with secret complacency through her tears.
               She then once more entreated me to be explicit; and beginning at the epocha of our rencontre in the packet boat, I related sincerely and without disguise every circumstance in which Lord Lin-rose has been concerned.
               Lady Aubrey listened with the kind-est and most anxious solicitude, and en-tered with interest into all my emotions. She felt for my disappointments, re-joiced when any intervals of gratification seemed to afford me a recompence for my sufferings, exulted at the generosity of Lord Linrose's conduct, and shed tears at Lord Belmont's cruelty. He is reckoned by many a rigid character, said she, but to me he was ever all gentleness and condescension; and even his faults I

am convinced have their origin in virtue. He is strict, and perhaps may be esteemed severe; but that severity is the result of a rectitude of heart, which being sub-ject to few weaknesses, possesses little indulgence for errors it never knew. His benevolence is warm, and his feelings but too keen. Where they have suf-fered from the misconduct of others, his resentment is proportioned to what he has endured. But his conduct in regard to his grand children is by no means in tone with the general tenor of his prin-ciples, which are founded on strict jus-tice and unbiassed integrity. It leads me to imagine that some previous pre-possession must have taken root in his mind; and it is not unlikely that Lady Linrose (being herself deceived) may have occasioned or at least confirmed this disgust, even without the slightest deliberate design of injuring your cause. At all events, on his arrival all can be

easily and effectually explained; and you have now but little reason to dread his inflexibility while you possess an advo-cate so thoroughly well disposed as Lord Linrose, to exert all his rhetoric in your behalf.
               I had just satisfied her in regard to the part Lady Linrose has acted, and con-cluded my narrative, acknowledging my astonishment and perturbation on re-ceiving an explanation so unlooked for of the seeming inconsistencies in Lord Lin-rose's conduct, when a note was brought me from him. He was, as I had sus-pected from the housekeeper's account, and as his own letter led me to imagine, on his way to Dover; and wrote from the inn, on the great road, about four miles from this place.
               He laments his disappointment on finding I was not yet returned when he called this morning, and requests leave

to be allowed to wait on me to-morrow morning.
               The moment I had read this note, I gave it to Lady Aubrey, who desired me to offer her compliments to his Lord-ship, and to request in her name the fa-vour of his company to-morrow at break-fast.
               I then withdrew to my dressing room to answer it. Glad of a pretext for be-ing a few moments alone, I threw my-self into a chair, and gave way to a reve-rie of the most enchanting nature. What a revolution in my mind had a few hours effected! What a reverse, from the de-pression that had but that very morning almost wholly overpowered me! My spi-rits were elated to a degree of enthusiasm; and I thanked the Almighty with a fer-vour till now unfelt for the delightful prospect that on all sides surrounded me. I sat down at length to my bureau. Had my pen followed the dictates of my heart,

I knew I should have committed my note to the flames instead of sending it away; yet I could not affect a cold ceremony, so opposite to my own feelings and to that affection which Lord Linrose had de-clared in terms of such warmth. Here is what I was obliged to rest satisfied with at last.
               
                  
                     TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD LINROSE.
                     I must confess my astonishment on having a letter from Lord Linrose put this evening into my hands immediately upon my return to Aubrey Castle. I will not affect a reserve so foreign to my feelings, and so injurious to the favoura-ble sentiments with which your Lordship honours me, as to deny that my surprise at its contents was not unmixed with pleasure, and that the perusal relieved me from much perplexity and even uneasi-ness.
                     
                        

have had to struggle at a very early pe-riod of life, have wholly blunted and obliterated the little rubs of adverse for-tune.
               I dare not venture to be inquisitive, said Roatsley, visibly affected by the pic-ture drawn by Mr. Howard, yet will you call me so when I acknowledge that both my curiosity and compassion are strongly excited. Remember however in my justification, that Miss Seymour her-self permitted the enquiry, and if I mis-take not seemed astonished it was yet to be made.
               You ought not to wonder at a circum-stance so natural, said Mr. Howard. Miss Seymour's astonishment, great as it must have been, can scarce exceed mine to find that her cousin, the grandson of Lord Belmont, remains still uninformed of the natural ties that exist between them, especially after the unsuccessful applica-tion made to his Lordship through the
Lady Aubrey, of whose elevated qua-lities you have formed so just an idea, anxiously desires the pleasure of knowing you. She requests your Lordship's com-pany at breakfast to-morrow: and permit me to assure you of a favourable recep-tion from all the present inhabitants of her residence.
                     
                        H. SEYMOUR.
                        AUBREY CASTLE,
JULY 13.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Having dispatched my note, I re-turned to Lady Aubrey. Oh! Sophia! how amiable, how exalted is this woman! Her spirits were this evening exhilerated even to gaiety, her eyes sparkled with pleasure, and the agonizing recollections, which remembrance might be supposed on this occasion to have naturally renewed, were wholly suppressed or rather sup-planted by the prospect of my approach-ing happiness. She asked me a thou-sand questions in regard to Lord Lin-rose,

made me minutely describe his person, and insisted on my shewing her a little sketch on ivory, which at Hil-bury Lodge soothed many a melancholy hour, but which I had at length deter-mined to destroy as it afforded an insinua-ting indulgence extremely ill adapted to that victory over my sensibility which I have so often attempted without success. This preliminary towards conquering my weakness, you will perhaps sagely ob-serve, ought to have been the first step. I grant it; but indeed you must be pre-cisely in my situation before you can prove an adequate judge of the difficul-ties of such a sacrifice.
               We separated early; and I have been writing while I ought to have been in bed. But I have little chance of sleep-ing; though the weakness of my frame at present renders the agitations of the day so violent on my spirits, that I feel quite exhausted, and think of to-morrow's

interview even with some degree of ap-prehension. Yes, Sophia; for is not there something formidable in the idea of seeing Lord Linrose after the weakness of my behaviour at our last meeting.
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 14.
                     
                  
                  I had no inclination to sleep when I gave over writing last night, but I began to consider that if I did not contrive to get a few hours rest after the mental and bodily fatigues of the preceding day, I should look still more like a ghost than I already do; and really you never beheld any thing so pale and so ugly as I am grown of late.
                  I suspect however my complexion was sufficiently florid this morning, when Lord Linrose entered the breakfasting parlour; where dreading the formality

of being called down to him, I rather chose to be ready to receive him.
                  Lady Aubrey was not yet stirring, so that we were tete a tete. But I cannot give you all the particulars of our con-versation. A love interview, except to the parties immediately concerned, is al-ways absurd; but I fancy you will shrewdly suspect that I found nothing extremely ridiculous in the eager urgen-cy with which Lord Linrose, after an explanation the most impassioned, en-treated my permission to apply to Lord Belmont for his consent and approbation, the instant he found a favourable oppor-tunity for interesting himself in my af-fairs, tho' my confusion during part of the scene might perhaps have afforded you some amusement.
                  He spoke with such feeling of my se-verity, as he called it, and of my conde-scention with so many expressions of gra-titude and obligation, that he half ba-nished

the shame which the recollection recalled; but I besought him never more to mention, and if possible to forget, all that had passed
                  I think, cried he smiling, I shall find it no easy matter to comply with that in-junction; for I have absolutely existed upon the remembrance ever since I had the happiness of seeing you; and un-doubtedly you cannot have the cruelty to wish to deprive me of the memory of one blessed moment that recompensed me for the anguish of the tedious hours that succeeded. Oh! Miss Seymou
                        •
                     ! added he, how could you leave me with such frigid abruptness? how could you poison and embitter the joy with which the delightful discovery of your pitying sympathy had overwhelmed me? Yet what must your opinion have been of me during the unhappy period of my silence? how must you have despised the man, who one day vowing eternal fidelity at

your feet with all the urgency of passion-ate affection, could the next apparently relinquish his hopes, and abandon a pur-suit to which a reward, a prize is annext, that may well fix the most fickle and ani-mate the most phlegmatic lover, that ever pretended to the passion. Alas! you knew not the blow, which from over-powering my spirits rendered me for some little time wholly incapable even of ex-plaining myself on this interesting sub-ject; till a visit from Bradshaw, a few days after, led me in the confidence of friendship partly to confess to him my si-tuation in regard to you. I owned that a fortunate moment had inspired me with courage to declare the passion, which he well knew had so long tormented me with all the misery of continual appre-hension, doubt, and uneasiness. I ac-knowledged that Miss Seymour had lis-tened to me with angelic softness; but that her behaviour had all at once be-trayed

a displeasure for which she had not deigned to assign a cause; and that she had left me with abrupt haste, notwith-standing my most earnest intreaties only for a few moments stay.
                  Bradshaw at once cleared up my doubts, enabled me to comprehend what had appeared so unaccountably mysteri-ous, and by informing me of the credit with which the report of my marriage has been circulated (a report, he told me, which even Miss Seymour herself had once hinted to him) enabled me by an immediate explanation to relieve my own mind and convince her's of the in-justice of her suspicions.
                  His Lordship then entered more fully into the particulars which have given rise to this idea. Circumstances, said he, have lately discovered to me that Lord Mortonbury and my grandfather very early formed the plan of a connection between Lady Elizabeth and myself.

The young lady's rank, fortune, and ac-complishments, undoubtedly render her an object of singular importance to those who look in matrimony for nothing be-yond such advantages; and Lord Bel-mont flattered himself the friendship which subsisted between the two families, by affording opportunities for frequent intercourse, would facilitate his wishes. This plan however, like most others which rest on adventitious events, failed of success; my early intimacy with Lady Elizabeth, far from promoting warmer sentiments, merely served to dis-cover to me those little foibles which in a lesser or greater degree pervade every human character, but which in her no tender partiality on my part either pal-liated or concealed. Lady Elizabeth's errors, though not of a more unamiable nature than those of most women of her rank who have received a similar educa-tion, were particularly ill suited to my

disposition, and to those views of domes-tic felicity to which, even in my most dissipated moments, my wishes have in-variably pointed; and soon suspicious of my grandfather's views, which must have utterly destroyed all my future prospects of happiness and which I found every individual of the family so anxiously de-sired, since my last return from the Continent, I have uniformly endeavoured by the most respectful distance to demon-strate that I did not presume to regard myself as entitled to offer my addresses to one of the first heiresses in England.
                  Some weeks ago, however, I received a letter from Lord Belmont, in plain terms proposing the match to my con-sideration, and representing it to me in all those glowing colours which a favour-ite plan ever receives from the pen of the contrivers. My mother too, who had often before hinted to me her wishes on the same subject and to whom my

Lord had written at the same time, used all her rhetoric to point out the splendid advantages that must result from this union.
                  Ah! why, my Lord, cried I inter-rupting him—why then have you soli-cited my consent to an application, which if such are Lord Belmont's views, never can prove successful.
                  Dearest Miss Seymour, cried he warmly, how can you form a conclusion so alarming and so perfectly unjust, merely from a simple explanation which you force me to give you. If you will only listen to me, you will find these ap-prehensions quite imaginary, and wholly void of foundation. Had fate indeed placed you in that situation, in which till so lately I beheld you doomed to remain, unconnected and unknown, ob-scure in rank, and distinguished only by your elegance, your merit, and accom-plishments; in this case, though you

medium and interference of Lady Lin-rose for his countenance and favour.
               At the expression "her cousin, the grandson of Lord Belmont," Roatsley caught suddenly the arm of Mr. Howard; and unable to interrupt him even by an ejaculation, remained rooted to the spot on which he stood in mute astonishment.
               Good heavens! cried he, at length re-covering himself—is it indeed possible that this amiable family, who so forcibly engaged my intetest and attachment al-most in the instant that accident presented them to my sight, should really prove the children of my late unfortunate un-cle, and connected with me by the ties of blood as they have ever been by those of regard and admiration. Permit me, my dear Sir, continued he, approaching Mr. Howard with open arms, to congra-tulate myself on this delightful informa-tion, and pray give me leave to flatter myself with the hopes of one day pro-curing

must ever have continued the first and dearest object of my affections, yet my friends I allow might have objected; and the certainty that Lord Belmont's approbation was not to be hoped for where no circumstances of birth or for-tune presented themselves, has not only tortured my bosom ever since the mo-ment in which I was favoured with your acquaintance, but has been the origin of all that inconsistency of conduct which must have often perplexed and even sometimes perhaps offended you. De-termined at one moment to conquer an attachment that I knew must involve me in all the difficulties of disunion with my family, I sedulously avoided you with fortitude and forbearance; con-scious the next of my utter inability to struggle against a passion which insinua-ted itself into my heart beyond all power of resistance, I sought with avidity what I had before shunned with apprehension,

and gave myself wholly up to the de-lightful illusions of hope and tenderness. Such being the fluctuating state of my mind for many months past, what was the relief, the exultation I experienced, on the discovery I made at Hubert Hill. The knowledge of your real rank and situation at once relieved me from all the misery of this continual contest be-tween inclination and principle. My whole soul was in a tumult of joy. Lord Belmont's approbation I considered as secured; and from that instant eagerly watched an opportunity for pouring out at your feet the feelings with which it was overwhelmed. When, there, too, I found the sympathetic softness of my Hermione—
                  Oh stop! for heaven's sake! cried I, interrupting him impatiently. Would to God you had never found the mo-ment you desired. I foresee a world of trouble and misery from my unpardona-ble

folly and weakness. Oh! what on earth could make me so unguarded! Lord Belmont, inflexible in his deter-minations and prepossessions, never will be induced to relinquish his hopes of an alliance on which his views have so long and so invariably rested, and must receive with augmented prejudice and unconquerable repugnance, the grand-child who so unpropitiously appears to interrupt his schemes and disappoint his wishes. Of this, my Lord, you must yourself be convinced, even while you labour to persuade me of the contrary.
                  Shocked at the alarming prospect which presented itself so forcibly to my appre-hension that I could not conceal my fears, my Lord exerted himself powerfully and successfully to dispel the notion of my grandfather's inflexibility; and I soon began to forget the idea that had given me so much pain. He represented to me that it was extremely unnatural and im-probable

to suppose, that his Lordship, when satisfied as to the propriety and de-corum of our past conduct, would re-ceive, otherwise than with open arms and delighted satisfaction, children who seemed sent as from heaven for the comfort and support of his old age. That his Lord-ship had hitherto rejected and disowned us, could merely be attributed, he said, to some mistaken prejudice which must have found its way to his mind even on the Continent. To suspect him now of an obstinacy so hardened, without any apparent motive except the cruelty and injustice of his nature, was to accuse him of a savage disposition extremely oppo-site to his benevolent temper, and indeed almost below human nature itself.
                  I longed extremely to ask him if Lady Linrose was yet acquainted with the de-claration he had made to me; and if so, in what manner she had received it; but the entrance of Lady Aubrey, who however

did not appear till long after her usual hour, interrupted all further private con-versation between us.
                  She received his Lordship with the most insinuating kindness, and with that flattering ease which so agreeably dis-cards the cold ceremony of a first inter-view. Immediately after breakfast, dur-ing which Lady Aubrey entertained her guest with the polite freedom due to an esteemed and long known friend, his Lordship told us he was constrained to set off without further delay. I must make up for this indulgence, said he, by travelling with the utmost expedition; yet with all the celerity I can effect, I think my Lord Belmont will have to wait my arrival at Calais; for as I did not apprehend the disappointment of finding you absent, I made no provision for the last day I spent on the road.
                  He then took leave, recommending, in a low voice, but with a look which

testified how sanguine were his expecta-tions, the success of this important jour-ney to my best wishes; and Lady Au-brey, who overheard him, told him with an expressive smile that her prayers at-tended his expedition.
                  After he was gone, she expressed her admiration of him in terms so strong as to gratify me beyond measure. His fi-gure, she said, seemed formed to capti-vate, and the pleasing intelligence of his countenance demonstrated that nature had not rested his merit solely on exter-nal superiority. She was enchanted with his address. From what I have heard of him, said she, with infinite kindness, and from what I have seen, I am con-vinced that he is not unworthy of my dear child.
                  I can hardly believe, Sophia, that four and twenty hours have effected such a re-volution in my mind. My prospects have undergone so great a change, that I almost

imagine I am in a dream. I am indeed in Fairy Land, and all things smile around me. To find myself the object of Lord Linrose's fondest partiality, to know that the most material obstacles to our mu-tual happiness never existed but in my own apprehensions, and to perceive a probable ray of hope of soon finding myself surrounded by friends and rela-tions, disposed to love, and willing to be beloved by me—oh! Sophia! what a blessed reverse from our late friendless, solitary state!
                  I have just had a note from Fanny, in-timating that she and Mr. Howard (hav-ing got all his matters adjusted) will be with us on Thursday.
                  Adieu, my beloved Sophia. I think with delight on the pleasure the perusal of this packet will give to your warm sympathetic heart.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXIV. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JULY 18.
                  
               
               MY sister and Mr. Howard arrived yesterday. I walked out in hopes of meeting their carriage; but they had taken another road, and had sat half an hour with Lady Aubrey before I returned to the house.
               This interval she had employed in ex-plaining to them the present posture of affairs. Mr. Howard was overjoyed, but less astonished than Lady Aubrey expected; for he had long been con-scious, he told her, that a mutual attach-ment subsided between Lord Linrose

and me; and however unaccountable his Lordship's conduct had sometimes ap-peared, and however well authenticated the report of his marriage had been, he had ever suspected the validity of its foundation, and foreseen what in that case the issue would prove.
               Fanny was quite intoxicated with joy. She kissed Lady Aubrey again and again for having communicated such good news, and when I entered the room, I was obliged to entreat her by a look not in-stantly to bring on the subject. But my caution was quite unnecessary. She seemed ready to dance from gaietè de caeur; and at length unable to contain herself longer —Mr. Howard, cried she, you must sa-lute Lady Linrose once more, and wish her Ladyship joy. It is extremely rude to be so inattentive on the present joyful occasion.
               It may rather be called unkind per-haps, said Mr. Howard, (smiling, while

               LETTER XXIV. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JULY 18.
                  
               
               MY sister and Mr. Howard arrived yesterday. I walked out in hopes of meeting their carriage; but they had taken another road, and had sat half an hour with Lady Aubrey before I returned to the house.
               This interval she had employed in ex-plaining to them the present posture of affairs. Mr. Howard was overjoyed, but less astonished than Lady Aubrey expected; for he had long been con-scious, he told her, that a mutual attach-ment subsided between Lord Linrose

an interest in the affections of my dear and valuable relations almost equal to what they have long possessed in mine.
               Mr. Howard was not a little affected by this generous warmth, as apparent in his countenance and manner as in his language, and expressed his feelings on the occasion in strong terms.
               But why has this explanation been made no sooner? cried Roatsley. Why have I continued so long in a painful and lingering uncertainty in regard to a fa-mily so respected and so beloved? dis-tracted and confounded by the most un-just representations, dark suggestions, and at best vague and comfortless con-jectures.
               Who may have found either interest or pleasure in fabricating or in circula-ting injurious reports of your innocent and amiable cousins, said Mr. Howard, is not possible for me to conceive, nei-ther will I lose a moment in attempting

and me; and however unaccountable his Lordship's conduct had sometimes ap-peared, and however well authenticated the report of his marriage had been, he had ever suspected the validity of its foundation, and foreseen what in that case the issue would prove.
               Fanny was quite intoxicated with joy. She kissed Lady Aubrey again and again for having communicated such good news, and when I entered the room, I was obliged to entreat her by a look not in-stantly to bring on the subject. But my caution was quite unnecessary. She seemed ready to dance from gaietè de caeur; and at length unable to contain herself longer —Mr. Howard, cried she, you must sa-lute Lady Linrose once more, and wish her Ladyship joy. It is extremely rude to be so inattentive on the present joyful occasion.
               It may rather be called unkind per-haps, said Mr. Howard, (smiling, while

he obeyed her commands) but I have long wished our dear sister from the bot-tom of my heart the enjoyment of that happiness which I was convinced would one day prove her fate.
               Our Hermione has many rivals, said Lady Aubrey. Mrs. Howard, I per-ceive, is quite enthusiastic about my Lord; and as for myself, though I had his picture faithfully delineated by the most able hand before I beheld him, yet I was quite charmed as well with his ap-pearance as with the superior elegance of his manners and conversation.
               Our little party last night was in un-common spirits, and Fanny quite giddy with mirth. We talked over and over every fancied circumstance of the meet-ing which must have by this time taken place between the travellers, with an in-terest that seemed equally to animate the whole party, yet I always feel uneasy on repeating before Lady Aubrey the

name of Lord Belmont, often as it has within these few days occurred in the course of conversation. She spoke of him this night herself however with an apparent tranquillity that partly relieved me; and when I attended her as usual to her dressing room after supper, she owned to me, that though the prospect of seeing him agitated her not a little, she felt for him the tender regard of a daughter, and thought of an interview with a sen-sation of mournful satisfaction that soothed and gratified her. He always demon-strated a peculiar fondness for me, said she, which excited my warmest gratitude; and though an ill founded resentment on my father's part obliged me during his life time wholly to break off all inter-course with the whole family, and after the misfortune of his death I had not courage to think of demanding a visit from the kind old man before I left Eng-land, my wounds being then too recent

and my feelings unsubdued by time and patience, yet I always remembered him with tenderness; and I flatter myself, after the first meeting is over, I shall derive much satisfaction from a re-union which I have always so anxiously desired. To enlarge the objects of our interest, is in fact to augment the scale of our hap-piness; and I shall never allow myself to sigh too bitterly for past sorrows, while the present affords me friends that ex-cite my warmest sensibility.
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 21.
                     
                  
                  I have impatiently expected letters from Calais these two days past; Lord Linrose having promised to write the moment he had seen Lord Belmont; but none have arrived; which I own both disappoints and surprises me.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        JULY 23.
                     
                  
                  No letters still. By this time, if no interruption has retarded their journey, Lord Belmont and his grandson might have been arrived in town in their way to Belmont, which is in —shire. But I imagine his Lordship has not travelled with such expedition as he proposed; and probably Lord Linrose did not get up with him so soon as was intended. Lord Belmont's health, though much improved by a salutary climate, is but lately re-established; and I fear the shock of his son's death may have occasioned a re-lapse. The weather has been so serene that apprehension on the score of their passage would be ridiculous, yet I can-not avoid being uneasy.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        JULY 24.
                     
                  
                  Lady Aubrey, whose astonishment at the silence of Lord Linrose fully equalled mine, sent her servant yesterday evening to wait the arrival of the post; and while she, Mr. Howard, and my sister, were sat down to ombre, my anxiety and impatience led me to steal away to meet the returning messenger. I had strolled towards the great road at the extremity of the park, which is near a mile from the house, before I saw him; and having hastily looked over the letters, perceived with redoubled regret that none were either directed for me or written by the hand of Lord Linrose.
                  Disappointed and perplexed, I bade the man go forwards; and returning slowly, was ruminating most uncomforta-bly on the unaccountable cause of this disappointment, when I heard the tramp-ling

of horses behind me; and turning round, perceived Lord Linrose on horse-back, attended by his servant. I had now got almost within sight of the house. He rode quietly up to me; and instantly. dismounting, gave his horse to his ser-vant, and approached me with a mixture of pleasure and uneasiness in his counte-nance that instantly told me something disagreeable was to follow. He took my hand, and tenderly congratulated me on my improved looks since he had last seen me. But the solemnity with which he spoke alarmed me; and I imagined he had not courage to proceed.
                  I am afraid, my Lord, said I at length with a forced smile, things have not turned out happily. Lord Belmont I perceive will not acknowledge his grand-children.
                  Oh! he is determined and immovable, cried he. He is deaf to my entreaties, and wholly insensible to the voice of na-ture,

to compassion, to humanity, or even to that cool dispassioned reason which he recommends to me perpetually as the only safe and rational rule of conduct. I have attempted every human method of prevailing, I have exhausted every possible argument of persuasion, and said all that man can say where his last and dearest hopes of bliss are at stake; but oh! he is impenetrable! neither to be softened into pity nor influenced by justice; and he declares himself delibe-rately resolved on no account whatever either privately to see or publicly to ac-knowledge his grandchildren. He has even forcibly and absolutely protested —
                  That we never more must meet, said I steadily, while he hesitated to proceed. Well, my Lord, if such is his resolution, it is your Lordship's duty as well as mine implicitly to submit.
                  Submit! exclaimed he with warmth, throwing himself passionately at my feet.

No! never, never will I submit to a de-cision so barbarous, unreasonable, and inhuman. Lord Belmont undoubtedly has a right within certain bounds to prescribe to me my conduct, but I on my part possess one equally potent to expert from his justice reason and moderation. Wherever in those points he fails, so far he cancels the mutual bonds of obliga-tion and duty that exist between us, and sets me free to act for myself. Had he prohibited a connection which could not have been considered as dishonourable, but merely as mortifying to his views and degrading to his dignity, even in this case had my heart been torn to death I scarce think I could have gratified my own wishes at the expence of torturing him with the disappointment of hopes, which however blindly, have invariably sought my happiness as their ultimate founda-tion, and I think, Miss Seymour, a short review of my past conduct may convince

you of the truth of this assertion; but when, without the slightest grounds for disapprobation, he objects, when he for-bids an alliance where every gratification of reason and even of vanity present themselves; when fortune has made you at least my equal, and nature created you ah! how infinitely my superior, these obligations of duty end; Lord Belmont must thank himself for the step he obliges us to take; and we are no longer bound to gratify that caprice which rigorously demands the sacrifice of our whole hap-piness.
                  Ah! my Lord, cried I sorrowfully, all this is mere sophistry. The real state of the matter is quite different. Lord Bel-mont rejects me as his grandchild either by blood or alliance; and never, never will I be prevailed with to grant an in-dependent consent, though my grandfa-ther's behaviour towards me may in your Lordship's opinion see us free from these

to confute what must appear so wholly unwarrantable and unjust, that I shall leave it entirely to time and intimacy to prove it so in the fullest extent.
               Unnecessary is the proof, cried Roats-ley with warmth, for false and malicious I have ever believed those reports to be. Yet you, my dear Sir, I am persuaded will be neither astonished nor offended, when I acknowledge that a multiplicity of disagreeable rumours continually reaching my ears to the disadvantage of those, of whom from the surer evidence of my senses I had the most amiable opi-nion, could not fail to shock and torment me; and if you can suppose a state in which you could just so far credit an as-persion as to allow it to teize and perplex you, without permitting it to influence your judgment, paradoxical as that state may seem it is exactly the situation under which my mind has for some time past laboured.
               
                  

obligations of duty which otherwise he must undoubtedly claim: yet surely you cannot be either ignorant of or insensible to the powerful motives that restrain me. How many painful minutes have the disobedience of his children occasioned to Lord Belmont. Disappointed in his sanguine expectations of their happiness, distracted with the conduct of one son and displeased, however unjustly, with the connection formed by the other, he now finds himself deprived for ever of both, and seeks in his grandson the completion of those expectations which have hitherto proved only a source of vexation, uneasiness, and mortification to his bosom. Oh! my Lord! ought we to render this unfortunate old man still more miserable? ought we to blast his last hopes, and teach him that while he had the generosity to place his happiness in the prosperity of his children, however blindly he judged of the means, disap-pointment

and ingratitude were all the return they afforded him.
                  Ah! Miss Seymour! in what a light you place Lord Belmont's conduct! But pray listen, I entreat you, with equal pa-tience and attention, to a fair and candid examination of the matter from me. Let not a romantic generosity warp your judgment and banish your compassion where it ought more naturally to exert itself. Great, I allow, would be the weight of your arguments, were Lord Belmont's misery the natural consequence of our happiness; but this is so far from being the real case, that the most cer-tain comfort and most assured satisfaction must flow from his being a witness of our mutual felicity, where no one obstacle, but those of caprice and prepossession are alledged. How is it to be reasonably supposed they will rest on his mind, when all hope of another alliance, which at present supports his inflexibility, is wholly

and for ever supprest. No; be assured my grandfather's eyes will then be open-ed to his error; with the most sincere re-gret he will abjure his own, and pardon ours, and taking my Hermione to his bosom, will experience in her duty and affection, and in the enjoyment he must derive from my unspeakable felicity, all the comfort, happiness, and delight, of which, by a false generosity and ill judg-ed adherence to the rigors of duty, you would wholly deprive him in his old days.
                  Ah! my Lord! cried I, softened at this soothing representation, and terrified at my own weakness, I have listened too long. I can hear no more. It grows late. I hastened on; but Lord Linrose persisted in detaining me, and seizing my hand, implored me for the sake of heaven to think on what he had urged.
                  No, cried I, I must think of it no more. But tell me, what said Lord Bel-mont?

of what did he accuse us? what excuse did he offer for this cruel pre-possession?
                  None. When I entered on the sub-ject, I found him thoroughly well inform-ed, and to all appearance even prepared for my application. Linrose, said he, I know what you are going to propose: but let me save you the fatigue of intreaties that are fruitless, and the pain of hopes that must be succeeded by disappoint-ment. The young women for whom you interceed, be assured I never will ac-knowledge. I have my own reasons for this conduct—reasons which, accounta-ble to none, shall die in my own breast. But hear my final determination on this head: if you trifle with my resentment, and dare form a connexion so repugnant to my wishes, I solemnly declare— But why should I repeat to you a denun-ciation evidently the consequence of some secret prepossession, fostered heaven knows

how, but which is rooted so deeply in his mind, that some inhuman, officious hand I am convinced still supports the prejudice it has originally implanted.
                  What secret enemy has done us an in-jury so irreparable I have not yet been able to discover. My Lord would not even hear me on the subject; and when I seriously insisted, that as your only sur-viving parent he was bound in honour to afford you his countenance and protec-tion, or to satisfy you and the world why both were withheld, he told me with an indignant smile that his motives would exculpate his conduct both to the world and to his own heart. I perceived, I re-plied, that he laboured under the inju-rious mistake which had for some time, owing to a variety of circumstances that a few moments could explain, prevailed to your disadvantage, and instantly en-tered on the several points that had so unfortunately led to this idea.
                  
                     
He listened in contemptuous silence. I am perfectly satisfied, said he ironically, as to the conduct of the young ladies. I accuse them of nothing: but I absolutely desire that I may hear nothing further on a subject that fatigues me, and which entirely embitters the enjoyment I had vainly flattered myself this meeting would have given me.
                  This conversation took place during the evening on which we met at Calais; and next day, while we travelled from Dover to town, I renewed the subject, and endeavoured to work on his Lord-ship's feelings, finding all attempts to convince his reason unsuccessful. An accident however occurred, which all the malice of ill fortune could not have introduced at a more unlucky moment. We encountered Lord Mortonbury at the stage where we dined, and he easily persuaded my Lord to spend a few days at his country seat, which lies in our way

to Belmont. A rencontre so ill fated could scarce have happened. The sight of his old friend could not fail to strength-en and augment his Lordship's obduracy, and confirm his determination in favour of an alliance that has so long been his favourite wish. For some time therefore I carefully avoided exciting his resent-ment by touching on a topic, which I perceived, from some disagreeable hints he occasionally let fall, would now be listened to with less temper than ever.
                  In this state, to write to you was im-possible. I could tell you nothing but what I wished eternally to forget, and I could only have made you a sharer in the uneasiness that weighed down my own spirits. Teazed and worn out, I could no longer support with patience the mi-serable uncertainty of my situation, and at length ventured to risk a renewal of this topic of contention. I began by im-prudently assuring his Lordship that my

resolutions in regard to Lady Elizabeth were fixed and unalterable. My ill judged warmth provoked and exasperated him; and I found, that instead of gaining ground, my arguments were received with augmented displeasure, and if possi-ble with more determined repugnance than before.
                  Convinced that all hopes of prevailing were at an end, I then determined to contrive an escape for one day, which the pretext of visiting a friend, who re-sides in this county easily afforded me; and to endeavour if possible to reconcile you to a step, which, however alarming on the first view, be assured, loveliest Hermione, presents no real danger. You determine before you have fairly weighed and considered the circumstances of the case. You are scared with the notion of disobedience, ere you reflect that from you Lord Belmont claims no duty; and the idea of a private marriage shocks you

as an indelicacy and terrafies you as dar-ing, merely because you have been ac-customed to regard it in that light, with-out reflecting on the singularity of your situation, and the satisfaction which must result even to Lord Belmont from this temporary disappointment, We leave Morton Hall to-morrow evening; at which place I must by that time be, in order to accompany my grandfather to Belmont, where he has some business to settle previous to a visit he means to pay my mother in Northamptonshire. But oh! Miss Seymour, with what alacrity, with what delight shall I return to him, if you will but raise me from this state of despair, if you will but animate me to life and hope, and generously promise to be mine, without an approbation that is not to be obtained.
                  We had now reached the house, and it began to be very late. Stay but for an instant, cried he, and relieve me from this agony of uncertainty.
                  
                     
No, no, cried I, pulling away my hand, I must listen no longer, I must hear no more; and entering the hall, I ran up to my own apartment in spite of all his efforts to detain me.
                  Oh! Sophia! I carried thither all the insinuating arguments to which I had been attending with so much irresolu-tion; and I found, that while my judg-ment remained unconvinced, and my de-licacy revolted at the idea of a clandes-tine connexion, so contrary to that open dignity of conduct which I had flattered myself with the hope of supporting inva-riably thro' life, my heart died within me at the cruel sacrifice I made to prin-ciple. Even self applause sustained not my spirits. Pride was subdued by soft-ness; and I found that one moment lon-ger would have given to Lord Linrose all he wished.
                  Involved in this mist of passion, I yet began at length to perceive how provi-dential
Far from being surprized, returned Mr. Howard with his usual candour, I think I should only have been so had you continued immovable and determined in your first prepossessions, when such infi-nite trouble and attention have been be-stowed to warp your judgment and mis-lead your sentiments.
               But my mother, you say, was in the secret. Pray how came she to be in-formed, while I and the rest of the family remained wholly ignorant and unsuspici-ous that my fair cousins had ever dreamt of quitting the secluded spot where they received their education.
               That any individual of Lord Belmont's family should continue uninformed of any step taken by the ladies since their father's death, was by no means either their intention or mine. To their rela-tions no secrecy was requisite; and in regard to others, a temporary conceal-ment was merely thought necessary, be-cause

was that escape which at first I had almost regretted; and I considered, with a thankfulness that half bordered on sa-tisfaction, what mortification must have ever attended the recollection of a step which I could not but have considered as derogatory to the character I have ever wished and endeavoured to maintain.
                  This idea somewhat consoled me; and resolving to struggle with feelings which I could not in private indulge without in a great measure betraying them to Lord Linrose, and rendering them obvious to the rest of the family, I forced myself in-to seeming composure, and went down stairs.
                  Lady Aubrey and my sister were toge-ther. Mr. Howard, I found, had been sent for to another room to Lord Linrose, of whose arrival they were yet ignorant. I had the disagreeable task therefore of disclosing to them the scene that had just taken place. Poor Fanny's chagrin kept

pace with her late exultation, and Lady Aubrey's countenance was clouded with the most friendly disappointment.
                  Who can be such a fiend, cried Fan-ny, as to persecute us in this cruel man-ner without the slightest provocation? who upon the face of the earth can find either interest or pleasure in blasting our reputations, and persuading Lord Bel-mont that we are unworthy of his re-gard? and who could possibly have dreamt that he would have proved thus obstinate and determined, when all the rest of the family are now our friends; when even Lady Linrose herself professes to love us, and wishes to see us reinstated in his favour.
                  So her Ladyship is pleased to say, cried I; but from what Lord Linrose let fall this evening, I think there is great reason to suspect that her wishes have a very contrary direction. From her represen-tation only can Lord Belmont have im-bibed

the prepossessions that retain such fast hold on his mind, since from no other person could he possibly have re-ceived intelligence concerning us.
                  I should be sorry, said Lady Aubrey, to accuse Lady Linrose, or to suspect her of a conduct below her character; but I own I have had my doubts of her on this occasion from the beginning. Her mo-tives, tho' mean and despicable, are suf-ficiently obvious, and I have been told by my aunt, Lady Meredith, that she is a woman of a very unamiable character, and generally disliked.
                  The entrance of Lord Linrose and Mr. Howard prevented her proceeding. The former was visibly depressed; and ap-peared to exert himself to converse upon the indifferent topics which ensued, but which were very languidly discussed by the company during the whole evening.
                  Supper was soon after announced; and being seated by him at table, he intreated

me in a low voice to give him an oppor-tunity for one half hour's conversation before he left us, which must be early in the morning.
                  I told him steadily that he must not expect me to listen to a repetition of ar-guments, which without Lord Belmont's sanction could lead to nothing, If any favourable moment occurs, said I, in which you can flatter yourself with the hope of setting your plans in such a point of view as will obtain my Lords appro-bation, I believe your Lordship hardly doubts of mine. But why should you even wish to soften me into a compliance which, wanting the concurrence of my reason, and wholly opposite to my ideas of propriety, would but lower me in my own estimation, and render me too un-happy to enable me to—
                  I was afraid of my voice, and ventured not to proceed. Lord Linrose prest my hand unobserved, and whispered a thou-sand

expressions of gratitude and acqui-escence. At least, said he, I promise to acquiesce till every possible source of tri-al has been attempted in vain. In the mean time, you cannot surely have the barbarity to refuse allowing me to corre-spond with you. To this request I can take no denial.
                  I agreed for the present to the propo-sal because I could not prevail with my-self to refuse all he asked; but I am much afraid even this is an indulgence that must soon be relinquished.
                  When we separated for the night, La-dy Aubrey remained some time behind in conversation with my Lord and Mr. Howard. His Lordship used every ar-gument to prevail with them to approve of an immediate marriage; and men-tioned the fortune he inherited from Sir Thomas Roatsley, which secured him a competency; all, he was certain, for which I would be solicitous till a recon-ciliation

with Lord Belmont took place. But Lady Aubrey told him, that tho', had such been the result of my delibera-tions, she should not have opposed a mea-sure which undoubtedly, from the pecu-liarity of our situation, afforded some ex-cuse, yet she would not advise what she could not approve, and on the contrary must ever admire the steadiness of my re-solution, which having it's foundation in delicacy and principle, whatever was the anguish it occasioned me, she was con-vinced I would strictly adhere to.
                  Ah! my dear Madam! cried I, pe-netrated with shame while she repeated to me this part of their conversation, stea-dily will I adhere to this resolution, since it is sanctioned with your applause. But much anguish has it occasioned to my heart, and much I fear your opinion of my heroism would be infinitely diminish-ed, did you know how near I was incur-ring your contempt by yielding to my Lord's wishes.
                  
                     
My contempt, my dearest Hermione? Be assured that is a sentiment my heart never can feel for you. Had you given way to the solicitations of your lover, be-lieve me I should have soothed and com-forted instead of condemning you. I wish you to assume the heroine to Lord Lin-rose; but I am far from either desiring or expecting you to appear one to me. On the contrary, I think I should love you less were you different in any point from what I find you.
                  Oh! Sophia! ought not the affection of this beloved friend to console me for every disappointment.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JULY 30.
                     
                  
                  I received this day the following letter from Lord Linrose.
                  
                     
                        TO MISS SEYMOUR.
                        How shall I summon resolution to ac-knowledge to the loveliest of women,

that my sole hope of becoming the hap-piest and most envied of men, rests on a plan, the mention of which I tremble to remember shocked and startled her so severely. Lord Belmont, I am unwil-lingly constrained to own, is more de-termined, more infatuated if possible than ever; and without dwelling on ungrate-ful particulars, I am forced to tell you, that of any alteration in his present sen-timents I dare no longer entertain the slightest hope.
                        But is it the necessary consequence of Lord Belmont's inflexibility, that I must be doomed to unmitigated misery, and you be rendered unhappy? And why ought we to prove a sacrifice to caprice, where not one reasonable obstacle ob-structs our union? no duty surely is ow-ing to that parent who denies the title and disowns all claim to obedience. Yet if you will persist in regurding him in that sacred light, give him, I intreat, the

most lively proof of your affection: oblige him in his own despite. Make me the happiest of mankind; and gratify the first wish of the old man's heart, by al-lowing him to witness the, unspeakable felicity which, you and you only can confer upon his grandson.
                        In regard to fortune, I am convinced you are by no means apprehensive. Mine, independent of my grandfather, were Hermione to share it with me, would surpass my own wishes, and I am convinced satisfy hers. The motive of her resistance, I am certain, is too ge-nerous to allow for a moment, of such considerations. She trembles to wound a heart that has so long and so severely bled; but be assured you will heal instead of augment his sorrows—you will sooth instead of torture his bosom, you will console him for all he has suffered, and a momentary disappointment will be succeeded by unceasing consolation.
                        
                           
I have more than once sounded my Lord as to the secret author of this pre-possession, which, without the assistance of some intermeddling slanderous tongue, never could have found its way into his mind; but on this subject his caution baffles all my penetration. I even be-gan most unjustly to accuse my mother, as the only person on whom I could contrive to rest my suspicions with any shadow of probability; but I now hear-tily repent the injurious idea which in-duced me to write her upon the subject with much acrimony, for my heart was too much tortured either to express my-self with calmness or to think with reason. She had the goodness however to pardon my impetuosity; and condescended to account for her behaviour in a manner that made me blush for my own.
                        Revolve, lovely Hermione, for the sake of heaven revolve, I entreat, on all I have said. We are still at Morton

it offered an easy method for escap-ing the impertinence of curiosity and in-vestigation; and they naturally deferred relinquishing the name by which they had always hitherto been known, till the sanction and countenance of Lord Bel-mont should enable them to support the cruel retrospections which they knew their father's memory must sustain on their introduction into the world. An utter and absolute rejection from his Lordship to their application for acknow-ledgment, soon pointed out the fortunate propriety and delicacy of this precaution, as they afterwards disdained all thoughts of assuming or proclaiming their title to a name, of which their family, however unjustly, deemed them unworthy.
               You open a transaction so entirely new, wonderful, and inconceivable, cried Mr. Roatsley, who had been attending with an expression of amazement in his coun-tenance to this speech of Mr. Howard's,

Hall; my grandfather having been con-fined with a slight fit of the gout, which will probably detain him some days longer. Consider the reason, the justice, the per-fect propriety, nay the duty and human-ity of the scheme I propose, and favour me with one propitious line, to alleviate the distress of your eternally grateful and obedient servant,
                        
                           LINROSE.
                           JULY 28.
                        
                     
                  
                  The perusal of this letter has indeed plunged me into a sea of troubles; and on the first reading, I thought only of acceding to Lord Linrose's proposal. I considered nothing but the sad alterna-tive, either of hazarding every incon-venience and yielding at once to his en-treaties, or of relinquishing him for ever. I forgot the repugnance of my own heart to a measure so bold and so dangerous, and which recurred with painful force

the instant the perturbation of my mind began to abate. I remembered not the applause which had in my cool moments attended my former refusal, nor the consolation which I had derived from that of my dear and ever respected Lady Aubrey, whose approbation of my con-duct is essential to my peace. I consi-dered not the peculiar situation of Lord Linrose; whose rank in the world, and habits of living must, with the best dis-position in the world, render him parti-cularly unfit for the circumscribed oeco-nomy and seclusion of which his own in-dependent fortune would admit. Mr. Howard tells me it does not exceed five or six hundred a year; and to this limit-ed income, which I make no doubt has hardly hitherto served for the little inci-dental charges of pocket money, Lord Linrose would be forced to submit pro-bably during the life time of Lord Bel-mont, for as to the hopes of softening

him into forgiveness, even Lady Au-brey, it is easy to perceive, builds little on that circumstance.
                  Stern and unrelenting when once tho-roughly exasperated, it is infinitely more probable, she says, that submission and time may soften him in our favour than that he should ever be prevailed with to pardon an act of open defiance. The very idea that Lord Linrose, from now considering himself as the sole and na-tural heir of his title and wealth, may with less apprehension dare to brave his displeasure, is a circumstance the most likely to induce him to let his grandson feel the whole weight of his indignation in every way he can devise, and as long as he lives to punish his disobedience.
                  Some of the most prudent of these considerations you will suspect, Sophia, were not wholly the suggestions of my own mind. At least at first, though my reason could not but entirely acquiesce

with the force, justice, and probability of all those conclusions, the moment they either occurred to myself or were suggested to me by the apprehensive tenderness of my dear Lady Aubrey, that difficulty which had impressed me with the least alarm became, from her prudent representa-tion, the motive that weighed the most forcibly against my compliance. The idea of involving Lord Linrose perhaps for a period of years, (for Lord Bel-mont, though advanced in life, may survive a long time) in all the inconve-niences of a narrow fortune, for which he must be so peculiarly ill calculated, is a measure I find I could not summon re-solution to hazard.
                  I have therefore written to him. I have desired him to think of me no more till his proposals are authorized by Lord Belmont's consent. But I believe I have not been able to conceal the poignant regret with which I make the

sacrifice; and indeed if it will serve to soften his disappointment, I wish not to deny how deeply I partake in the suffer-ings I am constrained to inflict.
               
               
                  
                     
                        AUGUST 1.
                     
                  
                  With what infinite tenderness and sym-pathy Lady Aubrey enters into all my feelings on this occasion. She sooths my uneasiness, with a pity that draws my confidence and claims my warmest gra-titude. I no longer conceal from her the regret I experience in giving pain to Lord Linrose, and disappointing his hopes. I even confess it to her with an ease that lulls my distress and fortifies my mind.
                  My sister's gaiety has quite deserted her, since this sad reverse took place. Mr. Howard too must naturally expe-rience some personal disappointment.

The advantages resulting from a recon-ciliation with Lord Belmont are of no trifling importance to the interests of an encreasing family. But I doubt if Fanny carries her ideas so far. Her mortifica-tion is merely excited by her feelings for mine and that regret which it is natural to suffer on being forced finally to relin-quish a favourite prospect that has been long and fondly cherished.
               
               
                  
                     
                        AUGUST 2.
                     
                  
                  I exert myself to appear chearful tho' the means by which I support my seem-ing heroism but prepares me perhaps for fresh uneasiness. I cannot help secretly flattering myself that if an interview were by any means to take place between Lady Aubrey and Lord Belmont, she might with some probability of success undertake our defence, and extirpate

those deep-rooted prejudices that have been productive of consequences so un-happy. Such a proposal, however, it is impossible for me to suggest; particu-larly as she now never mentions any in-tention of soliciting a renewal of Lord Belmont's acquaintance, and seems to have merely regarded that measure as the necessary result of the connection between them which my marriage must have produced. This I own surprises me; but I suppose her courage having failed her as the moment seemed ap-proaching, she hardly regrets a satisfac-tion which must have been purchased at the price of so much agitation and ap-prehension.
                  I think continually in what manner and with what sensations Lord Linrose has received my letter. I suppose I shall have his answer to-morrow or next day. I sincerely hope he will resign himself to my determination without any further

solicitations. I tremble lest he should take the resolution of coming again hi-ther.
                  This evening's post brought me my dear, dear Sophia's delightful packet, which has given me more pleasure than I thought it possible I could have tasted in the present state of my spirits. Oh what infinite comfort does the hopes, however distant, of one day embracing you infuse into my heart. I think I ought not to complain of any calamity when heaven promises me a consolation so powerful towards soothing every painful regret. This idea not only heals my uneasiness, but inspires me with resolution to strug-gle against it. I am infinitely more re-signed since your letter arrived. Two others accompanied it, which I should hardly have thought of mentioning did not one of them contain a piece of in-telligence at which I cannot but feel sin-cere pleasure: it is from Miss Parsons,

who informs me that she is in a few weeks to give her hand to a gentleman who has lately paid her his addresses: he is a clergyman, a middle aged man, she tells me, possessed of an excellent character, and a good living. My sister and I are much pleased to find that a set-tlement so fortunate and so comfortable at last puts a final period to poor Miss Jenny's mortifications and difficulties; for by some hints in her letter I suspect that her situation in Lady Linrose's fa-mily was by no means so comfortable as she at first expected. There is a para-graph towards the end that strongly cor-roborates our suspicions of that lady's duplicity. It is as follows.
                  "I suppose you are not ignorant that Lord Belmont is returned to England. Heaven grant that you and your amiable sister may derive the satisfaction from that event that my heart wishes you. He is most impatiently expected here by

her Ladyship, whose anxiety to see him would have carried her to meet him in town had he not prevented her by spend-ing some time with my Lord Morton-bury. I fear much, my dear Miss Sey-mour, that you entrusted not your cause to an unprejudiced advocate when you expected Lady Linrose would mediate in your favour with his Lordship. I have never presumed to repeat even your names in her presence till the other morning, when a gentleman of this neighbourhood, who saw you in town, happening in the course of conversation to mention the superior elegance of your appearance with many just encomiums, her Ladyship spoke of you with an in-dignant disrespect that astonished and shocked me. I could no longer attend in silence to so much injustice, and de-fended you with a warmth that ended in a rupture between us. My approaching marriage, however, renders this a cir-cumstance

            HERMIONE.
            
               LETTER XIX. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JUNE 16.
                  
               
               OH my dear friend, my astonish-ment and joy are unspeakable. I had re-mained alone about half an hour, my mind distracted with a thousand thoughts, when I was roused from my reverie by hearing the great door below open; and condemning myself severely for a gratifi-cation so weak, dangerous, and improper, I hastily tried to compose my features, and rose to meet the company; when instead of the Heathcote family whom I had expected, Mr. Howard and my sister entered, attended—conceive my astonish-ment Sophia—by Roatsley himself.
               
                  

that I can no otherwise hope to reduce it to my comprehension than by entreating you to favour me with a minute and re-gular detail of every circumstance.
               Mr. Howard then beginning at the unhappy epocha of my dear father's mis-fortunes, related briefly yet with preci-sion every particular respecting him and his children till the period of our arrival in England.
               In regard to many of these events, said Mr. Howard while he repeated to us this interesting conversation, I could not suppose Mr. Roatsley compleatly igno-rant. It may be naturally inferred that those who could traduce the innocent offspring would not fail to load the pa-rent's memory with additional reproach, and I doubt not but Mr. Roatsley's mind has been early tinctured with the most contumacious prejudices against his ill fated uncle. To know his errors, inde-pendent of the penitence and remorse

wholly immaterial, as my dear little charge is my only regret on quitting the family; and I am at pre-sent at the house of a friend, where I shall remain till I remove to that of Mr. Price."
                  This intelligence does not surprise me; neither, since it proves no material inconvenience to Miss Parsons, does the discovery displease me: for the disgust which has been implanted by misrepre-sentation and jealousy is infinitely less formidable than that which might have been the result of inherent obstinacy and caprice.
                  The other epistle is from Mrs. Hindon, who is returned from her expedition to Holland.
               
               
                  
                     
                        AUGUST 3.
                     
                  
                  Read, my beloved Sophia, read and participate in the happy revolution which

this day, this propitious day has pro-duced. I shall endeavour to inform you of the particulars with all the composure I can summon to my aid.
                  My sister having been yesterday a little indisposed. Lady Aubrey proposed taking her for an airing this morning immediately after breakfast, and en-treated me to accompany them; but I excused myself on pretence of finishing a packet to my Sophia, which really was my intention. My spirits however were particularly languid, and being left to my own meditations, I found myself un-fit for writing. I seated myself there-fore on the window seat, listless and in-active, and was revolving in my mind, among other subjects of uneasiness, the implicit submission and silence with which Lord Linrose had received my letter, when this reverie was suddenly inter-rupted by the appearance of a chariot and four, which drove full speed up the

avenue; and while I was thinking with regret who this unwelcome visitor could be, the door of the parlour opened and a servant announced Lord Linrose.
                  My own perturbation, unspeakable as it was, did not conceal from me the agi-tation that struggled in his countenance; but my apprehension and astonishment on so unexpectedly beholding him, pre-vented me from discovering whether it was grief or pleasure that occasioned the hurry and emotion visible in every fea-ture. Hermione! Miss Seymour! cried he, and seizing my hand, which he pas-sionately kissed—Lovely and beloved Hermione, I come at last to claim you. Pronounce my happiness. Tell me at once you will be mine: for now Lord Belmont no longer withholds his consent to my wishes. His warmest approba-tion, his most fervent concurrence at-tends it, and he sends you by me this

tender embrace and the paternal blessing of his heart.
                  Oh! Sophia! what were at this mo-ment my sensations. Doubt, joy, and astonishment, all at once overpowering my senses; my eyes closed; I became in-sensible; and leaned unconsciously on Lord Linrose's shoulder; while appre-hension rendered him almost incapable of supporting or of assisting me; and he waited my recovery, which was instanta-neous, in fearful silence.
                  The moment my senses were restored, he poured upon me so many grateful ac-knowledgments for this proof of my sensibility, and accused himself so bitterly of imprudence in having so suddenly in-formed me of this surprising event, that I blushed for the weakness I had be-trayed, and besought him to talk of it no more, but to inform me to what we owed this change in Lord Belmont's sentiments.
                  
                     
To that angel of heaven, Lady Au-brey, cried he. It is she who has opened Lord Belmont's eyes to his infatuation and injustice. It is she who has justified your character in his good opinion, and effected this happy revolution in his mind. That she alone could have pro-duced a change so sudden and so won-derful, he even himself acknowledges, while he obstinately persists in conceal-ing the name of the person who has in-fused, like poison, the most injurious falshoods into his imagination.
                  Whoever has done us this injury, cried I, I for my own part heartily for-give them; and I earnestly entreat, as a proof of the truth of the professions you have so repeatedly made me, that the recollection of it may never be the subject of the slightest resentment. Oh! banish, I beseech you, my Lord, banish all disagreeable suspicions, and every an-gry reflection from your thoughts, and

tender embrace and the paternal blessing of his heart.
                  Oh! Sophia! what were at this mo-ment my sensations. Doubt, joy, and astonishment, all at once overpowering my senses; my eyes closed; I became in-sensible; and leaned unconsciously on Lord Linrose's shoulder; while appre-hension rendered him almost incapable of supporting or of assisting me; and he waited my recovery, which was instanta-neous, in fearful silence.
                  The moment my senses were restored, he poured upon me so many grateful ac-knowledgments for this proof of my sensibility, and accused himself so bitterly of imprudence in having so suddenly in-formed me of this surprising event, that I blushed for the weakness I had be-trayed, and besought him to talk of it no more, but to inform me to what we owed this change in Lord Belmont's sentiments.
                  
                     
To that angel of heaven, Lady Au-brey, cried he. It is she who has opened Lord Belmont's eyes to his infatuation and injustice. It is she who has justified your character in his good opinion, and effected this happy revolution in his mind. That she alone could have pro-duced a change so sudden and so won-derful, he even himself acknowledges, while he obstinately persists in conceal-ing the name of the person who has in-fused, like poison, the most injurious falshoods into his imagination.
                  Whoever has done us this injury, cried I, I for my own part heartily for-give them; and I earnestly entreat, as a proof of the truth of the professions you have so repeatedly made me, that the recollection of it may never be the subject of the slightest resentment. Oh! banish, I beseech you, my Lord, banish all disagreeable suspicions, and every an-gry reflection from your thoughts, and

think only of what we owe to heaven and Lady Aubrey.
                  To this conciliating request, said my Lord, I certainly should not hesitate to promise implicit obedience; but I will not assume merit with you on account of a compliance which Lord Belmont, dreading the consequences of indignation so justly excited, has already exacted. The anxiety with which he laid his com-mands on me never to make this trans-action a foundation either for investiga-tion or retaliation convinced me at once —that I must indeed enquire no far-ther—though never will it be in my power in future to honour or esteem—
                  Hold for heaven's sake! cried I, frightened at the vehemence with which he spoke, you already infringe your pro-mise. Oh! think not of displeasure; but tell me what means Lady Aubrey employed to produce this wonderful change.
                  
                     
My Lord then put into my hands an open letter, which he took from his let-ter case. Here, cried he, is the invalu-able performance, that has wrought with the force of magic, and not only poured conviction on Lord Belmont's mind, for that indeed is a point which time must naturally have of course effected, but with miraculous power has at once re-moved all those barriers of prejudice and repugnance that have obstructed my hap-piness.
                  I instantly began to peruse it; but the first lines affected me so violently, that I was unable ta proceed; and my Lord insisted I should give over the attempt till I was less agitated. I would then have made my escape in order to recover some degree of composure; but he would not suffer me to withdraw, and detained me by relating the effect this pathetic let-ter had produced on Lord Belmont.
                  
                     
Lord Linrose said he was not pre-sent when the letter was presented to Lord Belmont; but having been an air-ing on horseback, a servant who watched his return informed him that my Lord desired to see him in his apartment.
                  On entering the chamber, he found his Lordship alone and much agitated. His features, on attempting to speak, seemed almost convulsed, from the effort of sup-pressing his tears, which at length forced their way down his cheek. Lord Lin-rose hastily enquired the cause of his emotion, but for some moments he was unable to explain it. Linrose, said he at last, be not alarmed. Read that letter. It was sufficiently explanatory, and hard-ly was it finished when Lord Linrose found himself in his grandfather's arms. I blame myself severely, said he; but I have been deceived and misled in a most ungenerous manner, I ought not howe-ver

which so powerfully extenuated and even obliterated his guilt, could not but mis-lead the nephew's candour, and must have induced him to regard with unabated horror a conduct that was followed by consequences so unhappy as to banish him for ever from his friends and coun-try.
               I therefore dwelt with particular ener-gy on the dismal lapse of years spent in sorrowful seclusion that had succeeded to your father's rupture with his family, and continued invariably till his death: his contrition, his sufferings, his rectitude and benevolence, and the assiduous care with which he incessantly laboured (and in which he so well succeeded) to instil into the minds of his children every vir-tuous and amiable sentiment, as a bar-rier against the temptations and vicissi-tudes of a world that from a too fatal experience he believed strewed with dan-gers and replete with misery: and in or-der

to have given implicit credit; but I will endeavour to atone for the injustice of my past conduct to these unfriended and neglected children, for whom you have so often interceded in vain.
                  I know, cried Lord Linrose, hastily firing at a suspicion which he had so often dismissed with much self accusation, it is my mother who has been secretly at the bottom of this affair; and I solemnly swear—
                  He was proceeding, he owns, in a strain equally violent and improper, when Lord Belmont suddenly stopt him; and without absolutely either affirming or denying the justice of the charge, told him that if he would not instantly give him his promise in the most sacred man-ner never to attempt by any means to search into the grounds of his behaviour, and whatever were his own private sus-picions never to dare to resent it, his eter-nal displeasure should be the inevitable

consequence: on the contrary, said he, if I find you disposed to oblige me in this particular, I shall obstruct your wishes no more.
                  Intoxicated with joy, I instantly bound myself by the most solemn vow, said Lord Linrose, conscientiously to adhere to this command. Lord Belmont had indeed taken a method so effectual for subduing my displeasure, that three words from his lips had wholly banished it from my memory, and threw me into an exta-cy of spirits that made me in charity with all mankind.
                  Lady Aubrey, said Lord Belmont, a-gain melting at the recollections that crouded on his mind, the amiable Lady Aubrey could make me no request with which I should not think myself bound to comply; and I consider it as a singu-lar felicity that I possess the ability of gratifying the wishes of the most bene-volent of female hearts, which, thro' my

family was in the early pride of youth and beauty torn with distraction and lost to the world. I loved and admired her with the tender partiality of a parent; and the circumstance of her having afforded my granddaughters that friendship and pro-tection which were denied them from a more natural quarter, convinces me they must be deserving of the warm in-terest she feels for them, and elevates her higher than ever in my estimation and regard.
                  Finding we were at Aubrey Castle, Lord Belmont willingly consented to al-low Lord Linrose to set off early this morning, after a short apology to Lord Mortonbury, which was afterwards to be followed by a fuller explanation; and having written an answer to Lady Au-brey's letter, to be presented by his grandson, promised to join him at this place on Wednesday next.
                  Lord Linrose having finished his rela-tion,

at length permitted me to retire for a few moments to read the propitious let-ter which had effected such miracles, and gave me Lord Belmont's answer to pre-sent to Lady Aubrey on her return from her airing. Here is a faithful copy of the former.
                  
                     
                        TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF BELMONT.
                        After a tedious space of sixteen mourn-ful years, will Lord Belmont allow a long forgotten friend to enquire, if time has wholly erased from his remembrance her whom once he honoured with the name of daughter; who once valued her-self on possessing a distinguished place in his esteem and in his affections, and who has cherished towards him, amidst the pangs of misery and the languor of a dis-tant and melancholy solitude, that tender duty and filial regard, which, connected with a thousand agonizing recollections, never can be effaced from her heart. Yes, my Lord, after a dismal lapse of time,

memory recalls your kindness, your pa-ternal caresses, with a gratitude and chas-tened pleasure scarce inferior to that which they excited when I was indeed your child; and one of the most fervent wishes of my heart is, to be allowed to think I have a father, and gratified with the permission of asking on my knees his blessing.
                        That heart, my Lord, which, worn out with suffering and subdued by sorrow, looked around the universe and beheld no single remaining source of hope and consolation, has lately discovered, by the mercy of a gracious providence, one lit-tle spot of rest, one prop of support, that tells me I have not been bereft of all; and which bids me be grateful and re-signed. The Almighty has vouchsafed me a tender bond of union, that binds me to life and connects me with mankind; He has granted me the tender interest of parental fondness, which with divine in-fluence

heals the corroding remembrance of his less gracious dispensations, and pre-sents me with a ray of satisfaction even in this world. Heaven has sent me two lovely and beloved daughters, dear to my soul and unrivalled in my admiration, and who claim the enthusiastic adoration of a parent's heart: yet by him alone, who enjoys a right to that sacred title, they are abandoned and disowned; to him the same healing benefit is offered; but he disdains its acceptance, he rejects the soothing comfort, and will not lay hold of those alleviations which a pitying Providence bestows.
                        What hidden and mysterious cause! what unaccountable and unmerited pre-possessions, have banished the warm be-nevolence and misled the rectitude that formed the ruling principles of Lord Bel-mont's character? Ah! my Lord! whatever secret and malevolent enemy has poisoned your mind with doubts and pre-judices,

be assured they have not the slightest foundation in truth. Some self-ish and ungenerous motive must have prompted these misrepresentations. Give not credit to so base a lie. Consent but to behold your innocent, your amiable grandchildren, and every suspicion will be refuted, all mediation useless, and per-suasion at an end. Subdued and en-chanted, you will take them to your pa-ternal bosom, you will desire to attach them to you by still closer ties, by the spontaneous bonds of gratitude and ob-ligation. You will love them with the fondness of a father: you will love them perhaps as I love them: and their unre-mitting and affectionate duty will give additional interest to your existence, as it constitutes the sole blessing of mine.
                        The youngest of these valuable young women, has already disposed of her hand to a gentleman of singular worth, but whose fortune equals not his merit. The

eldest, whose charms are of the most insi-nuating nature, beautiful and enchanting as an angel, unites with the most acute sensibility that disinterested generosity and high sense of honor, in which genu-ine virtue consists. Adoring and adored by her cousin Lord Linrose, she heroical-ly prefers the tranquillity of the parent who rejects her, and whose misguided prepossessions she must ever deplore, to the certain happiness it was in her option to have enjoyed; and what, alas! requir-ed tenfold fortitude—which it was in her power to have conferred.
                        Will you, my Lord, allow a sacrifice like this to remain unrewarded? Will you permit two amiable young people to continue disappointed and unhappy, who but for a just sense of filial piety would have been blessed in each other? Ah! no! your Lordship requires but the film that blinded you to be taken from your eyes, and I feel that I have already pre-vailed.

You will no longer deny your-self the delight of participating in the fe-licity you are enabled to bestow, and your generous mind will experience satisfac-tion in affording a lively sensation of plea-sure, to her whose heart has so long bled for and now deeply partakes in the suffer-ings of her young friends, but who shall ever remain, with implicit submission and the warmest regard,
                        
                           Your Lordship's affectionate daughter and obedient servant, JULIA AUBREY.
                           AUBREY CASTLE,
AUG. 2.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  I was not recovered from the emotion into which the perusal of this affecting letter had thrown me, when I heard Lady Aubrey's foot on the stairs, followed by my sister. Eager to inform them of what had taken place since the morning, I flew to the door just as they were passing in order to enter the adjoining drawing room; and incapable at that moment

either of calmly explaining the cause of my perturbation or of conquering its vi-olence, I threw myself into the arms of the dear friend to whom I owed so much, and sobbed upon her neck without being able to utter one word.
                  Fanny was terrified, and Lady Aubrey for an instant astonished and alarmed: but her own letter, which I held open in my hand, and the knowledge, of Lord Lin-rose's arrival, which she had learnt be-low, soon relieved her fears and told her what I was unable to express.
                  Lord Belmont has then yielded, my love, has he not? cried she, warmly re-turning my embraces. Oh! I hoped much from the generous benevolence of that worthy man's disposition. It was the apprehension of retaining you in a pain-ful state of suspence, which I could not be certain would not have been succeed-ed by disappointment, prevented me from acquainting you with this last and fortu-nate

to enforce this relation, I promised to procure him a perusal of the manu-script written by your father's own hand, which, as he seeks not in it either to pal-liate or conceal his faults, but breathes in every line that horror which ever at-tended the sense of his offences, offers a defence, the force of which candour must admit and justice itself acknowledge.
               As Mr. Roatsley did not attempt to interrupt Mr Howard, he proceeded to acquaint him with our arrival in town, our disappointment in regard to Mr. Benseley's decease, our application in this uncomfortable and friendless situation to Lord Belmont through the medium of Lady Linrose, and with every particular of the interview on that subject with her Ladyship.
               He next recapitulated the substance of my letter to my grandfather, imploring his favour and protection; and in answer to this, said he, taking out of his pocket

attempt to soften him in your fa-vour till I was informed of it's success.
                  Fanny was in extacies, and wept and laughed by turns; but soon growing more composed, I delivered to Lady Aubrey the letter from Lord Belmont.
                  She seemed much affected even with the sight of the writing. Her hand shook violently on receiving it from me, and she instantly retired with it into her own chamber. Fanny then left me, to con-gratulate Lord Linrose, whom she was impatient to see; but I found it impossi-ble to taste satisfaction while my ever dear Lady Aubrey's generous participa-tion in my happiness was damped with so much pain, and mingled with so many contending feelings. I ventured not for some time to intrude on her retirement; but at length apprehension carried me to the door of her apartment, where I over-heard her weeping with so much anguish that I took courage to make an attempt

to enter. It was fastened on the inside however, and I withdrew in respectful silence.
                  Short was this indulgence of sorrow. In half an hour she joined me wiih a pla-cid and composed countenance, and hav-ing once more embraced and congratu-lated me, gave me Lord Belmont's letter to peruse, and went to welcome Lord Linrose.
                  
                     
                        TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE COUNTESS OF AUBREY.
                        
                           MY DEAR MADAM,
                        
                        Be assured it is in the power neither of time nor absence to diminish that warm affection, which, founded on the highest esteem and admiration, never while life and reason holds can be weakened in my bosom. The letter you have honoured me with has but augmented the enthusi-astic regard with which every tender re-collection of Lady Aubrey has ever been

accompanied; and the humane and be-nevolent application it contains, while it gratifies my most anxious wish in afford-ing me an opportunity of obliging her, leaves only this painful regret on my mind, that from credulity and remission I have allowed such an application to be made. To acknowledge and to protect these helpless young women, was the un-doubted duty of a parent, and a duty, which, but for the misrepresentations of a secret enemy, should have been long ere now conscientiously discharged. But to bind them to me by still closer ties, to allow of an alliance with my grandson, the source of my dearest hopes and expecta-tions, to dismiss the prospect of a long cherished scheme, which must have se-cured to him connections of unbounded interest and importance, is a concession which Lady Aubrey alone could have procured—a revolution, that she of the whole world only could have effected.

When her enlarged and generous mind teaches me a lesson so noble, prejudice is subdued, and that repugnance which aided my credulity, vanishes and is for-gotten.
                        My grandson desires the honour of de-livering this letter. He carries my bles-sing to all my children, accompanied with a request that I may be allowed to em-brace them on Wednesday. Among the number, more numerous than I ever ex-pected to behold them, none claims a warmer sentiment of pleasure at meeting than that beloved and esteemed daughter to whom I have the unspeakable satisfac-tion and the honor of subscribing myself,
                        
                           her affectionate father and most obedient servant, BELMONT.
                           MORTON HALL,
AUG. 3.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Lady Aubrey returned just as I had done reading this kind epistle, telling me

that Lord Linrose was reproaching me for having deserted the company.
                  On joining it, the traces of tears were still visible on my countenance, and the consciousness of my betrayed emotions made me enter the drawing room with a degree of timidity. My Lord and Mr. Howard smiled affectionately on ap-proaching me. I believe, cried the lat-ter, my congratulations were rather pre-mature some time ago, but I hope I may repeat them now with all safety. I am not a little vain, added he, turning aside to Lord Linrose, of my talent of pre-science, for I foresaw this happy event, and no obstacles or difficulties have been able to convince me that it would not one day take place.
               
               
                  
                     
                        AUGUST 4.
                     
                  
                  When we parted last night, Lord Lin-rose made me promise to walk out with

him this morning before breakfast. You know I generally rise early; and to-day I was hot particularly late. We had a delightful walk, and a long and most in-teresting conversation before any of the family were stirring.
                  Lady Aubrey seems much agitated with the thoughts of to-morrow's inter-view. It appears formidable even to me; but to her—ah! how much more painful must it prove! She has been very thoughtful all this day; and I observed often endeavoured to suppress a starting tear, by covering it with a smile that but half performed it's duty. Were the first meeting over, I cannot help flattering myself that custom will soon banish the painful reflexions with which the sight of Lord Belmont cannot fail to be attended, and that lenient consequences will flow from this re-union, so soothing and salu-tary to the tender and gentle nature of this amiable woman.
                  
                     H. SEYMOUR.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXV. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     AUGUST 6.
                  
               
               THIS interview, so anxiously and so long desired, took place yesterday.
               Lady Aubrey's eyes, at breakfast, be-trayed how the night had been passed; and as for myself, I felt as if I was on the eve of an event, the consequences of which were formidable and precarious. Fanny seemed to partake very little in these apprehensions. All her anxiety was in regard to my appearance, which she wished to render as agreeable as pos-sible in my grandfather's eyes, as an apo-logy for the imprudence of Lord Linrose's

attachment; and she helped to adjust my dress with an eager anxiety that my un-easiness on Lady Aubrey's account hardly rendered me capable of attending to.
               My Lord and Mr. Howard had agreed to ride out, that they might not be in the way when Lord Belmont was introduced to us; and about one his Lordship ar-rived, having slept on the road, and tra-velled slowly.
               My sister and I trembled to leave Lady Aubrey in that state of agitation into which even the sight of his carriage at a distance had thrown her; but we obeyed the hint she gave us to allow her to re-ceive him alone; and having made her swallow a few drops in water, we with-drew into the adjoining library, which is separated from her dressing room only by a thin partition.
               We had scarce tinne to enter it, when the found of steps ascending the stairs threw me into a tremor not to be con-ceived.

The door of the dressing room was presently after thrown open, and a servant pronounced the name of Lord Belmont and instantly withdrew.
               A short silence ensued, which terrified me with the apprehension of Lady Au-brey's having fainted. This alarm was but too soon confirmed, from hearing Lord Belmont call out, in a voice of hurry and afright—Who's there? Good God, who's there? and the bell was in-stantly rung with great violence.
               My sister and I, overpowered with ter-ror and forgetful of every thing but our dear and invaluable friend, then burst into the room. She had sunk upon the sopha, and lay insensible, Lord Belmont hanging over her in all the despair of conscious inability to afford her assistance.
               What a moment, in which for the first time to behold our grandfather. Anxiously as I had expected this inter-view, and formidable as it had appeared,

I scarce regarded him; I almost forgot he was present; and flying to Lady Au-brey, I supported her head in my trem-bling arms, while Fanny and the maid, who had been summoned from below, administered salts and besprinkled her face with lavender water.
               Seeing her beginning to recover, my sister had the presence of mind to send away the maid, and Lady Aubrey soon after opened her lovely eyes. Returning recollection made her feebly raise her head, as if to seek Lord Belmont, who had prudently withdrawn behind from the fear that beholding him again too suddenly might occasion a relapse. But her emotions fortunately now took a less alarming turn; and clasping me in her arms as she reclined upon my neck, the fullness of her heart got vent in tears and sobs that seemed to rend her bosom; while the conflict of my feelings was so dreadful, that I cannot conceive how my

book the epistle written him on that oc-casion, pray take the trouble of reading his Lordship's final determination from the pen of Lady Linrose.
               During the latter part of this relation, Mr. Roatsley's countenance betrayed an agitation and astonishment that gave de-fiance, Mr. Howard said, to all powers of expression. His perplexity, after read-ing the letter, seemed but little abated. He was for some moments lost in thought; but at length breaking silence —all that I can possibly conceive, cried he, all that it is in my power to conjecture or comprehend in this affair, is, that my mother having been herself deceived by the injurious aspersions fabricated by the infamous woman Brumpton, which have been circulated in town with a credit that astonishes me, dreading the impetuosity of my temper, which might induce me to disoblige Lord Belmont and even to act in open defiance of a prohibition so

senses stood the shock they sustained at that instant.
               Lord Belmont, extremely affected, had moved towards us; but apprehensive of encreasing the violence of Lady Aubrey's feelings, and wholly subdued by his own, he stood for a moment irresolute whether or not he should advance. At length bursting into a violent flood of tears— by heavens this is too much! cried he, and suddenly retreated as if unable to support this scene.
               Lady Aubrey, as yet scarce capable of articulating, prevented his withdrawing by holding out her hand to him, which he kissed with the most moving tender-ness; and she fell into his arms in an agony of pathetic sorrow, which the most hardened and insensible could not have witnessed without being melted with compassion. Lord Belmont's whole soul seemed softened into pity, and he wept immoderately.
               
                  
There is something peculiarly affecting in any violent expressions of grief in an old man: one is so little accustomed to behold them give way to the softer feel-ings, that when they burst the restraints of fortitude, it appears a sort of convul-sion that is terrifying. Lady Aubrey, on perceiving the poignancy of his emo-tions, was instantly seized with an alarm which seemed to operate effectually in aiding her re-composure, or rather in inspiring her with resolution for strug-gling to attain it. She was for a mo-ment calm—Oh my Lord! I am wound-ing, I am destroying you, cried she; but behold the all-powerful consolation I promised you—behold your children!
               She disengaged herself from his em-braces, and perhaps, Sophia, you will conclude that my sister and I instantly fell at our grandfather's feet and im-plored his blessing; but though this behaviour might have been more be-coming,

and perhaps in some people more natural, my feelings operated very differently. The tenderness of his man-ner to Lady Aubrey, and the benevo-lent expression diffused over his aged countenance, had at the first glance de-prived him of the stern aspect with which my imagination had invested him, and a strong and obvious look of my dear father, which struck that moment at my heart with the force of an electrical shock, instead of throwing me on my knees conveyed me into his arms; where melted and subdued, had not sobs re-lieved me, I must have fainted away.
               My sister followed my example the moment I had a little recovered myself. He embraced us both with infinite affec-tion; and Lady Aubrey's tears flowed with a freedom and profusion that greatly relieved my apprehensions and her own sufferings.
               Permit me to leave you for one half

hour, said Lord Belmont. I shall be enabled presently to behold my dear daughters with more composure, and their gentle hearts will be fortified by my absence. Is there not a son too, to whom I have still to be introduced. I will find Linrose, and desire him to pre-sent me to Mr. Howard.
               I perceive they are just returned, cried Fanny, who had seen them from the windows; and my Lord left us with precipitation under pretence of going to join them.
               The instant he was gone, the momen-tary composure which Lady Aubrey had laboured to maintain entirely forsook her, and the violence of her perturbation was succeeded by a weakness, languor, and depression, that seemed wholly to overpower her, and rendered me ex-tremely apprehensive that this interview would be far from promoting the com-fort and tranquillity of her mind. By

the time that Lord Belmont returned, however, she was sedate and collected, yet both her health and looks have evi-dently suffered, though thank heaven not very materially, from this shock.
               Eager to avoid any subject that might lead to mournful retrospections, Lord Belmont anxiously entered into conversa-tion on matters less affecting, but equally interesting. He desired a particular ac-count of our situation in all respects from our arrival in England to my sister's marriage, and expressed himself much pleased with Mr. Howard, to whom he had been introduced below. Both his expression and his manner were kind to excess; and he blamed himself severely for the part he had been induced to act. I must endeavour to atone to my chil-dren, said he, for my past behaviour in a way that I hope will banish it from their remembrance though the recollec-tion ever must wound my own.
               
                  
I could have told him, had I been able to summon courage, that one word from his lips had already more than atoned for fifty times the uneasiness his rejection had occasioned; but I could only press his hand, as he held mine in his. I al-most think he understood this silent token of gratitude, for he embraced me affec-tionately.
               Lord Linrose and Mr. Howard having allowed a sufficient time for this expla-natory conversation, then entered. The appearance of the former for the first few minutes overwhelmed me with confusion. I recollected the repugnance with which my grandfather had so long listened to his solicitations in my behalf, and re-called with pain the reluctant consent which Lady Aubrey's interference had extorted. My confidence however was soon restored by the extreme affection and condescension of Lord Belmont; who, as if he had penetrated into my thoughts

and read my embarrassment, seemed to make me the object of his peculiar re-gard. He received, with infinite marks of satisfaction, all the little attentions which the pleasing idea of possessing a parent who claimed them excited from my sister and myself, was delighted with the information of our progress in dif-ferent accomplishments, such as music, painting, &amp;c. advantages which Lady Aubrey took care to display with all the exaggeration of maternal partiality, and when we were seating ourselves at table, ordered Lord Linrose to give him up the place of which he was about to take pos-session between Lady Aubrey and me. You begin to monopolize before your time, Sir, said he with a smile that co-vered me with blushes. He is indeed the most amiable old man I ever beheld, and must have been uncommonly hand-some I think in his youth; though I will not deny but that an air of conscious

dignity, accompanied even with a look of austerity, is diffused over it, that may not at first sight prove prepossessing in the eyes of a stranger. But to his friends and to his children, he appears only what in fact he is, all condescension and be-nevolence. His resemblance to my fa-ther is so obvious, that he recalls him every instant to my remembrance, and you may recollect how much you used to admire the noble expression of his countenance.
               Were his tenderness to my sister and myself wholly out of the question, his behaviour to Lady Aubrey would en-tirely gain my heart. Every look testi-fies the warmth of his admiration and re-spect; even the very tone of his voice on addressing her, is expressive of af-fection; and on her part, though the agitating scene of the morning seemed to have unhinged her nerves and wholly exhausted her strength and spirits, his

Lordship's tenderness appears to have recruited both. She is truly sensible of his goodness; and receives all his at-tentions with a mournful pleasure, which while it revives her sorrows, and encreases her melancholy, sooths and gratifies her heart.
               Hurt by the idea of overclouding the happiness (which however combated by sympathy and compassion. Lord Bel-mont's arrival had universally diffused) she exerted herself yesterday evening to appear chearful; but the effort was ap-parent: she conversed on indifferent to-pics with seeming interest; but it was easy to divine that her thoughts were not present; and at last she insisted that I should sit down to the harpsichord and sing to my grandfather a little French air, which he had said he particularly admired. The first few notes however obliged her to leave the room, and I found it impossible to proceed.
               
                  
This day, thank heaven, I think her spirits are less depressed. She had a long private conversation in the morning with Lord Belmont, chiefly in regard to our affairs, and seems to have been more re-lieved than affected by it. My Lord acknowledged to her every circumstance of the conduct of Lady Linrose, but re-quested that particular care might be taken not to encrease the resentment of her son by an open avowal of the unge-nerous part she has secretly acted.
               Her behaviour, said my Lord, has betrayed a degree of meanness, art, and duplicity, which convince me she is ca-pable of any step, however irregular, from which she has hopes of attaining a favourite point. I shall myself therefore break off all connection with her in fu-ture; but I should be sorry to involve Linrose in a difference with his mother, and if our Hermione be as amiable as her lovely countenance bespeaks her,

unjust, so inhuman, so wholly contrary to his natural character and benevolence, in consequence of her apprehension of creating that discordant dissention which ever leads to alienation of affection and of-ten to a total breach of family unanimity, has determined on concealing carefully from my knowledge every circumstance of the application; yet I must acknow-ledge myself extremely displeased at a step, which has been the means of re-taining me so long in uneasiness and un-certainty, and the more I consider the circumstances of the whole transaction, the more I am astonished and bewil-dered. To imagine that Lord Belmont, if properly apprized of the situation of his granddaughters, would allow an ob-stinate and hardened prejudice to arrest his justice, to influence his humanity, and even to banish natural affection from his bosom, is a supposition to which I cannot for an instant give credit; it is to

she will incline to soften rather than ex-asperate an indignation too justly excited. Oh Sophia! how proud and how pleased did this partial compliment from my grandfather make me.
               Lady Aubrey assured him of my paci-fic disposition, and said she was certain I would be infinitely shocked with the apprehension of occasioning a rupture between them. I am convinced, added she, that her present happiness has al-ready obliterated from her mind all re-sentment in regard to Lady Linrose; yet when she recalls the comfortless, uncon-nected situation in which she and her sister found themselves at the very mo-ment that she so unfeelingly transmitted to them the account of your Lordship's determination, a determination which undoubtedly her own misrepresentations had effected, there is perhaps some lit-tle merit in dismissing indignation.
               As an apology for the unkindness of

my conduct, said my Lord, I must re-quest you, my dear Madam, to peruse this letter, which I received from Lady Linrose in December last.
               Lady Aubrey immediately read it; and afterwards repeated to us the con-tents as faithfully as her memory could retail them.
               Lady Linrose began by informing Lord Belmont that she was about to ac-quaint him with an affair that had given her infinite vexation, and which she was afraid would involve his Lordship in much difficulty and uneasiness. She then tells him that his two granddaughters had taken the imprudent step (without any previous application or advice) of coming over to England; where they had lately arrived merely attended by a gentleman, who it was said was much devoted to them. After imprudently lodging all together in the house of a woman of very doubtful character, and

associating almost solely with the famous Mrs. Weldon, with whom they had been intimate abroad, who was kept at pre-sent by a profligate young man of for-tune, they had applied to her (Lady Linrose) as a relation from whom they expected countenance and civilities; and to this, her Ladyship adds, they would justly have been entitled, had not the glaring impropriety of their conduct rendered any attention on her part, on account of her daughters, wholly out of the question.
               These were circumstances, she said, much to be regretted: but alas this un-expected journey to England had been attended by consequences still more dis-agreeable, and indeed truly alarming: her son Roatsley had accidentally seen and was become passionately enamoured of the eldest of these girls; though from a singular train of particulars, too te-dious to retail, added to their having re-tained

the name by which they had been hitherto known, he was still ignorant of the relationship that subsisted between them. Artful, beautiful, and designing, this young woman had spread every snare of coquetry and insinuation to cap-tivate him, in which she had so entirely succeeded that he was blind to her im-prudence, nor would listen to any at-tempts made by his friends to open his eyes.
               She had no doubt, her Ladyship con-tinued, but the ladies would soon pre-vail with Roatsley to intercede with his Lordship in their favour, though as yet no explanation on that head seemed to have taken place between them; and added, that were it not for the unfortu-nate circumstance of his attachment, which absolutely required every possible check and discouragement, it would doubtless have been a natural and hu-mane act to have endeavoured to restrain

the conduct of the girls within the bounds of propriety and decency; and to effect this desirable end, the notice and protection of their friends might have proved conducive: but at present she was convinced any favour or atten-tions afforded them would but give life to those romantic hopes which the de-pendent and unconnected obscurity of their situation had hitherto suppressed.
               She then desires to have his Lordship's commands in what manner she should conduct herself on the occasion, to which she promises the most dutiful and impli-cit submission; and requests that his Lordship may not on any account allow her son to suspect that she had ever en-tered with him on this subject, as it could serve no purpose but that of pro-ducing endless quarrels and altercations between them, and he would be apt to suspect her (she adds) of having prepos-sessed him against them. Her Ladyship,

after a great deal more to the same pur-pose, concludes with these words, which Lady Aubrey repeated verbatim, "the young ladies, I understand, intend ad-dressing your Lordship in a letter, which I shall take particular care to dispatch the moment it is committed to my charge."
               This letter, however, my Lord in-formed Lady Aubrey, never had arrived, though Lady Linrose in her next in-formed him that she had sent it off some days before. I was little solicitous, said his Lordship, about the fate of an epistle which the alarm I had received from the intelligence of my grandson's folly ren-dered me unwilling to peruse; but I doubt if it was ever intended for my sight, from the moment in which it reached the hands of that artful woman. At the time however no suspicion even entered my thoughts. Shocked at the danger which threatened all my favourite schemes for Linrose, I instantly desired

his mother by every means in her power to discourage his passion, and to prevent the slightest intercourse between her fa-mily and these imprudent girls, whose ill conduct, added to my grandson's in-fatuation, determined me to renounce them; and I ordered her to assure them that my resolution neither to behold nor acknowledge them was irrevocable. I made enquiry however in what situation they were in regard to fortune, and was pleased to find that their finances were in a situation that required not the inter-ference of my assistance. Even this ac-count, Linrose tells me, was false; for the unlucky failure of their guardian rendered their circumstances so uncom-fortable that an application was made to him by one of their friends for some assistance, which I believe he intended to convey in the most delicate manner he could contrive under the borrowed form of a pension from government.
               
                  
On this head, said Lady Aubrey, I must exculpate Lady Linrose from blame; for the circumstance of Mr. Benseley's affairs I am convinced never, came to her knowledge; and when she informed your Lordship that their situa-tion required no aid, she was herself probably of that opinion. I must like-wise observe, that though this account of their situation received from her pen all the exaggeration that art and preju-dice could give it, yet it is possible that upon her first private enquiries in regard to them, she might have conceived a very unjust and unfavourable opinion of their behaviour. A variety of injurious rumours were the disagreeable conse-quence of their imprudence in lodging with a woman of whose character they were not particularly informed; and the unlucky intimacy which for a short time subsisted between them and Mrs. Wel-don, owing to that abandoned woman's having

art in getting admitted into very respec-table society abroad, must have confirmed her error.
               Yes, Madam, said Lord Belmont; but when she was herself undeceived, then, in honour, in justice, she was bound to have removed the disgust she had implanted: but instead of pursuing this path, the whole of her conduct dis-covers the most despicable and ungene-rous artifice. In a late letter dated from Holtenham Abbey, she tells me that my grandchildren are behaving with greater propriety than could have been expected; that the youngest had lately married the gentleman who had attended them from the Continent, a circumstance she ob-serves that looked well; and that her sister resided with them in that county, where they lived with credit. As they were but lately arrived and little known, nobody there she says seemed acquainted with their late levity of conduct. This

decorum, whether real or assumed merely for the purpose of deceiving Linrose, was extremely alarming, she adds, as they had acquired a reputation which youth and beauty, when attended with art, seldom found it difficult to obtain, where a favourite point was at stake. Thus, by working forcibly on my ap-prehensions in regard to my grandson, and representing my granddaughters in this unfavourable point of view, she evi-dently aimed at prepossessing me so strongly against them, as to render me on my return neither particular in my enquiries nor in any way solicitous about them: while at the same time, should at length the real truth transpire, she pre-served the salvo of having been herself deceived.
               To these accusations Lady Aubrey could have added the artful visit she made at Hubert Hill, and the feigned civilities and expressions of friendship

believe him scarce human, and devoid of the first and most powerful principle of our moral construction. My mother in-deed labours under a cruel misrepresen-tation, to which she has unfortunately given implicit faith, and which it has never been in my power to confute; for more than once have the Miss Seymours, though their names and some vague re-ports concerning them were all I con-cluded she knew, been the subject of discussion and even of altercation between us. Violently prepossessed against them previous to their application, her accounts may have perhaps influenced Lord Bel-mont's determination, even without her intending or dreading the injustice which her representation of their characters may have occasioned.
               This indeed in some measure accounts for her Ladyship's conduct, and even greatly exculpates her from the charge of selfish and interested views. While she re-garded

by which she had endeavoured to gain our confidence and lull her son's suspi-cions, as affording her the means of se-parating us from Lord Belmont with greater facility and less danger of detec-tion; but unwilling to exasperate where she was certain I would wish to recon-cile, Lady Aubrey forbore acquainting him with this part of her behaviour.
               She discovered however, in the course of this conversation, that Lord Linrose had partly hinted to him the approbation and admiration with which his mother had beheld us; but this having been followed by no particulars, and Lord Linrose having merely advanced that circumstance during the heat of their al-tercation as an argument in our favour, it had made no great impression on Lord Belmont's mind. I should be much distressed, Sophia, to be the means of occasioning divisions in a family with whom I am soon to be so intimately con-nected.

I shall endeavour therefore as much as is possible to keep all aggra-vating additions from Lord Belmont's knowledge, as well as to persuade Lord Linrose into conciliating measures; who, though he is withheld from openly testi-fying his resentment, cannot talk of his mother's conduct with patience, even while he is ignorant of the extent of her artifice.
               After this full and candid explanation, my Lord expressed in the strongest and most flattering terms his warm approba-tion of his grandson's choice, and spoke of me with a partial admiration that de-lighted the heart of our invaluable friend; and on being faithfully repeated to me, filled mine with gratitude and pleasure. Linrose, he said, was impatient to have matters concluded; and indeed, considering the happiness that awaited him, his eagerness was both natural and excusable; the ceremony therefore

should be no longer delayed, than till the papers and settlements could be made out.
               Having concluded this minute detail, I have one favour to request of my Hermione, added Lady Aubrey, and I flatter myself she will not refuse me. It is that you will not think of leaving this house, my love, till you have given your hand to Lord Linrose. Let me have the pleasure of thinking, that as under this roof you have experienced the most painful moments that hopeless love could send, under this roof your future happiness has he secured as far as the affection, gratitude, and admiration of a tender husband can secure it.
               To this kind request you may believe I gave a grateful and willing assent, provided Lord Belmont approved of the proposal. I even entreated that she would endeavour if possible to prevail with him to agree to it; for I am ex-tremely

apprehensive, from a hint he let drop this morning, that he has got the frightful intention of giving to this affair the air of a formal celebration, by inviting distant relations of the family, and introducing pomp and ceremonials where privacy with a very few friends is so much more suitable to the awful so-lemnity of the occasion. Lord Belmont, it is not difficult to perceive, is not easily moved by persuasion to alter a deter-mined purpose; but heaven grant that in this instance, as in so many still more arduous, Lady Aubrey's unbounded in-fluence may prevail.
               
                  
                     
                        AUGUST 8.
                     
                  
                  Lord Linrose and I, who contrive to steal a private walk, every morning be-fore breakfast, had a violent dispute during our early ramble to-day. He

insisted that there was no necessity for waiting the tedious forms of law, since they could go on at leisure fully as well after as before the ceremony was per-formed; and to defer it till Dudley Mount was fitted up for our reception was, he said, the most useless and absurd formality, when so many kind friends were quarrelling who should have the first visit from us; and at all events we could take up our residence if we chose it at Alton Park with Lord Belmont.
                  I did not wish to appear affected: yet ihe prospect of an event that I had believed at the distance of some weeks, threw me into consternation; and the urgency with which my Lord laboured to reconcile me to this hasty scheme, con-vinced me he would easily contrive to surmount any obstacles that Lord Bel-mont might oppose to it.
                  I therefore entreated him to give over all thoughts of so precipitate a plan, and

to wait till every thing was quietly and properly adjusted. In the mean while I told him I should divide my time equally between Hubert Hill and Au-brey Castle; and as he must find him-self equally at home at both those places, we might contrive to be constantly to-gether.
                  My arguments were without effect. He continued to persuade and I to re-monstrate. I think, at length cried he laughing, no plan remains for me but one, and that one is so natural on the present occasion, and must appear to all who hear of it so happy a termination to those endless difficulties and punctilios, that though you may not approve of the scheme I make no doubt time and con-trition might prevail with you to forgive it: at least I may venture to hazard your displeasure in a cause that would so am-ply recompence me for the utmost se-venty of its effect. I shall have my

carriage and servants in waiting to carry you off some morning when you are walk-ing, and my grandfather's chaplain will have no scruples to deter him from per-forming a ceremony that is merely de-ferred from motives of absurd propriety.
                  He had scarce finished this sentence, when Lord Belmont suddenly joined us from the next walk. He smiled at my confusion; but kindly taking my hand, had you really attempted this wild scheme some weeks ago, Linrose, said he, I might have been offended; but I think, considering the temptation, I could not possibly have been surprised; however you may now summon a little patience to your aid, and a few weeks will ad-just every thing to your satisfaction.
                  A few weeks, my Lord! exclaimed Lord Linrose. Your Lordship requires patience with a vengeance; but there is not the slightest chance that mine will hold out one third of the time.
                  
                     
I implored him by a look to defer the subject, but it was with evident difficulty and reluctance he obeyed me.
                  Well, Linrose, we shall see, cried Lord Belmont, and we soon after reached the house.
                  The family were just assembled at breakfast; and Lady Aubrey appeared in better looks and spirits than she has enjoyed since the receipt of Lord Bel-mont's letter. The company were all gaiety; and Lord Linrose having whis-pered to Mrs. Howard the circumstance of Lord Belmont having detected our morning tete a tete, she had the giddiness to say aloud that she understood an elope-ment was projected from Aubrey Castle, which she doubted not would soon take place unless Lord Belmont interfered to protect the injured honour of his family.
                  Yes, said my Lord, I must protect my daughter from the effects of an impetu-osity, which I suspect will require all her

gentleness and good sense to keep within proper bounds; but I see no method so well calculated for promoting this end as the one I am convinced she will be apt on all occasions to adopt—that of yielding the point. You and I, my dear Madam, added he to Lady Aubrey, will discuss this matter afterwards.
                  The worst of all ways of gaining a point, cried Fanny, and a most abomina-ble precedent for married women. I hope at least my sister won't think of introducing it at Hubert Hill.
                  Lord Belmont, with whom she is a great favourite, told her that he was convinced, as she had got the start of me in matrimony, I should in so acting merely follow the example set me by my youngest sister. I soon contrived to escape from this conversation, in which I found it impossible to join; and the moment I was gone, Lord Linrose earnestly entreat-ed Lady Aubrey to endeavour to reconcile

me to a speedy celebration. The matter being then debated in full council, it was at length determined that our marriage should be concluded at Aubrey Castle; and that the day following the whole party should set off together for Hubert Hill, the vicinity of which situation to Dudley Mount rendered it a convenient residence for Lord Linrose as well as an agreeable one for all the others.
                  This being resolved, though without my having been consulted on the matter, Lord Linrose flew to find me in order to communicate this sudden change of mea-sures. I was quietly seated in the li-brary, though not very busy at my stu-dies when he entered. My dearest Miss Seymour, cried he, a plan has been pro-posed and universally approved of, which I hope you will not be so inhuman as to oppose by any cold and fruitless ob-jections. Lord Belmont, Lady Aubrey, and in short our whole friends, join in

us in the light of relations who were likely to reflect dishonour upon our family, and who could bring no consola-tion to the desolated bosom of our grand-father, it cannot be supposed that her mediation in our favour would prove fervent, nor that her anxiety for our suc-cess could be as sincere as if our conduct had supported our claims. Her cold re-ception of Mr. Howard, and her distant reserve to myself, are here fully explained; and while the motives of her Ladyship's conduct are cleared up, a distant hope opens to view, that her prejudices being removed, those of our only surviving pa-rent may yet listen to truth and yield to the voice of nature.
               Is it not surprizing, however, that the infamous designs of this wretch Brump-ton in aspersing our reputations, should have so extensively spread the slander as to reach the ears of a person who moves in a sphere so superior, so distinct

opinion that the sooner my happiness is completed the better; and a thousand reasons, independent of my impatience, conspire to render it not merely proper but necessary. Lady Aubrey, whose maternal affection justly entitles her to every maternal privilege, with her usual unbounded goodness has condescended to name the very day of my happiness; and Wednesday next, my dearest Her-mione, will behold me the most envied of mankind. Oh! generously tell me that you will not invent unnecessary de-lays—tell me that you hesitate no longer.
                  I did not affect a reluctance to oblige him: but agitated as I was, consented with that soothing satisfaction that ever attends our compliance to the entreaties of those we anxiously desire to please. The gratitude of Lord Linrose was as fervent as had been his urgency. But hearing some person on the stairs, I made

my escape to my own dressing room, where Lady Aubrey soon joined me.
                  She repeated to me the above infor-mation; and told me, that warmly ex-periencing the tender anxieties of a mother, she had ventured to assume the rights of that character in fixing the day and may heaven, my Hermione, render every anniversary of Wednesday next more tranquil than that awful day can prove that unites us even to what our hearts hold most dear on earth, and if possible still more happy.
                  Oh! Sophia! in four days my fate will be determined. Mr. Price, the hus-band of our friend Miss Parsons, who I find was originally tutor to Lord Lin-rose and is particularly esteemed by him, has it seems long indulged the hopes of performing one day the sacred ceremony that must ascertain his pupil's happiness or misery in life; and a messenger has been actually dispatched to him, desiring

his attendance here on Wednesday. On this occasion Lady Aubrey willingly con-sented to Fanny's request that Mrs. Price should be invited to accompany her hus-band; and as I thought our little friend would be gratified with the compliment, I did not oppose it.
                  Adieu, my beloved friend! for the first and last time of my assuming the name, let me subscribe myself
                  
                     your affectionate and sincere friend, H. DUDLEY.
                  
               
            
            
               LETTER XXVI. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  HUBERT HILL,
AUG. 16.
                  
               
               ONCE more, my dearest Sophia, I write from Hubert Hill. This delight-ful

little abode, where, accompanied by the happy party from Aubrey Castle, I arrived on Friday forenoon.
               Your Hermione, in presence of these dear and amiable friends, gave her hand to Lord Linrose on Wednesday last. No addition was made to the family on that occasion, Mr. and Mrs. Price ex-cepted, from whom we parted on Thurs-day morning, as this little mansion could not have contained more visitors than at present are its inhabitants.
               We were charmed to perceive the agreeable alteration which an easy mind and comfortable circumstances have pro-duced in the looks of Mrs. Price. Her husband is a very amiable man; and her situation is in all respects as happy as it lately was the reverse. Mrs. Hindon, she told us, had received her, now her affairs no longer require her aid, with prodigious kindness, and had given her and Mr. Price an invitation to spend some

weeks at her house; but though I shall always continue on good terms with my aunt, said she, I have had enough of her family, and shall not be in haste to accept her offer.
               The formidable day, my Sophia, was passed in our usual way. Lady Aubrey, who always judges with peculiar good sense and propriety, would allow of no forms. Every thing went on as it had done on the preceding day, excepting that the servants and tenants had a ball and plentiful dinner provided for them in the hall; but as there was no necessity for my making my appearance, I merely partook of their mirth from hearing the distant sound of the fiddles from below.
               A licence having been procured, Mr. Price performed the ceremony; after which we sat down as usual to our cus-tomary employments, and cards and backgammon divided the evening. Lady Aubrey's agitation during the service

almost equalled mine; but thank heaven her spirits of late have been chearful and composed, and I trust every suc-ceeding day will bring her additional comfort and satisfaction.
               The company of Lady Linrose, on this occasion, you may suppose was nei-ther expected nor desired. Lord Lin-rose had in a cold letter informed her of the event a few days before it took place; but the presence of Lord Bel-mont, who had written her in a very decisive manner that they must meet no more, afforded an easy pretext for not requesting that of her Ladyship. All the notice Lord Linrose took of this rupture was, to tell her that as his grandfather appeared offended by some private par-ticulars of her Ladyship's conduct, it was not in his power to solicit the ho-nour of a visit from her on the occasion of an event which a multiplicity of mis-representations

and mistakes has unhap-pily too long deferred.
               On the evening of the day on which we got hither we all walked out, to shew Lord Belmont the beauties of this charming place; and oh! Sophia! what an altered aspect every object wore, from the languor that so lately invested them. Lord Linrose led the way to the spot by the side of the river, once the scene of so much confusion and perplexity to me, when he stole upon me unperceived and first made the discovery of my affections. He had the delicacy however to make no other observation on the occasion than to talk of the romantic beauty of the situa-tion with an enthusiastic admiration that evidently bespoke some secret source of partiality. His looks however were suf-ficiently expressive; and he pressed the hand that leaned on his arm with all the fervour of gratitude. Pray, cried he smiling, what is become of the pretty

little child that used to pay you frequent visits here.
               I could not recall the teizing curiosity of Charlotte's behaviour without laugh-ing heartily from that pleased sensation with which one recollects past vexations, now converted into enjoyment by the present happy reverse; and I related to my Lord, as we walked, the additional anguish which the little girl's persecution had given me during his mother's visit. Oh! with what gratitude did I raise my heart to heaven for the innumerable blessings that surrounded me.
               As it grew late, Lord Belmont, who dreaded the damps of the evening, per-suaded Lady Aubrey to return with him to the house, and Mr. and Mrs. Howard attended them: but my Lord and I pro-longed our walk for a full hour longer. Every object around afforded some in-teresting subject for retracing past un-easiness and for contemplating with de-lighted

thankfulness the present happy contrast. Every interview between us was remembered, every conversation where prudence on the one side and ti-midity on the other presided, was anna-lized and investigated, and the secret mo-tives of every action acknowledged.
               When at length we returned to the house, we found cards of congratulation from Lady Mary Lawrence and Lady Elizabeth; and this morning I have re-ceived a letter from Lady Linrose her-self, who sends me her felicitations with all the ease of a person who is uncon-scious of ever having intended to injure me. Lord Linrose coloured with indig-nation on perusing it. This is effrontery with a vengeance, said he: but the ap-proach of Lord Belmont sealed his lips.
               I have answered her with polite re-serve. She expects, she says, to be fa-voured with a visit from her son and his amiable bride, as soon as the parade

of receiving visits is at an end; but I fear it will not be in my power to per-suade Lord Linrose to condescend to this, at least for some time; and I have told her that as we have escaped for the present the disagreeable ceremonials she mentions, by taking up our residence with my brother and sister, we must de-vote some weeks to these duties when Dudley Mount becomes our residence, for which reason it is not in our power to fix any determined period for waiting upon her Ladyship. I have desired to be particularly remembered to the sweet Lucy; and indeed I promise myself much pleasure from cultivating her friendship. Her brother is passionately attached to her; and means if possible to prevail with her to join our family, as the unaccountable preference given by Lady Linrose to Miss Dudley renders home extremely unpleasant, and his

from that wicked woman's line of life, and that these calumnies should have flown with such rapidity; for Lady Lin-rose must have learnt that we were un-worthy of her notice almost as soon as she was informed that we solicited it. Mr. Howard's letter indeed, she received before her departure from her country seat, had afforded her an opportunity of being made acquainted with any particu-lars; but during the short interval be-tween her arrival in town and her confer-ence with Mr. Howard, our busy ene-mies must have contrived to sow the seeds of that contageous distrust and disgust, which then proceeded to infect and influ-ence Lord Belmont.
               This conversation having detained the two gentlemen till extremely late, they then separated and went to rest; though not before Roatsley had reminded Mr. Howard of his promise to intercede with my sister and myself to procure him a

mother, he says, he is convinced will have no objection to part with her.
               Lord Belmont, whose affection to-wards my sister and me seems hourly to encrease, has presented Fanny with ten thousand pounds. This comfortable ad-dition to Mr. Howard's fortune gives them every thing they desire to possess; for now that Lord Linrose and I are about to settle within four miles of them, Fanny has not a wish beyond the limits of the county, and her husband's taste leads him wholly to the enjoyment of a country life. His Lordship's settlements upon his grandson and me are noble; but as I am very little solicitous about these matters, I shall wave particulars. My Lord, who is fond of rural sports, intends that we shall spend great part of the year at Dudley Mount; a resolution which gives me infinite pleasure. He is sick of the frivolous amusements of London, and I have no pleasure in them.

I now possess all my heart can wish, and happy in the society of those I sincerely and fervently love, I wish not to en-large my circle beyond what politeness and propriety demand.
               
                  Adieu! H. LINROSE.
               
               
                  
                     P. S. I have this instant received your letter. I imagined my happy situation would not easily admit of augmentation; but the hopes of so soon embracing and presenting my beloved Sophia to my dear Lord Linrose has overwhelmed me with additional gratitude and delight. Hasten, my Sophia, hasten to your im-patient friend.
               
            
            FINIS.
            

perusal of the manuscript to which in his narration he had so often alluded.
               So pleased, so affected was I with this relation, that it was with difficulty I could restrain my too visible emotion; and I willingly gave into Mr. Howard's hands the dismal packet, the mere sight of which as it lies in my bureau often saddens my gayest moments.
               Mr. Roatsley has been up some time, said Mr. Howard; and anxious to pre-sent himself to you as a near and tender relation, has waited the hour of your rising with all the impatience of a dear and long absent friend.
               Mr. Howard and my sister then went to join him in the breakfasting parlour; but afraid to discover an agitation too poignant for the occasion, interesting as it was, I chose to remain a few moments behind in hopes of acquiring some degree of composure.
               The instant my sister appeared, Roats-ley

with open arms and a countenance in the highest degree expressive of kind-ness and delight, approached her. Mr. Howard, cried he, are not cousins blest with peculiar privileges, and folding her in his arms, he embraced her with the tenderness and familiarity of a brother.
               So our cousin does not desert us, cried Fanny, receiving his salute with equal ease and pleasure.
               Good heavens, my dear Mrs. Howard, I hope you do not confess ever having for a moment harboured a suspicion at once so unnatural and injurious.
               Just then I entered; and quitting my sister's hand, he hastened to seize mine, which he kissed very fervently more than once, though with a degree of embar-rassment, and even of distance, yes even of distance Sophia, which did not in the least influence his address to Mrs. How-ard.
               A variety of sensations, a conflict of
After disregarding your promise of waiting my return, Miss Seymour, cried he, probably you did not expect I should so soon make my appearance to reproach you: but though I believe I have some engagement or other with Bradshaw this evening, I found myself quite unable to withstand Mrs. Howard's kind and press-ing invitation to sup here. The remem-brance of the delightful evening I spent at Dover (which I shall ever regard as one of the happiest of my life) renders the temptation wholly irresistible.
               His appearance did indeed agitate and surprise me beyond measure; nor could I conjecture how it had taken place, at such an hour and at a juncture so unex-pected, till Fanny in a low voice con-trived to inform me, that in pursuance of her projected plan of operations she had deferred leaving the theatre as long as with propriety she could, and indeed I suspect rather longer; for she owned all

emotions, in defiance of all my sum-moned calmness and resolution, wholly deprived me of utterance. Will you not acknowledge me, my dearest cousin, cried he. At these words, you will blush for my weakness Sophia—(I'm sure I do most painfully at this moment, even at the recollection of my folly)—I burst into tears, and hastily pulling away my hand, turned from him in silence and ran out of the parlour.
               A moment's reflexion shewed me what an unaccountable appearance my, beha-viour must have had to all present. With-out allowing myself therefore an instant for hesitation least my spirit should eva-porate, I wiped my eyes and forced my-self to return.
               I blush for myself, said I on re-enter-ing the parlour; and my cheeks suffi-ciently proved how true was the confes-sion; but as I have never before enjoyed the happiness of knowing but one male

relation, it is no wonder that the acknow-ledged presence of another should bring the first so forcibly to my memory as wholly to overcome my feelings.
               In sheltering my weakness under this little artifice, I was hardly guilty of de-ceit; for though my tears did not at that instant owe their source to this cause, the very idea had during the night drawn showers from my eyes; and I could not help believing, that if our beloved father locked down upon his children, he must witness with pleasure, even in his angelic state, this re-union with his family.
               Mr. Roatsley only replied by pressing my hand tenderly in silence; and per-ceiving the subject as yet too affecting for my spirits, he forbore dwelling on it, and shifted the conversation to topics less interesting. My heart was indeed so completely awakened to softness and sensibility, that the keenness of my feel-ings gave even to my glad emotions the

tincture of melancholy; and while the most heartfelt satisfaction lightened my countenance, a tear, which all my ef-forts could hardly dispense, was ready to follow every smile.
               Of our breakfast conversation I can really give you no account. Indeed I believe it is conferring an unmerited compliment on what passed to dignify it with the name of conversation. A hun-dred different topics were occasionally touched upon; but not one pursued with any method or connexion. Fanny's mirth was giddy and unbounded; Roats-ley himself appeared in uncommon spi-rits; and though I perhaps was not the most talkative of the company, I believe my silent satisfaction was so apparent that I was far from appearing the least pleased.
               Soon after breakfast he took leave of us in the kindest manner. I am unfor-tunately engaged, cried he in answer to the pressing invitations of my sister and

relation, it is no wonder that the acknow-ledged presence of another should bring the first so forcibly to my memory as wholly to overcome my feelings.
               In sheltering my weakness under this little artifice, I was hardly guilty of de-ceit; for though my tears did not at that instant owe their source to this cause, the very idea had during the night drawn showers from my eyes; and I could not help believing, that if our beloved father locked down upon his children, he must witness with pleasure, even in his angelic state, this re-union with his family.
               Mr. Roatsley only replied by pressing my hand tenderly in silence; and per-ceiving the subject as yet too affecting for my spirits, he forbore dwelling on it, and shifted the conversation to topics less interesting. My heart was indeed so completely awakened to softness and sensibility, that the keenness of my feel-ings gave even to my glad emotions the

tincture of melancholy; and while the most heartfelt satisfaction lightened my countenance, a tear, which all my ef-forts could hardly dispense, was ready to follow every smile.
               Of our breakfast conversation I can really give you no account. Indeed I believe it is conferring an unmerited compliment on what passed to dignify it with the name of conversation. A hun-dred different topics were occasionally touched upon; but not one pursued with any method or connexion. Fanny's mirth was giddy and unbounded; Roats-ley himself appeared in uncommon spi-rits; and though I perhaps was not the most talkative of the company, I believe my silent satisfaction was so apparent that I was far from appearing the least pleased.
               Soon after breakfast he took leave of us in the kindest manner. I am unfor-tunately engaged, cried he in answer to the pressing invitations of my sister and

Mr. Howard, otherwise undoubtedly I should not have been proof against the friendly and obliging request of my new found relations, but while I remain in the county, which I think of doing for some time, I flatter myself you will allow me often to be your guest.
               He then departed, followed by Mr. Howard; who having some business in the village, accompanied him on horse-back part of the way.
               Fanny and I, left then to ourselves, talked over every circumstance of the transactions of last night. We made a thousand reflexions, you may believe, upon the singularity of our situation, and formed various conjectures upon the con-duct of Lady Linrose and the unaccount-able silence and secrecy she has observed; which we could not avoid attributing in part to selfish motives.
               My sister dwelt with pleasure on the tenderness of her cousin's behaviour on their first meeting. Had I never seen him

till now, said she, the warmth of feeling with which he acknowledged a connexion so repugnant to the wishes of his family must instantly have gained my heart. On approaching you, I observed he was more distant; and I confess the differ-ence struck me obviously. His address to me was that of a kind and long absent relation, who expressed in that character, with affection and familiarity, the plea-sure he felt at the rencontre; to you his behaviour seemed to betray more of the timidity of the lover than the undisguised kindness of the friend.
               O certainly it resembled the timidity of a lover extremely, cried I in an ironi-cal tone, and I am afraid rather pee-vishly, for Fanny burst into a loud laugh.
               Nay, cried she, I really think you have some reason to be jealous; for it must be confessed I am grown a prodi-gious favourite since last night, and be-fore, you know, he used to be so en-tirely

engaged in another quarter, that he never could give himself the trouble to speak nor to listen to me, and seldom seemed even conscious I was in the same room with him.
               She was diverting herself at my ex-pence, when Mr. Howard returned. Pray Fanny, cried he, what is it that amuses you?
               Nay I dare not tell for my ears, re-turned she, for Hermione will beat me; but smiling expressively, she sung these two lines from the entertainment of Mi-das:

                     My sister, he kiss'd her, but me he pass'd by,
                     I'm jealous of the fellow's bad taste and blind eye.
                  
She needed not have stopped there, for words could not have contrived to ex-plain more clearly what she pretended to conceal, and Mr. Howard's countenance expressed a momentary smile, but as if he was desirous of relieving my embar-rassment,

which was indeed extreme, he instantly entered on a new subject, tho' the rapidity with which he did so, by confirming my apprehensions of suspi-cion, gave me very severe mortification.
               He soon after began to join warmly with my sister in praise of our cousin's amiable qualities; and with an enthusi-asm which delighted me, though I hardly ventured to appear attentive, recapitu-lated the conversation he had had with him during their ride. Though we have suffered so unaccountably from the breath of fame, said he, it has at least rendered us justice to this young man, whose cha-racter rises upon me every opportunity I enjoy of conversing with him. I have just been receiving some farther lights in regard to the ignorance in which he has continued thus long, and which appeared so extraordinary after the information given us in Mrs. Hindon's letter; but he has just now told me that during the

conversation he had with my sister in law that evening at her house, she touched so lightly on particulars, supposing him already perfectly informed of the most material circumstances, that not a hint escaped her which could have led him to discover his connexion with you. All I learnt from her was, said he, that the two ladies had been unfortunate, were in-volved in consequent difficulties, and that an application to Lord Belmont (I con-cluded for his interest towards obtaining a pension) had proved unsuccessful. My anxiety could not fail to be strongly ex-cited: yet as the opportunity in a large company was unfavourable for entering more fully on the subject, I intended, for farther information, to apply next day to Mrs. Hindon, when I hoped to find her disengaged and at liberty to sa-tisfy me; and in the mean while I deter-mined to enquire of my mother what she knew of the affair, as I understood from

the ladies were gone and only a few strag-gling gentlemen continued to saunter about. Captain Bradshaw, however, still kept by her side; and Roatsley returning, heard with evident marks of disappoint-ment that I was already gone.
               Perceiving my sister's unaccountable delay, he naturally concluded that her carriage was not arrived, and politely asked leave to see after it. Fanny, more and more embarrassed, now beheld the total defeat of all her secret schemes to avoid detection, and was at length obliged to confess that as the way was so very short and the night so very pleasant she thought walking by far the most agreea-ble way of returning; after which decla-ration wishing Roatsley a hasty good night, in hopes she should get rid of all the gentlemen, she quickly led the way, accompanied, added she in a tone of cha-grin, by poor Mrs. Heathcote and the

some words dropped by Mrs. Hindon, that she had interested herself in the ap-plication. I seized the earliest moment I could lay hold of to mention the mat-ter to her, and next morning at breakfast asked her if she had ever been told that two young ladies of the name of Seymour, ladies whose names she had often heard me repeat with every expression of admi-ration, had besought my grandfather's interest towards procuring them an an-nuity from government. My mother's answer I perfectly recollect. She told me she believed such a demand had been made by the ladies in question, but that disadvantageous reports circulated a-gainst them had arrested his Lordship's intended exertions in their behalf, nor could he think of applying publicly in favour of girls, whose conduct by all ac-counts would reflect but discredit upon those who interested themselves in their affairs.
               
                  
It was in vain, continued Mr. Roats-ley, that I combated these unjust imputa-tions with all the arguments in my power, and appealed to your character (as their guardian) so fully established in the eyes of all favoured with your acquaintance. My mother coolly answered, that men even of the strictest probity were not likely to withdraw their protection on ac-count even of the most flagrant impro-prieties of conduct in young girls com-mitted to their charge, and that it was more than probable they had even im-posed on you with a borrowed appear-ance of that merit which art could easily assume and beauty sufficiently enforce. This, she said upon second thoughts, seemed indisputably the case, since a single evening spent accidentally in their company had rendered me so warmly their friend, and had induced me so ro-mantically to espouse their cause, though totally uninformed of their characters and

connexions. They were unknown in this country, even by my own account; (for I had mentioned that circumstance as a motive of compassion) their same was dubious at best: and such miscon-duct had been laid to their charge, that even this phrase was a charitable one.
               I warmly demanded from whom this slanderous intelligence had been received, and was at length unwillingly informed, that the woman with whom you lodged when in town had acknowledged to my mother's maid that the connexion be-tween the ladies and their guardian was much too intimate for the distance re-quired between a gentleman of character and his wards.
               Shocked and confounded, though per-fectly satisfied of the infamous falshood of this scandalous aspersion, I was deter-mined to have the matter fully explained, and instantly went to the woman's house, where having entered into conversation

with her I enquired particularly about her late guests. Her answers were am-biguous and evasive: and I soon per-ceived the character of the landlady was such as must render all information from that quarter false and injurious. I there-fore soon quitted her, first reprimanding her for the infamous aspersions she had expressed, and assuring her that the la-dies possessed friends who would loudly confute and rigorously punish those who might utter them. I returned home furnished as I imagined with proofs and arguments more than sufficient to over-throw the most determined prejudices. But my mother would hardly allow me to enter on the subject; and telling me neither herself nor I had any interest in the behaviour of two girls who were unknown to her even by sight, and she was afraid fully as unknown to me by character, al-though the acquaintance of a few hours had enabled me to judge so perfectly of

their dispositions, positively declared she should on no account be prevailed with to intercede with Lord Belmont in their behalf. I now perceive her motive, concluded Mr. Roatsley, for retaining me in ignorance. Prejudiced herself against my cousins before she was in-formed of their real name and situation, she was unwilling to strengthen a prepos-session which might lead me to act con-trary to the commands of Lord Belmont, whose will in matters of the most trifling moment has ever been regarded as a law in our family, and who it seems has positively forbidden the protection or countenance of my mother to be ex-tended to these amiable relations. In-deed she might well dread the impetu-osity of my temper on such an occasion would but ill brook the constraint of a prohibition so unnatural, and well might she know that no Lord Belmont on earth would have prevailed with me

to join in a measure, which reason and humanity must condemn, and the most inflexible prejudice only could adopt.
               I shall not comment on this conversa-tion, Sophia. It speaks for itself. Adieu my love. My packet is immense, but I rest assured you do not complain of its length. I direct it to Avignon, as you desired, me in your last; from which place I expect soon to receive a long volume of your journal.
               
                  H. SEYMOUR.
               
            
            
               LETTER XX. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  
                     JUNE 17.
                  
               
               YESTERDAY I walked out as usual in the morning, intending to strole

through the wood, attended by one of the parson's little girls, of whom my sister is extremely fond, and who often finds her way up the hill and spends the day with us. She is a delightful child of five years old, with a countenance animated and blooming as the spring; her flaxen hair curls round her face in ringlets so picturesque, that I imagined she would be an admirable subject for my pencil, and have accordingly drawn her in crayons, caressing a favourite lit-tle dog who always accompanies her in her visits. The portrait has surpassed my hopes; for I have succeeded tolerably well, both in the resemblance and atti-tude, and it makes a very ornamental piece of furniture for the drawing room. Since that period, the child had been continually teizing me to draw a little picture as a present for her doll; and as children, when they have got a whim in their heads, are unceasing in their impor-tunities,

she persecuted me during our walk to set down to work on a sheet of paper which she had brought in her hand from the house for that purpose.
               The scene here is romantic beyond imagination. The river, that murmurs below at the foot of a gentle descent, is shaded by the most venerable oaks, which sometimes form a thicket wild and sequestered, and in other places ad-mit views of a most fertile and beautiful country; which being embellished with the plantations surrounding the splendid seats of several gentlemen of the county at a distance, and ornamented with a nearer sight of the spire belonging to the parish church, exhibits a prospect of gaiety as well, as grandeur. A walk that is cut in the slope of the bank, is my favourite resort, and so well calcu-lated for soothing into a languor not un-pleasant, any oppression which rests upon the mind, that I found it peculiarly

suited to the present state of my spirits; and to rid myself of Charlotte's impor-tunities, I at length sat down on one of the green seats, and pulling out a pen-cil began to trace a little rough sketch which soon satisfied the child, who em-ployed herself in running about gather-ing nosegays from the wood flowers that adorned the banks of the river.
               Having the pencil in my hand, I be-gan almost unconsciously to delineate upon the cover of a letter, features so deeply engraven on my mind, that I required not the presence of the original to enable me to recollect every trait of expression with accuracy; and a few strokes, though incorrect and unfinished, soon exhibited a resemblance, to which, innumerable as have been my secret at-tempts on the same subject, I had never before attained.
               Charmed with my success, I gazed with delight on the drawing which pro-mised

to be the private companion of many a solitary hour; and so wholly absorbed was I in contemplating my per-formance, that I heard not the sound of steps that approached me, till a voice almost at my ear said—I hope I don't disturb your meditations, Miss Seymour: and suddenly looking up, I beheld Roatsley immediately behind me.
               Conscious apprehension made me in-stantly start up in confusion; and the paper dropping from my hand, a light breeze which just then seemed to rise for the purpose of plunging me into difficulties, got hold of it, and quickly conveyed it down the slope of the bank below.
               Uncertain whether he had a glimpse of it or not, and unable to recover my-self sufficiently to affect unconcern, I ut-tered not a word, but followed the fly-ing cover with my eyes, in which anxiety and embarrassment were so strongly

five children, all wrapt up like so many Egyptian mummeys.
               Roatsley however, with a politeness na-tural to him, followed, and offering his arm, begged she would allow him the pleasure of escorting her part of the way. With great civility and a profusion of thanks, Mrs. Howard made violent re-sistance; but in vain; Roatsley made his point good, and had attended her as far as the bottom of the hill when they were met by Mr. Howard, who could do no less you know than request that he would walk forward and partake of a family supper at Hubert Hill. To this, after some hesitation, he consented; and the parson's family, having seen Fanny safe under her husband's protection, very opportunely chose to excuse themselves from accompanying her farther, and jumped one after another over the style which leads through the fields to the par-sonage.
               
                  

painted, that Roatsley instantly added— what a world of mischief have I been guilty of, and directly flew to recover it.
               For heaven's sake, exclaimed I in absolute agonies, for heaven's sake don't think about it. It is not of the slightest importance; it is a trifle, a drawing, not worth the trouble of picking up; and catching hold of his arm, (for I knew not what I was doing) just as he had arrived at the spot where a bush ob-structed its progress—For God's sake come away, repeated I with a vehemence the most ill judged and absurd, and so far beyond what the occasion could pos-sibly require without the interest of some secret cause, that no wonder he stood with his eyes fixed upon me in mute astonishment. The look of perplexity and surprise with which he regarded me instantly discovered to me my foolish imprudence in giving way to an alarm that had in fact no real foundation, and

from which a small degree of self com-mand and presence of mind might have relieved me. I then heartily repented my folly; but alas! it was too late, and I only discovered my unfortunate ab-surdity time enough to lament its effects.
               We were both silent for a few mo-ments. At length —I cannot think any thing a trifle, said he, with a flush on his countenance, that gives Miss Seymour such visible uneasiness; especially—a drawing too—added he hesitating. The subject of her solitary contemplation. Allow me at least, Madam, to restore to you what appears of such infinite value; and darting forward, he caught the pa-per in his hand.
               Sir, cried I, with a spirit which the present exigency alone could have in-spired, and with all the firmness my ter-ror gave me courage to assume, only hear me: if you cast one look on that paper,

never will I pardon, never will I see you more.
               This speech certainly was frantic in the highest degree. It was acknowledg-ing the truth of his hint; it was allow-ing him to conclude that the drawing was the resemblance of some person dear to my heart, since my agitation appeared so uncontroulable; but my imprudent uneasiness from the beginning must I imagined have infused these suspicions by this time strongly into his mind; and shocked to the soul at the apprehension of my heart being thus laid open in a manner so mortifying, so dreadful, to the man on earth from whom I most wished its weakness concealed, this sud-den prohibition struck me as the only possible means of preventing immediate detection.
               He still held the paper in his hand, and would not be prevailed with to re-store it; but he made no attempt to exa-mine

it. I dare not risk your displea-sure, cried he, with a countenance ex-pressive of uneasiness and suspense. To be banished from your sight, and the object of your hate, are ideas too horrible, too insupportable to be thought of; yet are they almost the only punishments that could at this instant so forcibly operate on my mind as to arrest my impatience and deter me from satisfying my burn-ing curiosity.
               Give me the paper, cried I; it be-longs to me—it is mine—
               And is dear to you, interrupted he with a voice almost suffocated, and hold-ing it above my reach: say that it is dear to you, and I will indeed fly your sight for ever.
               No, cried I, 'tis nobody—'tis nothing —it is not of the least: consequence— only give it me, or I never will forgive you.
               Little Charlotte perceiving this al-tercation,

just then came running up to us. Is it the pretty gentleman's picture, cried she, for I had been imprudent enough to allow her to look over me while I was roughly sketching it.
               A gentleman's picture, repeated Roats-ley. Yes that it must be, and the resem-blance of the most blest, the most envied of mankind.
               No, cried I, with an imprudence which I shall deplore to my latest hour but of which my exhausted spirits made me unconsciously guilty, I almost hate him at this instant, and (oh! Sophia, you will blush the deepest crimson for me) I burst into tears.
               These words, and the manner, the warmth with which they were pro-nounced, alas! too plainly discovered the fatal secret. Scarce had they escaped my lips, when their too obvious mean-ing was apparent to myself. My feel-ings were then unutterable, but con-scious

that my folly could not be recalled, I saw no consolation but in flight, and turning away with all the expedition in my power, I was flying down the bank towards the Chinese bridge, when Roats-ley, too violently agitated to perceive the presence of the child, suddenly seiz-ing my hand, prevented me by throw-ing himself at my feet. Miss Seymour, cried he, with an energy which must have surmounted all opposition had re-sistance been in my power—lovely and adored Miss Seymour, stay but for an instant. That secret passion which has proved the torment of my life so long, how shall I stifle or conceal in a moment like this? how shall I suppress the per-haps too fatal presumption to which it gives birth! For the sake of heaven, al-low me either to put an interpretation on your present agitation, which will overwhelm me with a transport almost too infinite to be supported, or at once,

by withdrawing your prohibition, dash my delusive hopes and punish my aspir-ing folly as it deserves.
               Oh! Sophia, what were my sensations at this speech. I tried in vain to disen-gage my hand; and having at length effected it, I covered my face with both, and almost sunk upon the ground. Roats-ley, alarmed at my situation, hastily arose, and obliging me to lean on his arm, supported me almost fainting to a bench that encircled the trunk of an ancient sycamore not far distant.
               Weakness for a few moments sus-pended shame, but soon my strength re-turning, my confusion redoubled with a violence unspeakable. During this short interval we were both silent, and Roats-ley alternately kissed the hand he held in his and the drawing which he had now ventured to examine, and which he re-garded as the assured pledge of my af-fection. Oh! my Sophia, feel for your

friend at this moment of emotion. Con-ceive if you can my sensations. But in-deed that is wholly impossible. I was overwhelmed with shame, covered with blushes, and my pride most painfully wounded: the severity of the mortifica-tion I endured made me wish that I could sink into the ground and for ever conceal myself from the eyes of Roatsley, who gazed on me with a delight chas-tened by a degree of diffidence that seemed to aim at reconciling me to my-self.
               Pardon me, loveliest of women, cried he the moment he saw me beginning to recover, which I no sooner did than I attempted to rise—pardon the man who adores you—who would sacrifice his life, his happiness, for your's.
               Just as he pronounced these words with the most passionate warmth, little Charlotte, who had been present during the whole of this distressing scene, a cir-cumstance

which our mutual agitation had prevented our discovering, came running forward, and surprising him upon his knees, stared at the singularity of his attitude with a look of curiosity and surprise that quickly restored both his recollection and mine.
               Roatsley started from the posture from which I had before repeatedly entreated him to rise without effect, and instantly getting up to leave him, I declared that on no account I could remain longer; and unable to meet his eyes, quickened my steps towards the house.
               Stay but for a few moments, said he in a low voice, but in the most earnest manner; leave me not in this agonizing suspense I beseech you.
               My confusion and perplexity having somewhat subsided, my heart began to taste the felicity of knowing (distressing as had been the circumstances to which I owed the discovery) that what I felt I had

not been incapable of inspiring; but at this moment the recollection of Lady Elizabeth and his engagements rushing upon my mind, shame, resentment, and anguish, all at once assailed me; and recalling with bitter regret the weak-ness I had betrayed and the professions which compassion perhaps alone had extorted, I pulled away the hand that Roatsley had again seized, and hastily said—you have egregiously deceived yourself Sir, and I own I am justly to blame in having partly given cause for the deception; but I desire you will leave me, and allow me to return in-stantly home. I shall be seriously dis-pleased if you persist in detaining me; and having slightly curtseyed to him, though without venturing to regard him, I redoubled my pace and arrived at the house, not having once looked back.
               On entering the hall, my sister ran to me. Hermione, cried she, what have
You cannot easily conceive, Sophia, after the train of ideas which had pre-ceded his appearance, how singular and extraordinary it now appeared, when I recollected what pique and displeasure his silence to Mr. Howard's letter had a few days before occasioned me. I could scarce believe he was now at Hubert Hill; and when I contrasted his present flow of spirits with his dejected aspect two hours before, every thing appeared mysterious and unaccountable.
               Were my dear, dear Sophia now pre-sent, said I to myself more than once during the evening, she would confess that blind partiality has not guided my pen in my representation of this amiable young man.
               When our repast was concluded, Mr. Howard and Fanny, charmed to per-ceive their guest to all appearance fully as much pleased with their company as they were delighted with his, both joined

you done with yourself all the morning. I have been sending to the hut and all over the wood to find you: for pray who do you think is about to honour us with a visit, but our condescending Right Honourable relation, Lady Linrose.
               Lady Linrose! repeated I in amaze-ment.
               Yes, her servant has been here with a card informing us that her Ladyship is on the road to wait on us, and entreats the favour of being allowed to see us one half hour in private.
               Just as she spoke a carriage and four drove up to the door; and scarce had we gained the parlour, when Lady Linrose herself entered it.
               She approached us with a look of the most engaging and affectionate familiar-ity. I may well dread the reception I ought to meet with, said she, taking a hand of each; but if the countenance is to be trusted, I will venture to hope

that a behaviour which I have been un-willingly constrained hitherto to support will not, when its motives are candidly examined, utterly exclude me from the prospect of obtaining your friendship.
               Confounded by an address so unex-pected, we bowed in silence; and my sister leading to the sopha we all seated ourselves.
               I am now venturing on a step, re-sumed her Ladyship, which I have long ardently wished it in my power to pur-sue, but which even at this moment is so dangerous and daring, that the exi-gency of the present occasion, and a due regard to my own character only, can excuse or palliate my imprudence. I have long most anxiously desired the op-portunity of a moment like this, in which I could fairly and candidly lay before you the motives of a conduct which must doubtless have appeared to you harsh, cruel, and unfeeling. Alas! you knew

not, that while duty withheld from you the protection to which you so justly laid claim, slander and injustice united to render the prohibition on my part easy to fulfil. Lately, but very lately, was I made acquainted with the value of what, by the commands of a parent, I am deprived of enjoying—your friend-ship and society. No sooner however was the veil taken from my eyes, than my mind became uneasy till it had ac-knowledged its injurious prejudices; and some alarming circumstances, to which I must entreat one quarter of an hour's attention, have at length deter-mined me to hazard the danger of Lord Belmont's displeasure, should this act of disobedience reach his ears, rather than continue to appear in a light so injurious to my heart, so contrary to my real feel-ings.
               Having received a bow of acknow-ledgment from my sister, and an assurance

from me that the present apology en-tirely obliterated all recollection of what once perhaps we might have considered as unkind, her Ladyship proceeded.
               I must in the first place sincerely ac-knowledge, continued she, that I have no adequate apology to offer for having given credit to aspersions which I have since found so perfectly ill founded and unjust; but perhaps you may be kind enough to admit some sort of palliation from the utter ignorance in which I had been retained respecting you. That I had such relations, was merely all I knew; and no sooner had I received Mr. Howard's letter, than I determined in my own mind to afford you all the civility, kindness, and attention, to which your youth, sex, and situation in a quar-ter of the world entirely new, justly en-titled you, especially as it was not diffi-cult for me to perceive you were the same agreeable party which my son had

encountered on his journey, with whom he had been so much charmed and in whose favour he had so much prepos-sessed me. Had he been with me at the moment of my receiving the letter, I should undoubtedly have instantly yielded to the warmth of my compassion, and entrusted him, however imprudently, with the secret of your birth and con-nexion; but indispensible business had hurried him from me almost immediately upon his arrival, and time being given me for consideration, I foresaw how pre-carious and perplexing was the part I had now to act. Lord Belmont's character was well known to me. Though rigid in principle and fervent in benevolence, his prejudices are rooted and immovable; and a prepossession once fixed in his mind, allows neither reason nor humanity to interfere towards its extirpation. What steps he might pursue were doubt-ful and my fears greatly overbalanced

my hopes as to the generosity of his con-duct. These reflections, though com-bated by my secret wishes, determined me to stand aloof till his Lordship's re-solution was known; and if possible, by guarding the secret carefully from my family and more especially from my son, whose warmth of feelings and impetuosity I particularly dreaded, to preserve them from the wrathful effects of a displea-sure from which I myself have suffered too severely not to apprehend it with terror.
               I intended to hasten to town; but some previous business of real moment deferred my journey for some little time, and an alarming complaint, but of short duration, confined me so closely for a few days after my arrival, that I had no opportunity for transacting the business that had occasioned my removal, and which from the necessity of preserving it a profound secret I was unable to ma-nage

by an agent. During this interval, anxious to get information through every possible means of the situation of my young relations, in regard to whom I felt myself extremely solicitous, it may be easily conjectured that I attempted every channel of intelligence, and made enquiry of every person whom friendship or intimacy allowed to visit me during my confinement. I was constrained to mention you however merely as agreea-ble, accidental acquaintances, whom my son had represented to me in an engaging and favourable point of view, and your very names were unknown to all to whom I applied, my son's friend Mr. Bradshaw excepted; who informed me that he had the honour of residing under the same roof with you, but whose light and dis-respectful manner of expressing himself shocked and confounded me. The par-ticulars which I contrived to draw from him, though vague and void of proof,

I must acknowledge infused a portion of doubt and distrust into my mind; but when I take the liberty of repeating what he said, I hope you will in some measure excuse and forgive me.
               Your personal charms alone, he told me, were known to him; for to your private characters he was a stranger, tho' if appearances were to be trusted, the latter by no means conferred any addi-tional lustre on the former: he some time afterwards added, that he had been in-formed at all hands you were light, doubtful, and indiscreet; your princi-pal, if not your almost only associate, being a woman of infamous character, at whose windows he himself had frequently beheld you. Though I was thunder-struck at this intelligence, I did not give it implicit credit, but contrived to dispatch my own maid, who has been long and deservedly in my confidence, with orders to make private enquiries

respecting your conduct of the people with whom you lodged. Their accounts, ambiguous and perplexing, served only to strengthen and confirm my error.
               Here I could not resist making an attempt to interrupt Lady Linrose, with the design of explaining the various and singular causes of these shocking imputa-tions: but perceiving my intention— hold, my dear Madam, said she warmly. Do me not the injustice to imagine I now require any particulars to convince me of your innocence, and of my own in-considerate conclusions. 'Tis my vindi-cation not your's that brought me hither; and if any doubt could have remained on my mind, after having been once in your company, my son's explanation must have wholly removed it. I have already engaged your attention too long: yet I must request the indulgence of a few moments longer.
               Such was the situation of affairs, when

I besought the favour of a visit from Mr. Howard; and in spite of the ill opi-nion I had imbibed of his wards, I wrote to Lord Belmont in their behalf with all the warmth they could have desired; though to own the truth, the longer I reflected the more was I convinced that the success of the application would be such as it proved. The event justified my prudence in having concealed the matter from my son; his Lordship, amongst other injunctions, having strong-ly enjoined a continuation of secresy. There is a certain portion of spirit in my grandson's character, said he in his letter, which leads me to dread his con-duct on this occasion. While I admire and approve of a disposition that is the source in general of noble and generous actions, in the present instance I fear the effects of its enthusiasm, which may in-duce him to regard those unfortunate re-lations as objects of peculiar interest and

in entreating him to accept of a bed here. To this some slight objections in regard to inconvenience were on his part made, and easily overruled by the good lady of the mansion, who proposed dispatching Dubois to the village with orders to his servants and an apology to Mr. Brad-shaw; and in short he at length complied. The wine and fruits being placed on a small table before us, all ceremony and form seemed entirely discarded; and we chatted together with a social familiarity and cheerfulness, which a long series of occasional meetings in town could never have produced. We were all in uncom-mon spirits; and Fanny, in the giddi-ness of her mirth, let several little sallies of naivete escape her which seemed ex-tremely to please and amuse her visitor. Chance has hitherto so contrived it, that my sister has seldom or never been much the object of Mr. Roatsley's attention; but he appeared this night to regard her

regard. I solemnly declare however that his interference in this point with my commands, shall for ever exclude him my favour and cast him from my heart for ever.
               Some time afterwards, my son one day unexpectedly demanded if I had ever been made acquainted with an applica-tion to Lord Belmont from those ladies of the name of Seymour against whom I seemed to have taken a prepossession so unaccountable? I evaded the question; and, though not without difficulty, soon after waved the subject: for while his expressions shewed me that he knew but half the secret, his warmth convinced me his knowledge of the whole would prove destructive of that unanimity and affection which has ever subsisted between him and his grandfather.
               Such being my private sentiments of you, and such my situation with my son, you may easily conceive what my asto-nishment

must have been on finding my-self unexpectedly introduced to you at Holtenham Abbey. Your countenance, your manner, and the ingenuous inno-cence which shone conspicuous in both, opened my eyes, and unavoidably en-gaged my regard and admiration. Yet withheld from acknowledging myself to you in the manner I wished, I was unwil-lingly constrained to assume the distance of a stranger; and I will candidly own, that as such I must have still continued, had not the present unhappy dissention between my favourite son and myself obliged me to lay before you the private motives of my conduct—motives which I own only can excuse it.
               Her Ladyship was visibly affected at these words; but having wiped her eyes, continued—Mr. Roatsley, I find, has been informed, I suppose by this family, of the whole affair; and displeased with the part which prudence persuaded me

to perform, last night desired from me an explanation of every particular. Finding all further secresy impracticable, I readily and candidly acknowledged the truth; but this, instead of satisfying and convincing him, served merely to heighten a resentment that barely preserved the respect which duty and affection has ne-ver yet allowed him to forget towards his mother. Shocked to the soul by this difference, the first that from the moment of his birth ever occurred be-tween us, I determined to open my heart to you; from the flattering hope, that knowing the secret spring of every part of my conduct, you might be ena-bled to do justice to my motives; and I trust should the subject ever again recur when my son visits you, you will have the goodness and generosity to convince him that in such circumstances, where the inflexible displeasure of Lord Belmont

was at stake, it was the indispensible duty of a parent to act as I did.
               My sister and I in warm terms re-turned her Ladyship thanks for this can-did and ingenuous explanation, which we sincerely assured her entirely satisfied us as to every point of her behaviour. As matters stood, Sophia, it was un-doubtedly both prudent and natural for Lady Linrose to conduct herself in the manner she has done, and I now reflect with pain on the injurious opinion that chagrin and disappointment induced us to entertain of a character which this one conversation developes in the most amiable and honourable point of view.
               We expressed much uneasiness at the difference which Mr. Roatsley's compas-sionate humanity, in espousing so warmly our cause, had occasioned with a parent to whose foresight and maternal atten-tions he owed so much, and hoped it had proceeded no disagreeable lengths.
               
                  
My son, said her Ladyship, is pos-sessed of the most amiable disposition in the world. The conversation I have just now mentioned, passed between us last night, when he asked permission to attend me in my dressing room after sup-per. I had observed that he was grave and uneasy the whole day; but no op-portunity for an explanation had till then occurred. Though gentle to excess, his passions, when once roused, are by no means easily controuled. The circum-stances of your situation had naturally excited his compassion, and his know-ledge of your amiable characters de-prived me of the only excuse he would admit as a palliation of my conduct. Lord Belmont's prohibition, he said, he could regard as none where honour and humanity were concerned. There was neither spirit nor principle in a slavish dependence on the will and opinions of others. In such a moment, prudence

was selfishness, and obedience so implicit could only be deemed abject and servile.
               He left me with these words; but soon after recollecting himself, he re-turned, not however with the intention of openly apologizing for his hear, but apparently from the wish of in some measure atoning for it by talking over the matter with calmness and temper.
               This he did; and we parted at a late hour on good terms. What had passed however hung heavy on my spirits. I foresaw a world of tumult and opposition from this unfortunate discovery, and I determined to ease my mind of part of its burthen by openly disclosing my dis-quiets to the innocent cause of them, and entreating their forgiveness for the men-tal injury I have done them.
               My son avows his resolution of apply-ing to Lord Belmont in your favour, a determination, which far from dissuading him from performing I highly approve

of and shall myself enforce with that ad-ditional energy which admiration and regard must now produce; I cannot however avoid expressing my apprehen-sions that Roatsley's interference will irri-tate rather than persuade; and while to you he performs no essential service, he is disappointing and disobliging his grand-father at the most critical moment per-haps of his life: for I will not conceal any thing from you: I make no doubt indeed you must already have been in-formed of it: my son is soon to be hap-pily settled in life with a most amiable and valuable young lady; a tender af-fection subsists between them; the match is in every respect desirable; but Lord Belmont's decided approbation can alone secure that of his young bride's family and connexions.
               My heart, Sophia—oh! what did not my heart endure at these words? It died within me. I cast my eyes on the ground,

and avoided with the utmost care the pe-netrating look with which Lady Linrose regarded me. The agitating scene that had so recently passed between her son and myself flashed with redoubled an-guish on my thoughts; the recollection was misery, and I felt as a culprit in his mother's presence. From this state of embarrassment and distress, I was pre-sently in part relieved by the entrance of my little teizing companion Charlotte, who had been playing on the green be-fore the house, and just at this moment appeared. Her Ladyship, not thinking it prudent to proceed in a subject of such moment before the child, having now explained herself sufficiently, shifted the conversation to less interesting topicks; and being charmed with the little girl's beauty, began to chat with her.
               Amongst other questions suited to her age, Lady Linrose, to set her a prattling, made the enquiry with which all chil-dren

have been so often importuned, viz. which did she love best, Mrs. Howard or Miss Seymour? and Charlotte, not in the least at a loss for a reply which delicacy even in infancy sometimes renders em-barrassing, instantly replied—oh Miss Seymour certainly. Every body loves Miss Seymour, and the gentleman loves her too, for I know that well enough.
               We shall get at all your secrets, Miss Seymour, cried Lady Linrose, smiling at my unspeakable confusion. But pray, my dear, turning to the child, who is this admirer of Miss Seymour's?
               What does the child mean, cried I, with a look which I intended for surprise but which I am afraid partook infinitely more of alarm: pray don't be foolish Charlotte. But alas! I tried in vain to interrupt her; for delighted with being allowed to prate, and charmed with the importance of evidently distressing me, she answered Lady Linrose archly in a

loud whisper—oh it must be her lover you know; for he kissed her hand just now again and again in the Filbert walk.
               Conceive, if it is possible, my conscious distress. Words can but faintly express my situation. I dreaded that every fea-ture of my face would discover who this secret admirer was, and all spirit to rally it off forsook me. I thought at that moment this was certainly the most pain-ful excess to which shame and apprehen-sion could arrive; but I was too soon taught how deplorably erroneous was this idea.
               A short and most distressing pause suc-ceeded to Charlotte's sally of gaiety. Lady Linrose, perceiving I suppose my uneasiness, politely forbore encreasing it by proceeding in her enquiries, and look-ing at her watch, rose to depart.
               My sister asked the favour of her La-dyship's company to partake of a family dinner, if she was not otherwise engaged.

in a point of view wholly new, and en-tered with much relish into the natural simplicity of her character.
               As yet, however, nothing had been hinted relating to the proposed explana-tion. Had Roatsley been tete a tete with any of the company, doubtless it would have been an easy matter to have led to the subject; but while the whole family were met together, to have enquired into particulars which from the agitation I had betrayed he could not but naturally conclude were of a very delicate nature, I doubt not must have appeared a pre-sumption for which he could not sum-mon resolution. Wholly unsuspicious besides how nearly he was himself inte-rested in the tale, all he could possibly conjecture in regard to what he was to learn must have been, that in gratitude for the obligation he had procured me, I thought it incumbent he should be made acquainted with certain circumstances of

I sincerely regret, said she, that I pro-mised my friend Lady Mary to be home by four o'clock: for as my visits, my dear Mrs. Howard, must be few and pri-vately stolen, I lament that I cannot in-dulge myself with a longer one at pre-sent: but we know not how things may turn out, added she with great kindness —we may perhaps be more fortunate than we at present imagine.
               Mr. Howard will regret not having shared in the honour of this visit, Ma-dam, said my sister: and just as she spoke, her husband, who had been told who was with us, entered the parlour.
               Lady Linrose received him with par-ticular civility; and though on her way to the carriage, which had been ordered to the door, unfortunately turned back and sat down again for a few minutes.
               After the usual compliments and en-quiries—I flattered myself Mr. Roatsley had accompanied your Ladyship, said

Mr. Howard, as I saw him at a distance little more than an hour ago with my sis-ter in the walk; but it was not then in my power to join them, as I was em-ployed procuring assistance to my old gardener, who has met with a very dis-agreeable accident this morning.
               You must have mistaken some other person for Mr. Roatsley, said Mrs. How-ard, for he has not favoured us with his company to-day.
               Was he not here, sister, cried Mr. Howard turning to me with a surprise which I fear my too apparent distress sufficiently abated; for as if conscious of having committed some mistake, he left the sentence unfinished.
               This was too dreadful. I believe Mr. Roatsley was walking to-day, said I at length: but the anguish of my feelings made my voice faulter even during this short sentence; and Lady Linrose rose, before I had concluded it, curtseyed in

silence to me, and taking her leave, was attended to the hall by Mr. Howard and my sister.
               Being left alone—oh God! cried I to myself, what a day of misery has this been? My imprudence can only be equalled by my shame and despair. I was in agonies. I now perceived that Roatsley was inevitably devoted to ano-ther. The declaration, my Sophia, which burst from his lips, his reason, his principles, even his heart, must condemn in the first moments of cool reflexion. The remembrance must wound him, and is an insult to me. He knows my weak-ness. It is no longer concealed as hi-therto in the secret recesses of my heart. All the world knows it. Even his mo-ther is no longer ignorant of the fatal secret; and what may she not conclude from the circumstances which have re-vealed it to her knowledge. Would to heaven I could hide my confusion and

folly for ever from the whole earth. But even if I could, how shall I ever conceal from myself the bitter, heart rending re-collection of my own imprudence.
               I was almost frantic: and the moment I perceived the carriage drive off, I flew into my own room and shut myself up. Fanny soon followed, demanding admit-tance. But I could not for some time prevail with myself to grant it; for al-though my heart is strongly and tenderly attached to her, a dissimilarity of dispo-sition, and the circumstance of her being a married woman, which makes me ap-prehensive that her husband will be a sharer of all she knows, renders my confidence in her neither so comfortable nor so undisguised as it would otherwise prove. I am not so unjust as to suppose she could ever be prevailed with to be-tray by the slightest hint the secrets re-posed in her; but the openness of her disposition renders me very suspicious

that she might be imprudent without being conscious of her error; and though I am thoroughly satisfied that she is as happy with Mr. Howard as it is possible for any woman to be in the married state, yet I feel a degree of indelicacy in paint-ing anxieties and ardours which were so wholly excluded her own courtship, and which may for that reason appear roman-tic and unaccountable.
               I partly confessed however the disa-greeable situation in which I found my-self involved; and without touching on the circumstances of the drawing, and the declaration it had produced, which indeed I cannot recall to mind and could not have mentioned without anguish un-speakable, I owned I had met with Roatsley that morning, and acknow-ledged the uneasiness which the little girl's raillery before his mother had oc-casioned me.
               I know not what to make of him,

said Fanny: and undoubtedly this cousin of ours after all is a little unaccountable; for as Miss Farnford observed, his mis-tress has surely some reason to complain of his attentions in another quarter; and what can the man mean if he is actually on the eve of wedlock? I don't under-stand his behaviour.
               Alas! thought I, I understand his be-haviour but too well. It is my too ap-parent weakness and folly which have for a time produced in his heart a temporary inconstancy. Oh, Sophia! how painful is this idea. All my pride of heart rises against it. I am sunk in my own opi-nion—I am humbled and miserable.
               There is but one step to be taken, said I to my sister. To see Lady Linrose a-gain would be at present peculiarly disa-greeable; and tho' she gave at parting no intimation of a speedy return, she may very possibly contrive to see us before she leaves the county, which I own I

would wish to avoid, and a very simple and natural method of doing so has oc-curred to me: I think of hastening my visit to our dear and valuable Lady Au-brey. It is but setting off in a day or two instead of three weeks hence. I am sure of finding her at home, and shall this very day write to prepare her to ex-pect me.
               My sister, who has never been separat-ed from me for many years, and who dis-likes the idea of my leaving her even for a short time, made some little objections to this plan, alledging that Lady Lin-rose had requested her visit might be kept a secret, from which it was naturally to be inferred that it was not likely to be soon repeated.
               I did not chuse to own explicitly that it was the son still more than the mother that I wished to avoid, tho' I told her that I thought I ought not to expose my-self to attentions that were (tho' I be-lieved

unintentionally,) certainly an in-sult to my character: and I soon persuad-ed her to acknowledge, if such were my sentiments, that I ought not to defer my journey.
               The difficulty that now remained, was how to conceal my real motive from Mr. Howard: but happily a fortunate pre-tence soon presented itself: in the even-ing, while we were chatting on the oc-currences of the day and the unexpected visit we had received, a letter was brought me from our dear and respected friend, telling me that her impatience to embrace us had arisen to such a height, that she intreated, if Mr. and Mrs. Howard's vi-sit must still be delayed, mine might be deferred no longer; requesting leave to send her own carriage and servants to convey me sately to Aubrey Castle.
               This kind, maternal epistle, would at all events have determined my compli-ance, especially as Lady Meredith and

Sir William, I find, have left the castle, having been suddenly recalled home: but at this time it is particularly agreea-ble, as it at once relieves me from my difficulties in regard to Mr. Howard, re-moves me from the chance of again meet-ing the man I so anxiously wish never more to behold, and offers me an oppor-tunity undisturbed and at a distance, for combating the commotions of my mind.
               I have written Lady Aubrey that I shall be with her on Saturday evening. Her seat is forty five miles distant; but by setting off very early, I hope to ac-complish my journey without sleeping on the road, which I should dislike much. I have accepted the offer of her carriage and servants, which are to be here on Thursday evening.
            
            
               

               LETTER XXI. TO MISS BEAUMONT.
               
                  AUBREY CASTLE, JUNE 21.
                  
               
               I Arrived here last night about nine in the evening. The moment I alighted, our dear Lady Aubrey ran out to meet me in the hall. She pressed me to her bosom in the tenderest manner, and tears accompanied her embraces.
               She led me to her dressing room; where, after a thousand anxious appre-hensions on her part in regard to the fa-tigue I had undergone in travelling, and as many kind enquiries after my sister and Mr. Howard, I congratulated her with the most heartfelt satisfaction on the

my situation which he had reason to ap-prehend might prove a painful and not improbably a mortifying communication.
               Silent therefore he continued on this topick, tho' most amusing and agreeable on a thousand others, till my sister and I retired, which was not till after one in the morning, an hour unheard of in the sober annals of Hubert Hill.
               I did not shut my eyes for many hours after I went to bed. The distant mur-mur of the two gentlemen's voices be-low, who did not separate till almost sun rise, engaged my constant attention; and a thousand conjectures and reflections re-lating to the subject of their conversation, entirely banished all inclination to rest till about my usual time of rising, which at this season is seldom after six. I then slept for a couple of hours; but finding it so late when I awoke, I hastily rose, and had but just finished dressing, when Mr. Howard tapped at my chamber door

happy improvement of her health, indi-cated so visibly by the alteration in her looks.
               The change is indeed striking. That glow which health and tranquillity only can preserve, now throws a lustre over features, the interesting beauty of which seemed before incapable of addition.
               Both in mind and body, said that an-gelic woman, my amendment is wonder-ful: and how infinitely kind is it in my Hermione thus to soothe my heart by gratifying my ardent wishes for her com-pany. My spirits, thank heaven, are calm and equal; and my frame, at no period robust, begins to feel the pleasing effects of internal peace and composure. I do not allow myself to indulge the se-clusion to which inclination strongly im-pells me: on the contrary, I respect those exactions which the rights of society re-quire, and the neglect of which I, who have perhaps a long life before me, may

yet live to regret. I intend to force my-self therefore to make proper returns to the visits and civilities paid me by my country neighbours; and have even al-ready begun to form an intimacy with a very worthy couple, who have hitherto waved all ceremony, and who have been repeatedly my guests. They are at present with me; and though I should have much prefered the happiness of spending this evening tete a tete with you, I must submit to allow them a share of your company.
               She then conducted me to the draw-ing room, where we found a lady and gentleman engaged at picquet. She presented me to both in the kindest man-ner. I shall say nothing, my dear Ma-dam, said she to the lady, for leaving you my cards so long, as I bring my apology along with me in this amiable young friend, who has relieved my ap-prehensions

by making her appearance at last.
               Supper was announced immediately after; and as I was fatigued and ex-hausted, Lady Aubrey, whose solicitude and anxiety made her watch every change of my countenance, insisted that I should retire early to rest; and making her excuses to Mr. and Mrs. Berry, who seem very sensible, agreeable people, she led me to the chamber allotted me, where having ordered her maid to attend me, and satisfied herself that every thing was prepared for my comfort and satis-faction, she tenderly embraced me and wished me good night.
               
                  
                     
                        SUNDAY NIGHT.
                     
                  
                  Just as Lady Aubrey, her other guests, and myself were assembled this day at dinner, the arrival of the postman with

the newspapers induced Mr. Berry, who is a great politician, to hurry it over in order to read them aloud to the com-pany. His lady, who seemed little amused by the prospect of the parlia-mentary orations, requested him to give us the news of the day before she set off on her rambles; and in compliance with her desire, he began the list of mortality, in which he suddenly read the death of the Right Honourable Lord Linrose at Lyons. I was extremely shocked; though merely from compassion for the friends who must lament his loss; and Mr. Berry seemed himself conscious of having committed an impropriety in mentioning, in presence of Lady Au-brey, a name that seemed destined never again to reach her ears; for I remarked that his voice changed as he read, tho' he had the presence of mind not to make his thoughts evident by stopping before he had finished the sentence. Lady Au-brey

seemed so much affected by the paragraph that she soon after left the room.
                  I wished much to follow her: but re-collecting that any private conversation at that moment must naturally have led to subjects which I wish as much as pos-sible in future to avoid, I forebore my intention; and when she returned some time after into the room, I rejoiced that I had not given way to my first impulse, as though her eyes were red, she con-versed with a sedate chearfulness which testified her determination of combating all melancholy retrospections that might lead to repining and despondency, and soon after proposed conducting me thro' the different apartments of this elegant abode (the morning having been em-ployed at church) which infinitely sur-passed my expectations in point of mag-nificence. It is much too spacious in my opinion for the residence of a single,

solitary individual. However a large establishment of servants, and a chearful situation, in a eat measure atone for this defect, which Lady Aubrey herself remarked to me while we were survey-ing it. It is the spot where my prede-cessors have resided time immemorial, said she; and my grandfather made it an article in his will that I should inhabit the house, and not suffer it to fall into decay.
                  There is a collection of most valuable pictures; and a large library, where I intend passing several hours every day, stored with the works of the best authors in all languages. I never was less in a mood for study; but for that very rea-son I must endeavour to force a relish for every employment that banishes musing. At present, however, I am in-capable of any exertion; for I am really far from well, and as much exhausted as

if I had gone a journey of five hundred miles at least.
               
               
                  
                     
                        JUNE 24.
                     
                  
                  Our guests left us to-day, which I regret much. Mrs. Berry seldom leaves her family even for so long a period as a few days, and her present visit was a particular compliment to Lady Aubrey, to whom I suspect she and her husband have peculiar obligations.
                  I have received a letter from Fanny, dated Saturday evening. She writes to inform me of Lord Linrose's death, with which she had been made acquainted a few hours after I left her, by a note from Mr. Roatsley, merely mentioning the event and the time it took place, as a piece of respect due to relations of the family. Mr. Howard, she tells me, wrote a letter of condolence next morn-ing,

to which he received a very kind reply, assuring him that nothing but the shock he has received would have prevented his being at Hubert Hill long before now. Lord Belmont, he says, who has been severely wounded by this blow, meant to set off directly for Eng-land. He must be already on his jour-ney, adds Mr. Roatsley; and as I intend meeting him at Calais, I flatter myself I shall soon merit his grateful acknow-ledgements for the essential service I mean to confer upon him—that of con-soling him in a great measure for what death has snatched from his arms, by presenting to him relations who must and who ought to be so dear to his heart.
                  Fanny tells me, likewise, that she hears. Lady Linrose and her family are soon to leave Holtenham Abbey, and to set out for Northamptonshire. She makes no doubt, she says, but Roatsley will call at Hubert Hill before his departure. Poor

Lady Linrose, it seems, is much afflic-ted; and their stay with Lady Mary is to be no longer prolonged than till her Ladyship's spirits will admit of the ex-ertion of a removal.
                  This letter, which I received last night in Lady Aubrey's presence, and which I withdrew to a window to read, threw an air of such depression over my countenance, that on turning round she enquired with anxious apprehension if all were well at Hubert Hill. This hint made me exert myself to appear chear-ful; but I fancy I could not boast of my success. Since my arrival here Lady Aubrey has never recurred to those pain-ful subjects which burst from her in the moments of agitation at Hubert Hill; and I could not have read my sister's letter to her without calling back her thoughts to many dismal reflections, the natural result of being told that Lord Belmont was on his way to England.
               
               
                  

                  
                     
                        JUNE 28.
                     
                  
                  Our style of living here is so rational and serene, and Lady Aubrey's tender-ness and attention towards me so unre-mitting and endearing, that I should be happy in future to divide my time equally between Hubert Hill and Au-brey Castle. Lady Aubrey's conversa-tion is a never failing source of interest and amusement. Her heart is so bene-volent, and her understanding so highly cultivated, that it is impossible ever to tire in her company or desire other so-ciety. I am only distressed that she re-marks my thoughtfulness; and is be-come so uneasy about my loss of appetite and palid colour, that she quite tortures herself with uneasy apprehensions, for which I cannot convince her there is not the slightest cause.
                  
                     

            THE SISTER: A COMEDY.
            By Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
            LONDON, Printed for J. DODSLEY, in Pall-Mall; and T. DAVIES, in Russel-Street, Covent-Garden. M DCC LXIX.
            [Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]
         
         
            

simplicity, has had art enough to ensnare your af-fections.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Dear Courteney, speak with more reverence of what I love—they are again in sight; shall we go round and meet them?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Well, since it must be so, I will attend you.
                  
                  
                     Exeunt Courteney and Clairville.
               
               
                  SCENE II.
                  
                     Enter Miss Autumn and Miss Courteney.
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     It is very true, my dear, when I told you this morning, that you would make but an awkward fine lady, you surveyed yourself in my glass with a certain consciousness
(mimicking her):
well, I will allow that you are tolerably handsome; but half that bloom which you brought from the country might be spared, provided you knew what to do with the remainder—indeed, Harriet, I am almost ashamed of your simplicity.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Why, my dear whimsical friend, what faults have I committed lately?
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Faults! you never do one earthly thing that is right—all my documents are thrown away upon you—you blush, truly, when a sop looks atten-tively on you—you cannot meet the steady gaze with the confident stare. You speak without lisping; walk without tottering, and courtesy without tossing back your head.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     All this is gross affectation.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Indeed, Harriet, you are a silly girl, with all your knowledge—you have spent eighteen years of your life in cultivating your understanding, without reflecting that it is by your beauty only you can hope to make your fortune; cease to be wise, child, and grow prudent; do not study the belle lettres, but the belle air—reason less with your tongue, and more with your eyes—why, really now, I believe you imagine nature gave you those two sparkling orbs for no other purpose but to see with.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     You railly your sex's follies so agreeably, my dear, that one would conclude you despised them, were you not too often seen practising them your-self—your eyes serve you for many other purposes besides seeing.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     My eyes, child, are well-disciplined troops; they know how to attack, conquer, pursue, retreat, beg quarter—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Beg quarter! I am sure they will never give any, if they can possibly help it—what an obstinate siege have they laid to the heart of poor Freeman!
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     True; and they have carried the place at last, you find.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Well, and what do you intend to do with it?
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Do with it—? why, throw a garrison into it, and march off to new conquests.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I doubt the place is not tenable, my dear; two enemies to your power, pride and resentment, have got admittance, and it is more than probable will expell your garrison.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     That, indeed, would be a great disgrace upon my generalship.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Mr. Freeman is a man of sense: he has per-ceived that your design was only to torment him. You are too much and too little of a coquet, my fair friend; and have not artifice enough to dis-semble the want of it.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Prodigious! What, the sage Harriet taking upon her to give me lessons in coquetry!
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I might profit by your faults, were I disposed to commence coquet.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Well, since I find you have some skill, I may venture to consult you sometimes upon my opera-tions; tell me truly then, do you think Freeman will escape me?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I think he has already.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     This would mortify me extremely, if I did not despise the rebel.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I perceive you do.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Not that I think him despicable, I assure you.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     No, really!
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     No, really! why, is he not handsome? has he not wit, learning, elegance?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Ha! ha! ha! and yet you despise him, my dear.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Despise him—why yes—and yet I do not despise him neither. — I only mean that I do not like him.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Why should you not like him? is he not hand-some? has he not wit, learning, elegance?
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Pooh! to convince you that I do not like him, observe how ill I will treat him the next time we meet.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     That will be the way to convince me that you do like him.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Strange indeed! you could not say more were I to treat him well.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     No, but I should say as much.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     You have a mind to maintain paradoxes, I per-ceive.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Indeed you are mistaken, I have no mind to be ridiculous; the glitter of false wit, like the shine of false jewels, serve at once to shew the poverty and vanity of the possessor. What I mean, my dear, is, that if you are indeed—indifferent towards Mr. Freeman, you will treat him with that general po-liteness, which a man of real merit is sure to meet with from a woman of sense: too much or too lit-tle attention to such a man, is alike liable to be construed into a secret attachment.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     According to this rule, my dear Harriet, you have certainly a secret attachment for his friend Mr. Belmour.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY
                     (confused.)
                     I, a secret attachment! why, is it possible you can have discovered—that is, that you suspect—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Ha! ha! ha! no, my dear, your extreme reserve made me first suspect, and afterwards discover—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     What have you discovered?
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     That you love Mr. Belmour—aye, you may blush.—This was a secret that required all my sa-gacity to discover; but as for his passion for you — any ideot might have found that out.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Yet does not reserve become one in my circum-stances? An unhappy orphan, compelled by my ill fate, to become a fugitive from the friend to whom I owed my past, and from whom I expected my future support; thus distrest — perhaps censured—
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     I will not hear you talk so, censured you cannot be; you have acted upon motives too justifiable; and I hope my fortune is sufficient to keep distress far from us both.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Generous Charlotte! yet if Lady Autumn should discover me, she will think it her duty to force me back to my aunt.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Most certainly; what favour can youth and beauty expect from a coquet of fifty?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Indeed, my dear, you make too free with the foibles of your father's widow; but you ought to remember, that, if she loves admiration at fifty, it is because she was a coquet at fifteen.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     That is true; — I protest I tremble at the idea, of being one day, what my step-mother is at present. Oh heavens! in the midst of wrinkles and grey hairs, to dream of gentle languishments, vows, ardors!—but there is some comfort yet, fifty and I are at an immense distance.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Do not cheat yourself, my dear, with that thought; young though you are, you will be old: whatever advances with such rapidity, cannot be accounted far distant—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Well, I am determined to grow grave in time: dear Harriet, give me a lesson every day till you have compleated my reformation:—but is not that Freeman and Belmour yonder? They are certainly come in search of us; —come hither, Harriet—you

who pronounced the rebel had escaped me—mark that pensive air, those folded arms.—Well, my sage monitress of eighteen, will you pretend to assert that he is not thinking on me? Now can I not for my life resist my inclination to teaze him a little.—Do, dear girl, indulge me this once; I promise you, I will not be very cruel.—Nay, you shall prescribe the utmost limits of my triumph; and when you think I am carrying it too far,— only pull me by the sleeve, and I will instantly re-collect myself.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Ha! ha! ha! I see your reformation is begun.
                  
               
               
                  SCENE III.
                  
                     Enter Lord Clairville and Courteney.
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your servant, ladies; we have been looking for you this half hour.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     One would think you expected to find us like daisies springing up under your steps. I observed your eyes bent constantly on the ground.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My friend is a little thoughtful to-day.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     
                        (aside to Miss Courteney.)
                     Mark that, Harriet; he has certainly escaped me: do you not think so?
                     (To Courteney.)
                     That is your melancholy, is it not so, Mr. Freeman? Well, does not this prove what I have often told you; there is not the least sympathy in our minds; you are always sad when I am gay; but I have a mind to be complaisant for once, and will permit you to chuse the humour I shall be of during the next half hour.
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY
                     (carelessly bowing.)
                     Pardon me, Madam, you must chuse for your-self; you are so agreeable in whatever humour you assume, that it is impossible for me to give the preference to any. Your smiles and frowns become you in my opinion so equally, that I am charmed alike whether you smile or frown.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     (aside, a little disconcerted.)
                     Indeed! so indifferent!
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY
                     (aside to her.)
                     I think I must pull him by the sleeve, my dear.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Mr. Bellmour, my mamma sent you a card this morning; you and your friend dine with us, I hope.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     We will certainly wait on you, ladies.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     It must be a farewell visit then, ladies; for we set out for Paris to-morrow.
                  
                  
                     (Here Clairville and Miss Courteney talk apart.)
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     (Going, and so unconcerned too!
(aside.)
This resolution is very sudden, Sir. To be sure, Paris is a charming place; you are vastly in the right to go. Miss D'Arcy, my dear, we have but just time to dress for dinner.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     We will wait on you home, ladies.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     
                        (drawing away her hand from Courteney, who offers to lead her.)
                     
                     No ceremony, Sir; I can walk without assist-ance.
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     Piqued by heaven! this is better than I expected.
                  
                  
                     Exeunt Courteney, Clairville, Miss Au-tumn, and Miss Courteney.
               
               
                  SCENE IV.
                  
                     Enter Lady Autumn, and her woman at the other side.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     There they are, but I shall not join them; these girls are never weary of walking.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     They are young, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Young! well, I suppose you do not think me old; and yet I hate walking, it is a robust exer-cise.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     To be sure, there can be no pleasure in walking, when one has the rheumatism so bad as your Lady-ship has.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     The rheumatism! who told you I had the rheu-matism? What, because I was laid up with a sprain, which I got by running rather too giddily indeed after my squirrel, it passed for the rheuma-tism?
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     I am sure, Madam, the doctors called it so.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     The doctors were blockheads then.—(Not return to join me! aside, and looking about.) Simple, ob-serve, whether Mr. Freeman be coming back.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     No, indeed, Madam; he is walking on towards the house, with the young ladies.
                  
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN
                     (aside.)
                     It is certainly so, he is vexed, I treated him with too much rigour last night; rigour was al-ways my fault, I cannot help it.
                     sighs.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Bless me! I hope your Ladyship is not taken ill
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Ill! no; and yet one cannot be very well, when one is the cause of so much pain to others.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Madam!
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     It does not signify, there is no living without a confidant;—Simple, you have been in my service but a short time; but I have a notion that you are very discreet.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE
                     (curtseying.)
                     Indeed I am, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Aye, I know you are, I am seldom mistaken in my judgement of people: to shew you then that I think you very discreet, I am resolved to make you my confidant.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Confidant! I thank you, Madam, — but, but—I had rather keep the place I was hired for, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Yes, I am determined to deposite all my secrets in your breast.—Know then, Simple, that there is a young man who seems—but why do I say seems—who is desperately—what shall I call it— who really languishes with an unconquerable, in-vincible, hopeless, fatal, dying passion, for—for— me;—is not this a sad thing?
                  
                  
                     

            PROLOGUE.
            Written by Mr. COLMAN.
            Spoken by Mrs. MATTOCKS.
            
               
                  THE law of custom is the law of fools—
                  And yet the wise are govern'd by her rules.
                  Why should Men only prologue all our plays,
                  Gentlemen-Ushers to each modern Bayes?
                  Why are the Fair to Epilogues confin'd,
                  Whose tongues are loud, and gen'ral as the wind?
                  Mark how in real life each sex is class'd!
                  Woman has there the first word and the last.
                  
               
               
                  Boast not your gallant deeds, romantic men!
                  To-night a Female Quixote draws the pen.
                  Arm'd by the Comic Muse, these lists she enters,
                  And sallies forth—in quest of strange adventures!
                  War, open war, 'gainst recreant knights declares,
                  Nor Giant-Vice nor Windmill-Folly spares:
                  Side-saddles Pegasus, and courts Apollo,
                  While I, (you see!) her female Sancho, follow.
               
               
                  Ye that in this enchanted castle sit,
                  Dames, squires, and dark magicians of the pit,
                  Smile on our fair knight-errantry to-day,
                  And raise no spells to blast a female play.
               
               
                  Oft has our Author, upon other ground,
                  Courted your smiles, and oft indulgence found.
                  Read in the closet, you approv'd her page;
                  Yet still she dreads the perils of the stage.
                  Reader with Writer due proportion keeps,
                  And if the Poet nods, the Critic sleeps!
                  If lethargied by dullness here you sit,
                  Sonorous catcalls rouse the sleeping pit.
               
               
                  Plac'd at the threshold of the weather-house,
                  There stands a pasteboard husband and his spouse,
                  Each doom'd to mark the changes of the weather,
                  But still—true man and wife!—ne'er seen together.
                  When low
                        ••
                     ing clouds the face of heav'n deform,
                  The muffled husband stands and braves the storm;
                  But when the fury of the tempest's done,
                  Break out at once the Lady and the Sun.
                  Thus oft has man, in custom's beaten track,
                  Come forth, as doleful Prologue, all in black!
                  Gloomy prognostick of the ba
                        •
                     a's disgrace,
                  With omens of foul weather in his face.
                  Trick'd out in silk and smiles let me appear,
                  And six, as sign of peace, the rainbow here;
                  Raise your compassion and your mirth together,
                  And prove to-day an emblem of fair weather!
               
            
         
         
            

                     SIMPLE.
                     Yes, indeed, Madam, it is a very strange thing!
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     A strange thing! I say, is it not a sad thing?
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     To be sure, it is a sad thing, Madam; and I am very sorry for it.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Poor Freeman! I am sorry too;—but there was a kind of fatality in it.—I never told you, Simple, the manner of our first acquaintance?
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     No, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     One morning, when I was sauntering in the forest, habited in a loose white sack, with my walking-crook in my hand—poor Lord Autumn used to say I looked like a nymph in this dress—I found myself fatigued, and was obliged to rest under a tree.—Here I sat, or rather reclined, in a pensive attitude, when I was roused by the sight of a monstrous snake, that had fastened on my arm—
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Lord bless me! Madam, what did you do?—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Do!—I screamed so loud, that two young gen-tlemen, who were walking at a little distance, came running to me:—both were eager to assist me;— but Mr. Freeman's assiduity was so animated, so languishing—so—so—in short, the blow was struck; I perceived immediately that I had made a violent impression.
                  
                  
                     

                     SIMPLE.
                     But pray, Madam, if I may be so bold, how did your Ladyship get rid of the snake?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     The snake!—O, I was mistaken: it was only a caterpillar, which my fears had magnified into a snake. Mr. Freeman then offered me his hand, to lead me home; but it was with such a timid aspect!—Since that day, his friend Belmour and he have been constant visitors at my house; and al-though his passion has been continually increasing, yet he has concealed it so carefully, that no person in the family has discovered it but myself.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     I'll answer for it, Madam, nobody dreams of any such thing.—But I wonder the gentleman has not broke his mind to your Ladyship!—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     No, he has ever been silent, awfully silent, as to that point—such is his extreme timidity!— Timidity, Simple, ever accompanies a violent pas-sion; for flames, as the poet says, burn highest, when they tremble most.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE
                     (looking out.)
                     I vow, Madam, here is Mr. Freeman coming, all alone. — Sure he intends to break his mind now.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     It is he, indeed!—This can never be chance: he has certainly followed me hither. His passion has at length got the better of his timidity, and he is resolved to declare himself. — I must not be too re-served—I must not kill his hope.—Simple, observe his looks when he accosts me.
                  
                  
                     

                     Enter Courteney.
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your Ladyship's most humble servant. I did not expect to meet you here, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     No! you had a mind for a solitary walk, then?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     No, indeed, Madam: I have been walking all the morning. I left Mr. Belmour with the young ladies, to take leave; for we set out for Paris to-morrow.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     How! do you leave us to-morrow?—Is this to try me?
(aside.)
Positively, Mr. Freeman, you must not go.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Indeed, Madam, I must: there is an absolute necessity for it.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Indeed, but there is no absolute necessity for it. Do you think I have so little penetration as not to have discovered the cause of this sudden resolu-tion?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     So, she means my Lord's passion for Miss D'Arcy! —If I could but draw some intelligence from her, concerning this young woman, it might be of use.
(aside.)
                     
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Now is he considering with himself, whether he may venture to make a discovery of his passion.— I protest, I am all in a slutter! He wants cou-rage.
(aside.)
—Mr. Freeman, have I guessed truly, as to the cause of your sudden departure?
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     I cannot answer that question, till I know what it is your Ladyship guesses.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN
                     (Looking down upon her fan, affectedly.)
                     Nay now, Mr. Freeman—this is too much!— you throw me into the greatest confusion imagi-nable!—To be sure, I have guessed—a passion so very obvious;—but, methinks, it would better be-come you to explain yourself—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Why, Madam, I confess you have guessed truly: my friend's passion is indeed pretty obvious; but there are certain reasons which make it highly im-proper for him to indulge it.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     His friend's passion! prettily turned.—How cau-tious! how diffident!
(aside.)
—Well, Sir, this you may assure your friend of, however, that to my certain knowledge he need not despair.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     So, she favours this business, I find.
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Well, Sir, do you still hold your resolution of leaving us?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your Ladyship may easily imagine, that I am somewhat interested in this affair.—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Yes, yes, I can very easily imagine that.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I should be glad, therefore, to know—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Positively, you shall know no more now.—You men are so importunate!—But suppose now I should

give you an opportunity of talking to me upon this affair?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I should be greatly obliged to you, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     He might have thrown a little more rapture into his answer.
(aside.)
—Well, I shall be alone, in the drawing-room, after dinner—and—But this looks so like an assignation, that I have a good mind to withdraw my promise.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Assignation! how could that come into her head?
(aside.)
—No, no, Madam; depend upon it, I will hold you to your promise.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Adieu, then, till dinner. Simple, do you hear, lay out my pink and white.—I shall dress imme-diately.
                  
                  
                     Exeunt Lady Autumn and Simple.
                  
                     COURTENEY
                     (alone.)
                     What a piece of affectation! But if she has not entered heartily into the interest of this Miss D'Arcy, with whom my pupil is madly in love, I shall be able to discover her character and circumstances, and must take my measures accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Exit Courteney.
               
               END OF THE FIRST ACT.
            
            
               

               ACT II.
               SCENE, a drawing-room, in Lady Autumn's house.
               
               
                  Enter Courteney, as from dinner.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  IF I do not hit upon some method to rescue Lord Clairville, he is undone; I observed him all dinner-time—his attachment to this young creature is amazing!
               
               
                  Enter Lord Clairville.
               
                  CLAIRVILLE.
                  Courteney, I wished to speak a word to you in private; I have been thinking all day on this jour-ney to Paris.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Well, my Lord.
               
               
                  CLAIRVILLE.
                  I find, I cannot resolve to go—
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I suspected as much.
               
               
                  CLAIRVILLE.
                  Without first seeing my father.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  There you are perfectly right, my Lord; you intend to wait on him to-morrow, I suppose?
               
               
                  

                  CLAIRVILLE.
                  Not so neither; I would prepare him first—I intend to write to him, to explain my reasons for returning before I had received his orders; and to assure him, that I cannot think of marrying Lady Anne, and that I wait his answer here. I will just step to my lodgings and write my letter, and return immediately.
               
               
                  Exit Clairville.
               
                  COURTENEY
                  (alone.)
                  My Lord has a very contented air, he has cer-tainly brought his mistress to terms; but what those terms are, I must endeavour to find out. This girl, I fear, will draw him into some rash engage-ment. I can form no judgement of her character and designs, she is so reserved. Ha! here she comes—I will try to found her; and for once, in order to preserve my pupil, I will assume a lan-guage foreign to my heart.
               
               
                  Enter Miss Courteney.
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Mr. Freeman, is it certain that you set out for Paris to-morrow?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  If not to-morrow, Madam, most certainly the next day.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  I have a relation in Paris, whom I have not heard from for several weeks—it is of great im-portance to me to have a letter safely conveyed to his hands—will you execute this little commission for me?
               
               
                  

                  COURTENEY
                  (Receiving the letter, which he puts into his pocket book.)
                  With pleasure, Madam; but the honour you do me, in employing me upon this occasion, will be envied by my friend.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Mr. Belmour tells me, he does not go with you.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  He once resolved otherwise, and his affairs re-quired it should be so; but I, who know how difficult it is to be in love and to be wise, am not surprized that he has changed his mind.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY
                  (in confusion.)
                  This is an affair which I do not pretend to judge of. Will you walk into the next room? the coffee is brought in.
going.
                  
               
               
                  COURTENEY
                  (detaining her.)
                  Nay, but this is an affair which concerns you, Madam, more than any other person—you must, indeed you must, permit me to plead for my friend —I know the sincerity and ardor of his passion for you—
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Hold, Mr. Freeman—am I to think you se-rious?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  You wrong yourself and me, by supposing I would jest upon so delicate a subject.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  It is strange, methinks, that you should encou-rage him in the liking, you say, he has entertained for me! his fortunes seem to be high; I am poor and dependant—do you think his parents will approve of so unequal match?
               
               
                  

                  COURTENEY.
                  What have parents to do with a tender engage-ment?
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Ha!
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  His, I believe, have destined his hand to ano-ther; but his heart, I am sure, will always be yours.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY
                  (aside, in great confusion.)
                  What can he mean?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  My friend adores you, Madam; he has the power and the will to make you happy—to place you in affluence and splendor—it is true, that, cir-cumscribed by a father's authority, he cannot offer you his hand—but—
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  No more, Sir—this insult is too plain
(turns, and weeps).
Oh! why am I thus weak?— indignation, scorn, contempt would better become me.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  She is strangely moved! in tears too! —her beau-tiful disorder affects me—surely I have been to blame.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY
                  (endeavouring to seem composed)
                  I will not ask you, Sir, what you have observed in my behaviour, which could encourage you to treat me thus freely.—You, no doubt, act upon principle; and it is not surprizing that persons, who hold riches to be the greatest good, should think they are more than an equivalent for vir-tue.
               
               
                  

                  COURTENEY.
                  Charming creature!
aside.
                  
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  You boast your friend's rank and affluence— it belongs, indeed, to the great to be licentious with impunity. My humbler fate makes other maxims safer. I have been taught to think poverty a less evil than dishonour; and to aspire to that distinction only, which is attainable by all, the dis-tinction due to virtue.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  How could I harbour a profane thought of such a woman!
(aside)
—I have offended so greatly. Ma-dam, that I hardly dare solicit, much less hope for pardon; but if you knew—
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  No apologies, Sir, to me; your offence is gene-ral, and proceeds from the bad opinion you have formed of my sex; yet to judge of all, from an acquaintance, perhaps, with the worst, is an error which a man of sense ought surely to have avoided. —It is sinning against conviction, for, whatever libertines pretend, the contempt they feel for those they have seduced, is a proof of that secret ho-mage which all men pay to virtue.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I am ashamed and confounded at what has past— yet permit me—
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  No more, Sir; we must be strangers for the fu-ture; therefore return the letter I gave you, I shall find a fitter way of conveying it.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Do not, Madam, deprive me of an opportunity of doing yon this small service.
               
               
                  

            Dramatis Personae.
            
               
                  Earl of Belmont, Father to Lord Clairville. Mr. CLARKE.
               
                  Lord Clairville, under the Name of Belmour. Mr. SMITH.
               
                  Courteney, under the Name of Freeman, Governor to Lord Clairville. Mr. POWELL.
               
                  Will, Servant to Courteney. Mr. CUSHING.
               
                  Lady Autumn, a Widow. Mrs. WARD.
               
                  Miss Autumn, Daughter of Lord Autumn by a former Wife. Mrs. BULKLEY.
               
                  Miss Courteney, Sister to Courte-ney, under the Name of D'Arcy. Miss MORRIS.
               
                  Simple, Woman to Lady Au-tumn. Miss PIERCE.
               
                  Betty, Woman to Miss Autumn. Mrs. GARDINER.
            
            SCENE, Windsor.
            
         
      
      
         
            

                  MISS COURTENEY
                  (with some emotion.)
                  No, Sir, no—that letter would introduce you to the friendship of a man, whose sentiments and conduct are very different from yours.—Alas! what would his generous heart suffer, were he to know the insult his sister has been subjected to this day!
               
               turns and weeps.
               
                  COURTENEY
                  (looking earnestly at her.)
                  Her brother! — good heaven! —should it be possible!
(takes out the letter, and reads the direc-tion.)
Ha! "To Mr. Courteney!"—her well-known hand too!—confusion! have I then been all this time practising on the virtue of my sister!
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY
                  (turning towards him.)
                  Give me the letter, Sir.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  The letter belongs to me; for oh! my dear Harriet, my amiable, my virtuous sister! I—I, am Courteney—I am your your brother.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Is it possible!
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I am; nay, shrink not from my embrace—and yet your doubts are natural; you were so young when we parted, it is impossible you should recol-lect my features.—But I have tokens that may convince you; see here, your mother's picture; this bracelet of her hair; her last dear gift.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  You are—you are my brother! but why have you concealed yourself so long? and why—why this severe trial of your sister?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  My dear Harriet, I must take shame to myself; I knew you not under a borrowed name, and in a

place where I so little expected to meet you;—I shall never think on what has passed without the deepest confusion and remorse. Anxious to pre-serve my pupil from offending his father by an unequal marriage, and suspicious of your real cha-racter, I have insulted innocence; and Heaven, to punish me, has turned that insult on my sister.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Oh! that my brother may be taught by this ad-venture, never more to insult distress and inno-cence; and to consider every virtuous, unprotected young woman as a sister. Alas! I was afraid my slight from my aunt had exposed me to your sus-picions.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I know your motives; they free you from all blame.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  But why did you assume the name of Freeman?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I believe you already guess, that the young gen-tleman you see with me is the Earl of Belmont's son, whom I have accompanied in his travels; his father having provided a match for him, he pre-vailed upon me to come with him privately to Eng-land, in order to see his intended bride without being known by her.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  His intended bride!
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Yes, his intended bride;—but why this emotion, sister? You love Mr. Belmour:—ah! this is what I fear;—but remember, my dear Harriet, that Mr. Belmour is Lord Clairville, and never can be yours; and, were he weak enough to offer you his hand, I am bound in honour to prevent it. He was com-mitted

to my care by my benefactor and my friend; and, should I encourage his passion for you, it would be such a scandalous breach of trust as would sink me below the meanest of mankind. By Heaven, I would rather lose my life than incur the infamy of having betrayed my pupil into a clandes-tine marriage with my sister.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Be calm, brother, and place some confidence in me; you will find that I deserve it.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  'Tis well, then promise me to conceal your name and family still from Lord Clairville; if he knows I am your brother, he will possibly be weak enough to expect my concurrence with his designs; and my fixed resolution to oppose them may occasion a breach between us.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Heaven forbid!
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Nor would I have Miss Autumn know me yet by any other name than Freeman.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  And is this necessary?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I am apprehensive, from her mistaken kindness for you, that she will certainly acquaint Lord Clair-ville with the truth.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Well, I will be entirely governed by you.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Then, my dear Harriet, you must resolve to go with me to-morrow to your aunt: I am assured that she is very desirous of being reconciled to you;

and you cannot with any propriety stay here, where Lord Clairville may have such easy access to you.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  To return to my aunt, is the hardest injunction you have laid upon me yet; but even in this you shall be obeyed.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  To-morrow morning early a post-chaise shall be ready for you; I will join you on the road, and conduct you to Essex.—But how is this, Harriet? You are in tears;—I expected more firmness from you.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  I am to blame—but—
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Here is somebody coming,— retire and compose yourself; and oh! remember the honour of your brother is in your keeping.
               
               
                  MISS COURTENEY.
                  Farewell; rely upon me.
               
               
                  Exit Miss Courteney.
               
                  COURTENEY
                  (looking after her.)
                  It were a sin to doubt her, yet she loves Lord Clairville; what a difficult task does my situation impose upon me! compelled to make two persons miserable, whose happiness I would purchase at the expence of my own.
               
               
                  Enter Lady Autumn.
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  Waiting in expectation of my coming.— So it should be— a passionate lover will always prevent the hour.
Aside.
                  
               
               
                  

                  COURTENEY
                  (without seeing her.)
                  If I can but avoid a discovery till I have placed her out of his reach, my honour will be safe.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  Lost in tender contemplation!
Aside.
                  
                  Mr. Freeman!
(advancing.)
                  
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  I ask your Ladyship's pardon, I did not see you.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  No! well, here I am, according to my promise— but you must not impute this condescension—you must not presume upon it.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Presume! Madam.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  Nay, positively you shall not gaze upon me thus;—I shall blush ten times more if you do.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Gaze upon you! Madam.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  How his respect for me embarrasses him!
(aside.)
You were talking to me this morning of your friend's passion, Mr. Freeman; you remember the phrase—your friend's passion—need I tell you that I am — very favourably —disposed —to hear all you have to say upon that subject?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  My friend's passion! —I must put that notion out of her head
(aside).
Oh! dear Madam, I was only jesting.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  How, Sir?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Raillery, I do assure your Ladyship.
               
               
                  

                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  I am confounded!
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  You were certainly mistaken, Madam, if you looked upon my friend's attachment in any other light than meer gallantry.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  This is strange! yet he owns an attachment; that is something, however
(aside).
—So then I am to suppose that—
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Nothing more than such homage as the young and beautiful will always claim from our sex.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  When you speak of beauty, there I am sure you flatter; and yet poor Lord Autumn used to think —but Lord Autumn, perhaps, was singular in his opinion.
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  What does she mean?
Aside.
                  
               
               
                  Enter Footman.
               
                  FOOTMAN.
                  Madam, Miss Autumn sends to acquaint your Ladyship, that the coffee is upon the table.
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  What an unseasonable interruption!
(aside).
— Mr. Freeman, I do not think you have any great inclination for coffee?
               
               
                  COURTENEY.
                  Indeed I have, Madam; I will attend your Lady-ship
(offering his hand).
                  
               
               
                  LADY AUTUMN.
                  I protest he trembles; all this inconsistency is nothing but extreme respect
aside
—Come, Sir, we will talk of this affair another time.
               
               
                  Exeunt Courteney and Lady Autumn.
               END OF THE SECOND ACT.
            
            
               

               ACT III.
               
                  SCENE I. The Drawing-Room.
                  
                  
                     Miss Autumn and her Woman.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     I AM astonished! — Leave me to-morrow morn-ing, and return to her aunt! What can have occasioned this sudden resolution? Sure Lady Au-tumn has not affronted her!—Betty—
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Madam—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Have you observed any coldness lately between Lady Autumn and Miss D'Arcy?—She talks of leaving me to-morrow. I am afraid she has taken some disgust.
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     O, dear Ma'am, you are quite mistaken; Miss D'Arcy has other thoughts in her head.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Other thoughts! What do you mean?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Lord, Ma'am, I mean nothing, not I; but I know—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     What do you know?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Nay, Ma'am, I know nothing, not I;—but I have seen something, and I have been told some-thing.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Then, pray, say something. What have you seen? and what have you heard?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     For that matter, Ma'am, nobody knows how to keep a secret better than I do.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Oh! if you have been trusted with a secret—I shall not tempt you to betray it, I assure you.—Go, and tell Miss D'Arcy, that I wish to speak with her here—
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Depend upon it, Ma'am, Miss D'Arcy will con-fess nothing; she has carried this matter too closely.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     You would fain disclose this secret, I perceive; but I will not gratify my curiosity at the expence of your fidelity.—Go, and deliver my message.
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Nay, Ma'am, since you will have it—though, I am sure, I never thought to have told—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Be gone, impertinent; I will not hear you.
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Nay, Ma'am, what I know is no great matter; it is only, that Mr. Freeman is in love with Miss D'Arcy.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     What is that you say? Come back—Mr. Free-man in love with Miss D'Arcy! impossible!
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Oh, dear Ma'am, why impossible? Miss D'Arcy is a fine young lady; and, to be sure, Mr. Freeman doats upon her.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Doats upon her! —Tormenting wretch! — But tell me instantly all you know.
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     I would have told you before, Ma'am; but you were so nice about betraying a secret—you would not hear me.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     That is true;—but this is a secret which ought not to be concealed. You know, Miss D'Arcy is my friend—she may be taking some rash step.—It is fit I should enquire into this matter.—So, Mr. Freeman is her lover, then?
sighs.
                     
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Yes, Ma'am, I am sure he is; for you must know, Ma'am, that they met here, in this very room, to-day: I saw them with my own eyes;—I was passing by the door when they were in earnest discourse.—Now, I abhor listening, Ma'am—I am above it:—so I stood still, and shut the door half-way, that they might not see me; but I could scarcely hear a word they said—they talked so low. —At last, I saw Miss D'Arcy burst into tears; and presently afterwards, Mr. Freeman threw his arms about her neck, and kissed her.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Kissed her! and did she suffer that?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Yes, indeed, did she, Ma'am; and kissed him again, very cordially too.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Amazement! Her motive for leaving me is now too plain.
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     To be sure, Ma'am. Why, Ma'am, Mr. Free-man is to go along with her.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     How do you know that?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     Why, Ma'am, you must know that Mr. William, Mr. Freeman's servant—his gentleman, I should say; for he is above wearing a livery—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     What is that to the purpose? Go on—
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     I hope you will excuse me, Ma'am;—but Mr. William has for some days made his addresses to me, upon honourable terms.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Absurd creature! What then?
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     He told me, Ma'am, under a promise of se-cresy, that his master was certainly going to steal a marriage with Miss D'Arcy; for that he had or-dered him to hire a post-chaise for her; that he was to attend her as far as London, and Mr. Freeman was to join them there; but where they were to proceed afterwards, he did not know.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     It is certainly so!—What a dupe have I been all this time!—Treacherous Harriet!
                  
                  
                     BETTY.
                     If I had thought this news would have discom-posed you so much, Ma'am, I would not have told you.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Discomposed! What is it to me whom Mr. Free-man marries?—Leave me.
                  
                  
                     Exit Betty.
                  
                     

            THE SISTER: A COMEDY.
            
               ACT I.
               
                  SCENE I. Windsor Park.
                  
                     Lord Clairville and Courteney meeting.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I THOUGHT I should find you here, my Lord: this new taste for solitude is a mortal symptom in your distemper. A lover seldom desires better company than his own thoughts.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I should have been glad of your company, how-ever. Why did you not join me sooner?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I come now to bring you unwelcome news—the Earl of Belmont is in town.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My father in town!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Will, whom I sent to London upon some parti-cular business, is just now returned, and tells me my Lord came from his country-seat two days ago.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN
                     (alone).
                     Discomposed!—yes, I feel it but too sensibly.— Ungrateful Harriet! But why do I complain of her? Have I not always affected to despise this man? laughed at, and raillied him continually? He is coming! Let me laugh and railly still. Let me conceal my weakness at least.— It will not be! I cannot look at him without betraying myself.
                  
                  going.
                  
                     Enter Courteney.
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Miss Autumn, you are wanted at the quadrille-table.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     I shall not play to-night, Sir.
Exit.
                     
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     That was spoke in a peevish tone—I am sure:— her eyes seemed full of tears too. Can that im-penetrable heart have feelings! Charming creature! She only wants a little sensibility to make her ir-resistible.
                  
                  
                     Enter Lord Clairville.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I am in no humour to play this evening—dear Courteney, take my place—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     That you may have an opportunity of entertain-ing Miss D'Arcy.—Is it not so, my Lord?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I confess it is. But why must I find you eter-nally in my way? What is it you apprehend?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Great inconveniences, from this attachment, my Lord; and I think it my duty to oppose it.
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I must dissemble with him
(aside).
—What! do you imagine I am weak enough to be honourably in love with this girl?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Ha! and do you own, my Lord, you have disho-nourable designs upon this girl, as you call her?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Why, if I had, what then?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     What then! confusion! dishonourable designs upon—upon—this is too much, my Lord. Let us talk no more upon this subject.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     This is astonishing! By Heaven, his colour changes; what can this mean?
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My Lord, I must advise, nay I intreat, you to think no more of Miss D'Arcy; you will find insuperable difficulties in your way. Hereafter I will explain myself more fully.
                  
                  bows, and exit.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Stay, Courteney; I insist upon your explaining yourself now—gone!—what am I to think of this? he loves her himself perhaps—what then? does he expect I should resign her to him? has he been base enough?—no, that is not possible.
                  
                  
                     Enter Miss Courteney.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I thought Mr. Freeman had been with you, Sir?
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Mr. Freeman! Madam? it was Mr. Freeman then you wished to see?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I have a little business with him.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Business with Mr. Freeman! Madam? how long has Mr. Freeman been honoured with your confidence?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I always esteemed Mr. Freeman. Sir.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Well, Madam, he is worthy of your esteem.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     He seems chagrined at something
(aside).
—Will you not join the company, Sir, in the next room?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Her looks are colder than usual; but I will clear up all my doubts at once
(aside).
—Indulge me with a few moments. Madam, while I intreat your pardon for having concealed my real name and circumstances from you. I am now at liberty to declare myself, since my father, by this time, knows my resolution never to marry the lady he designed for me.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     What would he say?
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My name is not Belmour; it is Clairville. I am son to the Earl of Belmont, and heir to his title and estate; but title and estate with you, I am sure, will weigh nothing, if the man is unworthy. But if, as Belmour, I have been so fortunate as to

gain your esteem, you will not refuse your hand to Clairville.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Generous youth! oh, my hard fate!
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     You turn from me; you answer me not. — Was it then a vain hope I flattered myself with, when I believed I was not disagreeable to you?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTEVEY.
                     Oh! brother, what a task have you imposed upon me!
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Keep me not, dear Miss D'Arcy, in this cruel suspence—but why do I say suspence?—your silence speaks plainly enough—your affections are bestowed upon another.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Oh! think not so, my Lord; my heart—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Go on, Madam, I conjure you.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Is sensible to your worth; but—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Finish the harsh sentence, Madam; you love another.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Love another! oh, heavens!
(aside)
— What can I say, my Lord? the honour you do me de-mands my most grateful acknowledgements; but there are obstacles—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My father—he will consent, perhaps—if not, he will forgive.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I understand you, my Lord. No, this can ne-ver be—there are difficulties which cannot be sur-mounted.—Yet do not suppose me ungrateful— insensible of—what am I going to say?—Think of me no more, my Lord, and obey the commands of your father.
                  
                  
                     Exit Miss Courteney.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Think of her no more!—difficulties that never can be surmounted!—Courteney said the very same words!—I fear it is too true that they love each other. Their secret conferences, the simularity of their conduct, their mutual confusion and reserve, all contribute to heighten my suspicions. Distrac-tion! this double jealousy of the objects both of my friendship and my love is intolerable.—Can then Courteney?—I cannot bear these doubts—I must and will be satisfied.
Exit.
                     
                  
                  
                     Enter Lady Autumn and Simple.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Did Betty tell you this?
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Yes, indeed, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     It cannot be—I will not believe it—I know I am the object of his secret affection.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     I would lay ever so much, your Ladyship is mistaken.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Simple, I begin to think you have not so much understanding as I once imagined you had.
                  
                  
                     

                     SIMPLE.
                     Here is Mr. Belmour; Madam, pray ask him: I dare say he knows all his secrets.
                  
                  
                     Enter Clairville.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Leave me.
(exit Simple.)
—Mr. Belmour, where have you been this half hour?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE
                     (with impatience.)
                     Is Mr. Freeman gone home, Madam?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     No, certainly; he sups here to-night, and you too, I hope.—We will join him in the garden, he is there—but first, Mr. Belmour, I would ask you a question—do you suspect your friend to be in love?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Ha! this may lead to a discovery
(aside).
—I do, Madam.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     You do?—well, that is candidly said. And so do I
(laughs).
—Poor Freeman!—yes, he is in love; a person of the least discernment in the world might have perceived his passion.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Then your Ladyship has perceived it?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     His sighs, his languishments, his tender assi-duity.—Do you imagine all this could escape ob-servation?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Yet it did mine—how have I been deceived?
                  
                  aside.
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     But has he not trusted you with the secret?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Me, Madam! was it likely he would own his passion to me?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I think so; but you have found it out, however; and, I doubt not can guess the object.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE
                     (sighing.)
                     Yes, Madam, I believe I can—but your Ladyship knows, I am sure.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I vow this is very provoking—know—yes, cer-tainly, I know—that is, I can guess—but sure you would not be so unpolite, as to oblige me to name her?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Well, Madam, I will name her then; but your Ladyship must condescend—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Condescend—bless me! you are leading me very far, methinks—I will not hear another word upon this subject —you are making conditions for your friend, I find;—but come, tell me what would you have me condescend to?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     When I have named the lady, to tell me if I have guessed truly.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Well, I protest this is a very modest request!— and to you would have me own—but name her— name her.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Miss D'Arcy.
                  
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN
                     (looking disappointed).
                     Miss D'Arcy! Is this your discernment? You never was more mistaken in your life.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Am I mistaken, Madam?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Certainly; but I know upon what grounds— Miss D'Arcy has surprized us all, with a sudden resolution to go into the country to-morrow; and Miss Autumn's tattling woman has told us, that it is at Mr. Freeman's instigation— that he has pro-vided a post-chaise for her, and is to conduct her himself. She pretends to know this from his own servant—idle stuff—but we will railly him upon it.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     So! it is all out; persidious Courteney!
Aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Well, what do you think of this absurd report?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     That it may possibly be true, Madam; for you say Miss D'Arcy is to leave you to-morrow.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Yes, but not to steal a marriage with Mr. Free-man. Ha! ha! ha! how people may be deceived! Do you understand the language of the eyes, Mr. Belmour?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     The language of the eyes, Madam?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     If you did, you would not have been so much mistaken with regard to your friend's attachment; your suspicions would have fallen somewhere else, I assure you.—Come, shall we take the air in the garden? The sun is almost set.
                  
                  
                     

                     LORD CLAIRVILLE.
                     Excuse me, Madam; I have a little private bu-siness with Mr. Freeman.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     You will find him in the garden — I will bring you to him.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I will follow you. Madam.
(Exeunt Lady Au-tumn and Simple).
Perfidious Courtney! it is too plain he has supplanted me, basely supplanted me; and the story he has told me of his sister was in-vented to excuse his sudden absence. Is this the friend who possessed more than a brother's part of my affections? I have been his dupe, his bubble: I will find him instantly, acquaint him with my detection of his perfidy, and demand satisfaction.
                  
               
               END OF THE THIRD ACT.
            
            
               

               ACT IV.
               
                  SCENE I. A garden.
                  
                  
                     Enter Courteney and Miss Courteney talking.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     YES, my dear sister, I agree with you that Lord Clairville has acted with great delicacy; and this frank offer of his hand is a proof that his esteem of you is equal to his love—but do not carry your gratitude too far; do not encourage sentiments that must be suppressed: the Earl of Belmont will ne-ver consent to your marriage—I am bound by ho-nour to prevent it—endeavour then to banish him from your thoughts.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     To banish him from my thoughts, is—perhaps— not in my power; but never to be his without your approbation, I can, and do promise, because I am convinced you ought to act as you do.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     And you hold to your resolution of going to-morrow?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I do.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     How does this generous self-denial endear you to me! Believe me, my dear Harriet, it wrings my soul to be obliged thus to oppose your happiness— were any thing less than my honour at stake— but you are just enough to perceive the reasonable-ness of my conduct.
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My dear Courteney, I shall never be able to look my father in the face.—To return to England without his orders—to be three weeks here under a borrowed name—If he has been informed of this, how can I excuse my conduct?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Tell him the truth.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     The truth!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Yes—That his Lordship, in his last letter to you at Paris, proposed a match to you; your impatience to see the lady made you anticipate his orders for your return; you left Paris incognito, saw the lady at Ranelagh, and—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     What then?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Are ready to obey him.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Pshaw! why will you trifle? You know I can-not.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Cannot! my Lord—
gravely.
                     
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     No: Lady Ann does not please me.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Because Miss D'Arcy pleases you too well.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Pr'ythee, do not torment me, Courteney.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Doubtless, his Lordship will excuse the violence of a passion, which keeps you here at Windsor,

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     No more, I beg you, on this subject—but tell me, when you will permit me to regain the confidence of my friend?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Whom do you mean?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Miss Autumn—my sudden resolution to leave her to-morrow, without being able to give her a satisfactory reason for it; and your design of con-ducting me yourself, having by some means or other come to her knowledge, she suspects you are my lover, and her resentment—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Resentment! does the suspicion of my being your lover give her any concern?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I am to blame; I have betrayed my friend's se-cret, without being sure of his sentiments for her.
                  
                  Aside.
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     But tell me, dear Harriet, is it possible that Miss Autumn can be jealous?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Jealous! what an inference has your vanity drawn! Miss Courteney thinks I have entered into some engagements with you, and considers my not having communicated them to her, as a breach of our friendship.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY
                     (confused).
                     Yes, to be sure—that is very natural—then she is angry—but, as you say, she considers it as a breach of friendship—that indeed accounts for her

anger. But tell me, Harriet, are Miss Autumn's affections wholly disengaged? is there not one happy man in the world who has been able to touch her heart?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Perhaps I may not tell you that; but I will tell you whose heart she has touched.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     That is no great matter—whose?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Yours, brother.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     You may be mistaken.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Am I mistaken?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     No—now laugh if you will—but do not tell your friend; I would not swell her triumph, and be numbered in the list of her discarded admirers—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     There is no danger of that, I believe.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     But what proofs have you of her partiality for me?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     The strongest in one of her temper; she affects to hate you.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     That is a good sign, I confess.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     And me she has ceased to love; now that she suspects me to be her rival. I can perceive her heart is torn with jealousy, yet she affects her usual gaiety and unconcern—but indifference is of all

dispositions of the mind, the hardest to feign, and she is too little practised in dissimulation to feign it well.—I wish it were consistent with your plan to own our secret.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Do not press me on this subject;—my situation is already sufficiently perplexing.—Should Lord Clairville suspect you are my sister—but I think I see him in the next walk.—Leave me, dear Harriet:— I would not have him find us alone.
                  
                  
                     Exit Miss Courteney.
                  
                     Enter Lord Clairville.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     It was she!—They separated at my approach.— Both, both are perfidious—
(aside.)
                     
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My Lord, you seem chagrined at something!— What is the matter?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Ask your own heart!—Have you dealt ingenu-ously with me, in regard to the lady who parted from you this moment?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY
                     (hesitating).
                     My Lord—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I will spare you any further dissimulation, Sir: I know all.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I am sorry for it, my Lord, because it convinces me of my sister's imprudence.—She has broke her word with me: weak girl!
(aside.)
                     
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Your sister's imprudence!—Yes, that was one of your artifices, to furnish you with an excuse for quitting me—false, false Courteney!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Forbear these unjust reproaches, my Lord.—By Heaven! till this day, I knew not that my sister—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     No more of your evasions, Sir!—The story you told me of your sister, may, or may not be true: it matters not; though it is most likely it was feigned, to cover your designs upon Miss D'Arcy.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     He knows her not yet, I find: she has kept her promise—my generous sister!
(aside.)
                     
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     You knew my passion for Miss D'Arcy!—Con-fiding in your friendship, my unsuspecting heart trusted you without reserve; and, while you were treacherously supplanting me in her affections, I was weak enough to believe that your eagerness of opposition, was the effect of a prudential regard to my interest.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     And so it was—so it is still.—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Villain! 'tis false.—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Ha! Villain!—He thinks I have wronged him.— But then this outrage.—Villain! 'tis too much—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Yes, Villain! I repeat the term, and will support my assertion. Lead where you please, I will follow you.
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY
                     (after a pause).
                     No, my Lord; I will neither lead nor follow you at present. You think I am your rival—think so still.—After the treatment I have received from you, it would be mean to undeceive you.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Against such plain, such convincing circum-stances, what can you offer in your justification?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Nothing—I will offer nothing;—and yet I could undeceive you with a single word:—but you do not deserve this condescension, my Lord—you, who have condemned your friend unheard—who have suffered a light, ill-grounded suspicion to rob him of the merit of many years faithful attachment— injured, insulted, and branded him with the name of Villain!—while he—but no more.—Here-after you will know the motives upon which I have acted:—then, when shame and remorse for your offence have intitled you to my forgiveness, then I may think you worthy of an explanation.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     This language is very bold, Sir!—Sure, you forget—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Oh, no—I remember you are a Lord; a title greatly inferior to that of a man of honour.—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     How, Sir!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My Lord, nobility is virtue, or it is nothing.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Well, grant it possible I may have wronged you by my suspicions—answer me then one question; is it true, that you go with Miss D'Arcy to-morrow?
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     It is—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     You own it?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I do—and—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     No more!—I am convinced!—Thou mean se-ducer!—But hope not to carry it thus triumphant-ly!—Within this half hour, meet me behind the garden-wall:—there, if I cannot obtain satisfaction from the man, I will at least do justice on a coward!—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Coward! My Lord, I'll meet you.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     'Tis well—I shall expect you.

                           Exit Clairville.
                     
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY
                     (after a pause).
                     In taking revenge, a man is only even with his enemy; in passing it over, he is superior:—this sounds well; the practice is something difficult.— But is Lord Clairville my enemy?—a lover, and jealous! appearances strong too, against me! But such an outrage! Villain! Coward!
                  
                  
                     Enter Miss Courteney.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Oh, brother! how greatly you distress me! I heard high words between Lord Clairville and you: he shot by me this moment, with looks inflamed with rage—scarce bowed to me in passing!—I fear you have quarreled.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Calm yourself, dear Harriet; and conside in my prudence.
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Excuse me, brother; but I cannot help telling you, that your prudence has hitherto produced no-thing but confusion: by some means or other, the whole family knows that I go under your conduct to-morrow.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     This must be owing to some imprudence—I doubt—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Your relation to me being a secret, this has raised a suspicion of my having entered into a clan-destine engagement with you: on this account, Miss Autumn has withdrawn her friendship from me, Lord Clairville despises me, and you are be-come the object of his resentment. All these in-conveniences might have been prevented, had you declared yourself my brother.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Perhaps not.—Obliged as I am in honour to oppose Lord Clairville's passion for you, had I ac-knowledged you to be my sister, I should have ex-posed myself to importunities, which it would have been difficult to have rejected; and, after all, my conduct might have had the appearance of arti-fice.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     My heart forebodes some misfortune!—Were it not better to own me now to Lord Clairville, than to leave him in a mistake which draws his suspicions on you?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     It is, indeed, unlucky that he should suspect me to be his rival: had he been more temperate, I be-lieve I should have undeceived him; but now an explanation would seem cowardice.
walks aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY
                     (aside.)
                     Ah! I perceive how it is. I must and will pre-vent it.—Lady Autumn! this is fortunate!
                  
                  
                     Enter Lady Autumn.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I beg of you, dear Madam, not to quit Mr. Free-man!—Something has happened—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     What!—has he explained himself to you, then?
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Explained himself to me, Madam! I find your Ladyship knows something of the matter.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I believe I do.—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Then, Madam, you see the necessity of pre-venting—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I understand you.—Leave me with him.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     If I can but see Lord Clairville before they meet again—
aside, and exit hastily.
                     
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     'Tis so!—He has not had courage to declare his passion to me himself, and has employed her to mediate for him.—I think, I have carried punctilio far enough:—so respectful a flame deserves—he sees me, and advances.—Mr. Freeman, you have chosen the most retired part of the garden to walk in. These shades are a nurse for tender thoughts, as the poet says.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My thoughts, Madam!—
                  
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Come, come—I have known your thoughts for some time: I know you love—I know, too, that you are beloved.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     And do you condescend to tell me so, Madam?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I do; and yet perhaps I ought not: but your respectful silence has had its weight with me, I assure you.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     And has Miss Autumn, Madam, consented?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Miss Autumn, though mistress of her fortune by her father's will, has yet much to hope for from my favour:—she will hardly presume to offer any opposition; or, if she should—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Ah! Madam, did you not this moment flatter me with the hope of being beloved?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Yes; you are beloved: I repeat it.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Then, surely, no opposition is to be appre-hended!—Your consent secures my happiness!— Thus let me thank your Ladyship—
                  
                  kneels, and kisses her hand.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Oh! rise—These raptures!—Yet methinks he scarcely touched my hand—what invincible respect!
(aside.)
                     
                  
                  
                     

                     Enter a Footman.
                  
                  
                     FOOTMAN.
                     Madam, the Earl of Belmont is at the gate, and sends to know if your Ladyship is at home?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     The Earl of Belmont! I hardly know him.— Admit his Lordship. What can this visit mean?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     'Tis strange, yet it is lucky.—
(aside.)
Nothing could happen more fortunate for me. Madam, than my Lord Belmont's visit. Whatever be the oc-casion of it, his Lordship can acquaint you with some particulars relating to my family and charac-ter, which it is necessary you should know; and which will serve to shew you, that I am not wholly unworthy of the honour you design me.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I am impatient 'till I see him.—Adieu!
                  
                  
                     Exit Lady Autumn.
                  
                     Enter Miss Courteney.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Sure, never was any thing so unfortunate! Lord Clairville is not to be found.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My dear sister, I have the most surprizing news to tell you!—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     It is good news, then; for you look pleased.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Lady Autumn is the most generous woman in the world! and I am the happiest of men!—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     What do you mean?
                  
                  
                     

under a fictitious name, sighing at the feet of a young divinity, that has visited this sublunary world in the shape of an humble dependant upon a haughty lady of quality.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     What a blunder has Fortune committed, to place her in that state!—Courteney, she is an angel.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     An angel! Lovers have a fine creative fancy! It costs them little to make angels, goddesses, nymphs—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Are you apprehensive, then, that my passion for Miss D'Arcy may lead me too far?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Why, truly, my Lord, there seems to be some reason for my apprehension.—However this may be, some particular business obliges me to leave you.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Particular business! Is this affair to be a secret to your friend?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I have no secrets that I would hide from you, my Lord. My sister, whom you have often heard me mention with tenderness, though I have not seen her since she was a child, has privately with-drawn herself from an aunt, with whom she has resided since the death of her parents; and it is conjectured she is gone to Paris to meet me, my last letter to her being dated from thence.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Her aunt had made some prudent choice of a husband for her, perhaps—
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     Would you think it? Your dear, saucy, tor-menting, lovely friend, has owned an inclination for me to her step-mother; and this paragon of step-mothers, overlooking the inequality of for-tune, is determined to make us happy, and has promised me her hand.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     You amaze me!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     'Tis true! and just at the moment when I was preparing to acquaint her with my real name, Lord Belmont arrives; from whom the discovery will come with more advantage.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Lord Belmont here! my fears of a quarrel are at an end.—I suppose I am now at liberty to convince Miss Autumn that I cannot be her rival?—She promised to join me in the gar-den.—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Paint, if you can, your brother's transports; and obtain me permission to throw myself at her feet. Mean time, I will attend Lord Belmont, who is doubtless come hither in search of his son: our little excursion will draw some reproaches from him; but, when he knows all, I shall be justified in his opinion. As for you, my dear Harriet, your conduct has been so generous—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     No more on this subject, I intreat you.—I shall be impatient to know what passes between

the Earl and you.—You will find me here in the garden.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I'll come to you.—Adieu.
                  
                  Exeunt severally.
               
               END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
            
            
               

               ACT V.
               
                  SCENE I. The drawing-room.
                  
                  
                     Enter Lady Autumn and Lord Belmont.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     WHAT you tell me, my Lord, surprises me greatly; your son here in Windsor, under a borrowed name, and a constant visitor at my house—what an adventure!
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     It is very true, Madam; he left Paris with his governor some weeks ago, without acquainting me with their intention; and, as I am informed, have passed the greatest part of their time here.—Are there not two young gentlemen, who visit your Ladyship under the names of Belmour and Free-man?
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Pray, my Lord, which of them is your son?
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     He who calls himself Belmour; the other is his governor, a young man of a good family, but low fortunes, whose father was my friend; and upon that account, as well as for the good qualities I observed in him, I determined to take care of his fortune; I placed him at the university of Leyden, and, when he had finished his studies, sent him to travel with my son, to whose care I confided him—young as he is, his merit justified my choice of him for this trust.
                  
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     No doubt of it, my Lord;—all the world must approve of your choice; Mr. Freeman's merit— but Freeman is not his name, your Lordship says?
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     No, Madam; Courteney is his real name.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Courteney!—your Lordship had reason to say he is of a good family!—Courteney is a name that any person might be proud to own.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     And he always supported the honour of it till now.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     'Till now, my Lord;—I am sorry—your Lord-ship must excuse me—but any imputation cast upon Mr. Freeman—Mr. Courteney, I mean—
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     I see, Madam, you are prejudiced in his favour; I am not surprised at it—Courteney has many good qualities; but to me he has shewn himself ungrateful. I confided my son to his care; and he has either led him into this misconduct, or has concurred with him in it; either way he has be-trayed his trust.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     A youthful frolic; perhaps love.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Aye, Madam, that is what I apprehend.—Your Ladyship must excuse me; but, although Miss An-tumn is an accomplished young lady—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Your Lordship is extremely mistaken; Miss Autumn is not the object of Mr. Courteney's vows, I assure you.
                  
                  
                     

                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Mr. Courteney, Madam, is his own master: he may offer his vows where he pleases; but I per-suade myself your Ladyship will not encourage my son in a clandestine address to Miss Autumn, when you know that I have other views for him.— It was to tell you this, Madam, that I took the liberty to trouble you with a visit.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I do assure you, my Lord, I know of no cor-respondence between Lord Clairville and Miss Au-tumn—I never expected to be consulted by her upon these occasions; a mother-in-law of my years cannot be supposed to have much authority over a girl of one and twenty.
                  
                  
                     Enter Simple hastily.
                  
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     Oh! dear Madam, I am in such a fright! I hope your Ladyship will excuse me; but here is Mr. Belmour's servant, who tells us, that his mas-ter and Mr. Freeman have quarrelled, and are gone out to fight.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     What can this mean?—quarrelled!—with your leave. Madam—bid the fellow come hither.
                  
                  
                     Exit Simple.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     It cannot be, my Lord; I left Mr. Courteney a few minutes ago.
                  
                  
                     Enter William.
                  
                     WILLIAM.
                     My old Lord here! we are all blown up.
aside.
                     
                  
                  
                     

                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Well, Sir; what is the meaning of the alarm you have given the family?
                  
                  
                     WILLIAM.
                     Pray, my Lord, pardon me; I am but a ser-vant, and was obliged to obey the orders that were given me.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     What orders?
                  
                  
                     WILLIAM.
                     I brought my young Lord his pistols, as he com-manded me; and, to be sure, I believe some mischief is going forwards; for I know my Lord and his governor have quarrelled: I overheard them in the garden; I was behind an hedge—a challenge passed between them; and my young Lord, meeting me, sent me to bring his case of pistols. I fol-lowed my Lord unobserved, and saw which way he went; and some time afterwards I saw Mr. Courte-ney taking the same path.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Bring me instantly to the place; I may yet pre-vent their rashness.
                  
                  
                     Exeunt Lord Belmont and William.
                  
                     Enter Miss Courteney.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Oh! Madam, I thought my brother had been with you.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Your brother!—but this is no time for expla-nations. I'll follow Lord Belmont—my fears distract me.

                           Exit Lady Autumn.
                     
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Alas! what are your fears to mine!— Oh! Char-lotte!
                  
                  
                     Enter Miss Autumn.
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Well, Madam, your coquetry has produced fine effects!—two of the most amiable young men in the world are this moment, perhaps, dying by each other's hand, and you the cause! —false woman!—
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     My coquetry! dear Charlotte. Mr. Freeman!
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Name him not, would I had never seen him!— but you, how have you deceived me!—such insa-tiate vanity in one who pretended to be so far su-perior to all the little foibles of her sex!—who was continually pressing her grave rebukes upon me, and throwing out moral sentences at every turn— away—hypocrisy at eighteen—unnatural vice!
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     My dear Charlotte, these are unjust reproaches; I never was your rival—Mr. Freeman is my bro-ther.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Freeman your brother!—Freeman Mr. Cour-teney!—how barbarously have I treated you!
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Alas! perhaps I have no brother now; neither of us knew each other till this day, and then an accident—but I cannot enter into particulars—dear Charlotte, let us haste—
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Whither would you go, my dear? we shall have some intelligence presently—all the servants are gone after them.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Shocking intelligence, perhaps!—oh! why have I concealed this fatal secret so long?
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Why, indeed! but let me not blame you —I have been too rash already in my censures.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Sure the sight of Lord Belmont;— but he may come too late—I cannot bear this cruel suspence any longer.
going.
                     
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     (stopping her.)
                     Here is somebody coming—my dear, dear Har-riet; I give you joy! your brother's safe, it is him—
                  
                  
                     Enter Mr. Courteney.
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     My brother—thank Heaven!—but oh! Lord Clairville
(aside)
—what terrors have you caused us! where is your friend?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Be not alarmed, my dear; nothing has happened —but the whole house is in strange confusion; how came this foolish affair to be known?—Miss Au-tumn, ha! she looks as if she had been weeping, delightful thought! her fears perhaps for me.
(Going up to Miss Autumn)
Will you pardon me, Ma-dam, for the disingenuity I have been guilty of, in appearing before you so long under a borrowed name? my sister may have informed you that—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN.
                     Your sister, Sir, has been under too much anxi-ety for you to enter into explanations—my dear

Harriet, when you have chid your brother suffi-ciently for the fright he has put you into, come and give me the history of this pretty adventure, that I may know whether I ought to pardon him or not.

                           Exit Miss Autumn.
                     
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Oh! brother, what affliction would you have spared me, had you permitted me to undeceive Lord Clairville?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     As things were situated, it was not fit you should.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     But have you met?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Yes, I met him; I thought I could not in ho-nour avoid it.
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     Oh! Heavens—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Be calm, and hear the event; he brought pistols, and insisted upon my taking one; he then bid me fire: I refused, saying, that, as I was resolved he should in every point be the aggressor, he should fire first; he did, and missed me, and on my soul I believe designedly; for by the changes in his coun-tenance, I could perceive that grief, and not anger, was then the predominant passion in his mind—my turn was next; I fired my pistol in the air, then calmly told him, that his father was here, and that I would explain myself in his presence; he spoke not a word, but bowed and left me, and we took differ-ent paths to the house—but tell me, dear Harriet, does Miss Autumn seem to know her mother's fa-vourable intentions? has she acknowledged any thing to you?
                  
                  
                     

                     MISS COURTENEY.
                     I have seen her but for a few moments since you left me, and neither of us was then in a humour to enter upon a discourse of that kind; but now that she knows who you are, she will certainly have no reserves to me.— Adieu! I am going to her.
                  
                  
                     Exit Miss Courteney.
                  
                     COURTENEY
                     (alone.)
                     Lady Autumn's generosity is so surprizing, that it looks more like caprice than a design taken up upon reflection; I don't know what to make of it.
                  
                  
                     Enter Lord Belmont.
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     So, Sir, you are here; I have been in search of you: where is my son? How has your honourable rencounter ended?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Not dis-honourably, my Lord, for either of us— Lord Clairville will be here this moment, he will do me the justice to acknowledge that this affair was forced upon me.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Ungrateful youth! and dare you own! to me too, dare you own a quarrel with my son?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My Lord, I can no more suffer an injury, than I dare do one.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     This is the language of conscious worth, and but ill becomes a man who has so basely betrayed the trust that was reposed in him.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Basely betrayed my trust, my Lord!
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Yes, Sir, basely.
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     No—the old lady is a bigoted Roman Catho-lick—and, having a large fortune to bestow, at-tempted to make a proselyte of the poor girl, pro-mising her, in that case, to settle her estate upon her. This failing, she laid a scheme for entrapping her into a convent; which my sister being informed of, fled to me.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Who gave you this intelligence?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     A friend of my father's, whom I accidentally met with upon the terrace, who had seen me at Leyden, while I was at the university there, and knew me immediately. We cannot hope, you see, to be longer concealed; therefore it is absolutely necessary, my Lord, that you should present your-self as soon as possible to your father.—What do you resolve to do, my Lord?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Give me a day or two to consider.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     But, in the mean time, my sister—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     True—You ought to fly immediately to her assistance.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     And leave you here, my Lord?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Why not? Do you doubt my prudence?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your Lordship's in love.
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     This reproach, this unjust reproach, my Lord— but you have been my benefactor; I know how much that sacred title claims from me—rail on, my Lord; you shall never force me to be ungrateful.
                  
                  
                     Enter Clairville.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My father! how can I appear before you after what has passed? how can I hope for pardon?
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Rise, Clairville; you have been to blame, but so have I; your fault has been the consequence of my imprudent choice of a governor for you. You have forgot your duty, but he was your seducer.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     No, my Lord; whatever reason I may have to complain of Mr. Courteney in one particular in-stance in which I only am concerned, yet let me justify to yourself your choice: he has in every re-spect fulfilled your intentions, and faithfully dis-charged the trust which you reposed in him.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Faithfully discharged his trust! he who could engage in licentious brawls with his pupil, and at-tempt the life of one committed to his care.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My Lord—
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Be silent, you can say nothing that can exte-nuate guilt like this. Mr. Courteney, after what has happened, you must not reckon upon my friend-ship—the salary I allowed you while travelling with my son, is yours for life—but we must meet no more; if you consider the loss of my protection

as a misfortune, remember you have yourself only to blame for it.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     There is but one real misfortune, my Lord, which a man can suffer; and that is, when he is conscious of a crime, and has any thing to re-proach himself with. The salary your Lordship offers me I will not accept; judging of me as you do, you cannot mean it as a reward; and, low as my fortunes are, I will not be indebted to compas-sion, for that which your esteem only ought to be-stow upon me. Lord Clairville, I promised you an explanation before your father; and—
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Hold, Sir; it is but just that I should first clear you of an imputation which cannot wound you, more than it has me.—My Lord, you have re-proached Mr. Courteney without cause; he sought not my life, but gave it me when in his power: I urged him with the most opprobrious terms to ac-cept my challenge; and when my rashness had given him an advantage, he forbore to take it.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     If this be true, I have wronged him, greatly wronged him.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Oh! Courteney, a treacherous rival and a gene-rous enemy! how can you reconcile this contra-diction?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I never was your rival, my Lord; it is my sister whom you have all this time addressed under the name of D'Arcy.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Miss D'Arcy your sister?
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     Neither she nor I knew this circumstance till to-day, when an accident which I shall ever remem-ber discovered us to each other. I opposed your passion for her at first through prudence; but, when I knew her to be my sister, my honour was more immediately concerned, to prevent the continuance of an attachment which could never have the sanc-tion of your father's consent; my sister, with a spi-rit becoming her birth, adopted my sentiments; she refused your offered hand, and consented that I should conduct her where you could not have ac-cess to her; hence rose your jealousy, and the con-sequences that followed.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Courteney, you have acted nobly in this affair.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I have done my duty.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     But what brought your sister hither? and why did she conceal her name?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     She took refuge with Miss Autumn from the bigotry of her aunt, who, not having been able to pervert her to the Roman Catholick religion by the offer of settling her whole fortune upon her, was laying schemes to entrap her into a convent.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Something of this I heard before, and had determined to enquire into it.—Is Miss Courteney still here?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     She is, my Lord; but to-morrow I shall take her into the country; Lord Clairville will then, I hope, forget a slight impression, which he will have no oppurtunity of increasing.
                  
                  
                     

                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Generous youth!—Yet you have one more task to perform, worthy your disinterestedness:—engage my son—I know your influence over him—engage him to submit to my choice.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Alas! my Lord, were it possible for me to cease to love Miss Courteney, your commands were suf-ficient.—In this, and only in this one point, I can-not obey you.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Courteney, I rely upon your honour.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     You may, my Lord, securely.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Worthy son of a father whom I loved and esteemed! I will not intreat you to pardon the harsh treatment you have received from me, till I have made you an atonement equal to the injury.—I leave you to complete your reconciliation with your friend.
                  
                  
                     Exit Lord Belmont.
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I scarce can look up to you, Courteney! —Such nobleness, such generosity, to fall under my mean suspicions!—Can you forgive me?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Let us exchange forgiveness, my Lord.—I was to blame for leaving you so long in a mistake which occasioned these suspicions.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My friend! my brother!—yes, Courteney, it must be so—your sister—
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     Think of her no more, my Lord.—Are you not convinced, by what has past to-day, that you are not to expect my concurrence in this affair?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Alas! I am, indeed!—Yet leave your sister to her own determination.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     My sister is already determined.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I see I am doomed to be miserable! There is no hope of obtaining my father's consent; and your too rigid honour—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Banish from your heart, then, a hopeless passion; and, if possible, bend your will to your father's choice.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Never. Do not urge me on that head: my re-solution is fixed.
                  
                  
                     Enter Lord Belmont, Lady Autumn, Miss Autumn, Miss Courteney, and Simple.
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Oh! Mr. Freeman—Mr. Courteney, I mean— how have you distressed me! But I have pardoned you.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your Ladyship is all goodness.
                  
                  
                     Goes to Miss Autumn. They talk apart.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Clairville, you have still my pardon to obtain. — May I promise myself that you will merit it, by submitting to my will?
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Alas! my Lord, what can I say? I have not a heart to bestow: I can promise only a negative obedience—I will not dispose of myself without your consent; but—
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     This you promise, then?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I do, my Lord.
(sighing.)
                     
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     'Tis something, though not all that I have a right to expect from you.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     You have, indeed, my Lord, a right to expect my obedience in all things possible; but I can never—
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Make no rash resolutions, son; for I will be obeyed. Behold my choice!
                  
                  
                     (Taking Miss Courteney's hand, and leading her towards him.)
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY
                     (surprized.)
                     My Lord!
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     My father! can this be real?
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Take her, Clairville; the best, the worthiest gift a father can bestow, a truly virtuous woman! She who could sacrifice her fortune to her con-science, and subject her inclinations to her duty; who could despise riches, and triumph over love; she brings you in herself a treasure more valuable than both the Indies. Take her, my son; and en-deavour to deserve her.
                  
                  
                     

                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Best of fathers!—this amazing goodness!—Oh! let me thank you thus—
(kneels.)
                     
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT.
                     Courteney, I have yet but half discharged the debt I owe you.—Generous young man! had I a daughter—but in all things, except the name, I am your father.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     All the gratitude, the reverence, the duty, that sacred title claims, expect from me, my Lord.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Mr. Courteney, after such a testimony to your merit, I need not blush to declare my intentions—
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     I acknowledge your Ladyship's goodness.—You have permitted me to hope for favour here—
(ad-dressing himself to Miss Autumn.)
—How blest should I be, if you, Madam, would confirm it!
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     How is this!
                  
                  
                     MISS COURTENEY
                     (half aside to Miss Autumn.)
                     Now, dear Charlotte, do not play off any of your too agreeable airs.—Did you not, half an hour ago, own to me that—
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     (smiling.)
                     Ah! do not betray me.—Well, Sir, since you have obtained my mama's consent, though I can-not imagine how, I will not hazard the loss of her favour by my disobedience.—Here is my hand, since it must be so.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Charming creature! to deserve it, will be my glory.
                  
                  
                     

                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     I am confounded!—Simple—do I dream?
                  
                  aside to her.
                  
                     SIMPLE.
                     No, indeed, Madam, you do not dream now; you are but just awake, and have been dreaming all this time—I always told your Ladyship, that if the gentleman was in love, it must be with one of the young ladies.
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Confusion!
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     What can this disorder mean? dear Madam, if I have been so unfortunate as to have offended you—
                  
                  
                     LADY AUTUMN.
                     Ah, that seducing accent!—Simple, even at this moment might not one believe?—but I shall re-lapse—lead me to my chamber—my Lord, a sud-den indisposition—oh! what a delusion!
                  
                  
                     Exeunt Lady Autumn and Simple.
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Here is some mystery.
                  
                  
                     MISS AUTUMN
                     (aside to Miss Courteney.)
                     I could unfold it, I believe.
                  
                  
                     LORD BELMONT
                     
                        (to Miss Autumn.)
                     Be not uneasy, Madam; I take upon myself to reconcile Lady Autumn to your generous choice.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Lord Clairville, I give you joy; and yet con-gratulations from me, on the completion of your

wishes, may appear self-interested; but, if my sister continues to maintain those sentiments she has this day manifested, the rectitude of her heart will, in some measure, atone for the inferiority of her rank and fortune. As for me, though perhaps I have proved myself rather too young to be your go-vernor, I am yet old enough to be your friend, and shall ever be proud of that distinction, not from the consideration of your wealth and honour; but because I am convinced that you want neither example, nor precept to instruct you, that there are no characters so truly noble, as that of a woman of virtue, and a man of real honour.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            

            EPILOGUE.
            Written by Dr. GOLDSMITH.
            Spoken by Mrs. BULKLEY.
            
               WHAT! five long acts—and all to make us wiser!
               Our authoress sure has wanted an adviser.
               Had she consulted me, she should have made
               Her moral play a speaking masquerade.
               Warm'd up each bustling scene, and in her rage
               Have emptied all the Green-room on the stage.
               My life on't, this had kept her play from sinking,
               Have pleas'd our eyes, and sav'd the pain of thinking.
               Well, since she thus has shewn her want of skill,
               What if I give a masquerade? I will.
               But how! ay, there's the rub!
(pausing)
I've got my cue:
               The world's a masquerade! the masquers, you, you, you.
               To Boxes, Pit, Gall.
               Lud! what a groupe the motley scene discloses!
               False wits, false wives, false virgins, and false spouses:
               Statesmen with bridles on; and, close beside 'em,
               Patriots, in party colour'd suits, that ride 'em.
               There Hebes, turn'd of fifty, try once more,
               To raise a flame in Cupids of threescore.
               These, in their turn, with appetites as keen,
               Deserting fifty, fasten on fifteen.
               Miss, not yet full fifteen, with fire uncommon,
               Flings down her sampler, and takes up the woman:
               The little urchin smiles, and spreads her lure,
               And tries to kill ere she's got power to cure.
               Thus 'tis with all—Their chief and constant care
               Is to seem every thing—but what they are.
               Yon broad, bold, angry, spark, I fix my eye on,
               Who seems t' have robb'd his vizor from the lion,
               Who frowns, and talks, and swears, with round parade.
               Looking, as who should say, Damme! who's afraid!
                  mimicking.
               
               Strip but his vizor off, and sure I am,
               You'll find his lionship a very lamb.
               Yon politician, famous in debate,
               Perhaps to vulgar eyes bestrides the state;
               Yet, when he deigns his real shape t' assume,
               He turns old woman, and bestrides a broom.
               Yon patriot too, who presses on your sight,
               And seems to every gazer all in white;
               If with a bribe his candour you attack,
               He bows, turns round, and whip—the man's a black!
               Yon critic too—but whither do I run?
               If I proceed, our bard will be undone!
               Well then, a truce, since she requests it too;
               Do you spare her, and I'll for once spare you.
            
         
      
   


                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Can you think me weak enough to form a rash engagement with a young woman, to whose birth and circumstances I am wholly a stranger.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     You are in love, my Lord.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     You are determined, then, to acquaint my father with my being here?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Certainly, unless you resolve to present yourself to him immediately. My friendship for you, my Lord, has already carried me farther than it ought: I have indulged you, in coming over privately, that you might gratify your curiosity with a sight of the lady your father designs for you; this done, you promised to go back with me to Paris, there to wait his express orders for your return; but you have not kept your word. You still linger here— my remonstrances have hitherto been fruitless.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Well, since it must be so, I will go back with you to Paris.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Were it not better to wait upon your father, who is perhaps, by this time, informed of your re-turn?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     I cannot see my father; I cannot resolve to marry the lady he has chosen for me. Kind and indulgent as he has ever been, I have not fortitude enough to meet his frown — I will write to him when we get to Paris, and we will set out to-mor-row. Now are you satisfied?
                  
                  
                     

                     COURTENEY.
                     I am, my Lord, your servant; I will go home, and give the necessary orders for our journey.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Nay, pr'ythee, take a turn with me, dear Courte-ney; my heart is oppressed, and I have a thousand things to say to you.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Your Lordship must excuse me; we have not a moment to spare.
                     [Going; Miss Autumn and Miss Courteney appear at a distance; Courteney stops, looks at them, then comes back to Clairville, and says,]
                     If your Lordship is only for a short walk, I think I will accompany you.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE
                     (laughs).
                     So, you have a moment to spare then; confess honestly, that the sight of Miss Autumn has brought you back.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Miss Autumn! sure, my Lord, you do not imagine that I would neglect any serious busi-ness for the conversation of such a vain coquet?
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     Not unless you were in love, Courteney.
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Well, I am not in love with Miss Autumn, I do assure you, my Lord.
                  
                  
                     CLAIRVILLE.
                     With whom then?
                  
                  
                     COURTENEY.
                     Nor with your Pastorella, my Lord, your blushing Dryad, who, with all her innocence and

            PHILANDER.
            A DRAMATIC PASTORAL.
            By the AUTHOR of the FEMALE QUIXOTE.
            LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. MDCCLVIII.
            [Price ONE SHILLING.]
         
         
            

                  NERINA.
                  Ah! foolish nymph, begin the war at home:
                  Within thy charming breast the savage lies,
                  Covert too sweet for such a dang'rous foe.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Would'st thou a greater monster quell,
                              Than all our teeming woods e'er bore:
                              Subdue thy pride, that foe repel,
                              And yield to love's persuasive lore.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Thee, chaste Diana, all my wishes claim;
                  By choice thy vot'ry, my whole life is thine.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Oh! goddess of the Sylvan reign
                              Where peace, where innocence abide;
                              My freedom is to wear thy chain,
                              In serving thee my noblest pride.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  NERINA.
                  Thy infant-vows, to young Philander given,
                  Thou stand'st excluded from the virgin choir.
               
               
                  

                  SYLVIA.
                  
                     Philander was my parent's choice, not mine.
                  My heart subscrib'd not to th' unhallow'd vow
                  That pass'd my infant lips; urge it no more.
               
               
                  NERINA.
                  
                     Montano's heir, Montano Phoebus' priest,
                  Dear to his patron-god, and blest with wealth:
                  Where could your choice have fix'd, had it been free
                  But on your destin'd spouse? Arcadia's boast,
                  The secret wish of every blooming maid.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Take him who will, this all-accomplish'd youth:
                  My part in him I quit, and, sweet exchange!
                  Be freedom mine; mine the enchanting joys
                  These woods and forests yield, this well-strung bow,
                  This sounding quiver, pure delights supply.
                  Be but my arrows fleet, and just their aim,
                  And I have all my wish.
               
               
                  

                  NERINA.
                  Take heed, fond maid!
                  For love has arrows fleeter far; and oh!
                  More deadly too, if pointed with despair.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Think what the hapless virgin proves,
                              Who loves in vain, yet fondly loves;
                              While modesty and female pride,
                              The slighted passion seek to hide.
                              For oh! in vain the sigh's represt
                              That struggling heaves her anxious breast.
                              In vain the falling tear's with-held,
                              The conscious wish in vain repell'd.
                              Her faded cheek, and air forlorn,
                              Coarse jests invite, and cruel scorn.
                              To hopeless love she falls a prey,
                              And wastes in silent grief away.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  With her own coldness Cynthia guards my breast;
                  And the soft god can find no entrance there.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              

                              SONG.
                              
                                 Ye gently-breathing zephyrs say,
                                 If as your airy course yon fly,
                                 Did you e'er meet with one so gay,
                                 So happy, or so free, as I.
                              
                              
                                 Ye softly-murm'ring streams declare,
                                 If on your banks you ever knew
                                 A maid who own'd so little care,
                                 A heart to liberty so true.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  NERINA.
                  Yet dread the anger of avenging gods,
                  For broken vows and violated faith.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  The gods are just: they form'd me what I am,
                  Cold and disdainful of the nuptial tye;
                  They will not punish faults themselves have caus'd.
                  But while forgetful of the promis'd chace,
                  With thee the moments idly thus I waste,
                  A bevy of bright nymphs, already met
                  In yonder grove of oaks, expect my coming.
                  This day we hunt the stag.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              

                              SONG.
                              Celestial huntress, deign to grace
                              Our sports, and bless the morning chace.
                              The goddess comes, she comes, and lo!
                              I see her silver-beaming bow.
                              I hear her rattling quiver sound,
                              Her nymphs with chearful shoutings fill the place,
                              And the glad echos from the hills rebound.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               [Going.]
               PHILANDER meets her.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  One moment stay.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Detain me not, the morning wears apace.
                  The nymphs expect me to the promis'd chace.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Ah! quit the Sylvan war, the hunter's toils,
                  Love, nobler trophies yields, and sweeter spoils.
                  Beauty like your's should these rough sports despise,
                  Nor with your arrows conquer, but your eyes.
               
               
                  

                  SYLVIA.
                  Beauty's short conquests soon to bondage turn,
                  The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors mourn.
                  With haughty sway his empire Love maintains,
                  And all are vassals, where a tyrant reigns.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Yet his soft power, even gods themselves confess,
                  'Tis his to conquer, but 'tis his to bless.
                  Then yield thee, beauteous nymph, and thou shalt prove
                  How faint all joys compar'd to mutual love.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Away, presumptuous! taint not my chaste car
                  With sounds Diana's handmaid must not hear.
                  Hate ever be my part, be thine despair,
                  Away, presumptuous! and thy suit forbear.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Yes, cruel maid, I go to prove
                              The last sad effort of despair:
                              One death shall this lost wretch remove,
                              And thousands from thy scorn shall spare.
                              
                                 
Yet shall thy image bless my closing eye,
                              And my last breath thy still lov'd name shall sigh.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Exeunt.
               
                  NERINA.
                  Oh! cruelty extreme! ungrateful maid,
                  Thus, is it thus, that faithful love is paid?
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Cease chiding now, my savage lover comes,
                  The rude, rough Satyr—ah! he's here already.
                  Enter the SATYR.
                  Ah! Sylvia, whither, whither, dost thou fly?
                  Turn, cruel maid, too lovely Sylvia turn.
                  Oh! fairer than the fairest lillies thou,
                  Erect and tall as alders; thy soft skin
                  More sleek than orient shells; and whiter far
                  Than falling snows; turn, turn thy starry eyes,
                  And bless thy lover with their beauteous rays.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Great terror of these woods; ah! why on me,
                  This lavish praise? know thy own worth, and woo
                  
                     
Some nymph, if such there be, whose won-drous form
                  Is lovely as thy own.—
               
               
                  SATYR.
                  Insulting maid!
                  This form despis'd by thee wants not its charms,
                  If in the liquid mirror of the sea
                  I view myself aright, this face of mine
                  A sanguine colour boasts; these shaggy limbs
                  For strength and swiftness form'd, and manly grace.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  If charms like these want pow'r to gain my love,
                  Blame my dull eyes, and my still duller mind.
               
               
                  SATYR.
                  To charm those eyes the aid of art I'll try,
                  To move that mind the force of gifts I'll prove,
                  A pair of turtles callow from the nest,
                  Court the soft soothings of thy lilly-hand;
                  Oh! learn of them to love, and pay my pains.
                  
                     

                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Doves are Venus' birds, and bear
                              Her chariot through the yielding air;
                              
                                 Cupid, with their feathers, wings
                              Those darts th' unerring archer flings.
                              Yet his soft rage the wantons prove,
                              And all their little life, is love.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Melodious strains, indeed! your music, Satyr,
                  
                  Nought equals, but your verse.
               
               
                  SATYR.
                  Do my songs please thee? stay then and behold
                  A vintage measure, and my skill applaud
                  As in the harmonious maze I lightly move.
                  Here on the verdant turf recline, while I
                  Summon my fellows to the antic round.
                  Enter SATYRS.
                  Ye dear companions of my rural joys,
                  This paragon of nymphs, this conquering fair
                  Deigns to behold our sports; begin and shew
                  
                     
That Satyrs have their graces, and can tread
                  With Bacchanalian skill the sprightly dance.
                  Begin, I say.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  This lawless rout with terror chills my heart:
                  Seize the first happy moment, to retire.
               
               [To NERINA.]
               DANCE of the SATYRS.
               
                  Sylvia and Nerina steal off when it is almost ended.
               
                  SATYR.
                  Ha, gone! break off the dance:
                  She is not here whose eyes I sought to charm.
                  Ah! cruel nymph, inexorable fair,
                  Harder than tygers to be broke; than rocks
                  More fix'd in thy disdain; more haughty far
                  Than the vain peacock in its plumy pride.
                  Why seek I thee with song and dance to move?
                  Colder than fountains; like the sliding streams
                  Impossible to hold: but here I swear
                  By Pan, great author of our race, I swear,
                  
                     

            TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD VISCOUNT CHARLEMONT.
            
               MY LORD,
            
            IT is generally expected that there should be some rela-tion between the character of the patron and the nature of the work, for which protection is solicited.
            
               
Since song, nor dance, nor gifts, nor pray'rs can move
                  Thy stubborn soul, by force I'll crown my love.
               
               END of the FIRST ACT.
            
            
               

               ACT the SECOND.
               SCENE continues.
               
               Enter SYLVIA and NYMPHS, as from hunting, with bows and arrows.
               
                  First NYMPH.
                  GRace of our woods! sure Dian's self directs
                  Thy still unerring dart.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Be her's the praise.
                  Oh! virgin huntress, to thy fav'ring smile
                  Alone I owe, that foremost in the chace
                  My shaft transfixes first the trembling prey.
                  Thou speed'st the whistling arrow to its mark:
                  Wing'd with thy swiftness o'er the plain I fly,
                  And all my honours are deriv'd from thee.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              

                              SONG.
                              
                                 Cynthia, queen of rural pleasures,
                              Pleasures which no guilt destroys,
                              Thine are all health's choicest treasures,
                              Thine are virtue's solid joys.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               [Here the Satyr appears listening.]
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Now while the sun darts fierce the noon-tide blaze,
                  Haste to the neighb'ring grove, fair nymphs, and shun
                  His fervid ray; mean time, in yonder vale
                  Where pines and cedars mingling grateful shade,
                  And from the stream which slowly glides be-neath
                  Excludes the light; there will I bathe, then taste
                  A short repose upon its flow'ry border.
               
               
                  First NYMPH.
                  Soft be thy slumbers, gentle maid, farewel!
               
               Exeunt.
               
                  The SATYR comes forward.
               
               
                  

                  SATYR.
                  So my coy Nymph! I think I hold thee now
                  Safe in my toils; go on, securely go
                  To thy well-chosen privacy; by Pan,
                  
                  It fits my purpose well: yes, stubborn maid!
                  There shalt thou find an unexpected guest,
                  An injur'd lover bent on great revenge.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              I hate your sighing, fawning, lying,
                              To cry each moment one is dying,
                              In some sick puppy's tone.
                              No: while her pride looks most demurely,
                              Let me, invading, clasp securely
                              What force has made my own.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Exeunt Satyr.
               Enter PHILANDER in a melancholy posture.
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              
                                 In vain I strive to fly
                                 This soul-consuming care;
                                 My sorrow's always nigh,
                                 And present every where.
                              
                              
                                 

                                 In vain I seek the grove,
                                 There no repose I find,
                                 What shades can shut out love?
                                 Or cool the fever'd mind?
                              
                              
                                 That sweetly-dashing stream,
                                 Those gales that whisper round,
                                 Increase the fatal flame,
                                 Enlarge the bleeding wound.
                              
                              
                                 The silent gloom of night
                                 Adds horror to my grief;
                                 The gay return of light
                                 To me brings no relief.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Why do I wander thus in woods alone?
                  Why vent to senseless trees my mournful plaints;
                  Sigh to the fleeting wind; with tears deface
                  The dimpled stream? Oh! Sylvia, cruel maid!
                  Thy pride a savage sacrifice demands,
                  Nor will be satisfied with less than life.
               
               Enter THIRSIS.
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  I sought thee, dear Philander!
                  
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! my Thirsis!
                  
                  Why seek a wretch who cannot find himself?
                  Lost to each joy, to fierce despair a prey?
                  Fain would I shun all commerce with man-kind:
                  In these dark shades wear out the sad remains
                  Of hated life.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Oh love! thou tyrant of the human breast,
                  Fierce and remorseless as the prowling wolf
                  That nightly makes the helpless flock his prey:
                  Falsly they call thee god of pleasing pains,
                  Of gentle wishes and refin'd delights:
                  Doubts, fears, and jealousies, surround thy throne;
                  Eternal sighs fan thy destructive fires,
                  And broken hearts are thy sad sacrifice.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Such is, indeed, the fate of hopeless love;
                  And such is mine.
               
               
                  

                  THIRSIS.
                  You make yourself your fate;
                  Love should be paid with love, and hate with hate.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              In vain my passion you reprove,
                              This heart, alas! was form'd for love,
                              His pains, if not his joys, to feel:
                              Here the soft god has fix'd his throne,
                              But oh! 'midst sighs, and tears alone,
                              Nor deigns the wounds he makes to heal.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Oh! bend not thus thy drooping head to earth,
                  Like tender plants beneath the beating storm;
                  This day thy father, by thy griefs impell'd,
                  With grateful off'rings seeks his patron god;
                  Prostrate before his altar now he lies,
                  And all his pious prayers ascend for thee.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  To mine, alas! no pitying pow'rs enclin'd,
                  Unheard, and mingled with the vagrant wind.
               
               
                  

                  THIRSIS.
                  Hope better now, for see thy fire appears,
                  A solemn joy upon his brow he wears:
                  Some pleasing news he brings.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Be still, my heart!—
                  Oh! throb not thus, can hope be painful too?
               
               Enter MONTANO.
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Oh! thou to fierce despair a wretched prey,
                  Much-lov'd, lamented youth.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Ill-omen'd pity!
                  Alas! my father mourns my fate; 'tis past,
                  Hope is no more.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  I bring thee more than hope,
                  My vows are heard, thy wishes all are crown'd,
                  No more the haughty maid shall fly thy love.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! sounds which might arrest the stroke of death,
                  
                     
Call back the soul to her abandon'd seat,
                  And give it more than life, give immortality.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  With awful rev'rence hear the god's decree,
                  At whose dread altars I so long have serv'd;
                  
                     Sylvia, by plighted vows, thy lawful claim
                  Must either yield this day to be thy bride,
                  Or by her death—
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! love! almighty love!
                  What do I hear?
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Or, by her death atone
                  For violated faith. Thus dooms Apollo.
                  
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Is this to crown my wishes? oh! my father▪
                  
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Rash youth, repine not at the god's decree,
                  But to the haughty fair reveal her sentence,
                  This day to be a victim, or a bride,
                  Is all her fate allows.
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Oh! stop that death-denouncing sound,
                              Nor mix it with the passing air,
                              Lest by some ruder zephyr found,
                              'Tis wasted to the trembling fair.
                              His own soft cause love best can plead,
                              Or let me die, or let me thus succeed.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               [Exit.]
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Despair is in his eyes, oh! sage Montano!
                  
                  Should the proud nymph persist in her denial,
                  Her sentence urg'd would aggravate his woe;
                  And, but forgive my sad foreboding fears,
                  Perhaps involve him in her wretched fate.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Dismiss thy fears, thy unexperienc'd youth
                  Reads not the secret heart of varying woman;
                  Form'd to ensnare, and practis'd to delude,
                  She flies, but flying, hopes to be pursu'd,
                  With doubling arts long keeps the doubtful field,
                  And yields, or seems to force alone to yield.
               
               END of the SECOND ACT.
            
            
               
BUT this law, like many others, is broken when it op-poses the gratification of pas-sions too strong for the re-straints of regularity. Ambi-tion, which often overpowers the judgment in questions of more importance, has made me forget the disproportion be-tween Your Lordship's name, and a Dramatic Pastoral; and I have ventured to lay before You a composition of little dignity in the design, and per-haps of little elegance in the execution.
            YET for whatever we re-solve, we labour to find reasons,

               ACT the THIRD.
               SCENE, A Grove.
               
               SYLVIA discovered sleeping at a distance; PHILANDER enters and gazes on her.
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  SHE sleeps, and I may gaze securely now,
                  Nor fear the lightning of her angry eyes;
                  So looks the goddess of the silver bow!
                  When by Eurota's lucid wave she lies.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              
                                 On those fair eye-lids, gentle sleep,
                                 Thy softest influence shed,
                                 Still in thy downy fetters keep
                                 The lovely, cruel maid.
                              
                              
                                 Ye sighing gales, ye murm'ring streams,
                                 Ye tenants of the grove,
                                 Oh! lengthen out her pleasing dreams,
                                 And tune her soul to love.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
Conceal'd I'll guard thy slumbers, lovely maid,
                  Lest some rude swain the sweet recess invade,
                  Those charms a lover views with chasten'd fires,
                  In vulgar breasts may kindle loose desires.
               
               Enter the SATYR looking about him.
               
                  SATYR.
                  Low murm'ring sounds I heard, yet none are here;
                  'Twas but the whispers of the am'rous breeze
                  That plays among the boughs.
               
               
                  SYLVIA
                  awaking.
                  What do I see?
                  The brutal Satyr! guard me, chaste Diana.
                  
               
               
                  SATYR.
                  Aye, you may call your goddess to your aid,
                  She hears you not; the music of her hounds
                  And beagle-horn will drown your feeble cries.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Ah! whither would'st thou drag me, cruel Sylvan?
                  Help, help, some pitying power!
               
               
                  
Enter PHILANDER.
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Vile monster! hence.
               
               
                  The SATYR runs off.
               
               PHILANDER approaches SYLVIA, who turns from him.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! stedfast hate, yet hear me, cruel maid,
                  If to have sav'd thee from the brutal rage
                  Of that fierce Sylvan, claims one kind regard,
                  Turn, turn, and listen to my ardent vows.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Why will you still this hated theme pursue?
                  Must I another Satyr find in you?
                  Both persecutors in a different way,
                  My honour he, you would my heart betray.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Love, o'er the abject breast may reign,
                              With all his light fantastic train
                              
                                 
Of wishes, cares, and fond desires,
                              Fears and hopes, and jealous fires,
                              Be mine from the soft folly free;
                              Love has no charms like liberty.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Yet, yet, relent! yield to a lover's prayer.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Away, or this detested theme forbear.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  What shall I say, her stubborn mind to move?
                  Declare her sentence: no, forbid it love!
                  [To her]
                  Yet hear me, Sylvia, e'er it be too late,
                  Speak one kind word, for oh! thy breath is fate.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Mark then my firm resolves, and oh! be thou,
                  Celestial maid, propitious to my vow;
                  With thee an humble vot'ry to remain,
                  Tho' last and meanest of thy virgin train.
                  If cold and temp'rate as thy own mild ray,
                  Thy shades I haunt, and thy commands obey,
                  
                     
Still, goddess, thy protection let me prove,
                  And guard me from the sly seducer, love.
               
               [Exit.]
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Stay, Sylvia, stay, and from these trembling lips
                  Hear the stern god's decree—Alas! she flies
                  Swift as the trackless winds, to death she flies,
                  Death less abhorr'd than me.
               
               Enter NERINA.
               
                  NERINA.
                  Here Sylvia should be found; but sure I heard
                  The plaintive voice of sorrow—'tis Philander,
                  
                  Alas! poor youth, he weeps, I will observe him.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Why wears
                  The face of nature such a chearful smile?
                  Why this soft verdure? why this gaudy bloom?
                  Fall horrors, fall, and make this beauteous scene
                  Dark as my gloomy soul—oh Sylvia! Sylvia!
                  
               
               
                  NERINA.
                  Would she were here, and heard thee.
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  Cold shadowy queen, who laugh'st at lover's woes,
                  Thy self unloving, unbelov'd, now save
                  From the sad doom incurr'd, thy beauteous vot'ry.
               
               
                  NERINA
                  (approaching him)
                  Alas! what doom? speak'st thou of Sylvia, shepherd?
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Ha! sure the goddess' self inspires the thought.
                  Haste, haste Nerina, seek thy cruel friend,
                  Tell her—oh heaven! tell her that Phoebus claims
                  Her forfeit life for violated faith:
                  Fly, bid her seek Diana's sacred fane,
                  And claim protection there.
               
               
                  NERINA.
                  Oh gen'rous youth! oh my unhappy friend!
               
               [Exit running.]
               Enter THIRSIS.
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  He's here: how shall I speak the dreadful news?
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  Why art thou thus alarm'd? say, dearest Thirsis.
                  
                  Alas! 'tis the sad privilege of despair
                  To fear no worse.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  She has refus'd you then.—
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  She has, and oh! with such a fix'd disdain!
                  Ungrateful maid, then when my timely aid
                  Had sav'd her from a brutal Satyr's lust,
                  Then to reject my humble suff'ring love,
                  And, in despite of former ties, renew
                  Her vows to the rough goddess of the woods.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Horrid ingratitude! would thou could'st hate her.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Hate her! yes, friend, I'll tear her from my breast.
                  Oh! may she feel, like me, the pangs of love,
                  Like me unpity'd mourn, and sigh in vain.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  The righteous gods, to noblervengeance doom
                  The perjur'd maid.
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! Thirsis, there I'm lost.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  
                     Arcadia groans beneath Apollo's frown,
                  In thee his priest is scorn'd; the wrathful god
                  Bends his dread bow o'er our devoted plains,
                  And claims his victim.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  
                     Sylvia then must die!
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  She must, my friend, e'en now with mild en-treaty
                  Thy father urg'd her to perform her vow,
                  Scornful she heard, nor shook at the sad sen-tence
                  Which he with tears pronounc'd.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Yet hold my heart,—
                  Where is she now?
               
               
                  THRISIS.
                  I saw her, guarded by the attending priests
                  In sad procession, led tow'rds the temple:
                  
                     
Her griev'd companions rend the air with cries,
                  And beat their snowy breasts in wild despair.
                  But she with haughty mien, erect and firm
                  As the stern deity by her obey'd,
                  Welcomes her fate; nor can th'approach of death
                  Banish the colour from her cheeks; or rage
                  And fierce disdain plant fresher roses there.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! Sylvia, must thou die?
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Alas! my friend,
                  You tremble, you look pale; think on your wrongs,
                  Think on her scorn, and th'impending curse
                  That threats Arcadia, till the god's appeas'd.
               
               SOLEMN MUSIC at a distance.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  By all the pangs that rend this tortur'd breast,
                  The sad solemnity is now begun:
                  Ah! friend, farewel! farewel my dearest Thirsis.
                  
               
               [Embracing him.]
               
                  

                  THIRSIS.
                  Ha! whither now? what mean'st thou, dear Philander?
                  
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh Thirsis! I must see her once again.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  You must not go, forgive my friendly zeal.
               
               [Holding him.]
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Off! or by heaven this moment is my last.
                  See, fate is in my power.
               
               [Shewing a poniard.]
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Desp'rate youth!
               
               [Exit PHILANDER. THIRSIS following.]
               
                  

till in time we forget its impro-priety; I begin to hope, that by offering to Your Lordship a performance of an airy and luxuriant kind, which can at best hope only for excuse, I expose myself less to the im-putation of arrogance, than if I had prefixed Your name to a piece more grave and oftenta-tious, which might have been suspected of pretending to ap-probation.
            I am, my Lord, far from imagining that any of my ideas can be new to Your extensive knowledge, or that I have at-tained any beauties of style or
SCENE changes to the temple of Apollo, an altar, priests attending: solemn music plays; then the procession appears; four priests walk two and two, Montano next with the sacred knife in his hand; after him Sylvia in white, led by two priests, her head bound with the sacred fillets; a train of virgins following weeping: they ad-vance to the altar: the HYMN to Apollo is sung.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           HYMN to APOLLO.
                           
                              HAIL Phoebus, son of Jove,
                              
                              Great patron of the moving lyre,
                              Whose sounds, soft peace and smiling joy inspire,
                              And give new pleasures to the blest above.
                              To thee our noblest lays belong,
                              Thine is the poet, thine the song,
                              Eternal source of light, of music, and of love.
                           
                           
                              Hail! mighty Paean, hail!
                              Asserter of thy father's throne,
                              Thy force the rebel giants own,
                              Who vainly hop'd against him to prevail:
                              Thy name redeem'd Thessalia sings,
                              And all her noblest off'rings brings
                              To thee, by whose dread arm the monster Python fell.
                              
                                 

Who can thy frown sustain?
                              Or bear impure, thy piercing ray?
                              Thou, on the guilty bosom pour'st the day,
                              And all the wretch's crimes are seen:
                              Lo! perjur'd beauty justly dies,
                              Accept this awful sacrifice,
                              And bless, oh! bless Arcadia with thy smiles again.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Ill-fated maid! whose soul no pray'rs could move,
                  No sorrows soften, and no vows could bind;
                  Tho' by thy fierce disdain, my hapless son
                  In anguish wastes his days: tho' o'er Arcadia
                  
                  
                     Apollo bends his fatal bow, and claims
                  Thy forfeit life, yet still this aged hand
                  Shrinks to perform its office.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  You may spare
                  Your ill-tim'd pity, priest, I need it not.
                  O Cynthia! guardian-goddess of my youth,
                  To whom my virgin vows have still been paid;
                  I die thy votary, and this pure blood
                  Shed in thy cause, seals me for ever thine.
               
               
                  MONTANO to the PRIESTS.
                  Lead her to the altar.
               
               
                  
Enter PHILANDER.
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  I charge you hold.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Rash youth retire, nor with your useless grief
                  Profane the solemn rites.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! give me way.—
                  I swear the awful pow'r shall be appeas'd,
                  He shall, my father; only suffer me
                  To kneel before that dear devoted maid,
                  And groan for pardon, since she dies my victim.
               
               
                  SYLVIA to PHILANDER,
                  who kneels.
                  Hence, from my sight, and let me die in peace.
               
               
                  PHILANDER
                  rising.
                  Oh, cruel even in death! yet hold, my heart,
                  Break not, e'er thy sad purpose is compleated,
                  Lest heaven reject th'imperfect sacrifice.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  What mean'st thou?
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Mighty love!
                  This is thy triumph, Sylvia thou art free,
                  
                     
Oh! hate not life, because it is my gift;
                  Thus I appease the god, and die to save thee.
               
               
                  Kneels before the altar, and as he raises his arm to stab himself, Thirsis enters and holds him.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Help! save him, help!
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  My son! my dear Philander!
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Oh! wond'rous proof of unexampled love!
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Eternal night shroud my unhappy eyes.
               
               
                  THIRSIS.
                  Why this excess of grief? your son is safe.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  No pow'r on earth
                  Can save him now, our sacred law forbids
                  A second victim; well he knew it's force,
                  And hence this dire resolve.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Ah me! unhappy —
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Dost thou weep, proud maid?
                  Inhuman tears! such the hyena sheds
                  Over her helpless prey.
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! sacred drops,
                  To me more grateful than the morning dew
                  On dying plants; then dost thou pity me?
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Pity! yet sure there is a softer name
                  For what I feel this moment—oh Philander!
                  
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Why dost thou pause? why dost thou turn away?
                  Speak, speak again, and bless my ravish'd eyes
                  With one look more, then let them close for ever.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  For me thou shalt not die.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  For thee I will,
                  And oh! be witness, love!
                  With what extatic joy I meet my fate.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Ungrateful to a father's tender cares,
                  A faithful lover, but a son unkind!
                  Yet let me fold thee to my aking breast
                  Before we part for ever,—now farewel!
                  Receive your victim, priests, but spare my eyes
                  The dreadful sight!—I go to weep and die.
               
               
                  

                  SYLVIA.
                  Stay, holy sire.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  What would'st thou?
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  O! behold
                  The only lawful victim, save your son,
                  And strike this harden'd breast.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Away, fond maid!
                  Your pity comes too late — oh, my Philander!
                  
               
               [Going.]
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Oh! youth, too little known, belov'd too late,
                  Thou shalt not conquer in this noble strife:
                  I cannot change, but I will share thy fate,
                  And death shall give what I deny'd in life.
               
               [Snatches a dart from one of the nymphs.]
               
                  PHILANDER
                  (catching hold of her.)
                  Oh! hold thy hand, or hate me once again:
                  Live, beauteous maid, nor let me die in vain.
               
               
                  Thunder; a bright cloud appears; Apollo is discovered seated in his chariot; soft music as he descends.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  He comes, the awful god himself appears!
                  Kneel, and confess the present deity.
[All kneel.]
                  
               
               
                  

                  APOLLO.
                  
                     
                        Returning virtue's contrite sighs,
                     
                     
                        Are heaven's most pleasing sacrifice;
                     
                     
                        Through the wide space of yielding air,
                     
                     
                        The winds the grateful incense bear,
                     
                     
                        And waft it to the skies.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Blest shepherd! who such truth could prove,
                     
                     
                        Blest maid! whom truth at last could move;
                     
                     
                        On you th'immortal pow'rs bestow
                     
                     
                        Their best, their fairest gifts below,
                     
                     
                        Peace, innocence, and love.
                     
                  
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Oh! pow'r by me ador'd, with awful love,
                  With duteous rev'rence serv'd, gracious, accept
                  A happy father's thanks.
               
               
                  PHILANDER.
                  Oh! son of Jove,
                  
                  Immortal Phoebus, light-dispensing god,
                  And theme of verse perpetual, be thy praise
                  For ever sung by me.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Oh! pow'r benign!
                  Fav'rite of gods and men, my grateful heart
                  To thee its purest vows shall ever pay.
               
               
                  

                  PHILANDER to SYLVIA.
                  Restor'd to life, to hope, to love, and thee,
                  Now let me gaze upon thy beauteous eyes,
                  And read my bliss confirm'd, or else in vain
                  A god pronounc'd me happy.
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Dearest and best
                  Of all thy sex; oh! if thou read'st not there
                  The softest, truest passion, that e'er warm'd
                  A virgin-breast, they injure what I feel.
               
               
                  PHILANDER
                  (taking her hand)
                  Oh! sweet reward of suff'ring love; oh! bliss
                  Unutterable.
               
               
                  MONTANO.
                  Still may your joys increase, a virtuous flame
                  Knows no decay, and burns through life the same;
                  Like noon-tide sun it glows in youth's short day,
                  And milder friendship is its setting ray.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   


sentiment adequate to Your delicacy of taste. The merit of this Poem is but small in my own opinion, and yet, of the lit-tle praise which it may receive, I must resign a part, by confes-sing that the first hint was taken from the PASTOR FIDO, and that the two songs marked with asterisks See page 11, and 24., were written by another hand.
            WHATEVER praise this con-fession may detract from my abilities, it will add to my sin-cerity; and I should discover little knowledge of Your Lord-ship, if I should endeavour to

recommend myself, rather by elevation of genius than by pu-rity of manners.
            
               I am, with great respect, MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most obliged Humble servant, CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
               LONDON, Nov. 20, 1757.
               
            
         
         
            

            PERSONS of the DRAMA.
            
               MONTANO, Priest of Apollo.
               
               PHILANDER, his son, in love with Sylvia.
               
               THIRSIS, his friend.
               SATYR.
               SYLVIA, a huntress, betrothed to Philander.
               
               NERINA, her friend.
               NYMPHS and SATYRS.
            
            SCENE, ARCADIA.
         
      
      
         
            

            PHILANDER.
            
               ACT I.
               SCENE, An open plain, with the prospect of a wood at a distance.
               
               Enter SYLVIA. NERINA following.
               
                  NERINA.
                  
                     YOU shun me then, my Sylvia?
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  No, my friend,
                  Not you, 'tis the fond voice of love, I shun;
                  Chuse any other theme, and I will listen
                  Still as the night, when not a zephyr stirs
                  The trembling leaves.
               
               
                  

                  NERINA.
                  And why not talk of love?
                  While that soft bloom glows on thy beauteous cheek,
                  While thy eyes dart their undiminish'd rays,
                  And every feature smiles with rosy youth.
                  Youth, the fit season for delight and joy.
                  Ah! trifler, waste not thus the fleeting hours,
                  The spring of life knows no return; and age,
                  The ceaseless winter of the human frame,
                  Steals silent on, to blast thy flow'ry prime.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              Ah! waste not thus thy flow'ry prime,
                              The vernal season of delight;
                              Youth flies upon the wings of time,
                              And age and winter are in sight.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  SYLVIA.
                  Then let me seize each minute as it flies,
                  Consume in varied sports the blissful day,
                  Rise with the dawn, and join the virgin train,
                  Bound o'er the dewy vale, dislodge the deer,
                  Pursue with flying pace the nimble doe,
                  And with the savage wage a distant war.
               
               
                  

I read to him sometimes; and per-ceived, with great satisfaction, that he began to acquire a taste for this amuse-ment. My voice and manner pleased him. He had a well-stored library; and he approved my choice of the books which were to furnish out his entertain-ment. You will easily imagine how much this taste for reading increased upon him, when I tell you that I read all Plutarch's Lives to him in less than a fortnight. Thus this long fit of the gout passed away; during which, my aunt had time to make observations on her own insufficiency on such occasions, and my apparent superiority over her. A second attack of the gout gave her an opportunity to practise some of those ar-tifices which she had imagined, in order to lessen my uncle's regard for me. She redoubled her cares and assiduity; she scarce ever left him a moment; she watched his looks, and every turn of his distemper, with such an anxious solici-tude, as if her life depended upon his.

closet for several hours; and the next morning set out for Mr. Greville's, seat. She was buried in the fa-mily vault with great solemnity; but, I am sorry to say, not much lamented; for her lady ship was not very charitable to the poor; and she always behaved to the tenants and small gentry in the neighbourhood with great haughtiness.
               
               HERE Mr. Martin ended his narra-tion, which took up two or three of my evenings in listening to; and I have given it you almost in his very words. What more I have to tell you on this subject must be deferred till my next. But now adieu! my ever dear Euphe-mia.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER X. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               I SHALL never for the future rank your uncle with men of common understanding; his whole conduct with regard to Lady Harley, on the most trying occasion imaginable, displays a fund of good sense and philosophy, rarely to be met with in persons, who, like him, have spent so great a part of their lives in the pursuit of pleasure.
               How nicely has he steered between two extremes, equally fatal to his re-putation. Had he appeared insensible of her levities, and indifferent to the ungrateful returns she made to his af-fection, he would have passed for a dupe: had he avowed his resentment, he would have authorised suspicions that

would have ruined her character, and fixed ridicule upon his own; he escaped both these rocks by the most masterly management imaginable, and neither malice nor ridicule can find a shaft to hit him.
               I AM not surprised at the despair which Lady Harley seems to have fallen into. The most common view persons have, when they commit imprudent actions, is the probability of always finding out some resource or other: but Lady Harley, in this case, could have no such hope; she had fixed her hus-band's opinion of her irrevocably, and the very methods he used to render her less contemptible in the eyes of the world, served only to lessen her more in her own. But peace be to her ashes, and oblivion to her memory!
               I AM particularly impatient for your next letter, in hopes that it will clear up an ambiguous expression in one of

your former ones, that has puzzled me greatly; you say, you have no will of your own, and that you are a slave to that of another; pray make me under-stand this. Adieu! my dear Maria.
            
            
               

               LETTER XI. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               I WISH I could with any propriety have shewn my uncle some part of your last letter; even the wise might be pardoned for indulging a little vanity at receiving praises from judgment and sincerity like yours; but you will easily conceive this would not have been pro-per, at least at this time, after what I am going to tell you.
               MARTIN having informed him that he had obeyed his commands, and given me a very particular (and you must own, my friend, that it was a very particular) account of all that had

happened during my absence, my uncle spoke to me in this manner:
               
                  You have heard from Martin some very interesting circumstances relat-ing to your aunt and me; you have candour and good sense; I doubt not but you will judge rightly of my con-duct. I only intreat you never to mention Lady Harley to me in private, and in public be as reserved on that subject as I am. Mr. Greville, he added, is certainly your friend; you owe him some acknowldgments; and these, my dear, I did not fail to pay him the very first opportunity, with an effusion of heart which convinced him of my gratitude.
               I WAS obliged to listen to some hu-mrous sallies on my aunt's account, and even to smile at them, for indeed it would have been very difficult to re-frain; however, he always spared my uncle, which, considering his fondness

for raillery, was an instance of self-denial that had some merit in it.
               MY aunt's woman was still in the house; she expected to have made her court to me by throwing out some reflections upon her late lady, and by making an ample discovery of all she knew; but I silenced her by a severe look, and an absolute command never to speak to me on the subject.
               MY uncle left it to me to do as I pleased with regard to her; I had reason to think her very deceitful, and incapa-ble of being true to any one; I resolved to discharge her immediately; so I gave her all her late lady's clothes and linen, with what money she had in her pockets when she died, and dismissed her, to the great joy of the servants, who had all of them, at one time or other, experienced her treachery.
               
                  
You will call Mr. Greville a bold man, when I tell you he would read your last letter, notwith standing all I could do to hinder him; he came in when I was writing, and saw it lying on my table, and actually read it through; and this is what he said when he returned it to me: No modesty is able to resist the praises that come from your amiable friend; and although I have hitherto thought vanity a ridiculous quality, yet I protest I should take a pleasure in being corrupted by her.
               
               HE prest me much to shew my uncle what you said of him; but I pleaded his absolute command not to mention Lady Harley to him; and he agreed that he ought to be obeyed.
               THIS unlooked for intrusion of Mr. Greville's will teach me caution; I will always fasten my door for the future when I sit down to write to you. But I will now explain to you what I meant

when I told you my uncle was kinder to me than ever, and yet I had no will of my own, but was a slave to that of an-other.
               IT is that kindness of his that has en-slaved my will, my dear Euphemia, that has loaded me with a debt of gra-titude which I can never be able to pay, and has fixed shackles upon my mind which it is impossible for me ever to unloose, Mark the method he took to produce this voluntary subjection.
               SOME little time after my return from France, Mr. Greville being upon a vi-sit at the Hall, my uncle sent for me into his study, where he was sitting with his friend; they had papers lying upon the table before them, one of which, upon my entrance, my uncle took, and, presenting it to Mr. Greville, Here, Sir, said he, is a deed of gift to my niece of the greatest part of my per-sonal estate, amounting to about twenty

thousand pounds, which, as her guar-dian and trustee, I lodge in your hands. It is all placed on govern-ment securities, for the interest of which you are to be accountable to her only from the present moment, and to pay into her hands for her sole use and benefit.
               
               'BE not surprised,' pursued he, 'child,' taking my hand, and leading me, all amazed and speechless, to a chair next his own, I believe you have a sincere affection for me, and I am willing to enjoy the pleasure this thought gives me, pure and unmixed with the least shadow of a doubt. What I in-tended to bequeath you at my death I give you now, irrevocably, that you may be free and absolute mistress of yourself, and that having nothing more to hope, or any thing to fear, from me, your actions may be as unconstrained as your thoughts, and your real affection for me liable to no misconstructions.
               
               
                  

She would rise several times in the night, and run into his chamber to know if he slept, and if the nurse was attentive. A thousand things of this kind she did, which left me, fond as I was of my uncle, far behind her in these outward testimonies of affection.
               IT is common for people to judge of friendship by the shew it makes, without considering that superstition is fuller of ceremonies than true devotion. My at-tentions appeared cold and constrained, compared with those of my aunt; and were received with indifference. My uncle now seldom desired me to read; and, when I offered to take a book, he would ask me, if I did not think reading so much had hurt me. I sometimes smiled at this: and he would add, with a significant look—Reading aloud is not good for one who has weak lungs. —'That is not my case, Sir', replied I. 'I am glad of it', said he, coldly: but, however, you shall not read to
IT was easy to perceive, by this conduct of my uncle, my dear Euphemia, what an impression Lady Harley's duplicity and artifice had made upon his mind, and how much he apprehended being thought the dupe of female subtilty a second time. His favourable opinion of me was also evident; and this was the point to which, as I conceived, de-licacy obliged me only to answer.
               MY heart was full, but I endeavoured to suppress my emotions; and taking his hand, which I respectfully kissed, while an involuntary tear at the same time dropped upon it, I am obliged to you, Sir, said I, not so much for making me rich, or for making me rich before my time, but for putting it in my power to shew you—I un-derstand you, my dear niece, said he, hastily interrupting me,— we under-stand one another, I believe, and we shall both be the happier for it. Would to Heaven, added he, with some emo-tion,

                  that the estate of my family, which falls to a collateral branch which I have no reason to love, could have been your's likewise.—Come, no more of this, said Mr. Greville, my fair ward here will have enough of that pelf, which, as Pope says,
Buys the sex a tyrant in itself.
                  
               
               MR. Greville very judiciously end ea voured to give the conversation a gayer turn, to r
                     ••
                  ieve my uncle and me from the very awkward situation we found ourselves in, while he was afraid of hearing acknowledgments, which my full heart left me not the power of ex-pressing. And thus, my friend, has the independence my uncle bestowed on me been the beginning of my slavery, for I cannot, I ought not, to have any will but that of a benefactor who has acted with such uncommon generosity.
               
                  
THE power to follow my inclinations is secured to me, but my will is fettered by the obligations I lie under. Thus, for instance, my heart impels me to fly to you, to sooth, to comfort, to assist you in your present situation; and I should most certainly have asked his permis-sion for a short absence, if he had not, by making me my own mistress, deprived himself, as he thinks, of the power of refusing; and my company being now more necessary to him than ever, I cannot give the least hint that I have a wish that way, for fear of lay-ing him under the necessity of doing what may be disagreeable to him. But perhaps his own good fense may sug-gest to him to offer what I cannot ask, and then you may depend upon seeing me in London.
               I HAVE this moment received the long-expected packet; but I must rein in my impatience, and not open it till I re-tire for the night; for this whole day I

shal1 be employed, in reading to my uncle, who is a little indisposed, and cannot take his usual ride, My dear Euphemia, adieu.
            
            
               

               LETTER XII. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               BEFORE I continue my little nar-rative, I must entreat you, my dear Maria, not to suffer these papers to be seen by any person but yourself; they will contain a faithful account of my affairs, and give you a just picture of my situation: and consequently I shall be obliged to touch upon the faults of one who, from the near relation in which he stands to me, has claims upon my ten-derness and respect, which even those faults cannot dispense with me from al-lowing him. Mine, I know, your friend-ship would spare and conceal; and he, being a part of myself, for him I expect the same indulgence.
               
                  

I HAVE already repeated what Mrs. Benson told me concerning my father's imprudent management of his affairs, the consequence of which has involved his family in ruin. My mother, always gentle and kind, endeavoured to palliate those errors by which she was so great a sufferer.
               THERE is nothing, said she, more com-mendable than generosity, but nothing ought less to be stretched too far. Mr. Lumley served his friends with too little attention to his own ability, which, to-gether with other imprudences, pro-duced that bitter remorse which short-ened his days.
               HER tears flowed fast at these words; I suppressed my own emotions that I might comfort her, and endeavoured to detach her thoughts from the melan-choly idea, by giving her a detail of the inequality of Mrs. Highmore's beha-viour to me during the first and the last days of my residence with her, which

the wreck of our fortunes now enabled me to account for.
               My mother smiled at my story; and taking two letters out of her pocket-book, put them into my hand. Here are two letters from Mrs. Highmore, said she, of different dates: the first is to Mrs. Lumley in affluence; the se-cond to the same Mrs. Lumley in dis-tress; read them. I did so, and here is what they contained.
               
                  
                     TO MRS. LUMLEY.
                     
                        DEAR MADAM,
                     
                     My whole family have been transported with joy ever since I com-municated to them, your resolution to give us the inestimable blessing of Miss Lumley's company during your stay at Bath. My daughters will think themselves honoured by her accepting their services, and I shall be proud to stand in the place of a mother to such

excellence, during the absence of you, her incomparable mother! Most de-voutly do I pray for the perfect reco-very of good Mr. Lumley, and for all imaginable blessings to your worthy self, being, with great respect,
                     
                        Dear Madam,
                        Your obliged, most humble, And most obedient servant, A. HIGHMORE.
                     
                     
                        
                           P. S. The dear young lady is in perfect health.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     TO MRS. LUMLEY.
                     I AM sincerely sorry, my very good friend, for your late loss, which is attended with such dreadful conse-quences to your affairs. Your daugh-ter takes on greatly for her father's death, but we keep her in ignorance of the rest of her misfortunes—against my judgment, indeed; for it moves

my pity to see the poor thing so unsus-picious of the sad reverse of her for-tune.
                     I WISH I could offer you any conso-lation in this great calamity; but, as you are a good Christian, and a woman of sense, you will doubtless reflect that all are not born to be rich, and that it behoves us to be resigned and hum-ble under difficult situations. Pray let me know when you design to leave Bath, and whether I can be of any use to you here on this occasion, for I shall always be glad to shew myself your very sincere friend,
                     
                        And humble servant, A. HIGHMORE.
                     
                     
                        The poor child is as well as can be expected, considering her afflication.
                     
                  
               
               My mother answered this extraordinary epistle no otherwise than by cancelling a

note for sixty pounds, which Mrs. High-more had borrowed of her about a year before, and enclosing it in a cover, which contained only these words: Mrs. Lumley's compliments, and desires Mrs. Highmore will accept the en-closed as payment for her daughter's and her governess board for five weeks.
               
               THIS billet was sent by a porter to Mrs. Highmore's house in town, whi-ther we had heard she was come, with orders not to stay for an answer. She came herself a few days afterwards to visit my mother, who pleaded indispo-sition, and refused to see her.
               MRS. Highmore's behaviour was imi-tated by many other persons of our ac-quaintance, whose cool kindness, and constrained civility, marked too well the change of our fortunes.
               
                  

me. I was quite confounded at this peremptory refusal, and knew not what to say to him; but, though vexed and mortified to the last degree, I suffered no complaints to escape me, because I was not willing to discompose my uncle, or gratify the malice of Lady Harley, who, I judged, was at the bottom of this peevishness in him: and I judged right; for this was the manner in which she effected her purpose, as my uncle after-wards informed me.
               ONE day, when he desired her to bid me come and read to him, she regretted her not having equal talents with me for that employment—'Which if I had', said she, I should not be afraid of fall-ing into a consumption by using them'. —'Why, has Mari
                     •
                   that notion?' said Sir John. 'She certainly has', said my aunt: but you must not mention to her what I tell you. She complains of a pain in her breast; of shortness of breath; and declares, that when she has
SOME of our relations were of high rank; and these kept us at a distance by their very ceremonious behaviour, Some were only rich, and to them po-verty appeared rather a crime than a misfortune; so that in strict morality they were obliged to treat us with great coldness and reserve.
               My mother appeared calm and Un-ruffled by this general depravity. Per-sons of quicker sensibility than my-self, said she, would, on this occa-sion, complain of the world; but I shall content myself with forgetting it.
               
               HAVING settled all her affairs in Lon-don, we retired to a small house, which my mother had taken in a neighbouring town, and furnished with a simplicity suitable to her fortune, and a neatness that gave elegance to that simplicity.
               MRS. Benson refused the part of go-verness to a young lady of high distinc-tion,

in order to accompany us in this retreat. 'I have an income,' said she, which, though small, is sufficient to prevent my being an incumbrance to you. I acquired part of it in your service; and, I will never quit you while my attendance can be either useful or agreeable to you.
               
               You will easily imagine, my dear Ma-ria, how acceptable such an instance of faithful attachment must be to my mo-ther, at a time when she seemed forsaken by all the world. She embraced, and thanked her with tears of tenderness and joy; yet represented to her, that her interest required she should accept the advantageous proposal that was made to her.
               'HONOUR, gratitude, and friendship,' replied she, impel me to attach my-self to you, and my beloved pupil; in doing so I find my interest.
               
               
                  
WE were soon settled in our new habitation: one maid-servant composed our whole equipage. We worked, we read, we dressed our little garden—all was peace, friendship, and mutual com-placency.
               'I SEE,' said I one day to my mother, that one may cease to be rich without being unhappy—A life led in tran-quillity, and with judgment, replied my mother, which is the work of reason, is preferable to one half of those sud-den and great successes which the world admires, and which are scarce ever the rewards of merit, but the mere vagaries of fortune.
               
               THE privacy my mother so earnestly desired was not like to be interrupted in a neighbourhood chiefly composed of fa-milies grown wealthy by the successful arts of trade, and had chosen this retreat for their summer residence, who had no idea of any merit but riches, and allowed no

claims to respect, but what were derived from the ostentatious display of them. The name of Lumley sounded less re-spectable in their ears than that of Jack-son or Wilson, because Jackson or Wil-son kept coaches, and could afford to fare sumptuously every day.
               'NOTHING,' says the immortal Bacon, can make that great which nature meant to be little. Our situation af-forded us many opportunities of observ-ing how fortune and nature were at strife, when the lavish gifts bestowed by the one, could not efface the despicable stamp impressed by the other. The Indian plunderer, raised from the con-dition of a link-boy to princely affluence, in the midst of his blaze of grandeur, looked like a robber going in mock state to execution; and the forestalling trader enjoyed his clumsy magnificence with the same aspect as when he had over-reached a less cunning dealer in a bargain.
               
                  
SUCH were the observations of Mrs. Benson, when these sons and daughters of sudden opulence rolled in unwieldy state by our humble habitation.
               MY mother used sometimes to chide her for the severity of her sarcasms; but her spleen was often roused by the in-conveniences which our contiguity to these great personages exposed us to: for money, which, as she said, cost them no-thing to acquire, but what they valued as nothing, consequently, was expended so lavishly, as raised the prices of necessa-ries; and this grievance was severely felt by their less opulent neighbours.
               
                  
bespoke every day, to furnish this indis-pensable article to their afternoon re-gale.
               SUCH inconveniences as these my mo-ther bore without murmuring; but she was not so easy under the difficulty she found of procuring a seat in the church, 'which,' said Mrs. Benson, are almost all taken up with the worshippers of Mammon, to whom, as they have erected an altar in their own houses, they might as well perform their devo-tions at home, and let Christians have access to the house of God.
               
               MY mother, however, sometimes, by the force of bribe, got admission into a pew; and one Sunday, making use of the same powerful oratory, she was let into a pew where there was only one lady, of a diminutive figure indeed, but a soul so vast, as seemed to oe'r-inform her small tenement of clay, and made her fancy herself large enough to occupy
               
                  
WE were soon settled in our new habitation: one maid-servant composed our whole equipage. We worked, we read, we dressed our little garden—all was peace, friendship, and mutual com-placency.
               'I SEE,' said I one day to my mother, that one may cease to be rich without being unhappy—A life led in tran-quillity, and with judgment, replied my mother, which is the work of reason, is preferable to one half of those sud-den and great successes which the world admires, and which are scarce ever the rewards of merit, but the mere vagaries of fortune.
               
               THE privacy my mother so earnestly desired was not like to be interrupted in a neighbourhood chiefly composed of fa-milies grown wealthy by the successful arts of trade, and had chosen this retreat for their summer residence, who had no idea of any merit but riches, and allowed no

claims to respect, but what were derived from the ostentatious display of them. The name of Lumley sounded less re-spectable in their ears than that of Jack-son or Wilson, because Jackson or Wil-son kept coaches, and could afford to fare sumptuously every day.
               'NOTHING,' says the immortal Bacon, can make that great which nature meant to be little. Our situation af-forded us many opportunities of observ-ing how fortune and nature were at strife, when the lavish gifts bestowed by the one, could not efface the despicable stamp impressed by the other. The Indian plunderer, raised from the con-dition of a link-boy to princely affluence, in the midst of his blaze of grandeur, looked like a robber going in mock state to execution; and the forestalling trader enjoyed his clumsy magnificence with the same aspect as when he had over-reached a less cunning dealer in a bargain.
               
                  
SUCH were the observations of Mrs. Benson, when these sons and daughters of sudden opulence rolled in unwieldy state by our humble habitation.
               MY mother used sometimes to chide her for the severity of her sarcasms; but her spleen was often roused by the in-conveniences which our contiguity to these great personages exposed us to: for money, which, as she said, cost them no-thing to acquire, but what they valued as nothing, consequently, was expended so lavishly, as raised the prices of necessa-ries; and this grievance was severely felt by their less opulent neighbours.
               
                  
bespoke every day, to furnish this indis-pensable article to their afternoon re-gale.
               SUCH inconveniences as these my mo-ther bore without murmuring; but she was not so easy under the difficulty she found of procuring a seat in the church, 'which,' said Mrs. Benson, are almost all taken up with the worshippers of Mammon, to whom, as they have erected an altar in their own houses, they might as well perform their devo-tions at home, and let Christians have access to the house of God.
               
               MY mother, however, sometimes, by the force of bribe, got admission into a pew; and one Sunday, making use of the same powerful oratory, she was let into a pew where there was only one lady, of a diminutive figure indeed, but a soul so vast, as seemed to oe'r-inform her small tenement of clay, and made her fancy herself large enough to occupy
               
                  

read to you an hour or two, she feels as if she was ready to expire with a strange oppression and faintness. She has carried her apprehensions so far, as to send her case to an eminent physi-cian; whose answer is, that if she con-tinues to read aloud, she will fall into a decline.
               
               MY uncle was amazed and confound-ed at hearing this, for I never looked better in my life; and he took notice of that circumstance. Lady Harley assured him I was perfectly well, and in very good spirits; 'And therefore', added she, it is the more surprizing that she should give way to such strange fan-cies.
               
               MY aunt followed this first blow with many others of the same kind, which would be tedious to enumerate: so that at length my uncle viewing all my actions in an unfavourable light, set me down in his mind as a perfect hypocrite; a cha-racter
the whole pew; so that upon my mother's entrance, she spread her flounces and hoop over the whole bench, and, wedg-ing my mother close in a corner, looked askance upon her, without making the least return to the courtesy she made her after she had risen from her knees.
               WHEN the service was over, the little great lady, being in a hurry to get out, flounced by my mother, and said, loud enough to be heard by her, to the wo-man who attended to open the door, I wonder at your assurance, to put peo-ple that nobody knows into my pew— I shall complain to the church-warden, I assure you.
               
               'MADAM,' said the woman, you have a right to but one seat in the pew, and the gentlewoman looks as much like a lady as any body.
               
               THIS speech called forth a contemp-tuous smile, and a repetition of the word

'lady!' for although my mother was, as you know, my Maria, a most elegant figure, and had an air of dignity, which was rendered more interesting by the gentle sorrow which shaded her features, yet as she had no footman with her, that barrier, in this polite country town, between the high and the low, it was impossible to imagine she could have any claim to civility.
               SHOCKED, but not mortified, at the ridiculous pride of this daughter of trade, my mother was preparing to go out of the pew, when she was accosted by a lady, who, by her air and manner, seemed to be indeed a gentlewoman; she had heard what had been said to the pew-opener, and appeared much affected at it.
               'I PERCEIVE, Madam,' said she to my mother, that you are not provided with a seat in this church, which in-deed is very difficult to procure in the

summer season, but you will be ex-tremely welcome to one in my pew; there is room enough, and I shall be happy to accommodate you; you need only desire to be shewn to Mrs. How-ard's pew, and it will always be open to you.
               
               THE lady curtseyed, and passed on, giving my mother time to pay her ac-knowledgments for this favour, only by a deep curtsey and an expressive look.
               SHE related this incident to Mrs. Benson and me when she came home, telling us, at the same time, the name of the benevolent lady. I should have been surprised, said Mrs. Benson, if any of the plebeian gentry of this lofty place had been capable of such an in-stance of civility to a stranger; from the noble name of Howard one might expect it.
               
               
                  
'IT is true,' replied my mother, that pride and meanness are generally found together; but there are persons, even of high birth, who can submit to to be proud, and whose whole great-ness lie in their titles; so that if they would have us respect them, they must send a herald before to announce their claims.
               
               I BELIEVE you and I, my dear Maria, know several of these undignified great ones; and, to my sorrow, some may be found among my own relations.
               MY mother did not fail to go to church next Sunday, and the pew-opener, who had heard what Mrs. How-ard said, immediately conducted her to that lady's pew: Mrs. Howard was al-ready there, and received her with smiles, that shewed the satisfaction she felt at seeing her offer so readily accepted. My mother had now an opportunity of pay-ing her acknowledgments, which she did

with her usual politeness, and a heart glowing with gratitude.
               MRS. HOWARD, judging by the pale-ness of her looks that she was in a weak state of health, desired, as soon as the ser-vice was over, that she would permit her to set her down at her own door; which my mother, after a short apology for the trouble it would give her, con-sented to.
               MY mother being desired to tell the servant where the coach was to stop, directed him to the place, and said he would see the name of Lumley upon the door.
               'Is your name Lumley, Madam?' said Mrs. Howard hastily: my mother bowing.
               
                  THEN you are the widow of the late Mr. Lumley, who died at Bath, I pre-sume? said she.
               
                  
'I AM, Madam,' replied my mother, sighing.
               
                  How happy am I to meet with you thus unexpectedly, said Mrs. How-ard; I have often wished for the plea-sure of your acquaintance; but I know not how it was, I never met you at any of my parties; but you must promise that we shall be good neigh-bours now; I generally pass three or four months every year at a little plea-sant house I have about a short mile from hence, before I go to our seat in Hertfordshire. I will not part with you till you have promised to spend a day with me.
               
               MY mother assured her, she would with great pleasure. Mrs. Howard in-sisted upon alighting when the coach stopped, that she might be introduced to me, for I ha d hastened to the door to re-ceive my mother. She saluted me ten-derly;
               
                  
said some very civil things, and took leave of us; having first made us promise to dine with her the next day, and to name the hour when we chose the coach should come for us. But little did I imagine the influence this visit was to have over my future fortunes.
               THE coach came for us at the ap-pointed time, and carried us to a small, but elegant building. The grounds about it were laid out with a beautiful simplicity, and the apartments all fur-nished in the same taste.
               MRS. HOWARD received us with an easy politeness, which soon banished the idea of being but the acquaintance of a day. When we were summoned to the dining parlour, we found there no other company but one gentleman, who by his dress we knew to be an officer, whom Mr. Howard introduced to us as his kinsman.
               
                  
THIS was Mr. Neville, my dear Maria, now the husband of your Euphe-mia. His age seemed to be about thirty; he was well bred, talked sensibly, and had something very gra-cious and insinuating in his manner, which, I know not how it was, had not the same effect upon me that it had upon most other persons, on whom it gene-rally produced a favourable prepossession.
               ALTHOUGH I could perceive I had at-tracted his notice, his eyes being almost constantly fixed on me, and following all my motions, yet his attentions were chiefly directed to my mother; he sat next her at table, and served her with every thing in the most polite and oblig-ing manner imaginable. We walked in the gardens after dinner; he kept close by my mother, whom he prevailed upon to lean on his arm, and entertained her with all the gallantry of an admirer, yet with all the respect and reverence of a son. My mother was quite pleased with

him; he seemed solicitous to gain hèr good opinion, and frequently threw out sentiments which did prodigious honour to his heart.
               My mother was greatly struck with one thing he said, which she declared was worthy of Socrates himself. Hav-ing, upon some instance of his obliging assiduity, complimented him upon his politeness, Mrs. Howard said, with a smile, I do assure you, Madam, Mr. Neville is a general favourite.
               
               'I PROTEST to you, Madam,' replied Mr. Neville, I do not think I have any reason to be vain of such a com-mendation; the favour of the multi-tude is seldom procured by honest and lawful means. I aspire indeed to the approbation of the few, for I do not number voices, but weigh them.
               
               'PRAY,' said Mrs. Benson, when my mother repeated this speech to her,

'how old is this sententious gentleman?' My mother replied, that she believed he was under thirty. 'Ah!' replied she, a philosopher of that age will al-ways be suspected by me; these fine sayings come more from the head than the heart.
               
               
                  YOUR satire is too keen, my dear Benson, said my mother, it is easy to perceive you are out of humour with the world; but having no reason to be so on your own account, I must place it to your friendship for me, who am so uneasily situated in it; however, Fortune may justify herself for having favoured me so little, for I am sure I never courted her.
               
               'BUT I would fain know,' said Mrs. Benson, what my young pupil here thinks of this grave young gentle-man?
               
               
                  

which he ever despised and hated. But although, in consequence of this opinion, he withdrew his affection from me; yet, as it produced no other altera-tion in his behaviour than a certain cold-ness and reserve, which rather increased than lessened that politeness which was so natural to him, I knew not on what ground to build a complaint. My ex-pences were as liberally supplied as be-fore; my requests as readily granted. My uncle, as he has since told me, could never be brought to hate his brother's daughter, though he ceased to love me as his own.
               BEING in this unfavourable disposition towards me, he was easily persuaded to press me to a marriage, in which my in-clinations were much less consulted than my interest. You know the man I re-fused, my dear Euphemia; and you did not chide me for my disobedience. My, however, was offended; and as I was absolutely incapable of repairing my
'MY mama thinks well of him,' said I, her judgment ought to be a guide to mine; but if I may be permitted to speak my sentiments, I think the air of his countenance and the graciousness of his manner, are not of a piece; his smiles are rather forbidding than con-ciliating, and do not seem calculated to invite confidence in the goodness of his temper.
               
               'UPON my word,' said my mother, half smiling, Mrs. Benson seems to have infused part of her spirit in you; but my dear, pursued she in a grave tone, I wish he were your husband; I am persuaded he would make you happy; and to see you settled, is all the wish I have on this side heaven.
               
               'DEAR Madam,' said I, a little dis-concerted, the gentleman has no thought of me. 'I do not know that,' replied my mother, I am sure he took a very particular notice of you; and as

he seems to be a man of much worth and honour, it would make me happy to leave you under such a protection.
               
               THIS last thought affected me with a tender concern; and made Mrs. Benson look grave. We changed the discourse; but my mother often mentioned Mr. Neville, still finding something in his manners and behaviour to ground a good opinion of his morals on.
               HE called the next day to enquire after our health, but only left his name, with-out staying to be asked in, which af-forded my mother new matter for praise, as his modesty seemed in this instance to be equal to his politeness.
               IT soon became a custom to dine every Sunday with Mrs. Howard, who carried us home with her from church, and we were always sure to find Mr. Ne-ville there. His behaviour to me was now particular enough to be observed by

every body. Mrs. Howard, railing me on my conquest, was pleased to say, there are few men worthy of you, but, in point of birth or fortune, Mr. Ne-ville is no improper match. On the death of his uncle, who is now seventy, he will succeed to an estate of eight hun-dred a year; he is likely to rise in the army, and his own fortune, which is about five thousand pounds, is, I be-lieve, still entire, as I never heard he was addicted to any extravagance.
               
               MY mother was very well pleased with this account of his circumstances. Such an establishment for my daugh-ter, said she to Mrs. Benson, is in her situation not to be rejected, espe-cially when the man is so worthy.
               
               MRS. Benson, who knew how little I was disposed to become a wife, and did not perhaps think so highly of Mr. Ne-ville's good qualities as my mother did, shewed no great satisfaction at Mr. Ne-ville's

addresses, and wished the affair not to be hurried on too fast.
               'IT is dangerous,' said she, to en-ter the state of marriage rashly, and by the conduct of fortune; all the eyes that prudence hath, are not too many to serve as a guide in this business; for errors are mortal, where repentance is unprofitable.
               
               SHE sometimes expressed her surprise to me at my mother's earnestness to con-clude this affair. Alas! the motive soon became too obvious; her health was declining fast, her anxiety for me preyed upon her spirits; I could often observe her look at me earnestly for a minute till her eyes filled with tears, and then she would hastily turn away to con-ceal her emotion.
               MR. NEVILLE'S behaviour, all this time, was so tender, so obliging, so eager to do us little services, so attentive to my

mother, so passionate, yet so respectful to me, that he even brought over Mrs. Ben-son, in some degree, to his party. She would sometimes tell me, that since I was absolutely certain his addresses to me were not actuated by any motives of in-terest, I owed him some gratitude for the sincerity of his affection.
               MY mother's illness now increased so fast upon her, as to fill us with the most dreadful apprehensions; the physicians acknowledged they thought her case dan-gerous. I passed my days, and the greatest part of my nights, by her bed-side, indulging my tears in her inter-vals of rest—for I carefully concealed from her the agonizing fears that filled my mind.
               MR. NEVILLE, on this occasion, shewed all the tenderness of a son, and all the sympathy of the most cordial friend-ship.
               
                  
'OH! that you could love this man,' said my mother to me one day, what satisfaction would it give me to leave you under his protection; for indeed, my dear child, pursued she, I have reason to think my anxiety for you is one of the chief sources of my illness.
               
               I STARTED from the chair where I was sitting, I threw myself on my knees at her bed-side, and bathing the dear hand she held out to me with my tears, 'My dear mama,' said I, why, oh! why did you not explain yourself be-fore? could you doubt my ready obe-dience to your will?
               
               'IN this case, my Euphemia,' said she, I would exact nothing from your obedience; my wish went no far-ther than that you could love Mr. Ne-ville. Your good opinion of him I am sure he has.
               
               
                  
'HE has, Madam,' said I, and I will teach my heart to love him, since he is your choice, and since the peace of your mind depends upon my being settled; should my compliance restore you to your health, I shall be the hap-piest of human beings.
               
               'AND to see you happy,' said my mother, is all my wish upon earth; I am persuaded Mr. Neville will make you so, provided you have no dislike to him.
               
               'How is it possible, Madam,' said I, that I can have any dislike to a per-son for whom you have so great a re-gard? Doubt not but I shall love Mr. Neville, when it is my duty so to do; and I will make it my duty when-ever you please to command me.
               
               'MY dear child,' said my mother, Heaven will, I doubt not, reward you for this, as well as every other instance

of your filial piety. From a young woman of your reserved and delicate turn of mind, I expected no sudden attachment, no romantic flights of passion; but I am well assured, that the man whom your judgment ap-proves, will, when entitled to your af-fection, possess it entirely.
               
               FROM that day my mother began to be not only composed, but cheerful; the easy state of her mind had such a powerful effect upon her health, that in a few days she left her bed, and her re-covery seemed no longer doubtful.
               MR. NEVILLE received my consent with transports that seemed to border, I thought, upon madness, and rather frighted than pleased me. He asked his uncle's consent for form's sake, which was neither granted nor refused; for the old gentleman, who was not satisfied with his conduct in general, had long ceased to trouble himself about his af-fairs;

and it was thought, that his dis-gust had risen to such a height, that if he could have disinherited him, he would certainly have done it.
               MR. NEVILLE'S security on this point was perhaps one cause of the little care he took to conciliate him.
               MY mother made no reflections to the disadvantage of Mr. Neville on account of this coolness between him and his re-lation; for there are times when some persons are always in the right. We were married; and my husband, in about a fortnight afterwards, carried me to a genteel house in Hill-street, which he had taken ready furnished for my re-ception.
               THE parting with my mother, whose state of health did not permit her to live in London, would have been very grie-vous to me, if I had not been enabled to visit her constantly every day; for,

among other articles of expence which I did not expect, from the very mode-rate income my husband possessed at present, I had a chariot and servants in elegant liveries. My mother gently hinted her fears, that his great fondness for me would, in the oeconomy of his house and appearance, make him consi-der rather the affluence in which I had been bred, than the humble condition to which fortune had reduced me.
               I HAVE heard it observed, that it is common for persons who are conscious that they have done things deserving of blame, to answer their own thoughts, rather than what is said to them. Mr. Neville, therefore, hastily replied, I have no intention to mislead my Eu-phemia into an opinion that I am richer than I really am. I never deceived her with regard to my present circumstan-ces, nor my future prospects; what you object to was not done to cast a mist before her eyes.
               
               
                  

fault, or even repenting of it, his con-tinued displeasure gave me so deep a concern, that my situation became very miserable.
               MRS. Irwin was about this time pre-paring to go to the south of France, for the recovery of her health: as she was a near relation of my mother's, and a very worthy woman, I asked and obtain-ed leave to attend her. I left England without any regret, but parting with you, my sweet friend; for my uncle ap-peared so happy in the passionate tender-ness of his young wife, and so com-pleatly estranged from me, that I could not suppose my absence would give him any uneasiness. He provided for my ex-pences, however, with his usual gene-rosity. When I took leave of him, my tears, and the ardour with which I kissed his hand, seemed to awaken some tender emotions; for he turned aside, and wiped his eyes: but immediately afterwards, as if hardened by some unfavourable
'MY dear son,' said my mother, hastily interrupting him, how vastly do you mistake my meaning. You are incapable of deceit; but you are also incapable of reflecting, that your wife having brought you no fortune, has no claim to any increase of expence be-yond conveniences.
               
               MY husband's countenance now cleared up, and this short debate ended with a kind compliment to me, which I was pleased with, because it gave her satisfaction.
               MR. NEVILLE, however, had deceived several of his friends, and Mrs. Howard in particular, with regard to his circum-stances, and consequently my mother; for of his own fortune, which was five thousand pounds, the greatest part was spent. He had commanded a company of foot in a regiment which was lately reduced, and his half-pay was almost all he had to subsist on. Without reflect-ing

upon the causes of disgust he had given his uncle, he hoped that upon his marriage, an event which he had often wished for, he would have made him a decent allowance out of an estate which must one day be his, and of which he did not spend the half upon himself; but in this he was disappointed; after many fruitless endeavours to soften his uncle, he took a sudden resolution (for his re-solutions are always sudden) to extricate himself from his difficulties by going abroad; and fortune, on this occasion, favoured his designs.
               A YOUNG gentleman, who was ap-pointed first Lieutenant to one of the in-dependent companies in New-York, having no inclination to leave England, entered eagerly into a proposal Mr. Ne-ville made him, to exchange this com-mission for his Captain's half-pay; and having very considerable interest, the affair was soon accomplished. Mr. Ne-ville,

who has very high notions of the prerogatives of a husband, and doubt-less soreseeing the opposition I should make to this scheme, never deigned to consult me upon it. Little did I expect the storm that was ready to burst upon my head; when one evening, having staid later than usual with my mother, on my return I found him at home, very busy at his escrutore looking over papers, and settling accounts.
               AFTER some enquiries concerning my mother's health, he asked me abruptly, 'if I should like to travel?' I said, I should like it extremely in certain cir-cumstances. 
                  And pray what are these certain circumstances, my dear? said he. 'Why,' replied I, a full purse, and my mother's company. 
                  I cannot promise for either, said he; and yet I believe we must travel. He said this with so grave a look and accent, that although I could hardly think him

in earnest, yet I was strangely alarmed; and I asked him, with some emotion, 'what he meant?'
               'I MEAN what I say,' replied he, that we must go abroad, my dear; it is absolutely necessary.
               
               'ABSOLUTELY necessary to go abroad!' I repeated, trembling, and scarce able to speak.
               'IT is really as I tell you,' said he, without taking notice of the disorder I was in. My uncle is incorrigible, he will make no addition to my income, which is too small to support you pro-perly. I am besides incumbered with some debts, which, without his assist-ance, I am not able to pay; and he has had the cruelty to refuse me a few hun-dreds, which would have set me at ease. Fortunately an opportunity of-fers, which will enable me to extricate myself from these difficulties without

his help. I have made an advantage-ous exchange with an officer who was going to New-York. It is one of the finest of our American provinces; the climate is delightful, the air healthy, the people polished; all the luxuries of life are there more easily purchased than common necessaries here. There will be no great hardship in passing three or four years there. My un-cle's death will be the period of our banishment, if you will have me call it so: his age and infirmities scarce make it probable that he can last long; we will then return to Eng-land.
               
               ALL the time he was speaking, I sat with my hands folded, and my eyes fixed on the ground, in an agony of thought. He paused, as if expecting me to answer him.
               'You say nothing to me, Euphemia,' said he at length. You think it a

hardship, no doubt, to follow a hus-band who has given you such uncom-mon proofs of his affection.
               
               'OH! my dear mother,' cried I, am I to be torn from you, at a time when my attendance on you is so neces-sary?
               
               'YOUR mother will go with us, per-haps,' said he. The voyage is not so long a one as you imagine; they often run it in less than three weeks.
               
               'I CHARGE you,' interrupted I, rising hastily, and holding him as if he was go-ing that instant to my mother, I charge you, do not carry this dreadful news to my mother; you will kill her; she will not survive the parting with me. Alas! was it for this—I paused.
               'Go on,' said Mr. Neville, was it for this you married? I know to whom I was obliged for your reluctant consent.
               
               
                  
THIS was a sad thought.—Agitated as I was with other griess, I perceived instantly all the inconveniencies this notion, if it took too deep root, would bring upon me: but it was not possible for me to eradicate it, without descend-ing to the meanness of falsehood; my soul was unacquainted with those emo-tions, which, on this occasion, would have suggested professions of fondness and attachment, such as he perhaps ex-pected. I answered, therefore, with great simplicity, It is true, Sir, you were my mother's choice; I never had any other will but her's, and her choice regulated mine; but I would not have married an emperor, if by that marriage I should have been obliged to leave her.
               
               'WELL,' answered he, carelessly, I believe your mother will be the only rival I shall ever have in your affec-tions: we must endeavour to prevail upon her to go with us. But pray,
                  

pursued he, in a kinder accent, com-pose yourself; this separation is yet too distant to occasion all this uneasi-ness.
               
               'BUT still it is certain,' said I; is it not so?
               
               'I AM afraid it is,' he replied. My affairs are in such perplexity, that it must be so.
               
               AT this decisive word my tears flowed afresh. His patience (for, alas! he has but a small share of that useful qua-lity) seemed now exhausted; he rose up, and taking his hat, told me, he was obliged to go out, and hoped when he returned to find me in a better humour.
               I WAS not sorry to be left alone, that I might give free vent to my tears. But scarce had I passed a few minutes in this sad employment, when my servant in-formed me a gentleman from Lord S.

desired to speak with me. This noble-man, my dear Maria, was a relation of my mother's, and was my god-father, as I believe you have heard me say. He was but very lately returned from the Continent, where he had spent two years in search of health, which, how-ever, he had not found; as his let-ter, which his gentleman now deli-vered to me, informed me. He ex-pressed great concern for my father's death, and the situation in which he had left my mother and me; wished me happy in my marriage, and de-sired my acceptance of five hundred pounds as a nuptial present, lamenting his inability to do more for me; which indeed I knew to be true, as he had but a small estate, and several children to provide for.
               My surprise at this unexpected piece of good fortune, at a time when I was overwhelmed with despair, was so great, that the letter fell out of my hands, and

the bank-notes enclosed in it were scat-tered about the room. My soul was filled with joy and gratitude; in this pro-vidential relief I felt, I acknowledged the gracious hand of Heaven! It was with difficulty I could compose myself to write a few lines to my kind benefac-tor; and, when I sent for his messenger to deliver my billet to him myself, the transport I was in might easily be read in my countenance. Delivered from my fears of being separated from my mother, by being thus enabled to supply the necessities of my husband, I felt as if a mountain was removed from my breast. I expected his return with in-conceivable impatience; and as soon as he entered the room I flew eagerly to him.
               'My dear Mr. Neville,' said I, deli-vering him the letter with the notes, see how Providence has interposed to prevent a separation, that would have given death to my mother, and made

recollection, he relapsed into his former coldness, and took a much more cere-monious than kind leave of me. My aunt acted her part extremely well; regretted the loss of my company, and comforted herself with the hope of a happy meet-ing in a few months. Mrs. Irwin was amazed at the ascendant Lady Harley had gained over a man of my uncle's good sense: 'This woman', said she, will, as the poet says—
Mould his passions till she makes his will.
But it is my opinion, that your excur-sion to the Continent will prove less favourable to her machinations than your stay here. With friends and lovers, absence is a kind of Death, which sheds oblivion over faults, and heightens every virtue and amiable quality. Lady Harley will now miss a thousand opportunities of hurting you with your uncle, which artifice on her side, and innocent security on yours, would have furnished her with

me miserable. These sums will, I hope, be sufficient to set you at ease, and make it unnecessary for you to go abroad.
               
               HE read the letter, and examined the notes. —'It must be confessed,' said he coldly, this is a fortunate circumstance, considering your great unwillingness to leave England. —Well, Euphemia, I hope you will now be easy, since you have your wish. I saw he ex-pected I should thank him for his ready acquiescence to my will; and by this piece of policy he escaped what to him would have been a very great morti-fication—the appearance of being under any obligation to me or my friends. My answer was calculated to please him, and I left him the next day in very good humour, in order to visit my mother.
               My heart was light, and the inward satisfaction I felt gave such an air of

cheerfulness to my countenance, that upon my entering my mother's apart-ment she took notice of it. Holding out her hand to me, which I kissed, May I always see you, said she, with this contented air; and may you never have reason to be otherwise!
               
               ALAS! how soon was my cheerfulness to be overcast; I felt her hand intensely hot. I fixed my eager looks upon her face; the alteration I perceived there froze me with terror. I have had but an indifferent night, but I am better now, said she, forcing a smile to dis-sipate my apprehensions.
               MRS. Benson that moment entered the room: in the fixed concern that was visible in her face I read my impending misfortune. She was followed by the physician; but from him I could col-lect no comfort: he even acknowledged to me that my mother was in great danger. Shall I attempt to describe my

feelings to you on this occasion? Oh! no, it is impossible to give you an idea of my distress. I had sent back the carriage to town, which returned again immediately with Mr. Neville, who had been informed, by a billet from Mrs. Benson, of my mother's situation.
               THE most dutiful, the most affection-ate of sons, could not have behaved otherwise than he did: and I have the comfort to reflect, that my mother, to the last moment of her life, was fully persuaded that I was perfectly happy in the choice she had made for me.
               I LEFT her no more after this day, nor ever parted from her bed-side a moment while she lived. I had command enough over myself to suppress my sighs and tears, that I might not inter-rupt that saint-like composure with which she waited for her dissolution. All the moments that were not spent in her devotions, she employed in consol-ing,

fortifying, and instructing me. With the most pathetic sweetness she recommended me to my husband's care. She intreated Mrs. Benson to continue her friendship for me; and heard, with great satisfaction, her promise never to forsake me. She talked sensibly, she reasoned justly, to the last moment of her life. It was not more than a quar-ter of an hour before she died, when, faintly pressing my hand, which she held in her's, and looking earnestly on me,— 'It has been said,' said she, with more wit than truth, that virtue was the most beautiful and the most unprofitable thing in the world. Can that be called unprofitable which, when supported by 
                        
                     , give a calm like this? My heart, sunk as it was with sorrow, caught the enthu-siasm of her words.
               'OH!' cried I, lifting up my swim-ming eyes to Heaven, may I die the death of the righteous, and may my

latter end be like their's! —A smile of joy beamed over her countenance, now beginning to be overspread with the dark shades of death—once more I felt the faint pressure of her hand, now cold and clammy, and withdrawing from mine. — To the last moment she kept her eyes fixed upon me—then, gently closing them, her head sunk upon my bosom, and with one soft sigh she breathed out her pure and innocent soul.
               HERE let me draw a veil over the sad scene that ensued. —My husband car-ried me in his arms, and put me into the chariot, where I continued without sense or motion till we arrived at our own house. I had no reason to com-plain of his behaviour to me on this occasion; it was tender, affectionate, and assiduous, and filled my heart with the warmest sentiments of gratitude.
               MRS. Benson came in the evening, and spent two hours with me; and then

returned to watch by the dear remains of her friend and benefactress. Lord S. desired to be at the expence of the fune-ral, which was performed in a manner suitable to her birth and happier for-tunes. —She lies in the family vault at —. Oh, my Maria, I must pause here for a while; when I can de-tach my thoughts from this affecting subject, I will continue my narration.
               As soon as I was recovered from a dangerous fever, with which I was seized immediately after the death of my mother, Lord S. insisted upon my passing a few weeks at his country-seat with his lady and daughters. Mr. Ne-ville was also invited; but he pleaded business in town that required his at-tendance, and contented himself with sometimes coming to pass a day or two with us.
               
                  
WHEN I returned to town, I found Mrs. Benson had, with the concurrence of my husband, settled all my mother's affairs. She had taken lodgings in the same street where I lived, that she might be near me: and, now my mind being a little more composed, I thought it necessary to represent to Mr. Neville, that in the present state of our circum-stances, prudence required we should adopt some plan of living less expen-sive, and more suitable to our income. I took care to avoid giving this dis-course the air of advice; I even com-plimented his tenderness, by ascribing to that motive the figure we had hitherto made, which I said I was by no means intitled to.
               Mr. Neville, as usual, answered his own thoughts— 'I suppose,' says he, you think it strange that I have not yet acquainted you with the manner in which I have disposed of your five

hundred pounds; but the time has not been favourable for such discussions.
               
               'ALAS! no,' said I, bursting into tears at the sad remembrance he excited by these last words. —'And perhaps,' pursued he, I have now introduced this subject unseasonably; if you please we will talk no more of it at present,
               
               IT was not long, however, before he renewed it himself. —I cannot submit to alter my mode of living, said he; and I cannot continue it without in-volving myself in difficulties—there is no help for it—we must go abroad. — If your mother had lived, I should. have found it very difficult to have mentioned this to you again; but as it is, I think you can have no objection to changing the scene for a few years.
               
               MY surprise and confusion were so great at this unexpected declaration, that I continued silent for some mo-ments;

during which his countenance was marked with so much impatience, that I thought proper to tell him, I would endeavour to overcome the re-luctance I had to quit my native coun-try, and those few friends which the wreck of my fortunes had left me; but he must permit me to say, that I wish this hard task had not been imposed upon me.—He said, that it was impossible for him to break through his engagement, without bringing such a stain upon his honour, as could never be wiped off.—'Since that is the case,' I replied, 'I have nothing more to say;' and from that moment I have never suf-fered him to perceive that I had any reluctance to this voyage.
               MY dear Mrs. Benson goes with me. She has nothing dearer, she says, than me in the world; and no claims upon her that should hinder her from keeping the promise she made to my mother never to forsake me.
               
                  
Mr. Neville seems to approve of her design; I say seems, because he never heartily approves of any thing that he is not the first mover of himself.
               You are now, my dear Maria, in-formed of all those circumstances of my life which led to my present situa-tion. Some particulars I wish, indeed, may be known to none but yourself; for, when I discover secrets to you, I think I hide them. Adieu.
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

if you had staid here. It is certain, that the fine fabrick she had raised with such an expence of falshood, was de-stroyed on a sudden by means which she could neither foresee nor prevent.
               WITH what pleasure do I turn from this dark side of my fortune, to one in which my dear Euphemia will share in my satisfaction! But what do I say! My Euphemia is going to leave me! This thought, like the stings of a guilty con-science, saddens all my enjoyments; and, when I should be happy, gives me up to tears and complainings. But you wilt chide me if I continue this strain. Adieu, my dear friend.
               IN my next, you shall have a full ac-count of all that remains for you to know concerning my present situation. Mean time, pity ray impatience, my anxiety; and explain to me the causes of this sad reverse of fortune, and all that has happened to you in a separa-tion

               LETTER XIII. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               WHAT an affecting narrative is your's? If Nature herself could speak, she could not make use of more significant terms. You are above all praise; therefore, without incurring the guilt of making you vain, I may ven-ture to tell you how we talk of you here in our set. 'She is a woman,' said Mr. Grevilie, either lifted up by her own strength above the passions of her sex, or Nature hath exempted her from them by a peculiar privilege.—'Miss Lumley,' said my uncle, is indeed a wonderful young woman; she had an excellent monitress in her mother; and she has profited well, both by her

lessons and example. Young as she is, she is strict in the performance of all her duties, yet she affects no pecu-liar gravity in her aspect and manners, but tempers her reserve with so much sweetness, that, without endeavouring to please any, she pleases all the world.
               
               HAD any persons been present at this discourse, who were ignorant of my sen-timents for you, they might have judged, from my silence and discontented air, that I was envious of your praises. This is the friend, thought I, I must lose; and she, of whom hardly any man can be worthy, must follow one, who as-suredly cannot be ranked among the best, to the wilds of America.
               I AM afraid you will be angry with me, my Euphemia, for these impa-tient repinings, and for profiting so little by the example you set me; but you well know, that there are some of us of such spirits, that neither time nor

philosophy can work upon us; while there are others again, who prevent the work of time and philosophy by their own natural disposition.
               WE are going to spend a week at Mr. Greville's: he sets out to-day, to prepare for our reception, and two days afterwards we are to follow him. My chief pleasure there, as well as here, will be writing to you. I hope to have a letter from you before we leave the Hall. Adieu, my dear friend.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XIV.
               MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               YESTERDAY Mr. Neville told me he had been to pay his respects to Colonel Bellenden, whose first lieutenant he now is, and who is appointed com-mander of the forces stationed at New York under the governor, who, it seems, is captain-general. The colonel introduced him to his lady and daughters: he was greatly pleased with his recep-tion; and, having desired leave to pre-sent me to Mrs. Bellenden, and the young ladies, we received a polite invi-tation to dine there to-day, which we accepted.
               
                  
Mr. Neville is much out of humour that, being still in mourning for my dear mother, I cannot appear with eclat; that is his expression in this my first visit. He takes upon him to judge what ornaments I may wear with pro-priety, and has actually laid out my jewels, which, he says, will receive additional lustre from my sable habit.
               IT has been observed, that obstinate persons are ever most obstinate in error. Unhappily I experience the truth of this observation every day, on some occasion or other. When Mr. Neville has once given his opinion, however erroneous it may be, it is impossible by argument to set him right, for reason itself would seem to be wrong if it is not of his side. I was sadly perplexed; for I saw no-thing but determined opposition would save me from an absurdity, and upon this I could not resolve; when, fortu-nately for me, he took it into his head to make an appeal to Mrs. Benson, who

sat smiling all the time, without med-dling in the dispute. But first, he en-deavoured, by a long speech, to convince her, that what he proposed was the fit-test thing in the world to be done.
               'I KNOW not who it is,' said Mrs. Benson, very gravely, who says that eloquence is that powerful, efficacious, and dangerous gift, alike capable of persuading both to what is right and what is wrong. There is no answering your arguments, that is certain; but you are too gallant not to yield up this point to Mrs. Neville, since the article of dress is entirely her own affair.—'Oh, to be sure,' said Mr. Neville, she is at liberty to dress as she pleases; I only wanted to convince her I was right in what I proposed; —but I am satisfied if you think me so.
               
               HE was indeed satisfied with the com-pliment Mrs. Benson paid to his elo-quence, yet he could not help, now and

then, returning to the charge, with— How plainly you are dressed, my dear; if you would but add a few ornaments you would look much better.—I con-stantly replied with a smile, Have you not said I should dress as I please?—'Oh, to be sure, to be sure,' he cried, 'I shall never contradict you;'—and the next moment, Certainly, my dear, you might wear diamond ear-rings, at least.—But I see the chariot at the door—my husband is coming to fetch me. I protest he surveys me with a look of disapprobation; I must remind him of the compliment Mrs. Benson paid him to put him in a good humour again. Farewel, my dear Maria, I will give you an account of our new ac-quaintance when we return, if we are not kept too late.
               
                  

                  TEN O'CLOCK.
                  WE are just come home.—Mr. Neville is engaged with a gentleman in the parlour, who having business with him, waited his return; so I have an hour before supper, which I shall devote to you, my dear Maria, to acquit myself of my promise.
                  WE were set down at a handsome house in St. James's Square, and shewn into a genteel drawing-room; into which, immediately afterwards, came Mrs. Bellenden, followed by three young ladies, her daughters. Mrs. Bellenden is about-five-and forty years of age, or something more. She has, in her youth, been handsome, though her complexion is brown, for her features are regular and pleasing, and her eyes remarkably fine. She is well made; her motions perfectly genteel; and, in her beha-viour,

she has all that easy politeness which distinguishes persons in a certain rank of life. After saluting me with a mixture of ceremony and cordiality, both as a stranger, and one with whom an intimate connection was likely soon to take place, she presented her three daughters to me by name.
                  MISS Bellenden, the eldest, is about two-and-twenty, tall, and well-shaped, and may doubtless be called a good figure: yet her proportions are not fine, and her motions want grace. She is reckoned extremely handsome, Mr. Neville says; and it is certain that she has a fine complexion, and very regu-lar features; but they are merely regular, cold and insipid. Her eyes are not animated with any thing but motion, and so totally devoid of expression, that they may more properly be said to see than to look. She made me a short compliment, which gave me an oppor-tunity of observing, that the tones of her

voice are unpleasing, and her expres-sion confused.
                  LOUISA, the second daughter, resem-bles her eldest sister in the delicacy of her complexion, and the air of her features; but has greatly the advantage of her in the elegance of her form, which has be-sides more dignity in it than I ever remember to have seen in one so young. This young lady is about fifteen; she seems grave and reserved; and returned my salute with a deep curtsey, with-out scarce raising her eyes.
                  CLARA, the youngest daughter, is about fourteen, all life, soul and sensibility. She appeared, in her impatience to sa-lute me, almost ready to prevent her mother, who introduced her in her turn. The same powerful sympathy drew me towards her; I could scarcely help embracing her tenderly; but I checked this involuntary emotion, and confined myself to form. How shall I

of a few months; and which, alas! is so soon to be followed by one of many years. But I will fly this thought. Adieu!
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

give you an idea of this amiable girl, whose loveliness is rather felt than seen, how paint the ever-varying charms of a countenance which is never the same for three minutes together, yet pleasing in every change. She is not thought so handsome as either of her sisters, her complexion being less fair, and her fea-tures not so delicate. Her eyes, how-ever, are the finest in the world; large, dark, full of fire, full of softness: lan-guishing, yet bright; lively yet tender: so full of expression, that it is scarce necessary 
                        
                      her to speak, the intelli-gence of her looks conveying her thoughts as distinctly as her words. The make of her face is genteel, and her smile bewitching. She does not pro-mise to be quite so tall as her eldest sister, nor to equal her second in the dignity of her person; but she excels them both in the elegance and symme-try of her form. Her voice, in speak-ing, is so sweet, so modulated, that it is a kind of oratory in itself, and per-suades

as much as her words. She continued to sit near me the whole day, which gave me great pleasure.
                  IN about half an hour after our ar-rival. Colonel Bellenden entered the room. With an air of easy dignity he apoligized to us for not being able to join us sooner, having been detained at the coffee house by some persons of bu-siness. It is impossible, my dear Ma-ria, to look upon this gentleman with-out feeling for him, even at first sight, love, esteem, and reverence. He has a fine figure, a noble air, a most engaging countenance, in which every virtue that adorns the human heart is apparent. He is not a man of letters, having, as he told us, been a soldier from the age of fourteen; but nature has given him an excellent understanding. He talks little, but that little is always to the purpose; and he possesses so much na-tural grace, that all he says and does is pleasing.
                  
                     
SUCH, my Maria, is the family with whom I am to make a voyage to the New World; and, I believe, you will not think I shall find it a difficult mat-ter to pass my time agreeably with them.
                  WHEN tea was announced, we re-turned to the drawing-room, leaving the two gentlemen to their wine. Miss Bellenden then drawing her chair near me, said in a low voice, and a half sigh—
                  
                     Do you know, Madam, when this terrible voyage is to take place?—'Not exactly, Madam,' I replied; but I am sorry to find you are so much afraid of the sea.
                  
                  'OH dear, no,' said she, I am not afraid of the sea, I never thought about it; but I am very sorry to leave England.
                  
                  
                     
'OH,' said Clara, we shall find Lon-don in every place where there are balls, and concerts, and assemblies, and plays.—And who tells you, said Miss Bellenden, that there are any such things in the strange part of the world to which we are going?
                  
                  
                     YOUR sister may have heard so from me, said Mrs. Bellenden, 'who seemed anxious to quiet her daughter's mind about these matters. I have been told, by persons who have resided some years in the province of New-York, that it is a very gay place, that the people are fond of polite amuse-ments, and are in general very well bred. That last article, I found, had great weight with Mrs. Beilenden, for she spoke it with an emphasis.
                  'I AM informed too,' proceeded Mrs. Bellenden, that the air is pure, the climate agreeable, and the face of the country romantic and beautiful.
                  
                  
                     

                     THEN Clara will be delighted with it, said Miss Bellenden, for she would rather wander in woods and groves, she says, than mix in the most fashionable assemblies; nay, I have known her prefer a walk in the most solitary part of Hyde-Park, where she could see nothing but trees and grass, than accompany me to the Mall, when it has been so crowded with per-sons of fashion, that we could hardly move. Here I observed Clara cast down her eyes, and Miss Louisa smiling significantly.
                  'Is solitude your taste too, Miss?' said I. 'No, indeed, Madam,' said she, I like to be among persons of fashion; but not in such a crowd as my sister speaks of; for then every body looks alike, and there is no distinction of persons.
                  
                  FROM these lights, thus artlessly held out, it was no difficult matter to

discover the different dispositions of these young ladies; which were made still plainer, by the manner in which their portraits are taken by the inimitable pencil of Sir Joshua Reynolds, whose pieces are so full of mind, that you have the character, as well as form, of those who sit to him. But I am interrupted with a summons to supper; and as I shall not have an opportunity of filling up the remainder of my paper till to-morrow, I will here bid you good night.
               
               
                  MRS. NEVILLE, IN CONTINUATION.
                  THE Colonel and Mr. Neville hav-ing joined us, Mrs. Bellenden carried us into her dressing-room, to look at her daughters' pictures. 'I was resolved,' said she, to have them drawn before we left England, and by our great artist; because they are designed for presents to some of their nearest re-lations.
                  
                  
                     
SHE then directed my eyes to the por-trait of Miss Bellenden, which was placed in the most conspicuous part of the room. It is a whole-length, and finely executed. She is dressed for a masquerade; her habit that of a Cir-cassian Lady; she holds her masque in one hand, and, with the other, adjusts a curl of her bright auburn hair, which seems falling on her ivory neck; her countenance expresses all the self-com-placency of conscious beauty, and com-municates to the spectator part of that pleasure which she herself feels in the contemplation of it.
                  WHILE I was gazing attentively upon this finished piece, Miss Bellenden, who seemed impatient for my opinion, glided up to me, and said in a loud whisper, the painter has flattered me excessively; yet, I think, there is some resemblance.
                  
                  MR. Neville took the word, and, in a high strain of compliment, expatiated

upon the beauties of the picture, and the skill of the artist.
                  MISS Bellenden smiled, and interrupt-ing him at last, said, but I would have Mrs. Neville's opinion.
                  
                  
                     THE painter has done you justice, Madam, said I, 'and only justice.'
                  'AH,' replied she, I perceive you can compliment as well as your lord here.
                  
                  I LEFT it to Mr. Neville to satisfy the lady's scruples about our veracity, and turned my eyes upon Miss Louisa's pic-ture; her dress is a robe of pale blue sattin, ornamented with festoons of flowers; her hair hangs in loose ring-lets upon her fine turned neck, and its luxurious growth about the forehead and temples is confined by a tiara of pearls; she is represented standing in a garden; her left arm leaning on a marble column;

her right extended towards a beautiful little boy, as if to receive a small basket of flowers, which he offers her. Her attitude is extremely graceful, and cal-culated to mark the dignity of her form; she smiles upon the child who presents her with the flowers, who seems to have gathered them from a parterre at a dis-tance, to which he points. There is a beautiful distinction between the flowers on her robe, and those in the basket: we see that the former are artificial, only because they are contrasted with the others, which look like nature itself.
                  'You have gazed long enough,' said the colonel, upon these two fine ladies; now let me have your opinion of my little pastoral nymph here. Miss Louisa, while we were looking at her picture, stood by with an air quite easy and unconcerned; and replied to our compliments no otherwise than by a respectful curtsey.
                  
                     
My attention was now fixed upon the picture of my young favourite; which, both for design and execution, is one of the most pleasing pieces I ever saw. She is represented in a wood, and as just risen from the foot of a spreading oak; her book, a large folio volume, lying near it; a young fawn, at a distance, seems hastening to hide itself in a thicket; a length of ribband, which it trails along, shews that it has been her cap-tive, and has made its escape; she seems springing forwards to recover it; a sweet anxiety is expressed in her animated countenance; her hair is tied behind with a ribband, and floats in the wind. The admirable symmetry of her form is shewn to advantage by a thin white robe, which she gathers up with one hand, that it may not impede her flight; the other she holds out invitingly to-wards the little animal. I perceived the book was lettered on the back, it was Sidney's Arcadia; I smiled. That is a romance, is it not, Madam? said

               LETTER III. MRS. NEVILLE, TO MISS HARLEY.
               WHY does my dear Maria imagine I would chide her for a sensibility so amiable in her, so flattering to me who am the object of it? Am I qualified to recommend apathy to you, who share so deeply with you in an affliction that is common to us both; and while my heart is still smarting with a wound which never, never can be healed? You knew my mother, Maria; you knew her excel-lence: judge what my grief must be for her loss. But she is happy! her patient-suffering virtue has it's just reward.
               So little do events depend upon the most prudent measures, that had she lived to see the unprosperous event of a mar-riage which was her own work; and from which, in her last moments, she owed all her consolation with regard to me; she

Mrs. Bellenden; Clara is very fond of those sort of books, too fond I think. Clara blush'd, and seemed apprehensive of more rebukes on this subject. It is a romance, Madam, said I, but it is a very ingenious work, and contains excellent lessons of morality: it was wrote by one of the bravest soldiers, and most accomplished gentlemen of the age he lived in; an age too, that was fruitful in great men.
                  
                  
                     I SEE you are an advocate for ro-mances, Mrs. Neville, said Mrs. Bel-lenden, half grave, and half smiling, and indeed, you are still of an age to relish them. I smiled assentingly; and the Colonel leading me again to the drawing-room, the discourse turned upon matters relating to our intended voyage, and the country we were going to, till it was time to take leave.
                  I AM apprehensive this voyage will take place sooner than I expected; but I

could easily reconcile myself to all the difficulties of it, except parting with you, my dear Maria.—Alas! this is a subject I dare not trust myself to write on.
                  THIS moment your short letter (which to make amends for its shortness, it must be owned is very sweet) is brought me. By lavishing such praises on me, you do me a favour no doubt, but I cannot say you do me justice; and you seem to have a design to please me at the hazard of offend-ing truth. But you will tell me, these high commendations come from your uncle and Mr. Greville—'Tis well, I will rate them then at their just value; for do we not all know, my dear Maria, what po-liteness obliges men of wit and gallantry to, when ladies are the subjects of their panegyric? —but enough of this. Write to me soon; let me know all that passes in this little excursion; every thing in-terests me that relates to you. Adieu.
                  
                     EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XV. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               IT is some comfort to me to reflect, that if you must take this hated voy-age, the Bellenden family will afford you agreeable companions in it. Mr. Greville is well acquainted with the Co-lonel: he speaks of him with a kind of enthusiasm. In the language of Pope, he cried out,

                     A wit's a feather, a chief's a rod,
                     An honest man's the noblest work of God.
                  
'Colonel Bellenden,' said he, is that noblest work; and to this truth the candid bear testimony by their words, and detractors by their silence. I asked him his opinion of the ladies.
               
                  
'MRS. Bellenden,' he said, by her politeness and attention to please, sup-plies, in some degree, the defect of her education; which being confined to mere accomplishments, as they are called, has left the nobler powers of her mind uncultivated. She sings well; she dances finely; she performs on the harpsichord with great skill; she can carry on the small talk of a tea-table in French; draws prettily; and is al-lowed to shade her flowers in embroi-dery extremely well; but her read-ing has been wholly confined to her Psalter and Bible, a few devotional tracts, and some sermons; and, among profane authors, the Seven Cham-pions of Christendom, pamphlets, poems, and some other works of the same kind. She has a great contempt for what she calls book-learning in women; and thinks chastity and good breeding, for so she pairs them, the highest of female virtues. She is an obedient wife, a tender mother, and

an easy companion; is gentle in her censures of her acquaintance, except when they offend against the laws of modesty, or the rules of ceremony, and then, it must be owned, she is very severe.
               
               'YOUR characters,' said I, seem to be drawn with so much skill, that I wish to have Miss Bellenden's by the same hand. She will be the companion of my dear friend in a long voyage, and I shall be happy to know that she will be an agreeable one.
               
               'I DO not,' said Mr. Greville, think Miss Bellenden qualified to be an agreeable companion to one of your friend's solid understanding: but she is good-tempered, and will not give offence; she is very handsome, and has no idea of any higher excellence in women than beauty; she is greedy of admiration, and would be a coquet, if she had wit enough to secure her

conquests; but although nature directs her to throw the bait, and the gaudy fry often catch at it, yet she has not skill enough to bring her prey to land; and they always escape her. These dis-appointments affect her but little; for a constant succession of new conquests keeps her in good humour with her own charms, and leaves her no leisure to regret, that their effect is not lasting.
               
               
                  HER two sisters are too young to have any character yet; but they are both fine girls in their persons; and Clara, the youngest, seems, I think, to give the promise of being superior to the others, in the endowments of her mind. 
                  My friend has found that out already, said I. 'Then,' replied Mr. Greville, I shall have some opi-nion of my own penetration.
               
               MY uncle this moment sends to let me know that he is ready, and the car-riage

is at the gate. We are to spend a week at least at Mr. Greville's, and from thence my next letter will be dated, unless I should find leisure to write to you at the inn where my uncle puts up the first night. Ever, ever your's,
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XVI.
               MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  Bell Inn.
               
               HERE we are, my dear Euphemia, somewhat fatigued with our journey, for the roads were very heavy, and the day unpleasant; and, to complete our dissatisfaction, we met with some disagreeable occurrences on our arrival at this place, which have had a surpris-ing effect on my uncle's temper, and for which, at present, I can by no means account.
               WHEN our carriage drove into the inn-yard, a young gentleman, who was talking to Mrs. Deering, the landlady, hastily advanced, and with great polite-ness offered his hand to help me out:

he bowed low to my uncle, and observ-ing that he descended with some diffi-culty, he assisted him with equal atten-tion; my uncle thanked him very cor-dially, which the young gentleman an-swered only by a most respectful bow, and withdrew. Both my uncle and I thought him extremely handsome; and indeed, my dear Euphemia, he has a most engaging countenance, and is one of the finest figures I ever saw.
               MRS. Deering having conducted us to a parlour, appeared to be in some confusion. 'Your honour,' said she, used always to give me notice when you intended to come here, and then I prepared every thing for your recep-tion.
               
               'AND have you not had notice,' said my uncle; I sent Robert before me, early in the morning. 'Indeed, Sir,' said she, not a soul has been here from you: and I am in the greatest quan-dary

in the world; for I have not a bed for your honour, my house is so full: I can make a shift to accommodate the young lady, if she will put up with a little bed in a dark closet, and her maid can sleep with one of mine; but the room your honour used al-ways to have, is engaged by that young gentleman you saw in the yard, and I have not another room in the house, but what is taken up.
               
               MY uncle fretted very much at this disappointment, and at the negligence of the groom. What is to be done, Maria? said he to me; do you think you can bear the fatigue of tra-velling to the next stage this cold dark night?
               
               'I CAN bear it very well, Sir,' said I, but I am sure you cannot; therefore, I must entreat that you will accept of the dark room and the little bed Mrs. Deering talks of; and Fanny shall sit up with me in this room: here are two

            EUPHEMIA.
            BY Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
            
            IN FOUR VOLUMES.
            VOL. I.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND; AND J. EVANS, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
            M, DCC, XC.
         
      
      
         
            

would have been miserable. Heaven spared her this affliction: and, did not self mingle too frequently in our most justifiable passions, I should not now grieve so much for her death, as rejoice in her exemption from an evil which she might not perhaps have borne with her usual fortitude. But you shall have my history from the time of our separa-tion; and an eventful one it is, for the time. I have leisure enough; and to rehearse the past, when the present is un-happy, and the future presents only a gloomy prospect, is not so irksome a task as to make me decline obeying you.
               SCARCE were my tears dried up for your sudden and unexpected departure, when a surprizing alteration in the tem-per and behaviour of my father filled my mother and myself with the most uneasy apprehensions. He became peevish, melancholy, silent, and reserv-ed: he shunned company, staid much

easy chairs; and if I can get a book, I shall pass my time well enough. 
                  I cannot consent to that, said my uncle; then turning to Mrs. Deering, who had uttered a thousand good lacks all the time, he ordered her to get a boiled chicken forsupper; and in the mean time he would resolve upon something.
               I CONTINUED to press my uncle to agree to my proposal; which he could not prevail upon himself to approve.
               ALL this time we heard nothing of the groom. The night became wet and stormy. I trembled for my uncle's health; for he was immoveable in his resolution not to let me sit up all night; but rather to go forward to the next stage; when Mrs. Deering entered the room smiling, and told us, that the young gentleman, who had engaged the room, hearing of the inconveniences we were likely to suffer for want of an apartment, had politely resigned it to

my uncle; and was actually set out on horseback, in the midst of the storm, in order to reach the house of a friend, who lived about ten miles distant.
               'BLESSINGS on his heart for it!' said Mrs. Deering, it was as good a deed as ever was done; and it was all his own offer.
               
               MY uncle appeared very much af-fected with this young man's civility. 'Who is he?' said he to Mrs. Deering: I hope I shall have an opportunity, some time or other, of thanking him. 'He is your namesake,' said Mrs. Deer-ing.
               'HARLEY!' interrupted my uncle, im-patiently, 'Who's son is he?'
               
                  He is son to the Reverend Doctor Harley, answered Mrs. Deering; and is just returned from Germany. He was sent to get his learning at a

                     Versity there; because his father, it seems, is not rich, and could not main-tain him at one of our own Versities.
                  
               
               My uncle had been used to this good woman's language, and was able to listen to her gravely; but it was with some difficulty that I could help smiling. However, my mirth was immediately clouded, when casting my eyes upon my uncle, I perceived all the marks of astonishment, anger and confusion in his countenance.
               'PRAY hasten supper,' said he to Mrs. Deering, at the same time making a motion to her with his hand to be gone. She left the room; and he continued to walk about in it silently, with a hasty un-equal step.
               My astonishment at this evident dis-composure, kept me silent also for some moments. At length I asked him, if

any thing extraordinary had happened, to make him uneasy.
               'YES,' replied he, throwing himself into a chair, I have reason to be un-easy, when, contrary to my intentions, I am laid under obligations to persons I hate. This young fellow has in-sulted me by his mock-civility. Can-not you guess who he is? 
                  Is he not, Sir, said I, 'related to us?'
               
                  HE is so, to your and my misfor-tune, said he. His father is my enemy, my mortal enemy: and upon him, since I have no male heir, my estates are entailed. Oh! that my brother had left me a son instead of a daughter!
               
               'WELL, Sir,' said I, endeavouring to laugh him out of his ill humour, it is always misfortune enough to be a woman, without any aggravation. But I am not avaricious; and you have

made me as rich as I desire to be. I wish, indeed, your heir was more wor-thy of your regard. But has this young man affronted you, as well as his fa-ther?
               
               'His father is a villain!' cried my uncle, starting from his chair, and pacing again furiously about the room; then suddenly stopping, and grasping my hand eagerly.
               'OH! Maria,' said he, I have cause for hatred; that base man betrayed me! betrayed me in the tenderest point! betrayed me, who was his kins-man, his friend, his benefactor!
               
               HIS voice failed; his eyes filled with tears; he turned from me, and throw-ing himself again into his chair, fixed his looks, altered as they were from rage to melancholy, stedfastly upon the fire.
               
                  
WHILE he continued in this affecting silence, I could not refrain from tears; which I endeavoured to conceal, upon Mrs. Deering's entrance with supper. Sir John was so absorbed in thought, that he did not perceive she was in the room; I drew near to tell him softly, that supper was on the table.
               'I HOPE his Honour is not ill!' said Mrs. Deering, coming up officiously to-wards him. 'Sir John is fatigued,' said I, 'with his journey.' Ah! no doubt of it, said she. What a mercy it was, that his honour did not go fur-ther to-night. Blessings on good young Mr. Harley, for leaving us his bed!
               
               At that name my uncle started up in some emotion; and then, for the first time, perceiving our loquacious land-lady, he recollected himself, and drew his chair near the table.
               
                  
'IT is a bitter night,' pursued she; poor heart! I warrant he is drenched through with the rain by this time: but as long as his Honour is safe and warm, I am contented.
               
               SENSIBLE how much my uncle must suffer in the present state of his mind, by this woman's idle talk, I desired her to get his apartment ready for him as soon as possible; 'for I suppose, Sir,' said I, you will choose to retire when you have supped? 'Certainly,' he said: upon which Mrs. Deering with-drew.
               MY uncle, still pensive and silent, carved the chicken, helped me and him-self, but scarce ate any thing; and my supper being finished as soon as his, he drank one glass of wine; and ordering his valet, who attended, to light him to his room, he wished me a good night, and left me.
               
                  
I WAS glad to be alone, that I might give free vent to my tears; for the gen-tle melancholy my uncle fell into, after the first sallies of his anger were over, af-fected me greatly. I could have wished he had opened his heart to me, and ac-quainted me with the cause of his enmity against his kinsman. That there was no cordiality nor correspondence between them, I knew; but I never imagined their differences were of a nature to ex-cite such a strong and lasting enmity. But what has this poor young man done, to deserve so great a share of my uncle's dislike? for it seems he never saw him before, and was disposed to like him, till he heard his name: and indeed, it must be acknowledged, that he has some-thing extremely interesting in his coun-tenance, and his person and address are engaging to a great degree. Poor youth! his complaisance may probably cost him dear; the night is dark and stormy, his road lies across the country, and he has ten miles to travel, with no attendant

but an old countryman, whom, at a large expence, he hired to serve him as a guide.
               HERE is Mrs. Deering with her alasses! again; she puts a thousand frightful thoughts into one's head. I have al-ways observed, that low people take a pleasure in creating fears, when there is no cause for them, and in aggravating them when there is. But I will go to-bed: I am tired, but not sleepy. I have been writing ever since my uncle left me.—Good night, my dear Eu-phemia.
               
                  THREE O'CLOCK.
                  I CANNOT sleep, the tempest without is so violent; and, to say the truth, the agitations of my mind have raised a kind of tempest within me. I am risen, and I am got again to my pen. I dread the seeing my uncle; his uneasiness af-fects me greatly, Methinks, I can now

account for his ill-suited marriage with Miss Fenwick.—Doubtless, he hoped for an heir, to disappoint the expectations of his hated kinsman, and his race. But, why should his race be hated too? What-ever the father's guilt may be, ought it to involve the innocent son? Bless me! there is a loud knocking at the gate. This stormy night has driven some be-wildered travellers hither. Poor Mr. Harley! perhaps, he too, may be in difficulties. Good Heaven! how they thunder at the gate! This impatience speaks some emergency. So, the house is roused, I perceive: my window looks into the inn-yard; cold and dreary as it is, I must open it, and see what is the matter.
                  A POST chaise drives into the yard; they help a man out of it, who seems to be hurt: some dreadful accident has happened. I must ring for somebody to come to me; I am terrified, and can-not bear to be alone.
                  
                     

at home, and passed the greatest part of his time shut up in his closet; and was inaccessible even to my mother, who certainly was not even then wholly ignorant of the cause of this great change in him. A stroke of the palsy followed these first symptoms, and compleated our distress. It was but slight, however; and by the great skill and care of his physi-cians he was restored to some degree of health, and able to take a journey to Bath, which they judged necessary to his perfect recovery. I never doubted but I should be permitted to attend him thi-ther, as well as my mother; but my father had resolved otherwise. I durst: not dis-pute his will: tender and affectionate as he always seemed to me, he exacted, and never failed to receive, an implicit obedience to it. Spare me the descrip-tion of this sad parting! My father, as he turned from me, shed tears, which he endeavoured to hide. I had thrown my-self into the arms of my governess; but, raising my head to snatch a parting glance as he stepped into the coach, at
ALAS! my dear Euphemia, the wounded man I saw brought in is Mr. Harley! My maid, whom the noise had wakened, came to my chamber; I sent her to make some enquiries; she returned with my uncle's groom, who told me, that the young gentleman was dangerously hurt. I was excessively an-gry with this fellow, by whose neglect all this mischief has been brought about. I could hardly bear him in my sight; yet I was impatient to know, how he happened to be in Mr. Harley's com-pany, for he was in the chaise with him, it seems: he told me, after some awk-ward excuses for his transgression, which I impatiently interrupted, that having met with a brother, who was just re-turned from sea, and whom he had not seen for many years, he was by him persuaded to go into a public house; where drink and discourse beguiled the time, he said, in such a manner, that it was late in the evening before they parted; but the storm was so violent,

that he could not have proceeded, if he had not met with a returned post-chaise, the driver of which was his acquaint-ance, who invited him to take a seat in it; he set out with his friend, who promised to leave him at this inn. In their way, they were alarmed with the cries of a man, who begged them to alight, and assist a gentleman, whose horse had thrown him, and who, he be-lieved, was dangerously hurt: this was poor Mr. Harley, my dear. They found him lying under a tree, which af-forded him but indifferent shelter against the rain; and in this condition, it seems, he had remained near an hour, being unable to rise, much less to sit his horse; and in all this time, no carriage of any sort had passed by till their arrival; his guide, poor fellow! had taken off his own great coat to cover the poor youth as he lay, supporting his head upon his knees, hollowing in vain for help, where there was none to hear; and uncertain whether he ought to leave him, in that

condition, to seek for assistance, or stay near him, in expectation that Providence would send them relief.
                  WITH some difficulty they raised him, and put him into the chaise; Robert supporting him in it. The hu-manity he had shewn upon this occasion prevented any further reproaches from me for his negligence, and I promised to prevail with my uncle to pardon him; who, upon the report of what had hap-pened, had risen, and having sent to know if I was up, desired I would come to him in the parlour. He took notice that my eyes were red. I do not blame you for your sensibility, said he; I am concerned, as well as you, for the accident that has happened to this young man. That I should be un-designedly made, in part, the occasion of it, is one of those good turns which I am used to meet with from that family.
                  
                  
                     
I PERCEIVED he was in an ill humour; so I made him no answer to this speech, which, I thought, was a very strange one at this time. He walked hastily backwards and forwards in the room, as his manner is, when he is vexed.
                  'I HAVE sent to tell Mrs. Deering,' said he, that she may accommodate her guest with my bed, which I have left for that purpose; so there, I think, we are even. There was no answering to this, you know; so I was still silent.
                  'I AM impatient to be gone,' pursued he, therefore ring, and order some breakfast to be prepared immediately; we will set out as soon as it is light.
                  
                  I RUNG, and my maid appearing, I ordered her to get breakfast ready: for I suppose, said I, they have business enough below to employ them. My uncle looked withfully at Fanny, then at me, as if desirous to know what was passing. I asked no questions, though

I was really in a great deal of anxiety myself, being resolved to see how far good nature would work. He seemed disappointed when Fanny went out of the room; and going to the door, called her back.
                  'WHY do you not tell us,' said he, 'how the gentleman is?' He is very bad, Sir, said Fanny; he is very much bruised, and has got a large cut on the side of his head, for it seems he fell against a huge stone that lay in the road: Mrs. Deering says, he bleeds like a pig, and he has fainted away twice. There is no surgeon to be had nearer than the next town, and that is seven miles off.
                  
                  MY uncle now walked about faster than before. 'Cursed accident!' mut-tered he: then, suddenly stopping, Is any one gone for this surgeon? asked he, hastily. Fanny told him, a man and horse were gone full speed. Well, make haste with breakfast, said he,

                     it grows light; and tell the men to get the carriage ready; I will be gone immediately.
                  
                  MRS. Deering brought in the choco-late herself, and told us, that as good luck would have it, one of her guests, being a physical gentleman, had visited Mr. Harley, who was now in bed; that he said, he ought to be bled immedi-ately, and undertook to do it himself, though he did not practise that profes-sion; that he had subscribed something to anoint his bruises, and to compose him to sleep; and that he was actually in a fine breathing sweat, and was very quiet.
                  SIR John, I could observe, listened to her strange jargon very attentively, which, at any other time, would have made me smile. But I was really con-cerned for the young gentleman, ex-tremely concerned; it was natural I should be so, for he is our kinsman, you

know, and whatever may be his father's demerits, he is blameless.
                  MY uncle heard all she said without making any reply; and having drank his chocolate, seated himself in an easy chair, complaining that he was very sleepy. I retired to my own room, and wrote thus far, expecting to be soon summoned to depart, for I see the coach is drawn out. Methinks I could with the surgeon was come, that we might have his opinion of the poor young man's case: common humanity, you know, my dear, would suggest this. Sure, Sir John will not go till he knows what de-gree of danger Mr. Harley is in. I was mistaken; he sends this moment to know if I am ready. —Well, I will at-tend him.
               
               
                  
                     Greville Park.
                  
                  I AM retired for the night to my own chamber; the fatigue and agitation of the day affording me a reasonable ex-cuse

for desiring early rest; but I shall devote an hour or two to you before I go to-bed.
                  I TOLD you, my uncle sent to let me know he was ready to set out from the inn, and I hastened down to him. I found him reading a news-paper, and so leisurely, that he even read all the advertisements; at length, he laid down the paper, walked to the window, and looked at his watch. My maid coming in with my cloak, he asked her, If the surgeon was come? She answered, 'No;' but that the coach was ready.' I rose up, my uncle gave me his hand; I thought we were going away immediately, when he stopped short at the parlour door: 'I fancy, Maria,' said he, you would be glad of a dish of tea before you go; you have had very little rest, it will refresh you, and you are not used to breakfast upon chocolate.
                  
                  IT appeared to me, that my uncle was desirous of staying till the surgeon

came, though he would not own it. I accepted his proposal, and tea was or-dered. In about half an hour after-wards, Fanny told us the surgeon was come: 'Well,' said my uncle, with an assumed carelessness, we shall now hear his opinion of this case. And accord-ingly Mrs. Deering came, in a great hurry, to tell us.
                  'WELL, Heaven be praised,' said she, matters are not so bad as we imagined; Surgeon Parker has examined the wound, and shook his head; but says, he hopes it will not be attended with very great danger. He is a fine man; he will cure him, if any body can. He says, the young gentleman is very much bruised, but he hopes not dan-gerously; and his fever is pretty high, but he hopes not dangerous. He says, he must be kept quiet; for it will be a work of time to set him upon his legs again. Oh, he is a fine man; the young gentleman will be very safe in

his hands. But I must go, and get ready the things he has subscribed for him. And accordingly she left us, in as great a hurry as she came in.
                  'I FANCY this fine man,' said my uncle, half smiling, will make a fine job of this. Then pausing a little; the wounded gentleman,' said he, is probably not provided with money enough to answer such extraordinary expences as he may be brought into; and the wretch, his father, lives at a great distance: can you think of any method, Maria, of conveying this to him, taking a bank-note of fifty pounds out of his pocket-book; it will hurt his delicacy, I suppose, to put it into Mrs. Deering's hands for his use. I could have wished my uncle had completed this act of bene-volence, by making Mr. Harley a visit, and giving it to himself; but I durst not mention this to him.
                  
                     

that moment he appeared to me more like a corpse than my living father: I shrieked, and fainted away. My dear mother, who had taken every precaution to make this absence more supportable to me, directed my governess to carry me immediately to Richmond, where I was impatiently expected by Mrs. High-more and her family, with whom I was to reside till my parents returned from Bath. You know this lady, my dear Maria; you know how greatly she was esteemed by my mother, whose confi-dence she had acquired by the appear-ance of an uncommon attachment to her. She had daughters of an age fit to be my companions; and their birth and accomplishments made them very pro-per ones.
               DURING our little journey, Mrs. Bur-ton employed every soothing art to alle-viatemy grief: but that image, that death-like image of my father, filled my imagi-nation, and swam continually before my
'THERE is no other way, Sir,' said I, than to inclose it, and send it to him by Mrs. Deering. He said, that would do; and taking his hat, walked into the garden, to give me an oppor-tunity. Accordingly, I inclosed the note in a blank sheet of paper, and sealed it with my own cypher. I then sent for Mrs. Deering, and desired her to deliver it to Mr. Harley herself. She told me he was asleep, which I was glad to hear; and, smiling significantly, as-sured me, he should have it as soon as he waked. She was going to oppress me with her usual loquacity; but my uncle coming in, she stopped short. He gave me his hand to lead me to the coach, and we drove away immediately; my uncle not once speaking to me, till we came within five miles of Greville-park; when he perceived Mr. Greville, on horse back, coming to meet us; and he pointed him out to me.
                  
                     
MR. GREVILLE, full of the pleasure this visit gave him, said a great many civil thing to me; and thanked Sir John for the favour he did him, in prevailing upon me to accompany him. But my uncle continued to be grave and pensive; so that when we arrived at the Park, Mr. Greville, as he handed me out of the coach, expressed some surprise at the humour his friend seemed to be in; and asked me, in a whisper, What was the matter? I replied, That we had met with some disagreeable accidents at the inn, which, I supposed, Sir John would acquaint him with; and that I should then expect an explanation from him; for I knew he was too much in his confi-dence, to be ignorant of any thing that materially concerned him.
                  THIS iS a delightful seat, my dear Euphemia; sweetly romantic in its situ-ation and prospects. The house is not very large, but elegant, and furnished with great taste. I complimented the

house-keeper, who is a grave ma-tronly woman, upon the exquisite neat-ness that reigned in all the apartments. That which is allotted for me, during my stay, is one of the best.
                  I HAVE had a long conversation with Mr. Greville this morning. My uncle, being a little fatigued with his journey, did not accompany us in our walk in the park, which is a very extensive one. I was impatient to know what had passed between them, after I left them last night, concerning our adventures on the road; and Mr. Greville, to my wish, entered of himself into the subject.
                  
                     So, Sir John has seen his young kins-man, said he, I find. It must have been a trying interview for him; and, no doubt, opened all those wounds, which neither time nor reason have been able entirely to heal.
                  
                  
                     
'What are those wounds,' said I, which, in a mind so generous as my uncle's naturally is, could produce such fatal effects, as to make him confound innocence with guilt, and reject the blameless son for the faults of the of-fending father? Yet, it must be owned, that, angry as he was, he for-got not the duties of humanity.
                  
                  'THAT is exactly my friend,' replied Mr. Greville; his passions may some-times mislead him, but his inclinations are always good, and never fail to bring him again into the right path. But you will not be surprised at the continuance of his resentment against the father, when you know the inju-ries he has received from him; and I have his leave to make you acquainted with them. For I am not willing, said he,  that my niece should think meanly of me, as she probably will, till she is convinced, that my resent-ment

is but proportioned to the of-fence that has been given me.
                     
                  
                  
                     You must know then, that Sir John and Dr. Harley had contracted a great friendship for each other in their early youth. They received the first rudiments of their education at the same academy, and were sent to-gether to the same university. Dr. Harley's father was but in indifferent circumstances, and would have found it very difficult to have supported his son at college, had not his expences been liberally supplied by your uncle, whose father, Sir Henry Harley, gave him a very large allowance. The two friends were inseparable; and their mutual attachment was so steady and so ardent, that they were called Pila-des and Orestes. Mr. Harley, your uncle, during one of the vacations, became acquainted in a gentleman's family, the daughter of which was ex-quisitely

handsome, and highly accom-plished; for her father, having no for-tune to give her, was at an expence for her education, which but little suited his circumstances, not doubting but her beauty, aided by such advantages, would procure her a very honourable establishment. Your uncle conceived a violent passion for her; he made her a declaration of it, which was not ill received; but the prudent young lady referred him to her father, which put matters in such a train, that your uncle was soon engaged in a formal matri-monial address, which, for the pre-sent, however, was to be carried on secretly, as it was not expected that Sir Henry would be easily prevailed upon to give his consent, and the young gentleman was still master enough of himself, to reject all thoughts of a complete disobedience.
                     HIS young kinsman, you may be sure, became his confident; and he

undertook to manage a correspond-ence between the lovers; which, for some time, was carried on undiscovered; at length, some hints of the affair had been given to Sir Henry, who, when his son came next to visit him, caused him to be watched so closely, that he soon became master of the whole secret. He came to an explanation with his son, who had too much candour to deny his attachment to Miss Denby; but assured him, that he never entertained a thought of engaging himself further without his consent.
                     SIR HENRY seemed satisfied with this assurance, and gave him to under-stand, that he relied entirely upon his honour, and expected that he would break off this connexion; and, to make all sure, proposed, that he should set out immediately upon his travels. This was a sad stroke: Mr. Harley en-deavoured to ward it off by many bad arguments, which he brought to prove,

that it would be better to defer this expedition for a year at least.
                     SIR HENRY, who never had recourse to authority when the case in question could be decided by reason, was sen-sible, that to combat passion with re-monstrances was engaging with un-equal arms; therefore he put an end to the debate with a positive I will have it so; and preparations were immedi-ately made for his departure.
                     THE lovers, at parting, exchanged a thousand vows of constancy, and their faithful confident promised to manage their correspondence as usual, which went on unsuspected for near a year when Mr. Harley's governor disco-vered it by chance, and gave imme-diate notice to Sir Henry.
                     THE Baronet began now to appre-hend very serious consequences from a passion which had stood the test of

time and absence; and the active part young Harley had taken in the affair giving him just offence, he sent for him in order to reprove him severely for it. Mr. Harley, finding it in vain to deny the truth to one who was too well informed, pleaded in his own excuse the force of friend ship, and in your uncle's, the fascinating power of Miss Denby's charms; and on this last point he spoke so feelingly, as put a scheme into Sir Henry's head, which, if it succeeded, would effectually prevent the misfortune he feared from his son's imprudent at-tachment.
                     DROPPING therefore the first severity of his tone and aspect, he began to ex-postulate mildly with him.
                     "IF my son," said he, continues his addresses to this girl, he will of-fend me greatly; but, if he should be mad enough to marry her, never let him hope for my pardon; I will

banish him from my heart, and from my sight for ever; tell him this, and use all your influence with him to pre-vent such an insult to parental autho-rity; in doing so you will shew your friendship to him, and will secure mine to yourself.
                     
                     MR. Harley's father was lately dead and had left him a very small fortune; he had taken orders, but had little hopes of obtaining any preferment in the church but by the interest of Sir Henry. He perceived all the advan-tages of this opening towards gaining his confidence and friendship; and Sir Henry was convinced by the supple-ness of his answers, that it would not be a very difficult matter to lead him as far as he pleased. He resolved, therefore, to explain his whole design at once, founding his hopes of success in it, on the observations he had made on the warmth with which the young man expatiated upon the beauty and merit of Miss Denby. He knew that

sight. I was for a long time insensible to all the caresses of Mrs. Highmore and the young ladies; which were, in-deed, carried to excess, particularly on the part of Mrs. Highmore and the eld-est daughter: but I was more touched with the behaviour of Lucy, the young-est of these ladies, whose professions of friendship for me had an air of candour and sweetness which won my confidence, and engaged my gratitude.
               THE first letter I received from my mother, gave me so favourable an ac-count of my father's health, that my me-lancholy apprehensions began to abate; and I was once more able to mix in so-ciety, and to share in those amusements which the family were eager to procure for me. This attention, apparently so obliging, would certainly have made an impression upon me, if I had not been disgusted with the adulation which Mrs. Highmore and her eldest daughter were perpetually pouring in my ears. I have

the shortest way to persuade was to please; therefore, he instantly propo-sed to him to marry the young lady himself, whom he would portion with a thousand pounds, and give him the reversion of the living of— which was worth three hundred pounds a year, and was likely to be soon va-cant, the present incumbent being then above four-score.
                     THE once faithful Pilades could not resist these strong temptations; he sacrificed his Orestes without scruple, persuading himself that the friendship he had vowed for him required that he should use every means in his power to prevent his incurring the guilt of disobedience to his fathers; and know-ing that in great affairs there are no small steps, he went boldly to work, represented to Mr. Denby the danger of offending a man so powerful by his fortune and interest as Sir Henry Har-ley; by encouraging his son's clan-destine address to Miss Denby; that

the young gentleman himself did not entertain a thought of marrying her without his father's consent, which would never be obtained; that the Baronet's death alone could open a prospect of success in this affair; and this prospect, considering the vigour of his years and constitution, was very remote. He advised him, therefore, to listen to another proposal for his daughter, which, though not so splen-did yet was certain, and might be productive of more happiness.
                     MR. Denby was a reasonable man; he considered that nothing is less cer-tain than the future—nothing apter to deceive than hope. He was anxious to settle his daughter, and resolved not to reject a present good for the bare possibility of a greater in future; and, after some reflection, desired Mr. Harley to explain himself, which he accordingly did, relating very can-didly Sir Henry's proposal; for even

knaves can be honest when their inte-rest points that way.
                     THE two gentlemen were soon agreed; the greatest difficulty seemed to be the persuading Miss Denby to this new regulation:—but even this was got over in a little time, either because the young lady's passion for her absent lover was not very violent, or she had given way to a growing inclination for the present; or, what indeed was most likely, the precarious condition of her fortune, her sole de-pendence being upon the life of her father, whose health was declining, and whose income, arising from a place in the revenue, did not enable him to lay up any thing for her future sup-port.
                     SIR Henry had soon the satisfaction to hear that this marriage was com-pleted; he performed the first part of his promise immediately, and caused the

thousand pounds he gave Miss Denby to be settled on herself; and in a very few weeks he was enabled to perform the second part of it; the living be-came vacant, and Mr. Harley was put in possession of it.
                     YOUR uncle was at Brussels, on his way to England, when he heard of this marriage, which, upon report, he did not believe: but a letter from his father put it past a doubt. He received one at the same time from Dr. Harley, which he returned un-opened. He made no reproaches, he expressed no resentment; satisfied with the resolution he had taken, never for the future to hold any converse with a man who had so basely betrayed him, he confined his grief and rage within his own breast; and, in his letter to his father, took not the least notice of what had hap-pened, but desired he would approve of his intention to continue abroad some time longer.
                     
                        
DR. Harley was deeply wounded by the contemptuous silence of his injured friend, which carried with it more keen reproach than the severest invectives. His remorse, it was said, cost him a fit of sickness; and he had the mor-tification to find that Sir Henry, though he profited by his treachery, yet despised him for it, confining his acknowledgments to the bare per-formance of his promise, withoutkeep-ing up any correspondence with him, or pushing his interest any further.
                     YOUR uncle continued on the con-tinent three years longer, visiting most of the European courts; and being furnished with remittances to make a large expence, he amused himself so effectually, that he returned to Eng-land perfectly cured of his passion; but retaining all his resentment against the perfidious pair who had so basely betrayed him.
                     
                        
SIR Henry pressed him to marry, to which he seemed greatly averse; and when his father, to prevail upon him, mentioned the entail of his estates upon Mr. Harley in default of issue in his line, your uncle said, his bro-ther's marriage might as effectually prevent that misfortune as his. Ac-cordingly Mr. Edward Harley was, with the consent of all parties, mar-ried to your amiable mother; and Sir Henry, before he died, had the satis-faction to be grandfather to three fine boys and yourself. It pleased Heaven, however, to take your brother to him-self; and your parents, too much af-fected with their loss, followed them in a few months. Then it was that your uncle resolved upon marriage, but was not able to fix till he saw Miss Fenwick. A most judicious choice, as it has proved; and he has now the mortification to know, that the person whom he hates most, and has most

reason to hate, plumes himself with the hope of succeeding to his fortune.
                  
                  THIS was what Mr. Greville told me, my dear Euphemia; and it must be confessed, that my uncle's fixed resent-ment against the elder Mr. Harley is very justifiable. It was natural, you know, my dear, to be a little inquisitive about the character of the son. Mr. Greville, it seems, knows him very well, having met him several times in com-pany since his return from Leyden. He speaks of his merit in very high terms: he says he is a most amiable youth, is possessed of a fine understanding, and besides being an excellent scholar, is highly accomplished. He resembles his father, he says, in nothing but the graces of his person; and even in these he has the advantage of him.
                  'HE would be no bad representative,' added Mr. Greville, of the honours

of your family; but, if it be true what some have observed, that the qua-lities of the mind are hereditary, though the order of succession is not always observed, young Harley may have a son that will resemble his grandfather, and disgrace those honours.
                  
                  I SMILED at this conceit, and I must confess I was glad to hear so good an account of the young man, for I was willing to be justified in the favourable prepossession — I mean the good opi-nion I had conceived of him from his very polite and engaging behaviour. Mr. Greville told me that he would dis-patch a man and horse to-day to the Bell Inn, to know how the young gen-tleman is, and, by some means or other, said he, I will contrive to let Sir John know the state of his health, about which I am sure he has good nature enough to be anxious, though he will not own it.
                  
                  
                     
OUR walk ended with this little his-tory. My uncle himself mentioned Mr. Harley, and said he should be glad to know if the young man's hurt was really as bad as the surgeon represented it.
                  'WE shall know, presently,' said Mr. Greville, for I ordered Will, as he passed by the Bell Inn, to enquire; he must be come back I suppose by this time. — He rang the bell, and Will himself appeared, — Well, how is the wounded gentleman? said Sir John, carelessly. — 'Sir,' replied the man, he is much better; so well, in-deed, that he talks of setting out to-morrow in a post chaise for his fa-ther's house; but the surgeon and Mrs. Deering say he is mad to think of any such thing, and would fain have him stay a week longer, at least; but the young gentleman seems to be a very positive young gentleman, and will do as he pleases.
                  
                  
                     
WHEN William left the room, my uncle said he was glad the young man was not likely to be a great sufferer by his civility, which, whether it proceed-ed, said he, from an interested policy, or real benevolence, I profited by, and therefore owed him my thanks for it: and now, that the matter is all over, I must insist upon never having his name mentioned to me again.
                  HE spoke this with so severe a look, and in so firm an accent, that Mr. Gre-ville did not think fit to make any re-ply; much less did I, you may be sure. But is this just, my dear Euphemia, to shew so much rancour? — Rancour did I say! no, that is too harsh a word. My uncle is incapable of harbouring any rancour in his breast; but so much dislike to one who never offended him— one whose amiable qualities — yes, I think that praise may be allowed to him from what we observed of his behaviour, even though Mr. Greville may have

heard it said, that it is a mark of gran-deur to be hated by those who do not know us, and flattered by those who do: a young woman of fortune has this, in common with royalty, that she seldom hears truth. My governess would have it, that Mrs. Highmore had some de-sign upon me; and her suspicions were strengthened by a visit made her by her son, a youth of nineteen, from college, though it was not vacation-time.
               THE young gentleman had probably received orders to be violently in love with me; for he seemed to court oppor-tunities of speaking to me alone, which I believe were often contrived for him: but he was too bashful to profit by them as was expected; for, after some general conversation about the weather, he used to withdraw to a window, and whistle a tune. His behaviour might have af-forded me some diversion, had my mind been more at case: but now every letter from Bath brought me still less favour-able

drawn his character with some exaggera-tion. But why should one suppose that Mr. Greville, whose penetration and sincerity nobody ever called in question, could either be mistaken in the cha-racter of this youth, or draw it in false colours? If then he is what he repre-sents him to be, and what his behavi-our to us gives us reason to think he is, I must say it is unreasonable, nay, it is unjust in my uncle to con-found him with his unworthy parents, and make him answerable for their faults.
                  I EXPECTED to have had a letter from you by yesterday's post. How does it happen that I am disappointed? Does the Bellenden family engross you wholly? Have you not a few moments to spare to your friend? Let me not accuse you of neglect, my Euphemia; at this time it would affect me greatly. —I am low-spirited—I know not why, but I am really so; and yet have I not

too much cause for low spirits—are we not to be separated, perhaps for ever? Mr. Greville quarrels with me for spend-ing so many hours in the Park; its ro-mantic scenes charm me—solitude is the nurse of tender thought, the poet says; and in the silence and gloom of these shades I undergo the melancholy reveries of divided friendship—divided, but never to be lessened.— Yes, my dear Euphe-mia, I think of you with more tender-ness than ever; my fortitude has quite forsaken me, and my tears flow at the bare idea of our separation. How then shall I suppress the trial when it comes? But I must lay down my pen; Mr. Greville makes an entertainment to-morrow for some of the neighbouring families, who come to welcome us to this part of the country; and my maid tells me it is time to dress. The post carries you a large packet this time. Adieu.
                  
                     MARIA HARLEY.
                  
               
            
         
      
   


accounts of my father's health. At length, the fatal news of his death ar-rived; which, not with standing the cau-tion that was used, the melancholy looks of my governess, and the rest of the fa-mily, announced to me, before the ten-der Lucy, whose sad task it was to pre-pare me for this stroke, could utter a word. 'My father is dead!' cried I, trembling: 'Is it not so?' Lucy an-swered me only by her tears. Then I have seen him', said I, 'for the last time; and the last time I saw him, he looked as he is now.
               
               I CONTINUED several days in a most melancholy situation; during which time the family took part in my afflic-tion with an appearance of the most ten-der sympathy: they shut themselves up with me, and neither paid nor received any visits; each solicitous to outdo the other in endeavouring to calm my grief. On a sudden, this attention ceased; they saw company as usual; and their en-gagements,

both at home and abroad, took up their time so much, that they had scarce a few moments to bestow on me; and I have sometimes passed a whole day without seeing them in my apart-ment. The young man was sent back to college, without leaving even a com-pliment for me. A strange alteration now took place in their manner of con-versing with me: respect and adulation were no more; their kindness was dis-gustingly familiar, their pity humiliat-ing, and their civility constrained.
               ALL this passed unnoticed for some time: but when the violence of my grief was in some degree abated, my at-tention was awakened first to little neg-lects and failures in their usual polite-ness, that led to a fuller observation of their behaviour towards me; which I found so changed, that they did not seem to be the same person with whom I had conversed so long. Perplexed and asto-nished at what I now for the first time

discovered, I asked my governess the meaning of this strange alteration. My dear, said she, you now see the world as it is: and you will probably, added she, sighing, have but too many op-portunities of assenting to the truth of that maxim, which seems to bear hard upon human nature; but which is ne-vertheless but too true, That the gene-rality are bad.—'Bu
                     •
                  , Lucy,' said I, without taking in the full meaning of her words, Lucy is still the same; she is not changed. At that moment the dear girl entered the room. I flew into her arms; and my heart being greatly oppressed, I burst into tears. She look-ed at Mrs. Benson significantly, as I af-terwards recollected; and then applied herself, with her usual tender solicitude, to console me. My governess retired upon Mrs. Highmore's coming in: Why, my good girl,' said she to me, will you never have done grieving? Struck with the unusual coarseness of her phrase, I stared at her without mak-ing

any answer. 'Come,' pursued she, you must not stay moping in the house: take an airing in your chariot; you may not always have one. Here Lucy, in great agitation, stopped her; crying eagerly—'Mamma!' Mrs. Highmore, as if recollecting herself, replied—You are right. —But, Miss Lumley, said she to me, have you had a letter from your mamma? How is she? does she talk of returning?—Would to Heaven I were with her! said I, passionately. 'Ah, poor woman!' said Mrs High-more, she is in trouble enough; she is greatly to be pitied. My tears now flowed afresh: 'Pray, Madam,' said Lucy, receiving my declining head on her bosom, leave me to comfort Miss Lumley: she will be more calm when we are alone.—Well, I am going, said Mrs. Highmore. Pray, my good girl, moderate your afflic-tion. —And, Lucy, do you hear? I can-not possibly dispense with your din-ing at table to-day: I have company,

you know. You will hardly have time to dress. She went out of the room at these words; and I, with some peevishness, pressed Miss Lucy to go and dress: but she declared she would not quit me that day, Mrs. Benson being obliged to go to town to transact some business my mother had charged her with.
               I HAVE related this little scene cir-cumstantially to you, my dear Maria, that you may have some notion of the astonishment I must be in at the altera-tion of this woman's stile and behaviour, who a few weeks before had carried her respects and attentions to me even to servility. But the mystery was soon to be unravelled.
               Two days after this, Mrs. Benson told, me I should soon see my mother, 'When?' cried I impatiently.To-morrow, perhaps, said she, smiling; 'and perhaps, to-night.' I rose from

            EUPHEMIA.
            
               LETTER I. MISS HARLEY, TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               ONE of the greatest pleasures I proposed to myself, on my return to England, was to meet my dear Euphemia; to bind, if possible, in faster bands, that tender friendship which has united us from our earliest years; to live in sweet society together: to suffer only short absences; rendered tolerable by frequent letters, and the dear hope of meeting soon again. But how are these expectations destroyed! You are going to leave me; and, too probably, for ever I

my chair in a transport. Ah! she is here, said I; 'let me fly to her!'— 'No, my dear,' said Mrs. Benson, she is not here; she would not come here: but she is in London. I have a note from her, ordering me to bring you to her. The chariot is getting ready, and we will set out in a few minutes. Lucy came running to me all in tears: I took an affectionate leave of her; and re-ceived the parting civilities of Mrs. Highmore and her eldest daughter with great coolness Mrs. Highmore charg-ed me to assure her good friend, so she stiled my mother, that it should not be long before she called upon her. As supercilious as this speech was, the air that accompanied it was still more so I answered only by a slight bow; and we drove away.
               My thoughts, wholly employed on the expected meeting with my dear mother, a meeting at once so wished and dread-ed, prevented my taking notice of the

extreme dejection of Mrs. Benson, who scarce spoke to me all the way. Nor was I rouzed from my reverie, till I found myself in St. James's Square; when the carriage, instead of crossing into Pall Mall, where our house was, drove directly to Charles Street, and stop-ped at a small house, upon the window of which I observed a bill for lodgings. 'Have you any business here?' said I to my governess. 'My dear,' replied she, sighing, we shall find your mam-ma here.—'My mamma here!' cried I eagerly; and, springing out of the cha-riot, I flew up stairs, upon the top of which I saw her coming to meet me.
               HER deep mourning, her pale and ema-ciated countenance, the transient gleam of joy which the first sight of me occa-sioned, effaced by a flood of tears, af-fected me with such poignant anguish, that I sunk down at her feet; and, clasp-ing her knees, remained there speech-less and drowned in tears. Mrs. Benson

raised me, and led us both into the room. My dear mother continued gaz-ing on me for some time in silent sor-row; while I wept, and kissed the hand with which she affectionately pressed mine. 'My dear child,' said she, re-covering herself, you have, no doubt, paid your just tribute of tears to the me-mory of your father. The time calls upon us for fortitude. You have, alas! many evils to struggle against. Poverty is a more dreadful monster than any Hercules overcame: and, to bear it with patience, to preserve our integrity, our independence of mind; in a word, to fall with dignity; is to be a greater hero than he was.
               
               AT the word Poverty I started, and gazed on my mother eagerly. Yes, my dear, pursued she, we are no longer rich; you are no longer an heiress to a great fortune. From the small provision your father made for me on our marriage, before he succeeded to

his uncle's great riches, and which will cease at my death, we must for the fu-ture draw our subsistence. Mr. Lum-ley died insolvent. Houses, plate, jewels, furniture, all are seized by the creditors! This small apartment in which you now see me, is my habitation; and even this I must soon exchange for one less expensive, and more suitable to my circumstances: for it must be my part now to live in such a manner that my dear child may not be wholly desti-tute at my death. Something, I hope, I shall be able, by the strictest parsimony, to leave behind me, to put off the bad day of beggary! My mother could not restrain her tears at this word. She rose up, and said she would retire to her bed-chamber for a few moments, and endeavour to compose herself.
               WHEN she was gone, I gave free vent to those emotions which respect and tenderness for her had hitherto restrain-ed. Mrs. Benson endeavoured to com-fort

me. 'Tell me,' said I, if you know; tell me by what means this ruin was brought about?—Your fa-ther, replied she, would have been a happy man, if he had continued in that easy mediocrity which once bound-ed his wishes: but no sooner was he be-come possessed of the great riches your uncle had acquired in the Indies, than he plunged deep into all the fashion-able excesses of the age. The word All she pronounced with a deep em-phasis, and a meaning look that went to my heart. 'His seat in parliament,' continued she, cost him an immense sum. He played high, and always with ill success. In a word, he was ruined, my dear, before the continued dissipation in which he lived gave him leisure to look into his affairs. Re-flection, which came too late to pre-vent the wreck of his fortune, now produced a remorse that preyed upon his mind, and brought on those dis-orders which put a period to his life.
               
               
                  
MY mother's entrance obliged me to restrain those emotions which Mrs. Ben-son's discourse had excited: I dried my tears; I endeavoured to console my mother by every soothing power I pos-sessed. Her piety and good sense had already brought her to a state of perfect resignation in every thing that respected herself; it was for me only that she felt: and it was to relieve her from that ten-der anxiety which preyed upon her spi-rits, and destroyed her health, that I made a sacrifice which I cannot repent of; though, alas! it proved fruitless. But here let me break off for the pre-sent: I will continue my narrative some other time. This free communication of my misfortunes to a dear and sym-pathizing friend, seems to lessen their force,

                     The grief that must not speak,
                     Whispers the o'ercharg'd heart, and bids it break,
                  
says my favourite poet. I will go on, then, and speak to you.—But, my Maria,

remember, you must give me the re-mainder of your little history as soon as possible; you will easily imagine how much I am interested in it. Adieu, my dear friend.
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER IV. MISS HARLEY, TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               I Have almost effaced every word of your tender and affecting narrative with my tears. Alas! my sweet friend, what have you not suffered! Why was I not with you during these hard trials? Why did you conceal your situation from me? I never received but two letters from you while I was in France. In the last there were some obscure hints, which greatly perplexed me, and which you have now but too well explained: My uncle expresses great tenderness and concern for you; and speaks of your mother in terms of the highest admira-tion. He says, he was intimate enough with Mr. Lumley, to use the liberty of remonstrating against some of those errors in his conduct which have been

the source of his misfortunes: 'But,' added he very sententiously, there is a wide distance between being simply persuaded that a thing is wrong, to the being sufficiently so as to make us fall to action, when we must act con-trary to our inclinations. Mr. Lum-ley acknowledged there was reason in what I said; but did not alter his con-duct. —'How much easier,' thought I, it is to be wiser for others than ourselves! Had your father represented to Sir John the imprudence of marry-ing, at his years, a gay young girl, he might have made the same observation: but this truth he was soon convinced of by his own experience.
               I HAD been near a year in France, when I received a letter from my uncle, very different from any of his former ones; for it was extremely affectionate. He expressed great uneasiness at my long absence, and much impatience for my return. This letter was accompanied

with a large order upon his banker at Pa-ris, whither we were now going, and per-mission to stay there a month: after which, he said, he would expect me; and, if his health permitted, Lady Harley and he would meet me at—. He said not a word of those causes of un-easiness which he had given me, (for when do men own they are in the wrong?) but concluded with professions of the tenderest attachment to me. You will easily con-ceive that, after the receipt of this letter, I passed my time very pleasantly at Paris; when, a few days before our intended de-parture, I received another letter from my uncle: it contained but a few lines; and those surprized me with an account of the death of Lady Harley. As I have not naturally a hard heart, nor an un-forgiving temper, the death of this lady gave me a real concern, particularly on my uncle's account, who, I supposed, would be greatly afflicted. Mrs. Irwin agreed, that this news ought to hasten our

Long tracts of land, and an immeasur-able ocean, will soon divide us. I shall hear from you once or twice in a year, perhaps: my dear Euphemia will be lost to me; and all that now remains of that friendship, which was the pride and happiness of my life, will be the sad re-membrance of a good I once enjoyed, but which is fled for ever!
               HOW shall I teach my heart to forget you! How shall I bear the conversation of other young women of our age and condition, after being used to yours! It was some merit to be capable of tast-n g it with so high a relish, as to render that of my other companions insipid. There are friendships that serve only to pass away the time, and soften the te-diousness of solitude; but yours, be-sides being delightful, was profitable. I never read your letters, but I brought away pleasures that remained, and ad-vantages that did you no hurt. I grew rich by what I took from you, without

journey, and accordingly we set out im-mediately upon our return.
               MY uncle was surprized when he heard of my arrival so much sooner than he ex-pected; and, I could perceive, was pleased at my readiness to oblige him. He re-ceived me very kindly; and, as I did not observe any signs of immoderate grief in his countenance, my compliments of condolence were but short. He men-tioned my aunt only once, and employed but a few words on the subject. Her ill-ness, said he, was sudden, and reached it's height before she was thought to be in any danger. The faculty com-plained of her obstinacy in refusing to be bled, and attributed her death to the want of that remedy. When my uncle took leave of me for the night, he said— I will send Martin to you as soon as I am in bed; he will inform you of some cir-cumstances that have happened during your absence. I believe you have seen

this man: an old confidential servant, who had lived with him many years; and who, by his zeal and attachment, merited the great regard he expressed for him.
               MY curiosity was strongly excited, as well by my uncle's behaviour as by these words, which seemed to indicate that something extraordinary had really hap-pened. As soon as the good old man appeared, he congratulated me on my re-turn with tears; and assured me the te-nants and servants had constantly prayed for it. 'And they did not scruple,' pur-sued he, to tell my lady herself how much they all longed to see you: and this seemed to displease her, for my lady was cunning by halves only; and although she persuaded my master that she was grieved for your absence, she did not take the same pains to deceive us.
               
               'SHE has certainly,' said I, been less guarded on some occasion or other

than usual, for my uncle is greatly al-tered with respect to her; he appears not to regret her death, and speaks of her with little affection.
               
               'AH, Madam!' said Mr. Martin, there is good reason for that. I have a curious history to relate to you, if you can have the patience to hear it: my master ordered me to tell you every circumstance.—'Pray sit down,' said I, 'and let me have it all.' He did so: and here is what he told me, and in his own words.
               'You may remember, Madam,' said he, how childishly fond my lady af-fected to be of her husband; it was much worse after you was gone. She was continually taking his hand, strok-ing his cheek, and would often kiss him before the servants. I was sorry to see my good master so played upon; and, if I durst, I would have told him that all was not gold that glisters.

Mr. Greville, who, you know, Ma-dam, is a very facetious old gentle-man, and has a power of wit, used to joke with my master about his young wife's prodigious fondness for him; and would often say very home things, which my master would sometimes take very well, and sometimes answer pee-vishly to; but they had been great friends from their youth, so that it was not a little matter would part them. Now it happened that my master was taken with another fit of the gout, and griev-ous bad he was, so that the doctors were afraid that it was getting up into his stomach; and then, you know, Ma-dam, all would have been over with him. My lady sat by his bed-side al-most continually, sighing most piteous-ly, and shedding rivers of tears while she was with him: but her maid used to say that, when she was in her own apartment, she had no need of an handkerchief to dry her eyes. Well, Madam, my poor master grew worse

and worse; and my lady, to be sure, more and more sorrowful. And now my master resolved to alter his will: you may guess, Madam, who put that into his head. I was ordered to ride to town, and fetch Lawyer Grasp, and some more gentlemen of that per-suasion. I perceived what was go-ing forward: and, to be sure, Ma-dam, I thought a new will, under my lady's direction, would not be favour-able to you, and that it was fit some friend of yours should be present; and no one was more proper than Mr. Gre-ville, who loves you so dearly, and was, besides, my master's most dear friend. So I ventured to say to my master—Does not your honour please that I should send or go for Mr. Greville upon this occasion? My lady look-ed as if she could have eat me; and my master said weakly—Mr. Gre-ville is at his feat in— —, that is more than seventy miles distant: it will be too much trouble for him to

come on such short notice.— "Sir," said I, I am sure he will not think so. My master seemed to pause upon it; when my lady, losing her tem-per quite, called me an officious fool; and, bursting into tears, said—Do you want to persuade your master that he is dying.—My dear Sir John, the physicians assure me you are better. Mr. Greville will be here in a week or two. Do not let this blockhead put such sad thoughts into your head! She sobbed violently while she was speaking, holding my master's hand to her lips all the time. My master then said—Let him go for the law-yers, however. Upon which my lady, looking very spitefully at me, said—"Do as you are ordered!" and I left the room immediately, with my heart full, as well for my dear master's danger, as for the injustice you were likely to suffer, my dear young lady.
               
               
                  
I INTERRUPTED the honest man here; to thank him for the affection he had shewn for me at a time when selfish po-licy would have pointed out a different conduct; and, I do assure you, I thank-ed him with an effusion of heart equal to his own. But I must break off here; I am summoned to dinner. My uncle has been riding this morning, which has given me leisure to scribble so much: he has brought Mr. Greville home to din-ner. You cannot imagine how greatly I am obliged to this gentleman; but you shall know all in my next. My dear Euphemia, adieu!
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
               
                  THE post not being yet gone out, I have time to add a few lines. Some-thing that fell from Mr. Greville, relating to you, has alarmed me greatly. I fear, I fear, my sweet friend, you are not likely to be as happy in the married state as you deserve to be. Your husband, forgive

my freedom, is thought to be ill-temper-ed; you are all sweetness, patience, and condescension: I foresee from this con-trast, continual encroachments on one side; continual recedings on the other. You are one of those few persons who ne-ver contest what they think they cannot obtain. What a dangerous power will such a disposition throw into the hands of one who is disposed to use it tyranni-cally! Mr. Greville knows your hus-band; and this is what he said upon my telling my uncle, in answer to his enquiry how I had been amusing myself all the morning, that I had been writing to you. 'Poor Miss Lumley!' said he; she is married to Mr. Neville, then! There is nothing—a friend of mine said of himself, and may be applied to her—that could persuade a believer in modern miracles to confess that any thing is impossible to be done, but her ill fortune, which is unchange-able.—'I hope not,' said my uncle. 'There is no more room for hope,' replied

Mr. Greville: she is married to the worst-tempered man in the world; and that has crowned all her misfortunes.
                  
                  You may judge, my dear Euphemia, how I was affected by this discourse: I asked a thousand questions about Mr. Neville; and every answer I received served to convince me that his temper will make you very miserable. Good Heaven! and is it with this man that you are to cross the Atlantic! This the pro-tector, the friend, the companion, with whom you are to traverse an immense ocean, and live in unknown regions, far from your country and all you love! Surely you can never consent to it; he cannot be so unreasonable as to desire it. If his duty calls him hence, his ten-derness for you ought to make him dis-pense with your accompanying him. You must stay with me, my dear Euphemia; my fortune is yours: my uncle will be a father to us both; he offers you his house

for a retreat, and me for your compa-nion till your husband returns.
                  I HAVE not time to add more. Pray think on what I have proposed, and the necessity there is for complying with it. Once more adieu, my dear friend!
               
            
            
               

impoverishing you by my gain. In a word, I was happy, and I am so no more. I must lose you! there is no remedy! My tears efface my letters as I write! I cannot, I would not, restrain them! The wise may call these tender feelings in-firmities of the mind, if they will; I do not wish to be without them, and I had rather have my malady than their health.
               BUT tell me, my Euphemia, by what strange fatality have all these things happened? When I went to France, I left you rich and happy; the reputed heiress of a large fortune, both your be-loved parents alive, and every prospect brightening before you. What a re-verse, in the space of a few months! An orphan! your inheritance lost! married; and, in consequence of that marriage, becoming an exile from your country, doomed to waste your days in America! I cannot bear to think of it! But you go with a husband you love. I never

               LETTER V. MISS HARLEY, TO MRS. NEVILLE. IN CONTINUATION.
               MY uncle is gone to spend a day or two with Mr. Greville; so I shall have full leisure for my pen, which is never so pleasingly employed as when I am writing to my dear Euphemia. Well, Martin went on with his story, which I shall continue to give you in his own words. Finding I was not permitted to send for Mr. Greville in my master's name, I resolved, however, to write to him, and let him know what was go-ing on; and this I did before I set out for the lawyer's, and put my letter my-self into the post. I was sorry to find Mr. Grasp at home; so there could be no delay on that side. He told me he would call upon Counsellor Worden in his way, and bring him with him.

With this answer I returned. My lady seemed not at all satisfied with the haste I had made, and her woman told me she shewed great impatience, and was very restless and uneasy all the time I was gone.
               
               
                  WELL, Madam, the lawyers came at last; they were shut up with my master several hours, and my lady went back-wards and forwards continually. At last the chaplain and I were called up to wit-ness this fine will: the chaplain set his name, but, as Fortune would have it, I had cut my right thumb so desperately about an hour before, that I could not hold my pen, so I was excused, and Coun-sellor Worden's clerk signed instead of me; and right glad was I that I had escaped this odious office.
                  MY lady looked marvellously pleased when this affair was over; that is, when she was not in my master's chamber, for there her countenance was like Decem-ber,

all cold and surly, but all sunshine every where else.
                  As I waited on the lawyers to their carriage, I heard Counsellor Worden say to the attorney, Sir John's next heir will not thank him for burthening his estate with such an enormous jointure for so young a life as Lady Harley's. And Miss Harley, said the attorney, has no reason to be pleased with the small provision that is made for her. They shook their wise heads at each other, and smiled, as much as to say, Somebody has played her cards well. —Heaven forgive me, but I could not help hating them a little for the part they had in making this will: though to be sure they were no ways to blame, you know, Madam.
               
               "No, certainly," said I, but I long to hear of my uncle's recovery; methinks you leave him too long on this sick bed, Mr. Martin.
               
               
                  
'WHY, Madam,' replied the honest man, he grew better and better every day after this, and was soon able to leave his bed, and when Mr. Gre-ville came he found him walking about his chamber. I had just time to tell Mr. Greville all I knew of the matter, and he was sorely grieved at it, and lamented his not getting my letter sooner. My lady complained much of what she had suffered during my master's illness. And yet you never looked better in your life, Madam, said he, dryly; if grief is such a friend to your complexion, what will joy be? Why, your ladyship looks like May; but I am sorry, said he, turning to my master, to see my good friend here look so much like January.
                  
               
               THERE was some joke in this, I found; for Mr. Greville looked archly at my master, who blushed; and my lady seemed half pleased and half angry. My lady's woman went tittering out of the

room, and I followed, curious to know what she laughed at. "Oh, Mr. Martin," said she, if you had read as many books as I have, you would know what that comical gentleman luded to. Why, there is a tale in rhyme about January, an old knight, who mar-ried a young lady called May, and she made a fool of him; and Mr. Greville as good as called my master and lady Ja-nuary and May—there was the jest, Mr. Martin.
               
               I WAS afraid the old man might have sported with this idea too far, so I thought fit to look very grave; upon which he recollected himself, and went on.
               
                  MR. Greville staid several days at the Hall, and during that time I believe he talked in a pretty home manner to my master; for I observed, that, whenever they had had some private conversa-tion, my master would be in a musing mood a long time afterwards. My

lady on these occasions always redou-bled her fondness; and Mr. Greville used to cut his jokes without mercy; At length he went away; and now my lady, having my master all to herself, played all her old tricks over, but not with the same success as formerly; for my master, though he recovered his health, did not appear half so well pleased as usual; and used to be often talking of you, Madam, and wishing for your return: and at last he said he would write to you, and insist upon your coming home immediately. My lady was confounded, and brought a great many bad reasons, as my mas-ter told her, to put him off this de-sign: and finding she could not prevail that way, she fairly told him, that your temper was so bad, it was impos-sible to live with you; and hereupon she cried bitterly.
                  My master was not moved, as she expected, but seemed a little angry,

and defended you, Madam, very cor-dially, and in conclusion wrote to you, and gave me the letter before her face to get it properly conveyed to you, and glad was I of the office, you may be sure. After this his Honour was continually speaking of you, and al-ways in your praise; so that my lady was sufficiently mortified.
               
               I HAVE often observed, my dear Eu-phemia, let a calumniator be ever so artful, all that which does not directly hurt the persons abused, turns to their advantage. This charge of bad tem-pers appeared to my uncle so ill-found-ed, that it led him to weigh thoroughly many other faults she had accused me of, and to compare my behaviour with the picture she used to draw of my dis-position; and the result of this can-did investigation was so favourable for me, that upon my return I had reason to believe I stood higher in his opinion

than ever, as the sequel of my little His-tory will shew you.
               BUT here I will conclude for the pre-sent; a Letter from you is this moment brought me; does it or does it not bring an answer favourable to my wishes? —I break the seal with eagerness. —Ah, my dear Euphemia, your first words destroy all my hopes. Adieu.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER VI. MRS. NEVILLE, TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               DESTINED to live under the control of another, I find obedience to be a very necessary virtue, and in my case it is an indispensable duty. I am a wife; I know to what that sacred tie obliges me: I am determined, by Heaven's as-sistance, to fulfil the duties of my sta-tion. My lot is cast perhaps for misery here; the future will be like the past: so my foreboding heart suggests. I have drawn a blank in the great lottery of life, but there is a state beyond this, in which my hopes aspire to a prize: to that all my wishes, all my endeavours tend. Philosophy may teach us to bear the past and future evils; but it is the Christian only that can endure the pre-sent with fortitude. Oh, my dear Maria,

what could have supported me under my affliction for the death of my mother, but that active faith which made resign-ation to the will of Heaven at once my duty and my reward? —I perceive all the hardships of my situation, but I can-not avoid them without a crime; it is my duty to follow my husband; and what in other circumstances I should certainly have done from inclination, I do now from better motives—from a sense of those sacred obligations which the state I have entered into lays upon me; and which, whatever mortifica-tions I may meet with in the discharge of them, are still indispensable.
               BUT how shall I thank you, my dear friend, for your kind and generous of-fers? how shall I make you sensible of the gratitude that fills, that more than fills, that oppresses my heart, for this proof of your friendship? Words here are weak, and deeds, alas! are not in my power, for I am poor in every thing

thought my Euphemia very susceptible of that passion. Mr. Neville undoubted-ly must possess an uncommon share of merit, to have so soon conquered your indifference, your reserve, and, if I may now venture to say so, your indisposition to the married state. Oh! had it been otherwise, with what pleasure should I have communicated to you the happy change in my fortune; a fortune which, by sharing with you, I should have doubly enjoyed! I cannot enter into par-ticulars now; my mind is too much agi-tated. Write to me soon: yet what can you say to comfort me? If you cannot say that you are not to quit England, it will be the first of your letters that I shall not receive with transport. Adieu, my ever-dear Euphemia.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

but in will. Do not, however, imagine my leaving this country such a misfortune; except you, I have nothing to regret, for the unfortunate have few friends; here every object reminds me of my former state, and makes the present more sen-sibly felt. Every place where I have seen my mother, renews my grief for her loss. Change of scene, new objects, and different cares, may perhaps weaken this sad idea, and restore me some degree of tranquillity. Let this consi-deration reconcile you to my departure; and though separated, we will not be wholly absent—our minds shall meet in converse—a constant intercourse of let-ters shall bring us within view of each other—shall communicate our joys and sorrows, our hopes and fears, and all the little, as well as considerable, events of our lives.
               I WILL make it a rule to retire every day to my closet, for an hour at least, to talk to you; and every ship that sails

for England shall bring a packet from your Euphemia, which shall leave you ignorant of nothing that concerns her. Tell me, Maria, how you like this scheme, and whether you can resolve to be as punctual in the performance of your part of it, as I propose to be of mine: meantime I will continue to give you a relation of such of my affairs as you are yet ignorant of, but not in this letter, which I dispatch immediately, to bear my warmest acknowledgments for your most generous offers, to ac-quaint you with my reasons for declining them, and to share with you that com-fort I derive from the plan I commu-nicate. Present my best respects, and grateful thanks, to your good uncle, for his kind proposals; and do not let me wait long for the rest of your History. My curiosity is wound up to a very high pitch by what you have already related; and I am charmed with the honest zeal and affecting simplicity of your humble friend. I wait impatiently for the re-mainder

of his narration: —my griefs are all suspended while I read your letters; and is not this a sufficient mo-tive to make you hasten them to me? Farewel, my dear and most valuable friend.
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER VII. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               NOTHING can be offered in opposi-tion to the arguments you use in support of your resolution to leave Eng-land with your husband. My heart murmurs, it is true; but my reason ap-proves —Approves, did I say?—I admire, I love, I almost adore you, my excellent friend! —Blame not the warmth of my expressions. Must we not revere virtue, unless it be consecrated by antiquity? What were the merits of an Arria
                     •
                  , or a Portia, to your's? —Love produced in them those great actions, for which they are so famous. Religion and duty are the nobler motives which influence your's. To die for the man one loves is not an act of such heroism, as to chuse misery with the man one has no reason

to love, because we consider it to be our duty to do so.
               IT is the fate of the best things to be either wholly neglected, or at most but little known. Such is this noble con-duct of your's; for few will know it, and fewer still admire it. I, who am the greatest loser by it, am yet capable of admiring it, and this is a merit you must permit me to be vain of, since it costs me so dear.
               BUT it is time to introduce Mr. Mar-tin again. You tell me your griefs are suspended while you read my Letters; and this is sufficient to make me devote the greatest part of my time to writing, were I at liberty to follow my inclina-tions. But I have no will of my own, my dear Euphemia; I am a slave to that of another. Reconcile this, if you can, with what I told you of the happy change in my fortune: or, if you can-not, wait patiently for my explanation,

which will come in due time. But now hear Mr. Martin, who went on in this manner:
               
                  THE doctors, Madam, finding my master in so fine a way of recovery, told him, that change of air would set him quite up again; and so he accept-ed Mr. Greville's invitation to pass a week or two at his seat. Mr. Greville being a single man, my lady thought she should be troublesome to him; so she stayed behind at the Hall: but she wept over my master when he took leave of her, as if they were never to meet again. However, she quickly recovered her spirits, and passed her time very merrily with Lady Flareit, and some other gay ladies in the neigh-bourhood. There was nothing but airings and visiting, and dining and supping; and Colonel Flareit, Lady Flareit's kinsman, always made one; and he was so very obsequious to my lady, that her woman said, if my mas-ter

should happen to die, it would cer-tainly be a match; but my lady was wiser, I believe, than that comes to; for Colonel Flareit, you know, Madam, has no estate.
                  WELL, Madam, in the midst of all this jollity, news came, that my master, being out a hunting, had fallen from his horse, and was taken up dead. The whole family was in tears and lamenta-tion, but my lady was more com-posed, because she did not believe the report; "for if it was true," she said, she should have notice of it by a mes-senger sent express by Mr. Greville. This seemed likely; but, for all that, I was impatient to set out for Greville Park, to know the truth: but it being very late in the evening when the news came, my lady ordered me not to stir till the next morning, when I might set out as soon as I pleased. And now she thought sit to make a show of sor-row, and shed a few tears before her

woman and I. But, for all that, we thought we could perceive that she would not be sorry to be a rich young widow.
                  WELL, Madam, I passed an anxious night, Heaven knows! and the moment it was light I mounted and rode away.
                  BEING still weak with my distemper, I could not make as much haste as my impatience required; and at the very second stage I saw Mr. Greville's post-chaise, and himself in it, drive into the inn-yard. I was now seized with such a fit of trembling, that I could neither sit my horse nor alight, so one of the hostlers helped me, and I followed Mr. Greville to a room where he was sit-ting. —Oh, Sir! my master, my mas-ter! was all I could bring out. His very looks, however, relieved me instantly, as well as his words.'
                  
                     

                     WHAT does the simpleton mean, s;aid he, by trembling and looking so pale? What, you have heard of the accident then? —Well, your mas-ter has got off for only a few slight bruises. —"Heaven be praised," said I, for this good news! but we heard that he had broke his neck, and all us at the Hall are in the deepest affliction. "How!" said Mr. Greville, Does your lady believe Sir John is dead? "Not absolutely, Sir," replied I; s;he said, if it was true, a messenger would be sent express to inform her, and no one had come yet.—"A wise woman," said Mr. Greville; she was in the right not to be lavish of her tears upon an uncertainty: but, Martin, pursued he, after thinking a little, I have a mind to know how she will take his death, when she believes it to be certain. Sir John, poor man, believing his consinement is likely to be long, though that is by no means the case, was

desirous of his lady's company, so I could do no less than offer my service to conduct her to him, and that was the sole motive of my journey: but now I am resolved to have a little di-version from it. Can you keep a se-cret, Martin?—I believe I can, Sir, said I; my master has trusted me with many.—Ah, I do not doubt it, said Mr. Greville, shaking his head: Well, then, my design is, to tell your lady that the report of Sir John's death was but too true.—"Oh, Sir," cried I, you know how fond my lady is of her husband; this trial will be very hard upon her.—You are a rogue, said he, smiling, I see that; but you will be secret.—But Sir, said I, your servants will be-tray the matter.—"Never fear that," said he; I will give them their in-structions; so send them up to me. I did so; and after Mr. Greville had tutored them properly, we all set out for the Hall.
                  
                     

               LETTER II. MISS HARLEY, TO MRS. NEVILLE. IN CONTINUATION.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               I Cannot let the post go away without giving you the particulars of that happy change in my fortune which, while my heart was so full of your loss that I could utter nothing but com-plaints, I only hinted at: but you would have reason to be offended with me if I was silent on this subject, knowing so well as I do the tender interest you take in whatever concerns me.
               YOU never could be persuaded to think that my uncle's marriage with Miss Fenwick would make any altera-tion in his conduct towards me, having brought me up with a tenderness and care that supplied the loss of my parents;
MR. Greville, in consideration of my late illness, had the goodness to take me into the chaise with him, and all the way he diverted himself with the scheme he had formed, and with telling me what to say, and how to behave.
                  WELL, Madam, we had scarce entered the avenue, when, Mr. Greville's car-riage and servants being perceived by one of our men, the whole family was in motion, and came crowding round us. "Is the sad news true?" cried se-veral voices at once. Mr. Greville's servants shook their heads in a melan-choly way. "Alas! then it is too true," they all repeated, and ran back in great disorder into the house, which they filled with their lamentations. Mr. Greville, alighting, said in a so-lemn tone, If Lady Harley is at lei-sure, let her be informed I am come. He followed the butler, who, with eyes full of tears, shewed him into my mas-ter's library, and withdrew to acquaint my lady.
                  
                     
IT was with difficulty I could break from the servants, who hung upon me, lamenting, and inquiring—but I was curious to see how my lady would re-ceive Mr. Greville; so I hastened af-ter him.
                  HE was seated, and had taken a book; "for," said he to me, I cannot expect to have an audience so soon: the lady will take time to settle the face she is to wear upon this trying occasion: and to be sure, Madam, my lady was a full hour before she sent to desire Mr. Greville would be pleased to come to her in her dressing-room.
                  MR. Greville obeyed immediately, but with a slow step, and solemn air. I attended him; but I believe I did not act my part so well as his Honour; for my fellow-servants have since told me, that they thought my grief was not very violent. We found my lady half-lying

on a settee, with a handkerchief at her eyes, so that she did not perceive our entrance. Her woman was stand-ing close by her with a smelling bottle, which she offered her, and at the same time told her, Mr. Greville was there. My lady then, drawing aside her handkerchief, just looked up, and crying, "Ah, Mr. Greville!" clapped it close to her eyes again, and conti-nued silent.
                  
                     I CANNOT blame you, Madam; I cannot blame you, said Mr. Gre-ville; your grief is great, and so is your cause for grief:—you have lost a good husband, but that is not all;— you have lost— At that word my lady started, let fall her handkerchief, and fixed her eyes upon Mr. Greville, impatiently expecting him to proceed, for here the poor gentleman was seized with a violent cough, which held him for two or three minutes.
                  
                     
ALL that time I observed my lady heedfully: her colour went and came — she seemed hardly able to draw her breath, still keeping her fixed looks upon Mr. Greville, who, recovering, went on:— Yes, Madam, as I was saying, you have lost beside a good husband—My lady seemed now ready to die with impatience, for Mr. Greville paused, as if fearful of his cough returning; then slowly added, You have lost a friend, a protector, an amiable companion;—Sir John was all this to you, Madam; and how dear you were to him, you will (if you do not know it already) soon know.
                  
                  MY lady was again at leisure for her tears: she resumed her handkerchief, and Mr. Greville his fine speeches, which lasted till I was desired to let my lady know that dinner was served. Mr. Greville then offered his hand to lead her down, but she declined it, saying, she must entreat him to dis-pense

with her attending him at table, since her melancholy situation would plead her excuse. Mr. Greville al-lowed it; and only beseeching her to moderate her sorrow, if possible, bow-ed, and quitted the room.
                  I THEN advanced, and asked if her ladyship had any commands for me? She answered haughtily, "No!" and I followed Mr. Greville, who, seeing me enter the dining-parlour, said to the other servants, You need not wait, my lads, my old friend here will be sufficient to attend me: accordingly they left the room.
                  MR. Greville made a sign to me to fasten the door, which I did; And now, said he, let me have my laugh out, for I am almost strangled.
                  
                  WHAT diverted Mr. Greville most, Madam, was, that he had thrown my lady quite off her guard when he

made her apprehend a greater loss than that of her husband; for to be sure, Madam, my lady was quite in earnest then, and looked frighted out of her wits; for she supposed, as Mr. Greville intended she should, that my master had made some alteration in his will before the accident happened.
               
               BUT here I must drop Mr. Martin and his narration for the present, for I have only time to make up my letter, which you must acknowledge is of a tolerable length; therefore adieu my dear Euphe-mia. Alas, the moment is approach-ing when I must bid you adieu for a long, an indefinite time. This is a sad thought; but since I have well consi-dered your admirable reasons for a reso-lution so contrary to my hopes and wishes, I perceive a sort of calm ac-quiescence steal upon my mind, which gathers strength every moment. Yet you must not on this account imagine I love you less; I endeavour to imitate

your fortitude, and to make myself wor-thy of your esteem.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
               
                  WHY have I not a letter from you? Must I charge you with breach of pro-mise in not sending me the remainder of your affecting story?
               
            
            
               

               LETTER VIII. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               NO, my dear Maria, I do not think you love me less than you did, but that you love me more wisely. But were it possible for me to suspect the sincerity of your affection, it would be from the extravagant eulogium you be-stow on me, for what in my opinion is but an ordinary effect of duty and obe-dience.
               SURELY then you mean to excite me to virtue by a new subtilty, and the praises you give me are but disguised exhortations. Take notice, this is the construction I shall put upon all such language from you; and if you would not be thought rather to dictate than to commend, avoid it for the future.
               
                  
BUT to shew you that I am as little disposed to submit to unjust censure as to undeserved praise, I will not receive patiently your charge of being a pro-mise-breaker. Every thing that is pro-mised and not done, is not a violation of faith or breaking of promise, since acci-dent has so much, to do in the ordering of small events. The large packet that will soon follow this letter will convince you that I have been employed in obey-ing your commands; and I have given you my History, as you call it, down to the present moment, without inter-ruption, that you may no longer be ig-norant of the causes and motives of the most important transaction of my life, and from which that life must hereafter take all its colour.
               I HAVE been very much entertained with your friend Martin's relation, and like his manner extremely well, which your memory has so faithfully preserved; but I am not quite pleased with the me-thod

Mr. Greville hit upon to realise his doubts of Lady Harley's sincerity. He laid himself under the necessity of telling a direct falsehood, and of supporting that falsehood by many little artifices, not easily practised by an ingenuous mind. But your men of wit and ridicule have a very relaxed moral on certain occasions. A man of plain good sense starts at these humorous violations of truth, and thinks his reputation would be ruined for ever by such bold flights.
               BUT I ought to remember that it is my dear Maria's friend whose conduct I am censuring, and that it was for her service chiefly he devised this stratagem: therefore, though I cannot absolve, yet I am willing to pardon; for I confess my integrity is scarcely proof against so high a bribe. My dear friend, adieu.
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

a loss which I could only know by re-flection, being but an infant when they died, and which the kindness of my uncle made it impossible for me to feel. But in this you was mistaken, my dear friend: Lady Harley was a true step-mother, and contrived to alienate my uncle's af-fection from me by artifices which im-posed upon us both. I will give you two or three instances of her plan of ope-rations, as they have been since explain-ed to me.
               MY uncle, who really loved me, and viewed all my actions in a favourable light, was particularly pleased with a certain attention which prevented his wishes, and made him perceive that I was delighted when I could be useful to him. There is nothing so necessary as to know how to bear tedious moments. My uncle did not possess this art: he is, as you know, a man of sense, and some learning; but having passed the greatest part of his life in the common track of

               LETTER IX. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               AND do you really resolve to put such a strange construction upon the just tribute paid by a friend to your merit? Must my praises be considered as disguised exhortations? Let me tell you, you avoid presumption by a con-trary extreme, since envy itself would give you that which your own modesty takes away.
               BUT, notto offend you further by dwell-ing on this theme, you shall now have the remainder of Mr. Martin's relation; his simplicity pleases you; and I have been careful to make no alteration in his style and manner: thus then he went on:—
               
                  

                  MR. Greville, as soon as he had dined, sent to beg my lady would fa-vour him with a short interview before his departure, which he said the occa-sion required should be immediately. Accordingly he was admitted to see her. He told her, that he intended to get as far on his way home that night as he possibly could, and would call upon Mr. Mainwaring, and the executor, to settle all matters relating to the fune-ral. He desired to know if her lady-ship had any particular commands to favour him with: to which she answer-ed, Pray, Mr. Greville, do not con-sult me upon these sad affairs; I leave all to your discretion.
                  
                  "BUT, Madam," said Mr. Greville, I earnestly recommend it to you to arm yourself with fortitude; the body must be brought here to-morrow or next day at farthest.
                  
                  
                     
"As you please," said my lady, but I entreat you spare me any further discourse upon this melancholy sub-ject.
                  
                  ALL this, Madam, Mr. Greville told me was said with the utmost composure of look and accent; so, to be short, Ma-dam, he took his leave; and, as my ague now returned with great violence, this served for a good reason for my not going with him, so I went up to my chamber; but, as I afterwards found, my lady did not know I was in the house, for she concluded I was gone with Mr. Greville.
                  THAT very evening Lady Flareit came to condole with my lady, and supper was served up in her dressing-room; and nobody was allowed to wait but her woman, in whom my lady had great confidence, which she did not deserve, for she was very deceitsul. Now it hap-pened

that my name was mentioned upon some occasion or other, upon which Mrs. Wilson said I was very ill.
                  MY lady was much surprised to hear I was in the house, and declared I should not stay another moment in it. He is a busy meddling fellow, said she; he gained his master's good will by his fawning and his lies. Poor Sir John had no very strong head, and even this paltry fellow could make a dupe of him. Go, Wilson, and tell him to leave the Hall immediately. Mrs. Wilson told her that I was ill, and gone to bed.
                  "No matter," said my lady; he may go to the next inn; he is rich enough to procure accommodation any where—I am determined he shall not stay in the house—I am mistress here, and will be obeyed.
                  
                  
                     
"LORD, Madam!" said Mrs. Wilson, as she told me afterwards, does your ladyship consider what a clamour this will make: every one knows my late good master had a great regard for Mr. Martin; he has served him faithfully many years, you know Madam, and faithful servants ought not to be used so.
                  
                  "YOUR late good master," said my lady, has well rewarded him for his services, such as they were. But methinks you are very bold to stand arguing with me thus; go and deliver my orders— tell him to be gone: and here, said she, kicking a little French dog that my master was very fond of — bid him take this animal with him. This was a favourite too, and was allowed to snarl, and bark, and spoil the carpets, and no one, not even myself, durst find fault with him.
                  
                  
                     
MRS. Wilson took up the dog, and came to my room, and told me all that had passed. I was thundershook in a manner; and making no answer, she asked me what she should say to my lady?
                  "GIVE my duty to her ladyship," said I, and tell her that I will obey her com-mands to-morrow morning as soon as it is day, but for this night I hope she will excuse me; and as for the dog, I will take care of it for my dear mas-ter's sake; and so good night, Mrs. Wilson. She smiled, and said I acted quite right; so she went away, and I bolted the door after her, and went to bed.
                  I KNOW not how my lady took this answer, for early the next morning I got up, and, finding myself much bet-ter, I went to the stable, made the groom saddle my horse, and I set out for Mr. Greville's seat.
                  
                     
 I ARRIVED there the next day about noon, and had the satisfaction to hear that my master was quite well; for in-deed his hurt had been but very incon-siderable. I desired Mr. Greville's valet to tell his master that I was come, and begged to speak to him in private be-fore I waited on my master.
                  MR. Greville ordered me to come to him in his study, and expressed much surprise at seeing me. I told him all that had passed, and how my lady had, turned me out of doors, and the little dog with me.
                  MR. Greville rubbed his hands, and cried out joyfully, So, this goes well; she has shewn the cloven foot: what will my old friend say to this?
                  
                  "DOES my master know, Sir, said I, of the trick you have put upon my, lady?
                  
                  
                     
"OH, yes," said he, and laughs at the jest: but I fancy the story you have to tell will put some serious thoughts into his head. Come, I will bring you to him.
                  
                  I FOLLOWED Mr. Greville into my master's chamber, who was walking; about, and looked so well that my joy quite overpowered me, and I burst into tears.
                  "WELL, Martin," said my master, I believe you are glad to find me alive: but what brings you here? I heard you was not well: and why have you brought my poor Fidelle with you? added he, caressing the dog, who had got out of my arms, and was jumping about him.
                  I CAST down my eyes, and was silent, not knowing how to tell the mat-ter. My master then perceived that something extraordinary had happened,

and said hastily, Why don't you answer me, Martin?
                  
                  "I BELIEVE I must answer for him," said Mr. Greville, for the poor man is half ashamed of the matter; but the truth is, my lady, firmly believing that she is now whole and sole sove-reign, has, in the plenitude of her power, taken upon her to turn your faithful servant, and your favourite dog, out of doors.
                  
                  "How is this?" said my master, eagerly: then suddenly stopping, he mused a little, and added, with a smile, She has played you trick for trick; but considering that Martin was ill, this was carrying the jest too far. But, pray what cause did she assign for this treatment?
                  
                  
                     MY lady accuses me of being a spy, a busy body, and a mischief-maker, Sir, said I; and as for the dog, her

ladyship makes heavy complaints of him, for such faults as dogs are often guilty of, to be sure; but I never thought Fidelle was one of those.
                  
                  MY master now laughed heartily, at which, I thought, Mr. Greville looked a little silly. I see you take this mat-ter right, said he to my master, in a peevish tone.
                  "WHY yes," said my master, I be-lieve I do: but come, I am resolved to act a part in this farce; I find my-self strong enough to undertake a longer journey than that to my own house; so, if you please, we will set out to-morrow; and I will surprise Lady Harley with the ghost of her husband.
                  
                  "WITH all my heart," said Mr. Gre-ville, but if your sudden appearance should frighten her into fits, I am guiltless of the consequences; for I

men of fortune and fashion, his amuse-ments must come all from without: he knew not how to strike out any for him-self, from resources which a mind more cultivated might have afforded him.
               SOME time after his marriage, the gout began to visit him with periodical 
                     
                   he bore the pain and the confinement with much impatience. Lady Harley, whose fondness for him always appeared excessive, rather tired than relieved him by her importunate caresses: which, however, he received without any ap-parent peevishness; for, to be sure, he knew how to value a love so tender and passionate, with which he had inspired a woman twenty years younger than himself!
               MY company was now more accept-able than my aunt's. I sung, I played to him: I gave the rein to my natural vivacity, and endeavoured to divert him by a thousand lively sallies of imagina-tion.

do assure you, she thinks you are ac-tually dead.
                  
                  
                     INDEED I am persuaded she has been laughing at you all this time, said my master.
                  "WELL," replied Mr. Greville, I have no more to say; but I hope you will have your jest too.
                  
                  "THAT is what I intend," said my master. He then ordered me to go and take care of myself; and I with-drew, a little apprehensive of his dif-pleasure, because he did not take this matter as Mr. Greville expected.
                  HOWEVER, I had an opportunity of speaking to Mr. Greville that evening, and he assured me, my master was not angry with any of us; that was his phrase. "Though some of us," says he, certainly deserve that he should be so. He talks of what has past

very pleasantly; but I think I can per-ceive he has some serious thoughts about it, for he is often pensive and silent.
                  
                  WELL, Madam, my master set out next day at noon, with Mr. Gre-ville, for the Hall. He would have had me stay behind a day or two to recover myself; but I told him, I found myself well enough to attend him: and truly I would not upon any account have missed the scene I expected to see.
                  WE lay that night at a friend of Mr. Greville's, who had heard the report of my master's death, and was rejoiced to find it without foundation. We left this gentleman's house so late in the day, that it was night before we reached the Hall. No one took any notice of my master, who was wrapt up in his great coat and his hat slouched; he followed Mr. Greville up stairs, who had asked for my lady, and was told she was in her own apartment.
                  
                     
A SERVANT announced Mr. Greville to my lady's woman, who was in wait-ing; and Mr. Greville, without cere-mony, followed her into my lady's dress-ing room, my master being close at his heels; and to be sure, Madam, there was my lady, not mourning like a sor-rowful widow, but sitting at supper with Lady Flareit and the Colonel, and they all seemed very cheerful.
                  
                     YOUR servant, your servant, good people, said my master, gaily taking off his hat, will you permit a couple of hungry travellers to partake with you?
                  
                  MY lady, who had seemed lost in astonishment and terror at the sound of his voice, no sooner saw his face, than she screamed aloud and fell into a faint-ing fit. Lady Flareit cried out, A ghost! hid her eyes with her apron, and trembled like an aspen-leaf; and the Colonel, starting up, clapped his

hand "instinctively," aye, that was Mr. Greville's word, upon his sword, and, opening his eyes as wide as he could, stood staring at my master from a cor-ner of the room, who was very busy in endeavouring to recover my lady, which at last, with the assistance of her woman, who sprinkled her face plentifully with water, he effected.
                  BUT as soon as she opened her eyes, and saw my master, she seemed ready to relapse; upon which Lady Flareit, who was now, by the assistance of Mr. Gre-ville, quite recovered from her fright, approached, and taking her hand, said, Come, Lady Harley, let me lead you to your chamber; Sir John, this was a cruel jest.—It was all Grevslle's doings, said my master; therefore, pray, my dear, said he to my lady, who went tottering out of the room, leaning upon Lady Flareit's arms, do not be too much discomposed, but re-turn

again soon, if you would not spoil my supper.
                  
                  COLONEL Flareit then came forward, looking a little foolish, I thought, as if he did not know how to take my master's gaiety. "Come, Colonel," said my mas-ter, come and finish your supper, otherwise I shall think you are still afraid.
                  
                  "AFRAID, Sir!" said the Colonel; "Aye, afraid," said my matter; why Co-lonel a soldier may be afraid of a ghost, without any disparagement to his cou-rage: but after all, continued my master, laughing, you have all acted your parts very well; and my friend Greville need not boast much of the success of his trick; for I am confident, there is not one of you that was im-posed upon for a single moment, by the story he invented of my death; therefore the laugh, I think, is fairly turned upon him.
                  
                  
                     
THE Colonel said not a word; and Mr. Greville seemed utterly at a loss how to understand my master, so he continued to eat in silence.
                  AT length Lady Flareit came in, looking very grave; and was going to speak, but my master prevented her; crying out, So, Lady Harley is not with you, I see; she would fain carry on the jest a little further, and persuade me that she really thought I was dead; but I know better; she is not so good an actress as she thinks; and yet, after all, she imposed upon Greville, I believe.
                  
                  LADY Flareit now cleared up all on a sudden. "Ah," said she to my mas-ter, you have found us out; we in-tended to mortify you by our pre-tended indifference; but, however, your sudden appearance surprised Lady Harley; you know she has very weak nerves; she is really not well,

and is gone to bed.—I am sorry for that, said my master, I hoped she would have joined the laugh against this plotter here, clapping Mr. Gre-ville on the back.
                  LADY Flareit now returned to my lady; telling the Colonel, that she would go home in a quarter of an hour. Mrs. Wilson informed me, that this time was spent in close conversation between the two ladies, which she could not hear distinctly; but Lady Flareit seemed en-deavouring to persuade my lady to something. She was sent to acquaint the Colonel, that her lady ship was ready; so he took leave of my master and Mr. Greville, and they went away together.
                  EARLY the next morning, I saw my master and Mr. Greville walking to-gether upon the lawn, seemingly in deep discourse. When they came in to breakfast, my lady sent her woman with an apology, for her not being able to at-tend

them, having had a very indif-ferent night. My master expressed great concern for her illness; and desired her woman to let him know when she was up, that he might go and see her: then hastily turning to me, he said, Get ready immediately to go for Worden and Grasp; I have some business for them to do, which I think ought not to be delayed, lest I should die in good earnest. Mrs. Wilson heard these words, and hurried away to tell her lady; and I was as eager to execute my commission.
                  I BROUGHT them both with me to the Hall. My master was in my lady's chamber when they arrived; and as soon as he had notice of it, he joined them in his study. Mr. Greville was there; and they continued a long time together.
                  My master detained the two lawyers to dinner; at which my lady, being still indisposed, did not appear. The next

morning, Mr. Greville set out for his own seat: he shook my hand, as I at-tended him to his carriage, saying, in a low voice, All goes right, honest Mar-tin. I understood his Honour, and was heartily glad of it.
                  WHEN Mr. Greville was gone, my lady appeared at table as usual; but so sullen, so silent, that my master could hardly get a word out of her, though he was very complaisant and civil to her. Mrs. Wilson told me, that she could hear Lady Flareit, who seldom missed a day coming to see her, often chide her for her behaviour; telling her, she was wrong, quite wrong: but my lady could not be persuaded to alter it; continuing cold, reserved, and even peevish. But my master seemed to take no notice of this strange alteration in her manner towards him: he was often talking of you, Madam, and pleasing himself with the expectation of seeing you soon. He ordered your apart-set

of wrought dressing-plate for your toilet came from London, which my lady scarcely condescended to look at; saying coldly, when my master asked her opinion, that it was mighty pretty.
                  A GREAT alteration now appeared in my lady's looks; and it was apparent that her secret discontents had hurt her health. My master proposed to her change of air, and a journey to Paris; she said, she would rather go to some of the watering places. But she grew visi-bly worse, and at length was seized with a violent fever. The physicians had very little hopes from the first; and all their arguments and intreaties could not prevail upon her to be bled: so she died, as one may say, by her own fault.
                  MY master was very kind to her dur-ing her illness; but she was seldom sen-sible, and scarce ever spoke. The day she died, he continued shut up in his

            EUPHEMIA.
            BY Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
            
            IN FOUR VOLUMES.
            VOL. II.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND; AND J. EVANS, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
            M, DCC, XC.
         
      
      
         
            
               
            
            

so superfluous as the custom of com-forting. All the poisons of Thessaly might safely be trusted in the hands of the mourners of our time.
               
               'I HOPE, Sir,' said Lady Jackson, you include the male mourners in this observation.
               
               'CERTAINLY, Madam,' said Mr. Greville, there are men, I believe, who would be glad to outlive, not only their friends and relations, but even the age they live in, and their very country; and rather than die, would willingly stay in the world alone.
               
               
                  I AM sure there is no woman of that mind, said Lady Jackson.
               'For a very good reason, Madam,' said Mr. Greville; there would be no-body to admire her.
               
               
                  

vexation and regret to me. The fa-vours I receive, pursued he in a pee-vish tone, are so husbanded, that I cannot recover an eye but by losing a leg; my causes of complaint never cease, they only change their places.
               
               WE have had a melancholy day of it; I never saw my uncle so fretful and im-patient: he recals every circumstance to his mind that is likely to increase his remorse for his unkindness to Mr. Harley. He reprobates his own chur-lish conduct at the inn, where he first saw him, and received so strong a proof of the generosity and sweetness of his disposition, which I repaid, said he, by a tyrannous exertion of the power I had to make him mis:erable. I must ever despise and hate myself for it.
               'COME, come,' said Mr. Greville, we must not suffer you to be too se-vere a censurer of yourself; a man shews himself greater by being capable

of owning a fault, than by being in-capable of committing it.
               
               'I WOULD repair that fault,' replied my uncle impatiently, and fortune puts it out of my power—it is this that makes me wretched. His physician was surprised when he visited him to-day to find him so much worse. He said he had a considerable degree of fever; he seemed unwilling to take any medicines, telling him the danger he had escaped, which he could not do without sighing deeply several times.
               DR. Irwin told him he would carry his prescriptions himself to the apothecary, see them made up, and send them by one of his own servants; and this expe-dient has made us easy on that head. But as we have no tidings yet of Mar-tin, and my uncle apparently suffers in his health from the inquietude of his mind, we are under great apprehensions on his account. Mr. Greville utterly

condemns his too great sensibility on this occasion. The best virtues, he told him, when in excess, partake so much of vice, that even extreme right is no better than extreme wrong. My uncle answer-ed peevishly, that his philosophy was very unseasonable; and turning himself in his bed, seemed as if he was desirous of taking some rest; but I really believe he sought only to indulge his melancholy reflections without interruption.
               MR. Greville walked into the garden, and I retired to my chamber, and wrote thus far. I am now going down to make him some tea. —No news of Martin yet.
               AT NIGHT.
               MR. Greville being obliged to visit a friend in our neighbourhood to-day, I have been reading the whole evening to my uncle, in order to detach his

thoughts from the subject of his uneasi-ness. His friend is now with him; he tells him that Martin's not returning is a good sign, for if he had not had hopes of overtaking Mr. Harley, he would have been back ere now. There is some probability in this; but my uncle is so out of humour with himself, that he ad-mits of nothing which may tend to re-lieve his disquiet.
               WHAT an enormous packet you will receive this time! but I am willing to keep it open while our suspense conti-nues, that you may either rejoice or grieve with us for the event. I wish, yet dread, to have a letter from you—your next will probaby fix the very mo-ment of your departure. It is late; and with this sad expectation on my mind I will go to bed, I cannot say to rest.
               WELL, my dear Euphemia, Martin is returned. Has he brought back Mr.

Harley? you ask: he has, but not to us. This morning, as I was going into my uncle's chamber, I met Mr. Gre-ville, who, beckoning to me to come to one of the gallery windows, which look-ed out into the court-yard, shewed me Martin just arrived, alone, and looking melancholy. We were in doubt whe-ther we should let him see my uncle immediately, till we had prepared him for the ill news he brought. But he, who had already been informed that he was come, rang his bell impetuously, upon which we both went into his chamber.
               'So,' said he, as soon as he saw us, Martin is come, and alone it seems: it is as I expected. Did ever any thing happen according to my wish?
               
               MARTIN coming in, put a stop to these fretful complaints; but, as it should seem, he was afraid to ask him any questions, for he said not a word

to him. Upon which Mr. Greville said, I am sorry to see you are come alone, friend.
               
               'I AM sorry too, Sir,' replied Mar-tin; 'and Mr. Harley hopes, Sir,' ad-dressing himself to his master, when you know his reasons, you will have the goodness to excuse him.
               
               'YOU have seen him then,' cried my uncle impatiently, and he has refused to come: well, I might have expected this. But did he receive my invitation with disdain—did he express any bit-terness against me?
               
               'OH, Sir,' said Martin, I wish you could have seen with what respect he received your Honour's letter. At the very first words he read of it, his face seemed all in a glow. He read it over, I believe, twenty times; and kissing it respectfully before he put it in his pocket, I observed his eyes full

of tears. I ventured to say to him, May I hope, Sir, you will lay aside all thoughts of your intended voyage, and return with me to the Hall?
               
               
                  "CAN you doubt it, my good friend?" said he; "if you were not so much fa-tigued as I see you are, I would this moment set out with you, for I shall think every moment an age till I can throw myself at the feet of your noble master, to thank him for the unmerited goodness he expresses for me in this letter." He then took it out of his pocket again, and read it over half a dozen times, I believe.
               
               'BUT why is he not here?' interrupt-ed my uncle with his usual impatience; 'where is he—when shall I see him?'
               'SIR,' replied Martin, he is gone to his father's.
               
               
                  
'How!' interrupted my uncle, gone to his fathers'!
               
               'OH, Sir!' resumed Martin, the poor young gentleman heard the most melancholy piece of news when he came to the Rose-Inn last night, where we only stopped till fresh horses were put to the chaise. I walked out with him into the inn-yard, to hasten them, when a country fellow espying him, camerunning up to him, crying "Mas-ter Harley, I am glad to see you, faith! What, you have heard the sad news then. —But you must make haste, I can tell you that, or you will not see your father alive; he was just giving up the ghost when I came from— and that is five or six hours ago."
               
               'OH, Sir!' pursued Martin, wiping his eyes—I shall never forget the sad condition poor young Harley was in; I had just time to catch him in my arms, where he lay, without sense or

motion, for several minutes. As soon as he recovered, he begged me, with his eyes all drowned in tears, to tell you the sad circumstances he was in; and then eagerly throwing himself into the chaise, which was now ready, he bid the post-boy drive with all the speed he could to—. He just pronounced your Honour's name, and would have added something; but a violent burst of grief stopped his voice; he fell all along the feat, sigh-ing as if his heart would break, and the chaise driving away furiously, he was presently out of sight. I was obliged to stay several hours after him, not being able to get any conveyance here till five o'clock this morning.
               
               YOU will easily imagine, my dear Euphemia, that we were all greatly af-fected with this sad tale. I wept, I own it; my uncle discovered great emotion, and Mr. Greville walked to the window in a pensive mood.
               
                  
MY uncle, after a silence of some mi-nutes, told Martin he would allow him this day to rest himself after his fatigue, and that to-morrow he must set out early for Dr. Harley's—The post is just going out; I shall have only time to make up my packet. Adieu! then, my dear Euphemia.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               
'You are a perfect cynic,' replied the Lady, gravely; and rising, walked up to a window, from which there was a prospect of a very fine flower-garden, which she commended greatly. Mr. Greville assured her, it was part of his business every morning to dress that garden. 'For,' added he, I am a great admirer of beauty, wherever I meet it: but because it is a dangerous thing in women's faces, I had rather contemplate it in these flowers.
               
               LADY JACKSON, who has, it seems, a very happy facility in appropriating these sort of speeches to herself, imme-diately changed her manner; she be-came lively, witty, good-humoured; but her vivacity shewed itself in boister-ous laughs at a jest of her own finding out; her wit, in scraps of poetry quoted at random; and her good-hu-mour, in familiar nods, smiles, indeli-cate praise, and taps on the shoulder,

               LETTER XXVII. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               SIR John is so well recovered, that he took an airing this morning in his chariot. Mr. Greville has left us, and Martin is dispatched to Dr. Har-ley's, with a kind message to the af-flicted family, and his pocket-book stuffed with bank bills for Mr. Harley; and a short billet, in which my uncle earnestly requests him to come to the Hall as soon as he possibly can. His health seems to improve every moment. Joy is a great restorative. Yet he now and then breathes a half-suppressed sigh

to the memory of his once-loved friend, whose offences towards him could only, it seems, be cancelled by death.
               MARTIN is returned. Dr. Harley lived two hours after the arrival of his beloved son. He was perfectly sensible; and Mr. Harley had the comfort to remove his anxiety for the future for-tunes of the young family he left behind him, by acquainting him with the happy change in Sir John's disposition towards him.
               THE family are in great affliction. Mr. Harley has wrote a few lines to my uncle, which seem to please him greatly. He did not read them to me, but this was his observation upon them: This young man, said he, receives a bene-fit with the same grace with which he confers one. His gratitude loses no-thing of its force by the dignity of his

expression. Why have I not a letter from you? Yet when it comes I shall fear to break the seal, left it should tell me what I dread to know. Adieu!
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXVIII. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               I RETURNED last night from an-other visit to Lord L.'s. I could not resolve to leave England without visit-ing once more the place where the dear remains of my mother are deposited. As I was leaving the church I met Mr. Neville, who was just arrived at Lord L.'s seat, in order to conduct me home; and hearing to whatplace I was gone, came himself to fetch me. My mind, softened by the tender, melancholy ideas which the sight of my loved mother's tomb inspired, was so sensibly affected with the obliging solicitude of my husband, that I flew to meet him with a transport, which was instantly repressed by the au-sterity

of his looks, and the harshness of his reproofs, for the indulgence of a grief which he treats almost as a crime. There is no doubt but he meant well; and this severity was an effect of his con-cern for me: but he has so little deli-cacy, is so ungracious, that he converts even the best intentions into offences, by his unfortunate manner of expressing them.
               THIS meeting, therefore, as you may well imagine, did not contribute to calm my mind. I came home suffi-ciently mortified and dejected; but the society of my dear Mrs. Benson, her wise reasonings, and tender soothings, restored me to some degree of tran-quillity.
               YOU have made me a most accept-able present in the young person who has the honour to be recommended by you. Oppression has ever been, in my opinion, a sufficient ground for protec-tion;

but the testimony you give of her merit, and her own engaging appear-ance and manner, will secure her a large share of my kindness and esteem. Her situation with me shall, in every respect, be made as agreeable to her as you would wish. Mrs. Benson is much pleased with her; she is her bedfellow, and they are very seldom asunder.
               I HAVE got your second packet; my hopes, my wises, my expectations, are answered—you will be the wife of Mr. Harley. Excellent young man! but he is, as you justly observe, above all praise. He is worthy of you, my friend, lovely as you are in person and mind.
               SIR John Harley's character rises greatly upon me in your agreeable nar-rative—he has acted both a just and a generous part. You have painted him with great force; I see him in all the turns and changes of his temper, and in

every view he is pleasing. Your gay philosopher, your lively, yet sententious Mr, Greville, was in my opinion much to blame, when he placed the most amiable virtue of the mind in the num-ber of its maladies and infirmities. Sir John's sensibility is certainly very great; and if it be necessary, as some have said, that limits and bounds should be set in all cases, they cannot be unfit in acts of acknowledgment. If there be a fault opposite to ingratiude, he has fallen into it; and thus, by the excess, he has avoided the defect; but the de-fect is so horrid, and the excess so beau-tiful, that he must be a rigid moralist indeed who calls it an infirmity.
               AND now, my dear Maria, that I see you possessed of so much happiness at present, and so much greater in pro-spect, I shall with the less reluctance tell you, that our ship will absolutely sail within these ten days. All the for-titude I can boast would have been

scarce sufficient to have supported my spirits under this separation, if I had left you in that uneasy state of mind which your delicacy but half unveiled, but which your candor and amiable simpli-city made but too apparent to an obser-vation interested like mine.
               YES, my dear friend, you have loved Mr. Harley all this time; and your gentle mind has had some severe con-flicts to sustain between your inclination for him, and the obedience you owed Sir John, who, as your uncle and be-nefactor, had a double title to it. The virtues of Mr. Harley have made this sacrifice no longer necessary, and that which justifies your choice secures you the possession of its object.
               I EARNESTLY intreat you, my Maria, not to suffer the present sunshine of your fortune to be clouded with your appre-hensions for me. Our separation is the only circumstance that ought to give

you some concern, and that is common to us both. It is true, I have but little contentment but what I derive from reason and philosophy; that sort of phi-losophy I mean which teaches us submis-mision to the will of Heaven. I see no-thing terrible in this long voyage but my absence from you. I apprehend nothing worse than what has already happened to me; and I will never believe that ill fortune will follow me so far, or that it is possible for one to fall, who already stands so low. You may render absence tolerable to me by fre-quent letters. Continue your charming narratives; while I read your lively de-scriptions, I see, I converse with you—I partake your fears, I am elevated with your hopes, I sympathise with your sor-rows, and enjoy your happiness.
               AS for me, it will be the chief com-fort of my life to write to you, and make you acquainted with all the events of it. I propose to devote some part of

every day to this dear converse I will call it, which will make you present with me; and, although I cannot hope to give you equal entertainment, yet I will be punctual if not liberal, and send you that which I promised, if I cannot send you what I would. Adieu!
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

rather heavy indeed, for the hand that gave them was robust, and the manner truly masculine.
               MR. Greville kept up the scene so long, that the lady departed in full per-suasion that she had made a conquest; and this notion of her's afforded my uncle some diversion; but I was con-cerned that her folly had been soothed so agreeably; for if happiness be but opinion, Mr. Greville had made her happy; and what was this but to re-ward and continue folly?
               I WAS malicious enough to wish she had been a secret witness of the ridicule cast upon her by the very man whom she imagined was beginning to feel the influ-ence of her charms. But enough, and indeed too much of this lady; if it were not that she has earnestly requested me to make her the bearer of a letter to you, whose character she professes to be an idolater of. She says she has some

               LETTER XXIX. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               MR. Greville is just come from Dr. Harley's afflicted family, where he has been to pay a consolatory visit. He has brought a letter from Mr. Harley to my uncle, which he keeps to himself. I am extremely glad that the youth, in accepting my uncle's, liberal present, discovers nothing of that pride of spirit which appeared in that letter of his to me upon a former occasion. I men-tioned this circumstance to Mr. Gre-ville, as what had given me some appre-hensions.
               'YOU are right,' said he, for no-thing is more likely to create distrust in

a new reconciliation than to shew a shy-ness to be obliged to those with whom we are reconciled. But Harley, you know, is now his son by adoption; and no I think of it, pursued he, with a sly leer, you are too just not to have this worthy young man's interest ex-tremely at heart; would it not be more for his advantage, think you, for Sir John to call him his nephew than his son?
               
               I BLUSHED like a fool; but recollect-ing myself, I answered himgravely, that he had acted like a father by me, who was only his niece; and that which-soever of those characters he chose to consider Mr. Harley in, I did not doubt but he would shew himself equally affectionate.
               
               I WAS afraid of the archness I saw rising in his looks; therefore, to prevent his mischievous raillery, I asked him a great many questions concerning Mrs. Har-ley

and the young ladies; and he let me into a secret which surprised me greatly. Mrs. Harley was, it seems, bred up by her mother in the Roman Catholic re-ligion; and although obliged, on ac-count of her husband's profession, to conceal her principles while he lived, yet being a bigot to its tenets, she is de-termined to spend the remainder of her days in a convent in France, where she proposes to complete the education of her daughters. I believe this scheme will meet with some opposition from Sir John, who, I know, intends to take care of them.
               To-DAY at dinner my uncle told me, that he expected a visit from Mr. Har-ley in a day or two; and he desired me to give orders to the housekeeper to prepare that apartment for him which was formerly mine; for since Lady Harley's death I have, by his express command, occupied her's. I answered, hesitatingly, 'Yes, Sir;' for both the

gentlemen threw me into such confusion by their fascinating looks, that I scarce knew what I said.
               AS soon as the cloth was removed I retired to my own apartment; instead of giving the housekeeper orders myself, I bid my maid tell her, her master wanted her. She received his directions, and came to tell me, with great joy, that we were to have Mr. Harley for a guest.
               
                  WE are all debtors to this charming young gentleman, said she, for the life of our good master.
               
               NOW, my dear Euphemia, no one has a higher sense of this obligation than I have; but my situation is a little aukward. Mr, Greville's raillery, and my uncle's fixed looks on me, which seem as if they were exploring the in-most recesses of my heart, often distress me greatly—I escape from them when I can.
               
                  
I AM summoned this moment to make tea. I wish Mr. Greville was gone—I never thought his company tiresome before. Do you not think it is indelicate in him my Euphemia, to pursue me thus with his raillery?—So! a second summons—I must go.
               SIR John and his friend imagined a fine scheme to divert themselves with my embarrassment. Who do you think I saw upon my returning to the room where I had left them together?—Even Mr. Harley, whom I had been taught not to expect these two days. But this mischievous design did not succeed en-tirely to their wish; for, although my surprise was indeed very great at this unexpected sight of him, yet I felt my confusion decrease, in proportion as the tender melancholy in his looks fixed my attention upon the recent cause.
               A TRANSIENT blush overspread his cheeks on my first appearance; but

instantly gave place to that paleness which the death of a father, whom he had loved excessively, seemed to have planted there.
               HE approached me with an air of deep respect, but with a sedateness which he borrowed from his melancholy situa-tion, and made me a short compliment; which I received, and answered, without any other emotion than what arose from a participation in a grief so just and so affecting. He led me to my chair; and resuming his seat, which was next my uncle, he continued his discourse upon some indifferent matters, which my com-ing in had interrupted.
               SIR John and Mr. Greville were evi-dently disappointed, that this first inter-view had passed over without any of that discomposure which would have laid a foundation for some future raillery. I enjoyed their disappointment, I confess, and saw, with some little triumph, Mr.

Greville's arch looks, and my uncle's significant glances, give place to a seri-ousness, which was better suited to the circumstances of our young guest.
               THE evening passed over very agree-ably; my uncle seemed delighted with Mr. Harley's conversation; for al-though he was far from making an often-tatlous display of his powers of pleasing, yet, through all his modesty, there ap-peared a fund of knowledge and an ele-gance of expression, which captivated the attention, and gave an advantageous idea of his understanding and improve-ments.
               HE took occasion once to mention his great obligations to my uncle; he em-ployed but few words; for he seemed well aware of the justness of that obser-vation, that the dignity of truth is wounded by much professing: but his look and accent were so affecting, that Sir John seemed touched to the soul,

and grasping his hand with an eager pressure—
               'TALK not to me of obligations,' said he, your worth outstrips all my power of rewarding.
               
               MR. Greville was cruel enough, at that moment, to cast a glance full of mean-ing, at me, to add to the confusion with which I was overwhelmed. I perceived, as soon as I was able to look up, that this mischievous look had not escaped Mr. Harley's observation: his face was covered by a deep blush. With a timid and disconcerted air he raised my uncle's hand, which still held his fast clasped, to his lips, and told him, in a low but ardent accent, that it should be the bu-siness of his life to deserve his good opi-nion.
               OUR common persecutor now seemed to pity the embarrassment he had occa-sioned, and instantly began a conversa-tion on indifferent matters.
               
                  
I RETIRED early to my own apartment, to be at liberty to continue my letter to you. It was late, and I was still en-gaged in this dear employment, when Mrs. Groves, who had carried the can-dle before Mr. Harley when he retired to his chamber, where she left him with Martin, who was ordered to attend him, came into my room, and begging pardon for her intrusion, broke into the most extravagant praises of the young gentleman.
               THIS good woman loves to talk, and says every thing that comes into her head, without regarding time, or place, or persons; and she is indulged in this liberty on account of her long-tried rec-titude and fidelity.
               'DO you know, Madam,' said she, that I have found out that there is a great likeness between you and Mr. Harley. He has the very air of your countenance, your fine large eyes, said

the flatterer, and dimpled mouth; only his complexion is not like yours —his is a lovely brown, and yours, to be sure, is as fair as alabaster. I think he resembles you too in the air of his person—no disparagement to you neither, Madam, for I think he is one of the genteelest young men I ever saw.
               
               
                  WELL, but I must tell you some-thing, Madam: You must know, that as we passed through that room which was formerly your dressing-room, your picture, that hangs over the chimney, took his eye in a minute; well, what did he do, but, with great eagerness, he takes one of the candles out of my hand, goes up close to it, and there he s;tood looking and looking, as if he could never be tired. So I made bold to say, Sir, that is my young lady's picture; it was drawn when she was about fourteen: do you think it is like her?
               
               
                  

relations in New York, who by their station and connections may be of use to Mr. Neville; and this being confirmed to me by Mr. Greville, she will have the happiness to present this letter to you. Oh! envied happiness! could she taste it—but that is impossible, for minds like your's and her's can never mix. Adieu! my dear Euphemia.
            
            
               
'IT is like your young lady,' said he, but she is vastly improved since this was painted.
               
               
                  WELL, Madam, he staid looking and looking at it so long, till I was down-right tired with standing; at last, he begged my pardon, and returned me the candle; and, as sure as you are alive, Madam, he fetched a deep sigh when he took his eyes off it,
               
               'WELL, Mrs. Groves,' said I smiling, what is all this to the purpose?
               
               'WHY, Madam,' replied she, what I refer from all this is, that Mr. Har-ley has certainly a great kindness for you, and that you would make a charming couple.
               
               NOW, my dear Euphemia, I do not doubt but the wise assembly of the housekeeper's room have settled already all the preliminaries of this match, and

as good as concluded upon it. I was un-willing to hear any more upon the sub-ject; so I called my maid to assist me in undressing, and bade the loquacious housekeeper good night.
               AND a thousand thousand times good night to you, my dear friend, whom I always see in my dreams, but with me-lancholy omens; for, alas! you are torn from me; the distance between us seems to increase, and sometimes I lose fight of you entirely. But sure we shall meet again; do you not think we shall? I must, I will indulge this hope, for without it I shall be miserable.
            
            
               

               LETTER XXX. MISS HARLEY IN CONTINUATION.
               MR. Harley has left us, and I am just escaped from that unceasing teazer, Mr. Greville, to give my dear Euphemia an account of what has passed during this interesting day.
               AT breakfast, my uncle asked Mr. Harley if it would be inconvenient to him to stay another day. The youth replied, that a longer absence at this time would be severely felt by his af-flicted family.
               
                  WELL then, you shall go, my dear Edward, said my uncle, my horses

and groom shall attend you, unless you choose to have the post-chariot. Mr. Harley thanked him, and said, as the day was fair he would rather ride.
               'YOU will reach—,' said my uncle, before dark, though you do not set out these two hours; therefore, pursued he, rising, as I wish to have a little discourse with you in private be-fore you leave us, I will expect you in my library as soon as you have finished your breakfast.
               
               MR. Harley, who rose up when my uncle did, told him he was ready to at-tend him then; and accordingly followed him, after bowing to me with an air so timid and embarrassed, as threw me, I know not why, into confusion like-wise.
               I DURST not raise my eyes to Mr. Greville, who, I supposed, was making his malicious observations; so both of

us continued ridiculously silent for several minutes, when he thought fit to relieve me, by desiring me to give him another dish of tea. I did so; and he then asked me gravely, if I could guess what was likely to be the subject of Sir John's conversation with Mr. Harley?
               I TOLD him I really could not.
               
                  AND have you no curiosity about it? said he.
               'NOT much,' I answered.
               'NOT much!' repeated he; this in-difference is not very obliging to Mr. Harley.
               
               'YOU are mistaken, Sir,' replied I, I am not indifferent to any thing that concerns Mr. Harley; his interests will always be of some consequence to me, esteeming him so justly as I do. But I have no anxiety on my mind

on account of this private conference, and therefore little curiosity, because I have no doubt of the greatness and permanency of my uncle's affection for him, as it is founded upon his me-rit, and the grateful sense he has of his obligations to him.
               
               THE openness of my answer discon-certed Mr. Greville, who, I perceived, expected I should say something that would give him an opportunity of teaz-ing me, as was his custom. He looked at me, I thought, with complacency; and that moment my uncle called out, Greville.
               
               'Now,' said he, rising to go to him, I shall know all; and to punish you for your reserve, I will not tell you a word of what I know.
               
               'YES you will,' replied I, laughing, when I have curiosity enough to ask you.
               
               
                  
HE went to my uncle, and I took my usual walk upon the terrace, where, in about half an hour afterwards, I was joined by Mr. Greville and Mr. Har-ley. There was something in the coun-tenance of the latter so full of meaning, that, I knew not why—but I could nei-ther look at nor speak to him. He was silent too; and in this stupid way we followed Mr. Greville, who led us from one walk to another, pointing out to Mr. Harley somewhat or other to ad-mire in the disposition of the grounds, which, you know, are laid out in the most beautiful taste imaginable.
               ALL on a sudden he seemed to recol-lect something he had to say to Sir John; and telling us he would be with us again in a few minutes, left us to-gether.
               THIS silly contrivance of leaving me alone with Mr. Harley, was not calcu-lated to lessen that unaccountable em-barrassment

into which his coming had thrown me. I was impatient to free myself from this aukward situation; and therefore, pretending to be apprehensive that it would rain, I mended my pace, in order to get as soon as possible into the house; but he respectfully retaining me, begged me not to have the cruelty to deprive him of the only opportunity he had yet had of speaking to me alone. I then walked slower, but still towards the house, though he sought to turn my steps to another path.
               'THE tide of favour here,' said he, flows so strongly for me, as might in-deed carry my hopes very far, did not your coldness, Madam, or rather aver-sion, reduce me to despair.
               
               'MY aversion,' said I, Mr. Harley how can you imagine that I have any aversion to you—you who have so just a right to my esteem?
               
               
                  

                  AND am I honoured with your es-teem, Madam, replied he eagerly; and may I presume to hope that the tender, the ardent passion, with which you inspired me the first moment I beheld you, is not displeasing to you? Speak, I conjure you, Madam, pur-sued he, relieve me from this agony of doubt—suffer me not to depart un-certain of my fate.
               
               BEING still out of sight of the house, he threw himself at my feet, holding one of my hands, which he several times pressed to his lips, in spite of my endea-vours to withdraw it.
               THIS liberty was not altogether agree-able, any more than the parade of his posture, still kneeling. I moved a step back; and laughing, as I did once be-fore on the same occasion, told him, that I supposed he had lately read Cas-sandra and the grand Cyrus, for his lan-guage

and manners had all the air of an Orondates.
               I CONFESS to you, my dear Euphe-mia, that I was willing to relieve the embarrassment this very passionate ad-dress had thrown me into, by a little raillery, which detached my reflexions upon the silly figure I must have made during this short scene; but I was much concerned when I perceived the effect my ill-judged gaiety had upon him. —He dropped my hand submissively, and rising, bowed low, asking me pardon for the liberty he had taken in declar-ing his sentiments so freely. He was now convinced, he said, that my indif-ference, or rather dislike of him, was not to be overcome; that he could have borne my anger with more fortitude than my scorn, by which his presumption was too severely punished to leave him an excuse for ever repeating his of-fence.
               
                  

               LETTER XVIII.
               MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               By this time you have received my last letter, which Lady Jackson, transported with the opportunity it gave her of being acquainted with you, pro-mised to deliver to you herself. I am impatient till you give me an account of your interview; I am sure you will be diverted with her peculiarities; for you only smile at follies which make me peevish.
               I HAVE been surprised with a letter from Mr. Harley; a country fellow gave it to my maid. She asked if it re-quired an answer; he said he had no orders about that, but he would wait.
               
                  
I HEARD him sigh—I saw his eyes full of tears; I was shocked, perplexed—I knew not what to say to him. I am sure my heart was far from being in that disposition towards him which he seemed to apprehend. Scorn! good Heaven! Mr. Harley an object of scorn! how could a thought so inju-rious to his acknowledged merit rise in his mind? I wished to erase it; but nothing proper to be said recurred to my mind.
               I CONTINUED silent; and, without at-tending to what I did, walked fast to-wards the house. Doubtless he under-stood this to be in consequence of my eagerness to get rid of him; for again I heard him sigh deeply; but he spoke not a word.
               MR. Greville, who was come out again, joined us before either of us per-ceived him. He seemed surprised and vexed at the disorder that appeared in

Mr. Harley's countenance: it was in-deed sufficiently apparent, for at that moment I ventured to cast my eyes upon him; but instantly removed them again, being, I own it, greatly affected by the tender distress expressed in every line of his face.
               MR. Greville, who heedfully observed us both, cast an upbraiding glance on me; and being now arrived at the house, he said to Mr. Harley, I intend to accompany you a few miles; the horses are at the gate—I believe we shall find Sir John there likewise.
               MR. Harley then made me a most re-spectful bow; but uttered not a word, nor raised his eyes to my face. I curt-seyed also in silence, though I am sure I secretly wished him a good journey, and retired to my own apartment, where I have been ever since.
               
                  
I HAVE a most oppressive weight upon my spirits; I dread seeing Mr. Greville again—I hate his scrutinizing looks; but I must resolve to meet them; for my maid tells me that dinner is ready to be served, and that Mr. Gre-ville is returned from his ride. Why did he return? I think he takes root here.—Well, I must go.
               MY uncle looked very grave upon me all dinner-time; Mr. Greville was serious and reserved.
               WHEN I drank my uncle's health, he took no other notice of me than by a bow lower than usual, without his wonted smile of complacency. Just as I was rising from table, my maid brought me a letter from you. I took it out of her hand with a visible emotion, I suppose, for the gentlemen smiled, I asked leave to retire to read it; and, without waiting for an answer, flew up stairs.
               
                  
OH! my Euphemia, what do you tell me? a few days more, and I shall be separated from you, perhaps, for ever. Have I so anxiously wished for this letter, which, when it came, was to pierce my heart with its fatal tidings? Do not chide me, my dear friend, this stroke, though long expected, falls heavy on me. I must lay down my pen, my tears blind me; when I am more composed I will finish my letter.
               I have passed a sleepless night:
Thought followed thought, and tear succeeded tear.
But I am now, if not easy, yet resigned, since to remediless evils nothing but pa-tience can be opposed. But be assured, neither time nor absence will be able to weaken my affection—Your idea will always be present with me. I shall dream continually of you, and find no image in my memory so pleasing as that which presents me the time of

our being together. You shall have letters from me by every conveyance; and thus, though oceans roll between us, our minds may often meet and con-verse with each other.
               YOUR picture travels continually from one room to another; whereever I am likely to spend most of my time, thither it is removed; but this is not sufficient, I would have you always near me. I conjure you then, my dear friend, sit immediately to — for a miniature. You will still have time enough, if you set about it in-stantly. When the painter has done his part, send it to my jeweller, he has some diamonds of mine unem-ployed; I will write to him, and give him directions. I dispatch this pacquet to the post, without staying to consider some things in your last letter, which have given my thoughts a good deal of employment. Adieu! my dear Eu-phemia.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXI. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               I HAVE loved Mr. Harley all this time you say, my dear Euphemia; and this circumstance, which has hither-to been a secret to myself, you have, it seems, discovered, from my first men-tion of him. I will not call your pene-tration in question, nor will you, I am sure, doubt my candour when I declare, that the sentimental entertained for Mr. Harley, and which I freely avowed to you, appeared to me to be, such as every friend to virtue must feel for one so duly virtuous.
               
                  
YOU call him an excellent young man; and so he certainly is. It was natural to wish well to the worth I es-teemed—to feel for his situation, and to be anxious for his prosperity. I never thought it necessary to question my own heart about the nature of sentiments which appeared to me so reasonable and so just.
               I REMEMBER a saying that once fell from you—A young woman has pass-ed over the first bounds of reserved-ness, who allows herself to think she is in love. Nor would your delicacy have permitted you to speak so plainly to me on this subject, if you had not supposed, that from the great and just degree of favour Mr. Harley is now in with my uncle, his pretensions to me will be authorised by his consent; with-out it I am sure, however favourably I might think of him, he could never have hoped for success.
               
                  
BUT although, according to you, my inclinations and duty are now reconciled, you are not likely to leave me so happy as you imagined; for my uncle is of-fended, Mr. Greville reproaches me, and Mr. Harley perhaps hates me; and all these misfortunes I have drawn upon myself with the most innocent intentions imaginable.
               SOME time ago I suffered in my uncle's opinion for being willing to do justice to the merits of this young man, when I thought he was harshly used; and I was suspected of favouring ad-dresses from the son of his ancient ene-my; and now he reproaches me with caprice, and a tyrannical use of my power over a person whom he loves and esteems, and to whom he has the high-est obligations. In the former case I shewed a ready obedience to his will, by giving Mr. Harley an absolute re-jection; in the latter, whatever my sen-timents were with regard to him, I

thought myself obliged to act with great reserve, till my uncle was pleased to de-clare his intentions to me. Mr, Gre-ville calls my conduct, in this instance, a too scrupulous prudence, which does nothing for fear of doing ill. "Your uncle's prejudices, said he, have all given way to the conviction of his bet-ter judgment; for sensible persons only taste of an error, of which the ignorant drink till they are intoxicated. You could not, my dear Miss Harley, be ig-norant what designs Sir John entertained in favour of Mr. Harley. Why then treat him with a coldness that saddened all his delightful prospects?" And he was angry with me in good earnest, for sending his young friend, as he calls Mr. Harley, away in despair.
               IT is no unpleasant thing to see a phi-losopher in choler. I only smiled at his reproaches, though I could easily have justified myself. He was malicious enough to leave me alone with my uncle

this afternoon, who he knew was re-solved to chide me; and accordingly he began to rail at the caprice, the obstinacy and inconsistency of our sex, in very severe terms. I was determined not to make any particular application, and listened to him very patiently, which reduced him to the necessity of being more explicit.
               
                  I HOPED you had been, in a certain degree, free from those faults, Maria, said he; but you have convinced me, by your behaviour to Mr. Harley, that you are a very woman; and that to give steadiness to your inclinations, it is necessary you should meet with opposition.
               
               'HERE now,' pursued he, (without waiting for my answer, and indeed I had none ready for him) when, to my shame be it spoken, I viewed young Harley in no other light than as the son of an ungrateful man, who had deceiv-ed
IT should seem that he had chosen his time well; for Mr. Greville and my uncle had rode out to take the air, about a quarter of an hour before he came.
               
                  
                     TO MISS HARLEY.
                     
                        MADAM,
                     
                     LOW as my fortunes are, I never till now laboured under the weight of pecuniary obligations. But can any thing be humiliating that comes from you? Oh! why was this soft atten-tion to my situation shewn me at a time when my reason was still free enough to combat those sentiments which the first sight of you inspired. Sentiments, which the implacability of your uncle, and a just sense of my own unworthiness, convinced me I ought to suppress—I ought, it is true, but I never can suppress them: and all I dare to hope for from your goodness is, that you will pardon the boldness

and betrayed me, you were very favourably disposed towards him, and some very tender letters passed be-tween you.
               
               'OH! Sir,' interrupted I with some emotion, is this a candid representa-tion of my conduct? You have copies of my letters to Mr. Harley; will they bear such a comment?
               
               'WELL, well,' resumed Sir John, letting the letters pass, if Mr. Harley was indifferent to you, where was the merit of your rejecting him to comply with my unreasonable prejudices? That sacrifice, Maria, for so I consi-dered it, redoubled my affection for you; great as it was before, it has been greater since; but you have spoiled all, by your unaccountable be-haviour. Is this young man less ami-able in your eyes, because mine are open to his virtues?
               
               
                  
HAS he not deserved you by his noble disinterestedness? and can I do less for him who saved my life, at a time when it stood between him and happiness, than bestow on him a gift which he values, I am sure, more than my estate? which must be his whe-ther I will or not, since I have no other heir.
               MY dear uncle spoke all this so affec-tionately, that I was melted into tears. He mistook the cause of my emotion; and starting from his chair, began to pace about the room in great agitation.
               I WAS confounded, not being able to guess at the cause of this transport; when suddenly coming up to me, and seizing my hand, he looked earnestly at me for a moment, then exclaimed—
               IS it possible! have you really any dis-like to Mr. Harley? and must I be dis-appointed in the pleasing design I had

formed of making my preserver happy?
               'DISLIKE to Mr. Harley, Sir,' re-plied I, 'No, on the contrary—' I stopped, for his eyes were fixed upon me.
               'GO on,' said he, your contrary, come.—
               
                  EVERY one must be a friend to Mr. Harley who knows him, said I.
               NOW, my dear Euphemia, the dis-covery you think you have made coming into my head that moment, I felt my face glow like fire.
               'Very well,' said my uncle, that blush is honester than your words, and we are friends again, my Maria; so I will answer for you, since Mr. Harley is your choice, Sir, he shall be mine; have I hit your meaning?
               
               
                  

                  You may always depend upon my obedience, Sir, replied I; for I am sure you will never command any thing that is not reasonable.
               
               'Mighty well, mighty well,' cried my uncle, in a joyful accent, I am sa-tisfied. Mr. Greville coming in at that moment — 'Greville,' said Sir John, write to Harley instantly, tell him, I say he is a fool.
               
               I hastened out of the room, not being willing to hear more: though, it must be acknowledged, my uncle has not, on this occasion, been inatten-tive to the claims of female delicacy. Here is a prodigious change in my affairs: a happy one I know you will think it. But, alas! that happiness comes clogged with the painful idea of our separation.
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXII. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               I DISPATCHED my last letter to the post, without waiting till I could give you an account of my interview with Mr. Harley, which I expected would soon take place; for a messenger was immediately dispatched to him, with a letter from my uncle, which it was probable would soon bring him to the Hall; and indeed he came so early the next morning, that Sir John was not risen.
               
                  
By his order, however, he was intro-duced into his bed-chamber, where they had a conference of more than an hour. I had already finished my morn-ing walk, when they came together into the garden to meet me, for you know I am an early riser.
               While they were yet at some dis-tance, I could perceive so much heart-felt satisfaction in my uncle's looks, in Mr. Harley's so much joy, which yet seemed checked by a certain timidity that encreased as he approached me, that it was easy to guess their conversa-tion had been very interesting.
               I summoned up all my courage, in order to conquer my confusion, and prevent my acting a silly part in the trying scene that was preparing for me; and accordingly I paid my compliments to my uncle, with an air very unembar-rassed

as I thought; but when Icurtseyed to Mr. Harley, my half-raised eyes were encountered with so passionate a glance, at the same time that he bowed to me with the most profound respect, as quite disconcerted me; and I felt that I blushed, and blushed the more because I felt it.
               My uncle did not give me time to recover myself.
               'It is in vain to dissemble, Maria,' said he, eagerly; I have betrayed your secret to my young friend here. I have told him, that you have been kind enough to put it in my power to reward his nobleness of mind, and pay him back some part of the vast debt of gratitude I owe him, by a gift, which, knewing your merit so well as I do, I will call a precious one.
               
               
                  
'RECEIVE her hand from me, Harley,' proceeded he; I promise you it is not an unwilling one—Is it, niece?
               
               'If it were, Sir,' said I, I am sure you would not give it, nor would I. I could not bring out another word —I was half dead with confusion.
               Mr. Harley, as if remembering my rebuke a day or two before, and fearful of incurring the same censure, received my hand half bending on one knee, but kept it glewed to his lips with so passionate an action, that my uncle, willing, as it should seem, to relieve me, called out laughing—
               What, have you nothing to say to her!
               
                  We receive the answers of oracles, Sir, replied he, rising, in awful silence; true devotion is dumb; and all words, pursued he, taking

my uncle's hand, which he kissed re-spectfully, would be too weak to paint the excess of my transport and acknowledgment.
               
               
                  You have done pretty well now, however, said my uncle, still smiling, and giving his hand a hearty shake— 'and now we will go in to breakfast.'
               Just as we were preparing to enter the house we perceived Mr. Greville coming to meet us; he drew near, laughing,
               'I have rare news for you, Sir John,' said he; who do you think is come to breakfast with you? even the learned and scientific Lady Cornelia Classick, with the Diana of our forests, the fearless huntress Miss Sandford, who, at the age of forty-five, declares her fixed resolution never to marry, though an Endymion were to court

her; and boasts of her wonderful art in keeping the men at a distance.
               
               
                  Alas! to what am I condemned, for two hours at least? said Sir John.
               'Aye,' replied Mr. Greville, you must resolve to be patient; but as for you, Miss Harley, pursued he, fall upon your knees, and thank me for sparing you the mortification of shar-ing this tremendous visit; for I have told her, that you are confined to your chamber with a sore throat, a disorder she is infinitely afraid of, so you may breakfast quietly in your dressing-room, either alone or with company, looking at Mr. Harley, who would not venture to understand this proposal otherwise than by a speaking look.
               I thanked Mr. Greville very cor-dially for the good office he had done me at the expence of his veracity; and, without taking notice of his insinuation

of this confession, and pity the misfor-tune of him that makes it. I am, and ever will be, Madam,
                     
                        Your devoted servant, EDWARD HARLEY.
                     
                  
               
               WELL, my dear Euphemia, what do you think of this letter? is there not something extremely affecting in the manner in which this young man speaks of his situation? He is humble without meanness, and dignifies poverty by the nobleness of his sentiments. Dearly as I love my uncle, grateful as my heart is for his generosity to me, I must blame him a little for the implacability of his temper (as Mr. Harley calls it), which hinders him from distinguishing between the guilty and the innocent, and makes him suffer the heir of his ho-nour and fortunes to languish in indi-gence and obscurity.
               
                  

with regard to my having company to breakfast with me, I told him, I would employ the happy exemption he had afforded me in writing to you.
               He charged me with a thousand thou-sand good wishes for you; and we parted.
               Mr. Harley, notwithstanding a little cloud upon his brow, contrived, unseen, to kiss my hand with a mighty pas-sionate air; and here have I been ever since in company with my dear Euphe-mia; but I must quit you soon, I sup-pose, for my maid tells me the ladies are going. I hear their carriage draw up to the gate—I must have one look at them.
               There is my uncle leading Lady Cornelia with the most gallant air ima-ginable. By the motion of her hand and head it would seem that she is dis-cussing some deep question in politics,

theology, or the belles lettres; and my uncle, by his asenting nods, is fully convinced I observe.
               But here comes the virgin huntress, with Mr. Greville on one side of her, and Mr. Harley on the other. I protest she does not accompany Lady Cornelia in the carriage, but mounts her steed with most masculine agility, to escort her female friend. Her military riding-habit, the fierce cock of her hat, the intrepid air of her countenance, make her have the appearance of a very re-spectable guard, Ah! what a pity she has petticoats!— My uncle looks up to me as he passes, and beckons me. I come, my dear Sir—again! Pray do not be impatient. Adieu! then, my dear Euphemia, for a short time only, for I shall dispatch this letter to the post to-day.
               
                  
I found the gentlemen entertaining themselves very freely with the singu-larities of their female visitants. How absurd does it seem in our sex to step out of nature, in order to be more agreeable! And how mortified would these mistaken candidates for general admiration be, if they could, unseen, hear the censures and ridicule that are cast on them, instead of the praises they expect.
               My uncle congratulated me on hav-ing escaped this disagreeable visit; how-ever, said he, your part would only have been silence; for wherever Lady Cor-nelia is no one talks but herself.
               'Lady Cornelia,' said Mr. Greville, does not mix in company to converse, but to make orations. She will stun her female visitants of sixteen with learned gibberish; gives rules for epic and dramatic poetry, and cannot en-dure

a comedy that is not within the law of four-and-twenty hours.
               
               'Ah! if your charming friend,' pur-sued Mr. Greville, looking at me. (Can you guess who he meant, my dear?) had been here, what a contrast might we not have observed between true genius and an affectation of knowledge — elegant language, and pedantic stiffness, just sentiment and unintelligible conceit: when the other preached she would only speak; and, as some one justly observes, by making plain and simple answers to her rid-dles, and giving distinction to her confusion, she would have done her at least the good office of expounding her to herself.
               
               A man makes a silly figure,' said Mr. Harley, in company with so learned a Lady, and her Amazonian friend. Talents so masculine, and so ostenta-tiously displayed, place them above

those attentions and assiduities to which the charming sex have so just a claim, and which we delight to pay. Women should always be women; the virtues of our sex are not the virtues of theirs. When Lady Cornelia declaims in Greek, and Miss Sandford vaults into her saddle like another Hotspur, I for-get I am in company with women: the dogmatic critic awes me into silence, and the hardy rider makes my assistance unnecessary.
               
               'You do well,' said Mr. Greville, laughing, to find an excuse for not fly-ing to take up Miss Sandford's hand-kerchief when she dropped it, nor at-tending to a question put to you in Latin by Lady Cornelia.
               
               'Oh! as for that,' replied Mr. Har-ley, Lady Cornelia answered herself, and Miss Sandford drew up her hand-kerchief with the end of her whip so dexterously, that I had no opportunity of serving her.
               
               
                  
'I DO not think hunting,' said my uncle, a proper sport for ladies; it spoils their complexion, gives, them masculine manners, and hardens their tempers. A woman who, like Miss Sandford, leaps every five-bar gate, is ready to join the huntsman's hollow, and would grieve if she is not in at the death, may make a jolly companion over a flask of wine, but must not ex-pect to inspire a delicate passion. I would as soon marry the female pedant, her friend, as one of those Amazonian ladies.
               
               'Ah, Sir,' replied Mr. Harley, if you have seen the young, the noble, the beautiful Louisa join the chace, under the conduct of a fond father, and affectionate brothers, you would confess, that female delicacy may be preserved even in that habit; and that exercise, by the elegance and propri-ety of her dress, she loses none of the tender graces of her sex and years; her charming face retains all its sweetness,

her form all its delicacy, and her mind all its native softness.The happy in-nocent animal, whom she pursues but to save, as if conscious of her gene-rous intention, takes shelter at her feet, and there is sure of protection.
               
               
                  You have rescued one of our fair huntresses from Sir John's general censure, said Mr. Greville. Do you think we could not find a lady eminently distinguished for her erudi-tion, who yet is free from pedantry and ostentation? 
                  You, Sir, know such a one, I am sure, replied Mr. Harley. The wise, the pious, the virtuous Eleonora, superior to most of our sex in learning, in gentleness equal to the most gentle of her own. The poets describe Modesty as blushing at her own motion. Eleonora engages in discourse with timidity and is sur-prised, confused, to find her superio-rity acknowleged by those, whose higher attainments she considered with awe.
               
               
                  

                  THEN this lady does not stun one with her Latin and Greek like Lady Cornelia, said my uncle.
               'So far from it. Sir,' replied Mr. Harley, that unless her extraordi-nary acquirements are called forth by some apt and unavoidable occasion, one may converse with her for whole years as a sensible and amiable woman, without discovering her to be a great genius.
               
               Mr. Harley, this moment, tapped at my door, and presented me a small box, which contained your dear picture, which he would suffer no one to bring up to me but himself. I could not help thanking him very cordially, for the satisfaction he shewed in doing me this kind office.
               After we had spent some time in ad-miring those features, which so power-fully express the beauty of the soul that

animates them. I ordered my woman to tie the ribbon, to which I had fastened it round my neck; this task, also, he would perform, and did very dexte-rously. And now, I would have had him leave me, that I might be at liberty to indulge, alone, the sad, yet pleasing ideas, with which this dear image filled my mind, when, with a look of sympa-thising tenderness and concern, he drew from his pocket your letter.
               Oh! my Euphemia, my foreboding heart told me this would be the last I should receive from you in England. With trembling haste I broke the seal.—Your first lines confirmed the melan-choly truth—I burst into tears; and vainly repeated to Mr. Harley, my ear-nest desire to be left alone. He threw himself at my feet, and while he held one of my hands, and prest it to his lips, I felt it wet with a sympathising tear.
               
                  
'Yes,' said I, you would love her, as I do, if you knew her; and, like me, you would grieve at being sepa-rated from her— for ever. He soothed my sorrows, by a tender participation in them. He comforted me with hope; and, when he found me a little com-posed, he told me, that if I had any letters ready, the messenger who brought the picture would procure a safe and speedy conveyance for them, his bro-ther being to set out immediately for London; but that I had not a moment to lose. Alas! I have a thousand thou-sand things to say to you, and not a moment to say them. Farewell then, my Euphemia! and to that Almighty Power, to whom such piety and virtue must be dear, I trust the preservation of my friend! Farewell! farewell!
               
                  Maria Harley.
               
            
            
               
You will readily allow that I was un-der the necessity of answering this letter, which I certainly should not have done had it contained only a declaration of love: but it was just to set him right with regard to the pecuniary obligation, as he considers it. Here then is what I wrote.
               
                  
                     TO MR. HARLEY,
                     
                        SIR,
                     
                     IT was by my uncle's command that I enclosed to you the note which your grateful disposition seems to lay too great a stress upon. Both my uncle and myself were under the highest obligations to you, who hazarded your own life to prevent our suffering a slight inconvenience. It is but just that you should know this was the sense he had of your generous behaviour;. and the accident that befel you, in consequence of it, being likely to pro-duce some inconveniences to you, who

               LETTER XXXIII. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               THIS will be the last letter you will receive from me in England, my dear Maria; and could I not, at the same time that I tell you this disagree-able news, congratulate you on your approaching union with the virtuous youth who has so well deserved you, my full heart would have found it very difficult to bid you farewell; but I leave you happy, happy as my fondest wishes for you could require. And once more, I earnestly intreat you, not to re-pine that my lot has not been cast so favourably as yours.
               A well disposed mind will extract good out of evil; for, whatever hap-pens

to us, there is some virtue or other to be exercised; either patience or gra-titude, moderation or humility, charty or resignation, and they are all equally productive of peace here, and happiness hereafter.
               And do you count it a small matter that I enjoy such a friendship as yours? I tell you, my Maria, with such a friendship I can despise ill fortune; and it affords me comforts, which high fortune seldom enjoys.
               My picture will accompany this let-ter; the person who carries it will bring me back what letters you have ready. I shall begin a kind of journal from the day I leave England, and continue it as long as I am able to hold a pen; and thus I shall have the pleasure of conver-sing with you every day.
               The more splendid and active scenes of your life will hardly afford you equal

leisure to gratify me with packets as large as those I shall send you; but I am persuaded you will neglect no op-portunity of making me happy by your letters. Fanny writes to you by my messenger, who is this moment ready to set out. I must then, my Maria; I must bid you farewell—Most loved, most amiable of friends, farewell, fare-well!
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXIV. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  Portsmouth.
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               It was a great comfort to me that I did not miss your last packet, which was delivered to me a few hours before I set out from London. It brings me a confirmation of your happiness; and can I then, loving you as I do, be less than happy, when you are supremely so? Mrs. Bellenden insisted upon my performing my journey to this place in her coach, though I made a fifth in it; but the three young ladies accommodated themselves very easily on the back seat,

and I was obliged to sit next their mo-ther, whose polite attention to me, I am afraid, was not properly repaid by one, whose thoughts were so much engrossed by the absent.
               THE Colonel and Mr. Neville, with the men-servants, rode on horse-back, the maids were disposed of in the stage-coach, and my worthy Mrs. Benson and Fanny were together in a post-chaise. We were hospitably entertained two nights, at the house of a friend of the Colonel's; and next morning Cap-tain Wilmot sent the boat, full manned, to bring the Colonel and his train on board the ship.
               AFTER all the ceremonies of our re-ception were over, we retired to our se-veral little apartments. The Colonel and his family are all lodged near each other very commodiously. One of the lieu-tenants, an old acquaintance of Mr.

Neville's, having very obligingly re-signed his cabin to me during the voy-age, I found a small writing desk in it, which I shall make good use of. Mrs. Benson and Fanny continue to be bed-fellows, and are to be very near me.
               CAPTAIN Wilmot gave us an elegant dinner, and did the honours of his ta-ble very gracefully. The beautiful Miss Bellenden drew his particular attention, though her vivacity seemed a little clouded by her regret at leaving Eng-land, or rather, her beloved London, alone, the scene of all her triumphs.
               I HAPPENED to be seated at table near a lady, who I found was a relation of the Captain's; she had the air and man-ner of a woman of fashion, but seemed sunk in so profound a melancholy, that, although she answered with great po-liteness to the usual civilities that pass between persons at the same table, yet

she did not engage at all in the conver-sation, but seemed wholly taken up with her own sad thoughts.
               I OBSERVED her eyes were continually turned upon a most beautiful and ele gant boy, about twelve years of age, who sat opposite to her, and when she removed them, it was always with a sigh, that seemed to rend her heart.
               THE boy, whenever he met her eager glance, turned pale and red alternately, while his sweet eyes seemed full of tears, which he strove to hide, by for-cing a smile at an austere looking gentle-man next him, who watched his looks attentively, and never failed to re-pel the rising softness by a dreadful frown.
               WHILE I was busied in observing their different emotions, which greatly affected me, the lady, whose stifled grief had almost risen to a suffocation,

asked me, in a voice scarcely articulate, for a smelling-bottle, I immediately produced one, and proposed to her to leave the company for a few minutes, and go into fresher air.
               SHE accepted my supporting arm; the ladies were now all in motion to as-sist her, as well as the gentlemen; but she begged to be permitted to with-draw for a few minutes with me, on whom she still leaned.
               'AYE, aye,' said the stern gentle-man, whom I found was her husband, take a little air, my dear, this will go off. And nodding significantly at Captain Wilmot, Women will be foolish, said he, there is no help for it.
               
               THE sweet boy rose up eagerly, as if he would have gone with us, but was with-held by the frowning sire; he yielded submissively; but his eyes followed

us to the door with such an expression of tender anxiety, as moved me greatly.
               I LED the lady to my little apart-ment, and seated her on the bed. She burst into a violent passion of tears, which seemed a little to relieve her la-bouring heart. I endeavoured to sooth her, and begged of her to tell me, if I could in any way be useful to her.
               'AH! Madam,' said she, I ought to ask your pardon, for being thus troublesome to you with my grief; but when you are a mother, you will be able to guess what my sufferings are this moment.
               
               I AM upon the point of being se-parated, perhaps for ever, from the darling of my soul. That boy, that lovely boy! you saw at table, he is my son, he is my only child; the most dutiful, the most affectionate of chil-dren; he will be torn from me this day;

his father will have it so; I cannot sur-vive this parting—I wish not to sur-vive it.
               ANOTHER shower of tears now burst from her eyes: somebody tapping gently at the door, I opened it, and Captain Wilmot appeared, leading the boy; who seeing the disorder his mother was in, sprung into her arms; and lean-ing his head over her shoulder, while she pressed him to her sobbing bosom, he wept in silence, anxious, as it should seem, to hide his tears.
               'It is you cousin,' said the lady, cast-ing an upbraiding glance at the captain, it is to you that I am indebted for this severe affliction. Why would you en-courage Mr. Mansel in this odious de-sign of sending our son to sea? is he not born to an easy fortune? was he not prosecuting his studies with the greatest application and success?
               
               
                  

was far from home, and unattended— this was the cause of the liberty he took in offering you some assistance. I am apprehensive, from the turn of your letter, that you will reject what you consider as an obligation, when you know it came from him. This is what I sincerely wish to prevent, for it will be a means of increasing and con-tinuing that ill-will which has unhap-pily taken place between your families. As in the circumstances we both are, I can neither receive nor answer any more letters, without hazarding my uncle's displeasure. I take this opportunity to assure you that I am, with all the esteem that is due to you, Sir,
                     
                        Your very humble servant, MARIA HARLEY.
                     
                  
               
               TELL me, my dear Euphemia, have I done right in answering his letter thus, or indeed in answering it at all? I shall
'MY dear cousin,' interrupted the captain, you accuse me unjustly; I found Captain Mansel determined to bring up his son to the sea-service, a service in which he himself has ac-quired reputation. I neither encou-raged nor dissuaded him from his reso-lution, but desired to have him on board my own ship; and will it not be a greater satisfaction to you, that he should make his first voyage under my care and protection, than with a stranger?
               
               The poor little boy now interposed; and taking one of his mother's hands, which he kissed tenderly several times, said, in a soothing voice—My dear mamma, make yourself easy, I shall be very happy under my cousin's protection, he will bring me back safe to you; and if upon this trial I should not like the sea, or be found unfit for it, my papa may be persuaded to alter his mind.
               
               
                  
THE weeping mother made no reply; but strained him again in her arms, as if determined never to let him go from thence. The captain and I employed every argument we could think of to console and satisfy her mind; without attending to what we said, she ex-claimed—
               AH, my child, this boisterous ele-ment may not agree with the delicacy of your constitution. Who now will watch over your health? Who will attend to your complaints?
               'I WILL, Madam,' cried I, eagerly— I will supply your place during this voyage; in my cares and assiduity Master Mansel shall find another pa-rent.
               
               
                  OH! what comfort do you give me, Madam, said Mrs. Mansel; if any thing can support me under this afflict-ing separation, it will be this kind

promise of yours. Edmund, said she to her son, this sweet lady will be your mother now; I need not bid you love and respect her, for you have a grate-ful heart. The boy answered only by a most expressive look, and a bow low as the ground.
               CAPTAIN Mansel now burst in upon us.
               
                  What! have you not done whimper-ing yet? said he to his lady. Come, come, every body has been enquir-ing for you.
               
               HE strutted before her, and Captain Wilmot giving her his hand to lead her to the company, I addressed some tri-fling conversation to Master Mansel, in order to begin our acquaintance, and lessen his reserve.
               WHILE Mrs. Mansel was apologizing to the company for her absence, I took

care to seat myself next to my young charge, as I now considered him. I talked to him familiarly, and lessened his diffidence insensibly. He served me with my tea and coffee with a grace and freedom, and at the same time with an assiduity, that shewed at once the ele-gance of his manners, and the particular pleasure he took in attending me.
               MY heart glowed with transport when I observed that the mothér, who watched our behaviour, beheld the growing in-timacy with a satisfaction which seemed to suspend her grief. She took an op-portunity to approach me—and grasping my hand with an eager pressure—
               
                  I SEE my son will be happy in your favours to him, said she; this good-ness of your's has preserved me from despair. You are all over angel, pursued she in a transported accent: you look and act like one; and Hea-ven

surely sent you to my relief on this trying occasion.
               
               I STOPPED this rhapsody, by calling her attention to the little schemes we had formed for our amusement during the voyage. I promised to make him ac-quainted with the colonel's young daughters; and assured her he would pass his time very agreeably in such society.
               The evening now approached: I ex-pected she would be soon summoned to depart. I felt for her so sincerely, that I dreaded the fatal moment, and could not help trembling when I saw Captain Wilmot advancing towards us. He seemed disconcerted, and unwilling to tell her, that she must take leave of her son; but Captain Mansel spared him the disagreeable task.
               'The boat is ready, my dear,' said he, with an unfeeling abruptness. Ed-mund,

God bless you! Come, my dear, give him a kiss, we must be gone.
               
               A PALENESS, like that of death, over-spread her countenance. She stood mo-tionless, uttering not a word, nor shed-ing a tear, whilst the boy, who on his knee had received his father's blessing, now prostrated himself at her feet; and struggling to suppress his sighs and tears, while he held her hand, which he eagerly kissed several times, uttered in broken accents—
               WILL you not give me your bless-ing, my dear mamma? Pray look upon me—do not grieve, I shall soon return to you—indeed I shall.
               MRS. Mansel, whom I had supported all this time, after breathing a deep sigh, turned her eyes upon her son, who was still kneeling, and spreading her arms, he sprung into her embrace, wet-ing

her bosom with his tears, which now flowed fast from her eyes also.
               THIS scene affected even the men who were present. Mrs. Bellenden was greatly moved, and the young ladies were drowned in tears.
               CAPTAIN Mansel's sterness put an end to it. He seized his wife's hand, and told her in a voice, not very tender, that she was to blame to work upon the boy's passions, by giving way to her ex-travagant grief.—'See how he blubbers,' continued he —what a milk-sop you make of him! Come, I shall lose all patience if you go on thus.
               
               THE poor lady, who evidently was in great awe of him, suffered herself to be led upon the deck. I followed her with Master Mansel, giving her, as we passed on, the most tender assurances of my at-tention to him. She seemed struggling to repress her anguish, and assume some

degree of fortitude; and being now ready to seat herself in the chair, by which she was to be let down into the boat, after saluting the ladies, and the rest of the company, she took a more cordial leave of me, whispering, Re-member what you have promised me. Then solding her son once more in her arms, she breathed an ardent bles-sing on him, and still preserved some composure, till she was got into the boat. I then saw her suddenly sink into her husband's arms, apparently in a fainting fit.
               HER son, who had kept his eyes fixed upon her, cried out to me in a mourn-ful voice, 'Ah! Madam, my mother!' and hiding his face to conceal his tears. I endeavoured to comfort him, but in vain; till perceiving she was recovered, I bid him look up, and shewed him his tender mother, now standing waving her handkerchief to him—which he returned

with repeated bows, till the boat was out of sight.
               WE are got under sail; all the ladies, except Mrs. Bellenden and myself, are sea-sick. My dear Mrs. Benson strug-gled with the same disorder for some hours, in order to keep me company; but she was at last forced to yield to it; and she, as well as Fanny, is confined to her bed.
               I SAT upon the quarter-deck, as it is called, more than two hours this morn-ing, under an awning, which Lieutenant Crawford, my husband's friend, caused to be set up for me, with no other com-pany than my young charge, who never leaves me but when he retires to his studies, under the direction of the cap-tain; as for Mr. Neville, he always finds most amusement where I am not. My eyes follow the receding shores, while I revolve a thousand tender melancholy ideas, and many a heavy sigh I breathed,

which was constantly echoed back by my little friend, who, observing me taken up with my own thoughts, did not offer to interrupt them by any conver-sation. At last I asked him, Why he sighed so often?—Some of my sighs are for myself, Madam, replied he, but the greater part are for you: when I see you melancholy, I think it is my mother that I see so—and can I choose but sigh then?
               
               MR. Neville that moment came to us.
               'SO, so, young gentleman,' said he, what, always with the ladies! you will make a fine sailor at this rate; come, I heard the captain ask for you—I will bring you to him. Master Mansel, after making me a low bow, followed him.
               WE have now lost sight of land—all is sky and ocean; tremendous prospect!

not be easy till I have your approbation, which is so respected and revered by me, that I should prefer it to reason itself, if they were two things that could be sepa-rated, and one of them left to my choice. Adieu.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

My mind feels its awful influence— my ideas are all solemn and sad. I have recourse to my books to dissipate them; for Mrs. Benson continues still too much indisposed to relieve me by her agree-able conversation. My sweet Edmund is sick likewise, but Fanny is better, and able now to assist me in my office of nurse to him and my friend.
               TO-DAY Mrs. Bellenden and I, ac-companied by the colonel, took an air-ing upon deck. This lady has a charm-ing flow of spirits, and so much natural as well as acquired politeness, that al-though her understanding is not one of the first-rate, yet her company is some-times very desirable. When I left her, to retire to my own apartment, I was most agreeably surprised to find Mrs. Benson there, quite recovered, her sick-ness having lef
                     •
                   her as suddenly as it had come on; and she is, as it is com-mon it seems in these cases, the better for having been ill. I embraced, and

congratulated both her and myself for this change: but as the good things of this life are often mixed with the bad, I found Master Mansel worse, and even with some symptoms of a fe-ver. I staid with him great part of the day; and in the afternoon Mrs. Benson and I went to visit our sick friends. Mrs. Bellenden we found busy in nursing her daughters; for all their female attend-ants were so sick, that she could have but little assistance from them. Miss Bellenden, wrapped in a white satin negligee, with a most becoming night-dress on her head, lay reclined on some cushions, moaning grievously. Our young naval commander had, I found, been extremely assiduous about her, never failing to enquire a dozen times in a day concerning her health; and when his visits were permitted, expressed great solicitude for her. But this single adorer could not comfort her for the gay scenes she had abandoned; and the general admiration she supposed she had

attracted, when in the midst of them, she suffered more from discontent than sickness—she is sullen, fretful, and im-patient.
               WHEN I came into their apartment, I found her mother gently reproving her for her behaviour, which, she said, greatly affected her father, who is very fond of her.
               'HE thinks it strange, my dear,' said Mrs. Bellenden, that you should shew so much reluctance to follow him to any place where his duty calls him: this peevishness alters you so, that one would hardly know you.
               
               'ALTERS me, Madam!' repeated Miss Bellenden, roused to attention by these interesting words.
               'YES, my dear,' replied Mrs. Bel-lenden, I appeal to Mrs. Neville for the justness of my observation.
               
               
                  

                  PRAY be free, my dear Mrs. Ne-ville, said Miss Bellenden, eagerly, Tell me, am I really altered?
               
               'MY dear Miss,' said I, I am sorry to be obliged to tell you so disagree-able a truth; but if you suffer this depression of spirits to gain upon you, it may produce the jaundice, a dis-temper which is often the effect of con-tinued discontent.
               
               'OH Heavens!' cried Miss Bellen-den, taking out her pocket-glass, and fixing her eyes upon it, how you terrify me!
               
               COLONEL Bellenden and Captain Wil-mot that moment entered; the latter observing the young lady so intently gazing upon her own image that she did not perceive him, went close up to her, and whispered her to beware of the fate of Narcissus.
               
                  
'HAD Narcissus the jaundice, then?' said she, turning to him.
               'THE jaundice!' repeated the cap-tain, surprised.
               'AYE,' said Miss Bellenden; here is Mrs. Neville and my mamma have been frightening me out of my wits; they tell me I am grown quite shock-ing with this sea-sickness; I shall hate the sea while I live; I wish we could have gone to this New-York by land.
               
               'I AM glad that was not possible,' said Captain Wilmor, half smiling, for then I should not have had the plea-sure of conducting you.
               
               I HEARD no more of the sprightly dialogue that ensued, being engaged in discourse with the colonel and his lady, and in paying my compliments to the two youngest ladies, who are as ill as

their sister, but not quite so impatient. Presently afterwards Mrs. Benson and I took leave of them.
               WHEN she left me to retire for the night, I had recourse to my pen. It is a great comfort to me to be this way with you, and that from time to time I can make you read, that your image is the dear companion of all my soli-tary hours.
               WHEN I visited Master Mansel this morning, I was greatly alarmed to find his fever very high: Captain Wilmot ordered the surgeon to attend him im-mediately. This gentleman, who is a grave, sensible man, and, as far as I can judge, very skilful, thinks his dis-temper will be the small-pox. Mrs. Mansel, it seems, never had courage enough to have him inoculated: un-happy, yet amiable weakness, in a mind so full of maternal tenderness!
               
                  
I AM now fixed by his bed-side: I give him all his medicines, he refuses nothing from my hand. At times he is deli-rious, and then he takes me for his mo-ther. Giving me that tender appellation, which he accompanies with such affec-tionate expressions of duty and obedi-ence, as go to my heart. My anxiety is inexpressible! I fear for him, I fear for his mother—I fear for myself, for I feel a mother's tenderness for him.
               THE surgeon tells me, the symptoms are all favourable. He approves my method of nursing him; but I have some contests to sustain with Mr. Ne-ville, who is prejudiced in favour of all the old methods; he is indeed diseased with opinion, and infected by custom. He says I starve the youth; and, al-though the weather is very warm, mut-ters sadly when I suffer the fresh air to enter the little cabin. He asks me, How I will answer it to Mrs. Mansel if I kill her son by my improper ma-nagement?

                  
I generally get off by referring him to the surgeon, whose di-rections I tell him I am resolved to fol-low. He retires, shrugging up his shoulders; and I, in this case, persist in my own way.
               I HAVE passed some days under the most uneasy solicitude; but now, thank Heaven! all goes well: the eruption is so favourable, that the surgeon assures me we have nothing to fear. But the dear boy's sensibility is so great, that he even oppresses me with the excess of his gratitude. He employs the warmest acknowledgments, the most endearing expressions, to testify the sense he has of what he calls my kindness to him. I am obliged to leave him sometimes for half an hour together, to put a stop to these strong effusions of his grateful heart, lest they should act too power-fully upon his spirits.
               
                  
I HAVE the pleasure to tell you, my dear Maria, that notwithstanding all Mr. Neville's fatal prognostications, at which I own I have been weak enough to be sometimes alarmed, that my young friend is perfectly recovered, and will lose nothing of his beauty. The little redness that remains on his face will, the surgeon assures me, leave no marks. The Bellenden family, and Captain Wilmot in particular, have con-gratulated me upon this event in the most obliging terms.
               Mr. Neville, however, persists in ar-raigning my skill as a nurse; calls Mas-ter Mansel's recovery a lucky hit, in which the odds were ten to one against him; and declares, when he is so happy as to be a father, he will treat this dis-temper, when his child has it, his own way.
               
                  HEAVEN forbid you should have a daughter then, cried Miss Bellenden;

                     

sure you do not intend to spoil her face! Why, what a cruel man are you?
               
               'Your mamma was more cruel,' said Captain Wilmot to her, in a low voice, for he always contrives to sit next her, when she prevented what you think such a misfortune; she may be called the first cause of all the murders you have committed.
               
               MISS Bellenden smiled graciously at this gross flattery, which encouraged the gallant captain to add:
               CONFESS, now, have you the least remorse at being able to kill your thousand in a day?
               CLARA, the lively Clara, that moment raising her eyes from a book which she had been reading, and casting them archly on her sister, repeated, What! a whole day, and kill but one poor thousand!
                  

            
               me no matter for observation, either of praise or censure, and consequently no-thing for your entertainment. They are neither handsome nor ugly, witty nor foolish, aukward nor well-bred; they are in that class of mediocrity which leaves one nothing to say, but that they are good sort of people. However, there was another lady expected, who, I supposed, had some claim to distinction; for upon the mention of Lady Jackson, every one had something to say of her. 'She was at church last Sunday,' said one lady, quite new dressed in her fourth mourning, that is, for the last quarter, you know, and looked mighty well. 
                  To be sure, she is a very per-sonable woman, said another, and has a fine presence: but any one would look well, dressed to such advantage as she is; I dare say, she had not less than twenty pounds value of gauzes, and blonds, and feathers about her. 
                  Aye, she had plenty of white plumes on her head, said a third lady. I sup-pose

               LETTER XIX. MRS. NEVILLE, TO MISS HARLEY.
               I AM just returned from Lord S.'s seat, where I have spent a week. It was a farewel visit; and, like all other farewel visits, was begun in pleasure and ended in tears. The very day after my return, your Lady Jackson called upon me, introducing herself with a letter from you. I could not open it with any propriety, as I heard from her that you were in health, so I missed the advantage of knowing her character without the help of my own observa-tions; but, to say the truth, there is no need of any great acuteness to make one's self mistress of the subject; for the fea-tures

The powerful expression of her look and voice charmed me, and rivetted the cap-tain's attention upon her for a minute, which Miss Bellenden observing, said peevishly,
I SUPPOSE, Miss, you found that piece of wit in your book there.
               
               'INDEED I did,' said Clara; here, you may read it if you please, and offered her the book, which Miss Bel-lenden rejecting with a contemptuous frown, the sweet girl gave it to me; 'See, Mrs. Neville,' said she, how truly my sister has guessed; and guess-work it must always be with my sister, whispered she to me, for she hates reading, and always joins with my mamma when she chides me for being fond of it.
               
               CAPTAIN W
                     •
                  lmot now hastily stepped up to me; and looking over my shoul-der,

as I held the book open in my hand:
               'AH!' said he, it is Dryden's tra-gedy of the Duke of Guise, and Mar-montier—the charming Marmontier speaks that sprightly line.
               
               HE begged me to give him the book; and resuming his seat near Miss Bellen-den, read out the scene, which is full of extravagant passion, all which he ap-plied to the fair coquet with too little ceremony I thought; but she seemed highly delighted, though he read so ill, that Clara could not hide her dissa-tisfaction, but murmured softly, Poor Dryden, you have got into bad hands, I perceive.
               
               WHEN the Colonel joined us, the con-versation took another turn; for cap-tain Wilmot is extremely reserved in his address to Miss Bellenden before her worthy father; however, as this gentle-man's

private fortune is very consider-able, his present station respectable, and his interest great, he certainly would be no bad match for the young lady; but a coquet generally uses her advantages so ill, that these sudden attachments sel-dom produce any serious consequences.
               THE winds seem to favour the passion of our gallant commander; and, in order to keep the charming object near him, have lulled themselves into so per-fect a calm, that we make, in the sailor's phrase, very little way, and our voyage is likely to last long: however, as our sick are now in a fair way of being well, we pass our time very agreeably. We have music often, cards sometimes, and feasting every day.
               COLONEL Bellenden and the captain keep splendid tables: we have constant invitations to both; but I am never hap-pier than when I am permitted to pass a day in private with my own family, in

the pleasing vicissitude of conversation, reading, work, and writing to you.
               POOR Miss Bellenden is in a state of mortification at present. Notwithstand-ing the gratification her vanity has met with in the sighs of the enamoured Captain Wilmot, she has always pined in secret after the fuller triumphs she enjoyed in the gay metropolis, where she was a general toast. The uneasiness of her mind has brought on hysteric fits, to which it seems she is subject.
               HITHER TO she has been a very charm-ing invalid; and both her languor and her deshabille have been alike becom-ing: and being well aware of this cir-cumstance, her adorer has not been kept at a distance on account of her indispo-sition, which only rendered her charms more interesting: but it is quite another thing with an hysteric fit.
               
                  
CAPTAIN Wilmot happened to be present yesterday when she was sud-denly seized with one, which proved to be very violent; her frantic screams, the distortions of her countenance, her struggles, in which she exerted such strength, that it was with difficulty her mother, assisted by two maids and my-self, could hold her. Her lover stood motionless for some minutes with amaze-ment; and strong marks of disgust, mixed with some transient gleams of pity, appeared in his countenance. He hastened to send the surgeon, and in the mean time the young lady recovered her senses. I left her after she had taken some drops, and meeting Cap-tain Wilmot, as I was returning to my own apartment, he led me to the door of it, enquiring with more curiosity, as I thought, than concern after the sick lady; I told him she was in no danger; he smiled, but in a grave accent said, it was a terrible malady, he had never seen any thing like it.
               
                  
WE have, for this week past, had, what the sailors call, a brisk wind, and that so favourable, that the Captain tells us we may soon expect to reach our desired port. The weather is now very warm, and a few days ago it was so in-tensely cold, that we were scarce able to endure its rigour; this effect was pro-duced, it seems, by our passing near an island of ice, which rose up in the midst of the ocean to a surprising height, exactly in the form of a sugar-loaf, which it resembled in colour as well as shape.
               I WENT upon deck with the rest of the ladies to take a view of it, but was not able to stay more than a few moments; my limbs seemed all benumbed with cold, and my teeth, as the phrase is, chat-tered in my head. Happily this incon-venience did not last long; we soon lost sight of this beautiful, but uncomfort-able object, and its freezing influence was no longer felt.
               
                  
PROVIDENCE has been pleased to grant us hitherto so favourable a navi-gation, that nothing has happened to act, even upon the fears of ignorance and inexperience like mine, except a a few squalls, as the sailors call a sudden gust of wind. The hurry and bustle these would occasion among the mari-ners, seemed to me a certain indication that we were going to the bottom; but the danger, as well as the apprehension, was soon over.
               THE sailors are now emulously climbing up to the top-mast head, as they call it, looking out for land; from this fearful height they seem no big-ger than crows. Happy will the man be who first discovers it; he will be pre-sented with a handsome purse, the joint offering of all the passengers. We are all full of pleasing anxious expectation.
               IN this interval of hope and suspence, I often amuse myself with observing

what passes between the Captain and Miss Bellenden; the lover—lover now no more since the adventure of the hys-teric fit, is become a much more agree-able companion, now that his attention is not wholly engaged by one object— the lady's malady has restored him to health; he converses freely, and, in ge-neral, his eyes are no longer rivetted upon one face; he is at leisure to attend to all the little complaisances and assidui-ties, which a polite man pays to every female in company, but which a lover confines to one.
               HE disguises his indifference, how-ever, under a most profound respect; Miss Bellenden seems amazed, con-founded; she calls forth all her attrac-tions; she varies her posture twenty times in a minute in vain, his attention is wholly disengaged; she grows peevish, complains of the length of the voyage, enquires impatiently when it will be at an end? The Captain tells her, he

hopes soon to have the pleasure of con-gratulating her upon the fight of land. —She stares—He enters into some indif-ferent discourse with Mrs. Bellenden or myself. She is now down-right angry, and frowns; he does not perceive it; but, in the course of the conversation, addresses her with the same free unem-barrassed air as any other person in the company, and when she sullenly ne-glects to answer any question he hap-pens to ask her, he shews not the least surprise, but repeats it. with all the ap-parent simplicity imaginable, till she thinks fit to answer him.
               HER coquetry is now at a stand; smiles and frowns, peevishness and good humour, produce no alteration in his countenance and behaviour; he is al-ways polite, always respectful, and al-ways indifferent.
               IT is common with persons of deeper thinking than Miss Bellenden, to change

their opinions of others by their kind-ness or unkindness to them. This young lady has now found out, that Captain Wilmot is a very silly fellow, rude, unpolished, in a word, a mere sailor, and is much mortified to find, none of us can be persuaded to think as she does. However, she condescended yesterday to throw out, what she thought, a lure for him; which produced an effect quite contrary from what she expected, and which, to some of us who knew the secret, was a very diverting one.
               THE young ladies and myself were to-gether in the gallery, admiring the most beautiful landscape imaginable, formed by the setting sun, when Captain Wil-mot joined us. He had scarce paid his compliments, when we were alarmed with a cry, that one of the sailors had fallen over board; though this bad news was immediately contradicted, yet it had such an effect upon the tender nerves of Miss Bellenden, that she sighed out,

of her mind are as strongly mark-ed as those of her face; and, like a book printed in a large letter, the weakest eyes may read her.
               WITH a familiarity, which she bor-rowed from the notion of her superior rank, she invited herself to tea with me; and in less than half an hour professed, and claimed in return, an ardent and in-violable friendship. Having thus laid the foundations of an entire confidence, she entertained me with the history of her life, in which, like all other roman-ces, love made the principal part—she is a perfect homicide. There was no end to the murders of her eyes; then, for conjugal affection, none ever equalled her. Those widows, whose tears an-tiquity hath hallowed, were but the shadows of her substantial grief. She left me at length, after a strict embrace, to the pleasure your letters always afford me.
               
                  

'OH! I shall faint!' and would actually have fallen, if I had not supported her; for the Captain, who was still nearer her, being apprehensive that she was going to have another hysteric fit, instead of receiving her in his arms, ran away as fast as he could to send the Doctor; and we could hear him calling aloud for him long after the lady was recovered. Miss Bellenden looked mortified to the last degree, and retired, led by her two sisters.
               I MET the Captain some time after-wards, and rallied him a little upon his want of gallantry. He assured me, he had not fortitude enough to bear the sight of a lady in an hysteric fit, and he thought the best thing he could do, was to send the Doctor to her assist-ance.
               IF this young lady could be con-vinced, that these fits, to which she is so subject, prove a powerful antidote

against the effects of her charms, she might possibly endeavour to restrain the violence of her temper, for it is to that, and not to the weakness of her constitu-tion, that she owes this disgusting ma-lady.
               I WAS just risen this morning, when the sound of land! land! reached my ears, and which was soon afterwards re-peated by a hundred voices at once. A good we ardently wish for, always ap-pears uncertain till we are in possession of it. This may be an illusion, thought I, a mistake arising from too great eager-ness for the promised reward; but I was scarce dressed, when the good news was confirmed to me by Master Mansel, who, with a countenance like an April day, half smiles, half tears, came to wish me joy that our voyage would soon be happily concluded.
               'METHINKS, my dear little friend,' said I, your satisfaction on this occa-sion,

is not altogether unmixed with some chagrin; what is the reason?
               
               'BECAUSE, Madam,' replied he, I shall soon lose you; you will forget me I fear, and this parting will be al-most as terrible to me as the separa-tion from my mother; for have you not been a mother to me? pursued he, respectfully kissing my hand, which I felt wet with his tears, 'and can I help loving you like a son?
               
               I COMFORTED him with assurances, that I would always love him tenderly, and that while Captain Wilmot re-mained on the coast, I would make fre-quent opportunities of seeing him.
               I NOW went to pay my compliments to the Colonel and his family. Mr. Ne-ville, who, it must be acknowledged, is very exact in his observance of all due respect to his commander, was already in his apartment, which was soon filled

with several of the naval officers. When Captain Wilmot joined the company, Miss Bellenden affected the most extra-vagant joy, at the prospect of being soon delivered from her consinement on board an odious ship. The Captain, without taking notice of an expression, that insinuated so great a dislike to her present situation, appeared to en-joy the universal satisfaction. He gave us an elegant entertainment, at which the mortified fair sat sullen and silent. He assures us, we shall make the harbour in two days.
               THE wished for port is now in sight; we are all busy in making preparations for our landing. Miss Bellenden and her maid have been in close consult for many hours. The article of dress, on this occasion, is an arduous affair with this young lady.
               WE are entering fast the harbour.—I have now a sight of this new world; my heart throbs with sensations unfelt

before—I dread, I hope, I wish I know not what—my thoughts are all confused. I know not whether to re-joice or weep; but I feel a disposition to do both.
               I AM roused from this revery by the noise of the cannon from the fort. The city of New-York seems to rise from the waves, and, viewed from the sea, makes a fine appearance. The noise of the salutes, given and received from all the ships in the harbour, as well as the citadel, stuns me. We have now cast anchor. I must lay down my pen. Mr. Neville tells me the ladies expect me.—The barge is ordered. My next letter will be dated from the city now in my view.
               New-York.
               TILL this moment, my dear Maria, I have not had leasure to resume my lit-tle

narrative, though I have been al-ready two days upon this island.
               WHEN I waited upon Mrs. Bellenden in the great cabin, I found the ladies all ready to embark in the ship's barge, which was full manned; the streamers flying, and every decoration, both for state and convenience, ordered by the Captain, to accommodate Colonel Bel-lenden and his family.
               WHEN Miss Bellenden came upon deck, in the full blaze of dress and beauty, I observed Captain Wilmot look at her attentively, not without some emotions of surprise and pleasure, as I thought; but they were soon checked by the silly consciousness she betrayed of her own charms, and the scornful, yet exulting glances, she cast upon him. And he now, having taken a polite leave of Mrs. Bellenden, ad-dressed her with the most perfect indif-ference, associating myself and the young

ladies, her sisters, in his parting com-pliments.
               WHEN we were all seated in the barge, with Mrs. Bellenden at our head, I observed to her smiling, that she had a numerous suite; and indeed her charm-ing daughters, Mrs. Benson, myself, Fanny, with the female servants, who were all well drest, formed a respectable train.
               THE Governor's coaches waited our landing; the Colonel put me into the first coach with his lady and daughters; Mrs. Bellenden would have it so; he went in the next himself, with Mrs. Benson, Mr. Neville, and Fanny; who modestly declined the honour; but the Colonel insisted upon taking her.
               WE were carried to a very large house, the principal tavern in the place, where a magnificent dinner was pro-vided. Here we found a gentleman

waiting our arrival, who complimented the Colonel from the Governor, and in-troduced some ladies, wives to some of the principal merchants, one of whom did the honours of the table very po-litely.
               THE Governor had caused Colonel Bellenden to be informed, that he would wait upon him in the evening; but the Colonel, ever strictly attentive to all the duties of his station, with great polite-ness prevented this visit, which was in-tended as a mark of high respect, and paid a visit himself to the Governor af-ter dinner, taking Mr. Neville along with him. In the evening, we went to the several lodgings provided for us in the town, and had reason to be satisfied with their neatness and convenience.
               THIS city is situated upon an island about fourteen miles long, but not more than two broad. This island is just in the mouth of the river Hudson,

one of the noblest rivers in America, and is navigable for more than two hundred miles. Albany, the next prin-cipal city of the province, is situated on the same river, at about a hundred and fifty miles distant from New-York. There Colonel Bellenden, being second in military command to the Governor, will generally reside; half of the troops being constantly quartered there; and there also we must settle, my husband being one of the Colonel's lieutenants.
               MRS. Bellenden received a visit to-day from the Governor's lady; she brought with her three of her daughters, all handsome, their manners easy and engaging—so easy, that after the first ceremonies were over, they entered into the most familiar conversation with the Colonel's daughters; and before they parted, made them a thousand profes-sions of friendship, with surprising cor-diality, which ceased to be surprising, when I found these suddenly formed at-tachments

is the custom of the place. When Mrs. Bellenden presented me to the Governor's lady, she in a very grace-ful manner just mentioned my family, in order to procure me a more distin-guished notice; and it must be acknow-ledged, that Mrs. Montague answered her intention perfectly well by the recep-tion she gave me.
               YESTERDAY we dined at the Gover-nor's, and were most splendidly enter-tained. He resides in a very spacious house within the fort, where a lieute-nant's guard mounts every day. It be-ing Sunday, we heard divine service in the Governor's chapel. It is small but elegant; the Governor and his family sit in a little covered gallery, decorated with velvet hangings and cushions; they enter it by a door from one of their own apartments. The principal officers and their wives, who are considered as the nobility of the place, the Secretary of the Province, and some other per-sons
YOUR former large packet found me at Lord S.'s; it is full of adventure, my dear Maria. The unexpected meeting between your uncle and Mr. Harley has had consequences that will certainly produce some interesting events. The merit of the young man, and the natural good disposition of Sir John, prepare a scene, in which you will perhaps have a part. How greatly am I obliged to you for giving me, in your charming journal, so large a share of your conversation. The scene will soon change with me, and then my narratives may become in-teresting, for at present my days run on in one dull tenor, and afford nothing to engage your attention.
               I HAVE another letter from you this moment—things have fallen out just as I expected.—Mr. Harley is your conquest. Well, there is nothing sur-prising in that, he has a heart, and you have conquering eyes. You compliment too highly when you lay so great a stress upon my advice and approbation.
               
                  

in civil employments, have pews in this chapel, and are always invited to the Governor's table, who is very hospitable, very polite, and, without descending from his dignity, extremely affable. He has the reputation of being a man of distinguished understanding.
               A SUCCESSION of visits, balls, and entertainments, for these ten days past, have fatigued me greatly, which, toge-ther with the heat of the climate, at this season of the year, brought on a little fever, for which Mrs. Montague prescribes change of air, and insists upon my passing a week at a little cottage of her's, as she calls it, about two miles from the city, where she promises to join me in a day or two; I shall set out accompanied only by Mrs. Benson and Fanny.
               MR. Neville is perpetually engaged; and pleads in excuse for his not attend-ing me in this little excursion, the im-portunities

of the numerous friends he has made since his arrival here, who will not suffer him to have an hour at his own disposal.
               MRS. Benson tells him, that it is a great misfortune to be so much be-loved, for that one of whom so many others have need, can be of little use to himself. 'For my own part,' added she, I think it better to be less agree-able; and, as somebody says, never to sacrifice to the graces at all, than to become the victim of the sacrifice.
               
               MR. Neville looked a little grave at first, not knowing whether to take what she said as a compliment or banter; but self-love explained it to his own advan-tage, and the cloud that was gathering on his brow soon dispersed.
               A RIDE of about half an hour brought me to Mrs. Montague's little villa; a cottage for its simplicity; but it is a

palace for elegance and convenience.—The scene is sweetly romantic. I seem already to inhale health and spirits from the balmy breeze, impregnated with a thousand sweets from the flowers, which in vast profusion bloom around me. How sweet is solitude, to a mind capable of relishing its calm and rational plea-sures! Yet it is true, that your ab-sence is a perpetual drawback upon every thing that gives me joy; and possessing you but in idea, it requires a very strong imagination to make me de-sire nothing more.
               MR. Neville favoured me with a visit this morning, to tell me that a ship will sail to-morrow for England, and that I must make up my packet, which he will take care to put into proper hands, that it may be safely delivered. I have been so short a time here, that I can say but little of the place and its inhabitants. The city of New-York, as I observed

before, makes a good appearance, viewed from the sea; but its streets are irregular.—The houses are of brick, and some of them built in the Dutch taste, who were the first settlers; and many of their descendants remain here. The town has a flourishing trade, which pro-duces great profits. The merchants are wealthy; and the people, in general, comfortably provided for, and that with very moderate labour. There seems to be great freedom of society among the better sort, who are rich and hospitable. The officers live in a stile suitable to the distinguished rank they hold here.—And the Governor, though easy of access, and very affable in his manners, keeps up a proper state and dignity.
               THE soil of this country, I am told, is extremely fruitful, abounding not only in its native grain, Indian corn, but in all such as have been naturalized here from Europe. Here is wheat, they

say, in such abundance, and so excel-lent, that few parts of the world, for the part that is cultivated, exceed it in either of these qualities; nor in barley, oats, rye, and every sort of grain which you have. They have here a great number of horned cattle. Horses, sheep, hogs—all the European poultry, abound here. Game of all kinds is ex-tremely plenty.—Wild turkies of a vast size, and equal goodness; and a beau-tiful species of pheasants, only found, they say, in this country. Every spe-cies of herbs, or roots, which you force in your gardens, grows here with great case, as well as every kind of fruit; but some, such as peaches and melons, in far greater perfection than you have them.
               FROM the account I have given you, my dear Maria, of the productions of this clime, you will readily agree, that an epicure may find sufficient gratifi-cations

here for his predominant pas-sion.
               MR. Neville bids me haste and con-clude. He is going back to town im-mediately, and only waits for my packet. I inclose a few lines for my Lord L. which I intrust to your care; he is the only person, among my relations, who, I believe, is anxious to hear from me.
               THIS letter will, perhaps, reach your hands in three weeks, if the wind is fa-vourable, and the ship not becalmed, as ours was; and, perhaps, one from you is upon its road to me.—Oh! that thought, how I enjoy it! I am charged with a thousand compliments to you from Mrs. Benson and Mr. Ne-ville. Your Fanny is well and happy, and tells you so herself, in a letter which I inclose. Say every thing that is re-spectful

and kind, in my name, to Sir John and Mr. Harley. And from your own heart, my dearest friend, judge of the unalterable affection of your
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
         
      
   

You have no need of any precepts, nor indeed of any instruction; you cannot wander from the right if you go not astray from your own inclination, nor do amiss, if you borrow not a frailty which is none of your own. Your letter seems dictated by prudence itself. I wish, in-deed, there had been no concealment in the case; but I see not how you could have shewn Mr. Harley's letter to your uncle: there is one severe expression in it, which would doubtless have given him great offence, and would, perhaps, have clouded for ever those dawnings of good-will, which broke out, in spite of himself, in consequence of his engaging behaviour.
               WE are to dine to-morrow on board the man of war which is to carry the colonel and his family, of which we are considered as a part, to New York. I know the mention of this circumstance will raise some tumults in your breast; but you must accustom yourself, my

dear Maria, to bear these preludes to our parting, that the parting itself may not fall so heavy upon you.
               MRS. Benson has settled all her affairs; and having no relations but such as are much richer than herself, she has sunk part of her little fortune in an annuity for her life, and the remain-der she has bequeathed to me. Her good sense and obliging manners en-dear her to every one that knows her. I am most happy in this consideration, that having lost my mother, and upon the point of being separated from you, I have the comfort to enjoy such a com-panion—such a monitor and friend.
               I AM to spend this evening with Lady Jackson, in consequence of so pressing an invitation, that I know not how to refuse. It shall not be my fault if our intercourse of visits do not end here. She would be my friend, that is, ac-cording to her notion of the thing—a

companion in my amusements—one who returns my visits most punctually, never fails to send daily enquiries after my health if I am the least indisposed, and a most strict observer of all the civil duties of life. But by a friend, I mean a witness of the conscience, a physician of secret griefs, a moderator in prospe-rity, and a guide in adversity. How little are such as the qualified to act that part? But you tell me she styles herself an idolater of my character. A good opinion, it has been said, lays one under an obligation, let it come from whom it will; but it is only truly valuable when it proceeds from the wise, the candid, and the virtuous.
               AT NIGHT.
               I CANNOT close my letter without giving you an account of a most ex-travagantly kind proposal Lady Jackson made me.—I was obliged to stay till the rest of her company were gone, two

of whom, she said, were her intimate friends, married ladies, whose husbands she gave me to understand were, to her great grief, so much in love with her, that she lived in continual apprehen-sion, left their unfortunate passions should be discovered by their wives, whose peace of mind such a discovery would entirely destroy.
               As she seemed impatient for my opi-nion and advice upon this her very hard case, I told her gravely, that I had no advice to offer her but to keep the secret carefully herself, in order to pre-vent, as far as lay in her power, the bad consequences she apprehended. She then suddenly changed the discourse, loaded me with a thousand professions of friendship, and called it a misfortune to have known me, since she was to lose me so soon; execrated my husband's uncle for driving him, by his unjust parsimony, to the necessity of going abroad.
               
                  
'BUT I have thought of a way,' said she, to prevent that necessity, if you will do me the honour to accept my offer. I have some money unemploy-ed; I will lay it out in the purchase of a small estate in any county in Eng-land that will be most agreeable to you. It shall be yours for ever, if you will; yours at least; as long as you may want it. Tell me you will accept my offer—tell me so, and make me happy.
               
               MY first emotions on this speech were all gratitude and surprise at the uncom-mon generosity it displayed: but her looks and manners bore so little affinity with her words, that a moment after-wards I could scarce persuade myself she was in earnest: for, while she was pour-ing out these effusions of friendship and benevolence, she had her eyes often turned towards the class, with a compla-cency that shewed how much her thoughts were taken up with the object it repre-sented.

And, in the midst of her earnest entreaties that I would accept her offer, her hands were often employed in setting the flounces of her petticoat, adjusting her tucker, or pinning up a curl. These observations cooled the first warmth of my gratitude: I expressed my acknow-ledgments, however, for the generosity of her offer in civil terms, assuring her I should never forget it, but that I had some very powerful reasons for declining it. She would know my reasons.—I told her my husband was obliged in ho-nour to fulfil his engagements; and that, however painful it might be to me to leave my friends and my country, I hoped I should always be able to sa-crifice my inclination to his duty and reputation. That I had received from a dear and valuable friend, with whom I had been connected from my earliest youth, offers of the same generous na-ture with her's, and which, on the same account, I had been obliged to refuse.
               
                  
SHE seemed satisfied with my excuse; but lamented, in very passionate terms, her misfortune in being hopeless to pre-vail upon me. We parted, with great cordiality on her side, and much civility on mine.
               WHEN I related what had passed in this visit to my husband and Mrs. Ben-son, they diverted themselves extremely with my credulity, which they thought much greater than it was; for I did not endeavour to undeceive them, being really in some doubt whether I should wrong her by suspecting her sincerity. I shall be able, when I write next, to tell when our voyage is determined upon. Adieu! My dear Maria.
            
            
               

it is the fashion in London to wear so many; for Lady Jackson would rather be dead than out of the fashion: and they say, indeed, she spends two-thirds of her income in clothes, though she is not young, and never was hand-some; and, to my thinking, that prodigious quantity of feathers she wears is very frightful; for when she came into church, being a very tall woman, and walking through the crowd, she overtopped every body, and her white plumes, nodding as she moved, appeared like those carried before the hearse of some batchelor or maid in a funeral.
               
               EVERY one laughed at this conceit; and Mr. Greville happening to sit near me, I asked him, in a low voice, who is this Lady Jackson? 
                  She is the widow of a rich citizen, said he, who was knighted in the last promotion of bob-wigs and laced waistcoats. The lady so little understands this honour,

               LETTER XX MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               WELL, my dear friend, I have six weeks good yet. This news was like a reprieve to one under a pain-ful sentence, for I reckoned upon no more than a fortnight at farthest. May I not hope then to have one week of your dear society granted by your uncle? Do, my Maria, make the request now, while Sir John is with his friend; your absence will be more easily supported by him. Tell him I entreat this favour, and I will number it among the many instances I have received of his good-ness, which will live in my memory for ever.
               
                  
NEVER having been on board a ship in my life, you will easily conceive, my dear Maria, how much I was affected with a sight so new and strange as that of the—man of war, where I dined yesterday, in company with Co-lonel Bellenden, his lady, and eldest daughter. It was a beautiful, but to me terrific, object, when I considered, that in such a frail building I was to traverse an immense ocean; every thing I saw produced astonishment, and ex-cited my curiosity, so that I asked a thousand foolish questions, which were, however, answered with great civility by the gentlemen about us, by whom we were conducted round this little world, and shewn every thing worthy our observation.
               THE commander is a young man, very genteel in his person and dress; his man-ners are polite, soft, and insinuating; but in my opinion he has too much of the courtier, and too little of the chief. He

suffered greatly in the comparison with Colonel Bellenden, who in his person and manners unites dignity with sweet-ness, the martial air of a soldier with the elegance of the gentleman, the noble frankness of his profession with the po-liteness of a man of quality.
               THE captain presented his principal officers to Colonel Bellenden and the ladies. Miss Bellenden had reason to be pleased with the effect of her charms; every eye was rivetted upon her; every tongue seemed ready to pronounce her beautiful. I wish I could say she receiv-ed this involuntary homage with greater propriety; she even seemed to claim more than was paid her; a conscious simper, an affected toss of her head, a careless air, and a wandering eye, that seemed searching for new victims to gra-tify her pride of conquest, proclaimed the temper of her mind.
               
                  
THE handsome, it has been said with great truth, can never be seen without respect, and their youth hath not more days than their beauty hath triumphs—they conquer as often as they appear; but the mischief of it is, that their tri-umphs are short, their youth is not last-ing, and the handsome at last grow ugly. Queens and princesses, said your Mr. Neville once in my hearing, grow old; and there is no ancient beauty but that of the sun and the stars. What a pity it is then, that the generality of our sex neglect to acquire, in youth, those qualities which may preserve them from contempt when they are old, and secure esteem when they can no longer excite admiration.
               I SUSPECTED that my husband and Mrs. Benson, by their whispering and sig-nificant smiles at each other whenever I mentioned Lady Jackson, and her un-commonly generous offers, had some mischief in their heads; and to-day it

came out. I had passed the whole morning in the city, making some pur-chases for our approaching voyage; during which Lady Jackson paid me a visit. Mrs. Benson received her in my absence, and listened for a whole hour to her extravagant professions of friend-ship for me, and repinings at my cruel reserve, which would not permit her to be of some use to me. Mrs. Benson ex-cused me upon that delicacy which made persons born in affluence, and ac-customed to bestow, not to receive fa-vours, shy of laying themselves under great and unreturnable obligations. This called forth an oftentatious display of the most liberal sentiments from Lady Jackson, delivered with an impetuosity of voice and action peculiar to herself. Again she regretted her misfortune in not being permitted to shew the ardour of her affection for me by some substan-tial proofs.
               
                  
MRS. Benson seemed moved with the enthusiasm of her friendship; and after a little pause said—It is a pity such ge-nerous warmth should fail of its pur-pose; I have thought of a way by which you may gratify your earnest desire of serving Mrs. Neville, with-out wounding her delicacy.
               
               'PRAY name it,' said Lady Jackson, with a look and accent in which much of her former fervour was abated.
               'WHY, Madam,' said Mrs. Benson, you must certainly have heard of the fatal wreck of my friend's once shin-ing fortunes; and that all those posses-sions, to which she was born the heiress, fell by her father's imprudence into the hands of his creditors. In a day or two she is likely to suffer a very sensible mortification by the sale of a very fine collection of pictures, which her father, in a tour through Italy,

purchased at an immense expence. Some of these pictures were so highly valued by her mother, whose memory she almost adores, that I am persuaded you could not do her a more accept-able service than to prevent them from going into other hands, by purchasing them for her. If you please I will at-tend you to the auction-room, and point out to you those particular pic-tures which she so ardently wished to be possessed of; so that when the sale takes place you may have them.
               
               'YOU are very obliging,' said Lady Jackson, with a confused accent, and a freezing look—I shall not fail to give you notice when I am more at leisure than at present, being really very par-ticularly engaged. She then rose up, and took her leave, leaving kind com-pliments for me.
               
                  
WHEN I came home, I found Mr. Ne-ville and Mrs. Benson enjoying their tri-umph over my credulity; and Mr. Ne-ville, after his usual manner, dictating to me upon the choice of my friends, and affirming, that he only was the pro-per judge of what persons I ought to ad-mit into my friendship and confidence. I pleaded hard for an exemption with regard to my female acquaintance; but he insisted that we were no better judges of one another than we are of the men; and that a wife has nothing to do but to leave the choice to her husband's dis-cernment. You may be sure I did not yield this point without a little contest; but in regard to Mr. Neville, I have often experienced the truth of that ob-servation, that with some persons it is not safe to be reasonable. Whenever it happens that my arguments press home upon him, he has recourse to an expedient that never fails to silence me, —he falls into a passion—I say not a

word more—happy if silence will shelter me; but that is seldom the case, for he pursues me even to this last retreat, and nothing will serve him but my confession that he has convinced me I am in the wrong. For the sake of peace I submit to this; and presently afterwards, in some new instance, this confession is turned against me, with Why will you pretend to debate this matter with me? you know you are generally wrong—nay, you acknowledge it too. Why will you depend upon your own judgment, which you are so often obliged to own always misleads you? However, as we both agree in our high opinion of you, my Maria, I may, without fear of rebuke, subscribe myself ever your faithful and affec-tionate
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
               
                  
                     

                     P. S. I have just learned that Lady Jackson is gone out of town for a week, by which time she knew the sale of the pictures would be over. Is not this a strange woman? I was vexed this trial was made: a very little reflection might have served to convince me, that she meant nothing by all those high-sounding professions and offers.—Truth is simple and mo-dest; and when she cannot shew herself by real effects, will scorn to do it in words.
                  YOU will be pleased to hear that Lord S. has actually promised to pur-chase those pictures for me which my mother most valued. My husband and Mrs. Benson knew this, when they thought fit to make this trial of the lady's sincerity, otherwise I should have thought it an unpardonable mean-ness.
                  
                     

so envied by every alderman's wife in London, that she thinks it equals her with a countess; and if she knew how, she would assume the dignified manners of quality, as well as their dress; but her breeding is coarse, and her oppor-tunities of improvement few. One leading card in her character I cannot pass over; it is her insuperable vanity, which makes her imagine that every man who looks upon her is in love with her. No maiden can be secure of the constancy of her lover, no wife of the fidelity of her husband, if Lady Jackson comes in the way. This folly of hers is so apparent, that it draws a great deal of ridicule upon her from the men, who feed it with the grossest flattery, which she swallows as greedily as if—as Shakspeare says,

                        Her appetite grew with what it fed on.
                     
But it is not only to the praise of beauty she aspires; she unites, if you believe her professions, every amiable
IF I am to be indulged with a visit from you, give me speedy notice of it, that I may enjoy the blessing by anticipation.
                  
                     E. N.
                  
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXI. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               YES, my dear Euphemia, our wishes are granted; I am permitted to stay a week with you. My uncle did not wait to be requested; he kindly proposed this little excursion to me as soon as he knew that the time was fixed for your leaving England. Oh! that thought! but I will not distress you by my useless grief.
               I HAVE had an interview with Mr. Harley. You are surprised;—you blame me, perhaps; but hear how it happened, and you will acquit me I hope, of imprudence, since it was really out of my power to prevent it.
               
                  
I HAD wandered into that de-lightful wood, where, since my abode at this seat, I have passed so many hours in sweet, yet painful recollection. I was employed in reading some of your let-ters, when the sound of steps at a dis-tance made me turn to see who was coming. Guess my surprise when I saw it was Mr. Harley. I stopped, uncertain what to do, or how to take this unex-pected intrusion. He advanced with a slow and timid pace, his hat under his arm, his eyes cast on the ground, as if he was fearful to meet my quick-en-quiring glance. I remained immove-able; he approached me, bowing re-spectfully.
               'DO not be surprised, Miss Harley,' said he; wdo not be offended, that be-ing soon to absent myself from you, perhaps for ever, I have ventured to break in upon your solitude; I could not depart without the satisfaction of breathing at your feet those vows my

heart made the first moment I beheld you. And he actually, my dear, threw himself at my feet with the air of an Orondates.
               THE place, his posture, his language, had all so romantic an air, that I could not help smiling as I desired him to rise. He did rise, but with a disconcerted look, while a deep blush overspread his cheeks.
               I PERCEIVED the fault I had been guilty of, and was angry with myself for having wounded a sensibility so affect-ing. The alteration in my looks and manner relieved his confusion.
               'MAY I hope,' said he, that you will pardon my presumption in coming to find you here?
               
               'THE presumption of this visit, Sir,' said I, may be easily pardoned; but the imprudence of it, I am afraid, all

things considered, cannot be justified. Have you not called my uncle impla-cable? and indeed to you, perhaps, he appears so.
               
               'And is he not so, Madam,' replied he, to my family? I am sorry to ar-raign the conduct of a person who has had judgment enough to do justice to your merit; but can his long conti-nued enmity to my father, the friend and companion of his youth, his nearest kinsman, be excused?
               
               
                  Not unless he had received some great injury, I replied.
               'From my father, Madam,' inter-rupted he, impossible! my father is not capable of injuring any one, much less his friend, his relation, and, as I have heard, his benefactor.
               
               I cast down my eyes, and was silent; the noble warmth, the filial tenderness,

that appeared in his words, his accent, and his looks, affected me. I tried to dissipate a starting tear; it would not do, and I applied my handkerchief to my eyes—he looked eagerly at me—
               'WHAT can this mean?' said he. You seem greatly moved, Madam; do you know the cause of this long continued hatred on the part of Sir John? for as for my father, he appears to have no resentment against him; he speaks of him with respect, nay kindness. What can he have done to offend him so highly?
               
               'Nothing,' replied I, unless you will allow it was an offence to supplant him in his love for a most amiable object.
               
               'Nothing!' exclaimed he eagerly, do you call that nothing which was to stab him to the heart?—it was worse, —it was to make him live wretched.

But was it his fault that he was the successful lover? Yet that word sup-plant, implies some baseness in his conduct. Baseness! my father act basely! that cannot be. I conjure you, Madam, speak plainly. I perceive you are well acquainted with the par-ticulars of this affair—I wish to know them; what has escaped you has given me great uneasiness: pray inform me further.
               
               'If what I have said,' replied I, has given you uneasiness, why should I increase it by complying with your re-quest? I must beg to be excused from saying any more.
               
               'I see how it is,' said he; my fa-ther will suffer by this explanation— I must not expect it from your deli-cacy—every way I am unhappy.—He sighed deeply, and was silent for a moment, —then added
               
                  

                  Well, Madam, every thing concurs to shew me the imprudence, the hope-lessness of that passion I have dared to entertain. — I came to take my leave; but do not imagine that I expect my cure from absence—perhaps I do not wish it.
               
               'Pray no more of this,' said I con-fused, as you may well imagine at this conversation— but tell me where you are going?
               
               
                  I am going to seek my fortune in the Indies, said he, for I lie here a dead weight upon my father, who finds it difficult enough to bring up a large family of girls upon his slender in-come.
               
               'To the Indies!' interrupted I; pray in what capacity? Are you to be dig-nified with a commission, and the title of captain or colonel in the Compa-ny's troops; or are you to be a trader

yourself?—I have no talents for ei-ther, said he smiling. —He was going on, when I heard my uncle's voice call-ing me at a distance.
               'I would not have you seen here,' said I, on any account; pray retire. If you are resolved to go to the Indies, make Mr. Greville acquainted with your design; he is your friend, and will be glad of an opportunity of serv-ing you.
               
               I POINTED out to him the path he was to take, in order to avoid meeting my uncle; and curtseying low, turned from him. He followed me two or three steps, and taking my hand respect-fully, raised it to his lips; I felt it wet with a falling tear. He darted like lightning from me, and in an instant was out of sight.
               I met my uncle a moment after-wards; he said he had been looking for

me; and pointing to Mr. Greville, who was following him—'Our host,' said he, is come to take leave of you; he has received news which obliges him to set out for the North immediately. Mr. Greville accordingly joined us, and we walked with him to the gate, where his post-chaise waited.
               I WAS very much concerned at his departure, on Mr. Harley's account, to whom I know he wishes well. I was not without a hope that his representa-tions of the young gentleman's case might have made some impression upon my uncle, and induced him to prevent the heir of his title and fortune from seeking a subsistence in so distant a part of the globe, for my uncle is naturally good; but the best virtues have need of some standard to guide them.
               We are to return to the Hall to-mor-row, and the next day I am to set out for London. Oh! this meeting, what

quality in her mind, as well as every grace in her person. She is far gone in the refinements of friendship; she tastes, with the highest relish, the lux-ury of benevolence; while her insin-cerity incapacitates her for the one, and her selfishness for the other.
               
               'It must be confessed,' said I, that you are going to introduce me to a very valuable acquaintance. 
                  I could not avoid inviting her, replied he, as she is upon a visit to a lady in the neighbourhood, who is my intimate friend; besides, I am fond of extra-ordinary characters. I have given you but the bare outlines of Lady Jack-son's; the lady will finish the picture herself.
               
               I WAS obliged, however, to wait some time longer for this satisfaction; and dinner was ready to be served, before Lady Jackson came; doubtless, this delay was an effect of the same policy,

joy would it afford me, were it not so soon to be followed by a long, long absence! How can I support the thought? There is no friendship in the world of so much use to me as yours: it is my defence in all my contests—it is my consolation in all my distresses: but what is still more, it is my oracle in all my doubts. That which, before I have your advice, I propose to my-self with diffidence, when once I have your approbation I make it a maxim. Adieu! my dearest friend. On Wednes-day I shall have the happiness to em-brace you.
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXII. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               IT is done, I have taken a long, long leave of you, perhaps for ever, for my heart sinks within me, and tells me I shall not live to hail your return; do not chide me, my dear, my valuable friend, pardon the weakness of a vulgar mind, which feels no crosses lightly, and falls flat to the earth at the very first stroke of adverse fortune; perhaps in prosperity I should behave better, and I do not think that happiness would make me insolent, but in affiction I am less than nothing; and that which would not leave a scratch upon the skin of a stoick, pierces me to the heart; if light evils wound me so deeply, what

think you I must suffer from this great, this remediless calamity?—a separation from you. I have laid upon my wound all the balm that my small share of philo-sophy can administer; but methinks my grief is to me in the place of my friend. I possess it with a kind of sweetness, and I am so fond of it, that I should think it a second loss if I had it not to pass my time with.
               My uncle, in his reception of me at my return, seemed to accommodate his looks and behaviour to mine; for my grief, I confess, made me silent, unsoci-able, and incapable of any conversation but with my own sad thoughts: how-ever, when I reflected upon the respect and affection I owed my generous uncle, I resolved to put a constraint upon my-self, and meet him at breakfast next morning with cheerfulness in my looks and language.
               
                  
Alas! my dear Euphemia, I was mis-taken in the cause of my uncle's reserve—he is offended with me; I have lost his esteem; doubtless he thinks me unwor-thy of the benefits he has bestowed upon me. How then can I enjoy them with any satisfaction? He has heard of my interview with Mr. Harley—he thinks me ungrateful, designing, false—his cold looks, his altered behaviour, the hints he sometimes throws out, stab me to the very heart!—Oh! what needed this new affliction to one already over-whelmed with distress? Why did I not make him acquainted with all that has passed between Mr. Harley and me? I know you disapprove my conduct upon this occasion; but I had not you to ad-vise with at the time. I remember, in speaking of this affair, you told me that concealment always implies some-thing wrong: it is true, and apppear-ances are against me; to be thought ungrateful, capable of taking advantage of that independence which his good-ness

bestowed on me, and contrary to his will—I cannot bear it; I will be justified in his opinion, and become once more dependant on his bounty.
               BUT this dear, this affectionate, this more than father, shuns me; and hav-ing already condemned me in his thoughts, is unwilling to hear my de-fence; before the servants, and in com-pany, his behaviour, though less tender, is still polite; but when we are left alone, he is silent, reserved, and even stern: and either retires to his own apartment, or orders the carriage to take an airing, without asking me to ac-company him.
               He is this moment returned from one of these little excursions; I will go to him; he is alone in his library; either he must acquit me of any design to of-fend him, which Heaven knows is the truth, or take back those gifts which, by making me independent of him, have

exposed me to his suspicions. Oh! that you were here to advise, to direct me! I think I know how you would act on such an occasion; I will endeavour to imitate you; you are all openness, can-dour, and sincerity—so innocence should be; and I am sure I have no wilful offence, with regard to my uncle, to charge myself with. Well, I will go, I will speak to him; I will act this hu-miliating part; for surely nothing can, be more so than, conscious of innocence, to have a character to defend—but I will delay no longer—I go.
               This dreaded interview is over. I found my uncle in his library; he was reading; he looked up on my entrance. I asked if he was busy; my countenance, and the tone of my voice, which par-took, I suppose, of the perturbation of my heart, affected him I believe, for he answered with his usual sweetness; 'not if you have any thing to say to me;' and

rising, drew a chair for me opposite to his.
               
                  TILL I can remove the prejudices you have entertained against me, I am, said I, unworthy to sit in your presence, and far, far unworthy of that affluence your lavish gifts have raised me to; resume those gifts, I beseech you, Sir; suffer me to return to my former dependance on your bounty, and let my behaviour be the measure of your future generosity to me.
               
               'YOU are strangely moved,' said my uncle, looking earnestly on me; 'What do you complain of, Maria?' 'I do not presume to complain, Sir,' replied I, but I lament the loss of your favour, which is but too appa-rent from your altered behaviour to me.
               
               
                  
'ARE you conscious,' said he, of having done any thing to give me cause of complaint against you?
               
               'I AM, Sir,' answered I!
               'THAT is honest,' said he, well, since you have got so far in your con-fession, pray go on, and let me have the whole.
               
               He spoke this with a half smile, which gave me courage to proceed.
               'THE fault I have to confess, Sir,' said I, is my having received a letter from Mr. Harley, and answering it, without communicating either his let-ter, or my answer to you. I have also seen him; and this circumstance, like-wise, I have concealed from you.
               
               'AND was this right?' said my uncle, a little sternly.
               
                  
'MY intention was not wrong, Sir,' replied I. The principles of good actions, interrupted my uncle, are good inclinations; if you meant well, how did it happen that you have acted ill?
               
               'YOU will be a judge, Sir,' said I, how far I have acted ill on this occa-sion, if you will condescend to read the papers I have in my hands; here is Mr. Harley's letter to me, and a copy of my answer to it.
               
               'GIVE them to me,' said my uncle, with some precipitation.
               I DID so; he walked to the window, and I could perceive that he read both the letters twice over with great atten-tion. He did not return them to me, but threw them both upon the table, and resuming his seat—
               
                  
'SO the son of my greatest enemy,' said he peevishly, has made you a declaration of love? You whom I have considered as my daughter, and for whom I have the affection of a father.
               
               MY dear uncle,' said I, my more than father, Heaven is my witness I would rather die than offend you! I could not utter these words without tears. He looked at me, I thought, kindly. You have read my answer to Mr. Har-ley's letter, Sir? pursued I; is there any thing in it which offends you?
               
               'WHY, I cannot say,' said he, that your letter is much amiss, considering that you certainly were not displeased with his declaration.
               
               'DOES that appear, Sir?' said I. I think it does, replied he.
               
                  

which makes our celebrated beauties enter the church and the play-house, when the service is half over in the for-mer, and the second act of the comedy begun in the latter.
               At length Lady Jackson was an-nounced; she entered the room with a masculine step, and such an air of con-fidence in the superiority of her charms and her dress, as at the first moment inspired me with disgust.
               Mr. GREVILLE, who knew that din-ner only waited for her, led her imme-diately into the dining-hall, expressing his concern, by the way, that Mrs. Derwent did not accompany her. Lady Jackson told him, that Mrs. Derwent was so much indisposed, that she could not venture abroad, and that she had sat by her bed-side, in great uneasiness, all the morning. This was the first time I had heard her voice, which is loud and harsh; and so little did her countenance
NOw, my dear Euphemia, this sur-prised me: you have read this letter, do you think it will bear that infe-rence? I am sure I did not intend it should; I was vexed, —I was confused; I could not bear my uncle's looks, which were fixed upon me. I cast down my eyes, and was silent.
               HE seemed to wait for some reply; but finding I said nothing—
               'TAKING it for granted,' said he, what you have as good as confessed, that the addresses of my enemy's son are far from being unwelcome to you, and that your heart is very, very fa-vourably disposed towards him—
               
               I ROSE up precipitately.
               'OH! Sir,' said I, I have not de-served this: my tears flowed fast, I covered my face with my handkerchief,

and curtseying without looking at him, I was hastening out of the room.
               MY uncle rose up also, and getting between me and the door, took my hand, and led me back to my chair; he removed my handkerchief from my eyes; and still holding my hand—
               
                  NAY, you must hear what I have more to say, said he, and smiling, re-peated, taking it for granted that your heart is very favourably disposed towards this young man, who is the son of my mortal enemy, and who has himself offended me, by presuming to declare a passion for you, and endea-vouring to engage you in a clandestine correspondence with him: you whom I love, whom I have considered as my daughter, and from whom I might expect some returns of affection, and even duty: have I not reason to com-plain of you, Maria, for encouraging

pretensions which you knew I could never approve?
               
               I VENTURED to interrupt him here.
               
                  DOES it appear, Sir, by my answer to his letter, that I have encouraged his pretensions? said I.
               
                  IT does not appear by your letter, said he, that you have discouraged them.
                  
                     He comes too near who comes to be de-nied,
                  
said a poet very skilful in these matters; and one denial, it seems, will not serve his turn, else why is he continually hovering about my house, in hopes of some opportunity of speaking to you?
               
               NOW this circumstance, my dear Euphemia, I was till then quite igno-rant of—I blushed—my uncle observed

it. I do not wish to distress you, Ma-ria, said he, I pretend not to con-trol your inclinations—you are your own mistress; I suspected that you had acted disingenuously with me; and it was this notion which produced the coldness you complain of. I have been too hasty in my conclusions, I believe; I do not perceive that you are much to blame in this business; but I shall always think it a misfortune, that the person nearest and dearest to me in the world, should form connections with those I have most reason to hate.
               
               AT that moment Mr. Greville was announced—I rose up, and being un-willing to be seen in the disorder I then was, I hurried out of the room, saying only these few words to him—
               DEPEND upon it, Sir, you shall be satisfied with me; I would not dis-please you for the world.
               
                  
I HAVE often observed, my dear Eu-phemia, that most persons consider less the reasons of what is proposed to them contrary to their inclinations, than the motives which may have obliged the person who proposes them to make use of those reasons; had I attended only to my uncle's motives for the disappro-bation he expressed of Mr. Harley's addresses to me, I might have thought them rather unjustifiable; but the rea-sons he brought to influence my con-duct were unanswerable. As my parent, my friend, my benefactor, he had a right to my obedience; which, by having so nobly made me independent of his control, is an effect of my will, not of constraint: and I could not disoblige him, without being guilty of the high-est ingratitude.
               I HESITATED not a moment in resolv-ing to put an end to Mr. Harley's hopes, if he entertained any; and to forbid him absolutely from seeking op-portunities

to write or speak to me any more. My first intention was to write to him; but I found I could not please myself in the terms I was to use: these appeared too harsh, those not decisive enough. I tore my letter, and conclud-ed that my best way was to engage Mr. Greville to acquaint him with my in-tentions, and to prevail upon him to desist from his pursuits.
               THIS seemed so happy a thought, that I became composed enough to take my place at table, without shewing, in my countenance and behaviour, any traces of the disorder I had been in so lately.
               I PERCEIVED that my uncle observed me heedfully, and seemed pleased. I found an opportunity to have a quarter of an hour's private conversation with Mr. Greville, to whom I related, not without some confusion, all that had passed in regard to Mr. Harley; and as

I knew he often saw him, begged he would prevent my having any further disquiet upon his account.
               MR. Greville promised to execute my commission, for he acknowledged that I had no other part to act. The next news I shall hear perhaps is, that the poor youth is gone to the Indies. Well, what of that? You are going to America; can I think of that dreadful circumstance, and suffer any meaner regrets to mix with so just, so poignant an affliction? Adieu!
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXIII. MISS HARLEY, IN CONTINUATION.
               MR Greville, it seems, soon met with an opportunity of delivering my message, which he charged himself with two days ago, and is this morning re-turned to give me an account of his commission; he appeared affected with the gentle sorrow, for so he phrased it, with which Mr. Harley received my absolute rejection of him; it never rose to complaint, said he, much less to murmurings against your commands; silent dejection, and some half-suppressed sighs, and a promise faintly pro-nounced—that he would obey you, were all his answer.
               MR. Greville really seemed moved himself, when he repeated this: so you see it is not so very difficult to make

philosophy feel compassion sometimes. I hope Sir John will now be satisfied with me, said I, without taking no-tice of his pathetic description.
               'IF you had a little more sensibility,' replied he, I should say you have shewn great heroism on this occasion; but as it is, I can only compliment you upon your prudence and good sense.
               
               
                  I DO not think I have done any more than my duty, said I, which my uncle pointed out to me; and when once one is assured of the skill of one's guide, it is afterwards a pleasure to be led.
               
               'I AM not sure,' replied Mr. Gre-ville, gravely, that my good friend is quite right in all this; the limits that part justice from wrong, are not so well marked out, but that we may pass them before we are aware. Mr. Harley is not answerable for his

father's faults, and he has virtues that render him not unworthy even of you, —and that is saying a great deal.
               
               I WILL dispatch this letter to the post immediately; my uncle keeps his chamber with a slight indisposition. I shall be employed in sending to him all day. My dear Euphemia, I expect a letter from you every mo-ment, and would you think it, I trem-ble at the very thoughts of receiving one, lest it should fix the day of your departure. Oh! my friend, my forti-tude grows less every day; I feel it does, —how shall I bear the loss of you? but I will not wound you with my vain re-grets. Adieu!
            
            
               

express the sensibility she would be thought to possess, that her mouth was screwed up into an affected simper, while her eyes were fixed upon the large glass that fronted the door by which she en-tered, and shewed her her figure at full length. This sight had the force of magic, and seemed to have rivetted her feet to the spot where she stood; when Mr. Greville, by a gentle violence, led her to her seat at the table, which was on my right hand. She soon entered into a particular conversation with me; admired the elegance of my undress; asked who was my millener, and how much my lace cost a yard; and, in a de-cisive tone, assured me every thing I had on was perfectly fashionable.
               AFTER dinner, when we were got back to the drawing-room, being still seated near me, she renewed the dis-course; and making a sudden transi-tion from the trimming of gowns, to which she condescended to ask my opi-nion

               LETTER XXIV. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               NO, my dear friend, this letter will not fix the day of my departure, which may perhaps be yet more distant than I imagined; for the Bellenden fa-mily do not seem to have finished half their preparations yet. They propose to set out in a very splendid style, suit-able to the rank the colonel will hold in the province, and the taste the people of our colonies have, as I am informed, for expence. I think I can perceive the colonel is only passive in these affairs; that innate grandeur of soul which he possesses, neither seeks nor needs the aid of outward shew.
               
                  
How shall I thank you, my dear Ma-ria, for the unbounded generosity of your presents to me? Your jeweller was with me this morning, and in a few instants I was made so rich by your mu-nificence, that Mr. Neville was struck with astonishment, and seemed to doubt whether he was not in a dream. Grati-tude is the best virtue of the poor, and that Heaven knows my heart is full of; so full indeed, that no words seem ade-quate to its feelings; and were you pre-sent with me, I could only thank you with a silent tear.
               I CANNOT express how much I ad-mire you, for being able to maintain so noble a conduct under your present trials and difficulties—I repeat it, my friend, trials; for, although you have not been pleased to open your whole heart to me; yet that heart, incapable of disguise, dis-plays itself even in the midst of all your delicate reserve. Would I could con-gratulate, as well as praise; for I had ra-ther see the virtue of my friend employ-ed

in wisely using well-deserved prospe-rity, than in nobly bearing unmerited distresses. If Heaven hears my ardent prayers, I shall yet be able to leave you in a more tranquil situation than you are at present. Adieu!
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXV.
               MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               YOU have a right to all occasions of doing good; I think it therefore in-cumbent upon me to offer you one. There is a young woman in my neigh-bourhood, for whom I have a great esteem, on account of her good sense and amiable qualities. Some disappoint-ments she has lately met with, makes her very desirous to go abroad. She will think herself happy to be about your person, for she knows enough of your character to love and revere you with a kind of enthusiasm: her history is briefly this:
               
                  
HER parents, who were persons of genteel birth and education, dying when she was very young, left her wholly unprovided for, to the charita-ble cares of an aunt, who was a widow, without children, and in tolerable cir-cumstances. She bred up the little girl as her own, gave her a good edu-cation, and declared she would leave her all she was worth. The merit of the girl, and the dutiful and affection-ate returns she made to her kindness, made this disposing of her property seem not more an act of affection than justice. The old gentlewoman being seized with a dangerous fit of sickness, sent for an attorney, in great practice here, to make her will: a man remark-able for his success in his profession, by which, being likewise very fortunate in the numerous legacies that have been bequeathed him, he has made a very considerable fortune in a few years.
               
                  
THE old lady died; and when the will was opened, Mr. D. the attorney, was, to the astonishment of every one, appointed her executor, and sole heir to her fortune, which was about two thousand pounds—her once-loved neice being cut off with a shilling!—This strange and unexpected reverse of for-tune drew on a still more poignant af-fliction: A young man, who had courted her with the consent of his parents, and to whom she was soon to have been married, was ordered by them to see her no more. He loved her, and persisted in his resolution to marry her, though at the hazard of losing the greatest part of his fortune by disobliging his father. — Poor Fanny! though she loves him tenderly, has had the generosity to give him a positive denial, and to avoid his im-portunities; and doubtful, perhaps, of her own resolution, is anxiously desir-ous of leaving England. When I mentioned recommending her to you,

she was in transports. If you approve of my proposal, I will send her to Lon-don in the stage-coach, under the care of our housekeeper, a good matronly woman, who has a great kindness for her, with whose absence I must dispense for a few days, that I may have the satisfaction of delivering her safe to your protection.
               I AM very uneasy about my uncle; I am afraid he is going to have a severe attack of his old distemper, the gout; at present it is but slight, yet he is more restless and impatient than usual. I read to him continually; but he does not seem to give much attention, and often interrupts me to tell me, that my voice is low and faint, and that my spirits seem greatly depressed. It may be so; and sure I have cause, so soon to be se-parated from the friend of my heart, the companion of my youth, my com-fort in adversity, and my example for virtue.
               
                  
MR. Greville will have it that my uncle is not quite satisfied with his con-duct towards young Mr. Harley, which, doubtless, said he, was harsh, if not un-just; and yet, if he was here (so he is gone you see, my Euphemia), it is probable he would not alter it. Now I cannot be of this opinion. I am sure, if my un-cle thought he was wrong in this case, he would make haste to be right: bad men justify their faults, the good amend them.
               I WAS obliged to lay down my pen, being summoned to Sir John, who was taken extremely ill. The physicians were afraid the gout was getting into his stomach. I have not been in bed these two nights: my dear, suffering uncle, seeing me continually by his bed-side, expressed great uneasiness, lest my health might suffer by so constant an attendance upon him, and insisted upon my retiring to rest. It was not possible for me to obey him; so I kept out of

his sight, yet without quitting his apart-ment.
               THIS morning, when I approached his bed, as if just come down from my own chamber, he took notice that I looked very pale, and said, He was afraid I had not slept well. He com-forted me with an assurance that he was better; and pressing my hand affection-ately, 'You are a good girl,' said he, your whole conduct is of a piece. I never will forget the generous sacrifice you have made me on a late oc-casion.
               
               I FELT my face all in a glow; I was not able to make him any answer. The physicians coming in relieved my con-fusion; they pronounced him better: and now being in some measure free from my racking apprehensions, I really retired to my chamber, and threw my-self upon my bed. Two hours sleep re-freshed me so much, that when I entered

my uncle's apartment again, he per-ceived the alteration in my looks.
               I FOUND the servants had informed him that I had not been in bed for three nights; he tenderly reproached me with the deceit I had practised upon him; but added, that as he hoped for some rest himself to-night, the physicians having ordered something to compose him, he would never pardon me if I did not go to bed.
               
               MR. Greville is come to pass a day or two here. I left the two friends to-gether, and retired to my own apart-ment, to have the pleasure of conversing with you, my dear friend; for when I am writing to you, and relating all the little occurrences that help to vary the dull scene of my life, I fancy you are present, and I am talking to you. Adieu! however, for a little time.
               
                  

of, she talked of books; ran over the names of Milton, Shakespeare, Dry-den, Pope:—But her observations and criticisms were confined to exclamations of—excellent! divine! inimitable! which she uttered with great vehemence; while she entered more deeply into the merits of Mariveaux and Marmontel; the cha-racters of the former were so natural—the tales of the latter so charming—so interesting! This flow of erudition was stopped by the attention the company seemed willing to give, to a lady who was relating to the person that sat next her, a melancholy accident which had happened to an acquaintance of her's—a gentleman who was killed by a fall from his horse, and brought home dead to his wife a few hours after he had left her in high health and spirits. The wretched wife was seised with convul-sions at the sight, and died the next day.
               
                  
I HAVE a strange and terrible circum-stance to tell you, my Euphemia, which I shall never wholly lose the remem-brance of, and which, as often as it is recollected, will probably occasion the same horrors that I feel now.
               THIS evening, when I went into my uncle's chamber to take leave of him for the night, he told me he would take the draught that was ordered for him then, that he might have the pleasure of taking it from my hands. Accordingly, after having read the label, I poured the medicine into a cup, and gave it into his hand: in the very moment that he was raising it to his lips Martin came into the room, and perceiving what my uncle was doing, cried out, with eyes all wild and staring, and in a voice scarce articulate, from the violence of his agitation—Hold, Sir! for Heaven's sake do not drink!
               
               
                  
'WHAT is the matter with the man,' said my uncle; 'are you mad?'
               
                  YOU have not drank any of it, have you, Sir, said he, eagerly taking the cup out of his master's hand, are you sure you have not?
               
               'WELL,' replied my uncle, I have not, and what then?
               
               'Heaven be praised!' said the good old man. Why, Sir, if you had drank it, you would have been dead by this time; it is poison.
               
               'How! poison!' said my uncle asto-nished. As for me, I was near fainting, and should have fallen to the ground, if my dear uncle, weak as he was, had not raised himself up in his bed to support me: in the mean time Mr. Greville was examining the medicine.
               
                  
'I BELIEVE it is laudanum,' said he; and sure enough you would, as Mar-tin says, have been a dead man if you had taken this dose. But pray, my good friend, said he to Martin, how did it happen that you knew this?
               
               'SIR,' said Martin, two moments since a man and horse came to the gate; he must have rode hard indeed, for the horse was all over in a foam. If your master has not yet drank the potion that was sent him by Mr. Allen, the apothecary, this evening, said he, haste — prevent him — it is poison. Allen will be here soon after me and explain,—and he rode away instantly.
               
               MR. Greville now congratulated my uncle on his escape, who seemed touched with the sincerst gratitude to Heaven for his preservation, and said some very kind things to Martin, who had been, under Providence, the happy instrument of it.
               
                  
IT WAS some time before I could re-cover any degree of composure, so greatly had I been affected by my uncle's danger. He pressed me earnestly to go to bed; but all inclination to sleep was vanished, and I was resolved to sit up, and hear what the apothecary had to say.
               I RETIRED, however, for a few mo-ments, to write you an account of this strange accident, which was likely to have been so fatal a one, both to him and me; for I think I never should have forgiven myself for having, though in-nocently, administered the deadly draught to him.
               THESE ill-shaped letters and crooked lines are an effect of that agitation un-der which I still labour.
               SURE the apothecary must be come by this time.—I am impatient to hear how this dreadful mistake happened. For

the future I shall tremble to take their medicines; for how can one be sure of their exactness? Jenny tells me Mr. Allen is this moment arrived.
               ONE IN THE MORNING.
               WELL, my dear friend, here I am, in my own chamber, without the least desire of going to bed to night. Joy is as great an enemy to sleep as grief; and I am overjoyed, I own it. You are surprised—you are impatient to know what has happened to produce a sensa-tion I am so little acquainted with—so long unfelt, and almost despaired of. Take then things in order, and share, largely share in the satisfaction of your friend.
               MR. Allen entered my uncle's apart-ment a moment after me; his counte-nance retained the traces of the great perturbation he had been in.
               
                  
'HEAVEN be praised! Sir,' said he to his patient, that this mistake has had no other consequences than to make me, for some hours, the most wretched man in the world.—I can easily con-ceive the fright you have been in, said Sir John; but prithee, Allen, how did it happen that you sent me this fatal dose.
               
               'SIR,' replied the apothecary, a patient of mine, a gentlewoman in years, is accustomed to take small doses of laudanum every night: she is mise-rable if it is not always at hand; so I generally send her two ounces at a time. I had prepared your draught, and wrote the labels for both the phials, when a servant of a dear friend of mine, who lived about a quarter of a mile distant, came to tell me that I must go instantly and bleed his master, who was in an apoplectic fit.
               
               
                  

                  MY journeyman, who had always been remarkably diligent and careful in his business, was just ready to mount on horseback to take your medicine to the Hall. I gave him the label; and shewing him the phial, bid him tie it on, and set out with it immedi-ately; and I hastened to relieve my friend. My man, who, during the five years that he has lived with me, never made any mistake of this kind before, took the phial which contained the laudanum, put the label on it de-signed for your draught, and rode away.
                  WHEN I came home, about an hour afterwards, I discovered the dreadful mistake; the draught designed for you being still on the counter. I con-cluded that the other was by this time delivered, and probably taken. I was almost distracted, having no horse but that my journeyman rode on, I deter-mined to set out on foot for the Hall;

but, however anxiety and terror might have quickened my pace, I must have come too late, when a gentleman alight-ing at my door, desired me to dress his hand, which by some accident he had cut dreadfully. I answered, that it was impossible; that Sir John Har-ley was in danger of being poisoned by a mistake of my man, who had carried him a large dose of laudanum instead of the prescription I had pre-pared for him. Saying this, I rushed by him, scarce knowing what I did.
               
               
                  THE gentleman instantly re-mounted his horse, and putting him in full gal-lop, cried out to me as he passed by me, that he would be at the Hall in less than ten minutes, and hoped to pre-vent the mischief. Then, and not be-fore, I recollected who he was.—And who is he? said my uncle eagerly; The reverend Dr. Harley's son, re-plied Mr. Allen, I know him very well.
               
               
                  
My uncle hearing this name, clasped his hands together with great emotion, and casting his eyes first upon Mr. Gre-ville, then on me, with a look big with meaning, he turned himself about in his bed, and continued silent. His piercing glance at me filled me, I know not how, with confusion. I felt my face covered with blushes. I could not look at Mr. Greville, who exclaimed two or three times, in a transported ac-cent—'Generous, noble fellow! What think you of this, my friend, said he to Sir John, approaching his bed. My uncle made him no answer; but I thought I heard him sigh deeply.
               Mr. Greville then observing that Mr. Allen must be greatly fatigued with so long a walk in such agitation of mind (and indeed the poor man looked like a ghost), desired him to walk into the next room, where he would find something to refresh him, and in the mean time he

would give directions for a horse to be saddled, to carry him home.
               Mr. Allen withdrew; and Martin appearing upon Mr. Greville's ringing the bell, my uncle interrupted the or-ders he was giving, to ask him eagerly if he knew the person who brought the message from the apothecary.
               'YES, Sir,' said Martin, it was Mr. Harley. 
                  And why did you not tell us this circumstance? said my uncle. Martin cast down his eyes.
               
                  How did he look, —what did he say to you? asked my uncle.
               
                  HE seemed to be in great agitation: Sir, replied Martin, his horse was all in a foam, and himself seemed al-most breathless.
               
               
                  
LADY JACKSON, being a widow her-self, it was her part to be more affected than any one else with this sad story : she sighed aloud. My uncle observed, that such instances of conjugal affection were very rare.
               'Very rare indeed,' said Mr. Gre-ville; for one such afflicted widow, we shall see a hundred, who, as Pope, one of your admired authors, Madam, said he, addressing himself to Lady Jack-son, 'has it,

                     Bear about the mockery of woe
                     To midnight dances, and the public shew.
                  
               
               'Oh, dear Sir,' said Lady Jackson, 'you are very fevere.'
               'Not at all, Madam,' said he, for although my censures are general, I admit of some exceptions. But, to speak the truth, there is no virtue now so common as fortitude, nor any thing

                  "Has your master,' said he, taken the medicine that Mr. Allen sent here this morning? I replied, No. Fly, prevent him, it is poison, said he; the apothecary is following me, he will explain the mistake. The porter has since told me, that he rode away in-stantly, and that he thought he was wounded, for his handkerchief was bound round his left hand, and seemed covered with blood.
               
               My uncle then bid Martin go and attend Mr. Allen; when Mr. Greville repeating,
               WHAT think you of all this, my friend?
               'I THINK,' replied Sir John, that this young man is the noblest of all human beings. My life stood be-tween him and an ample fortune; and, what is more, between him and a bles-sing which he sets perhaps a much

higher value upon. Yet has he saved that life with the hazard of his own, and done as much for his enemy as he would have done for his father.—Then pausing a little—And a father I will be to him now, added he; from this moment I will consider him as my son. Why is he not here, that I may embrace and call him so? My uncle spoke this in so affectionate a manner, as moved even the lively Mr. Greville.
               'WHERE shall I find, him,' pursued he—who will bring him to me? that wound in his hand alarms me. I feel already the anxiety of a father for him. Then looking at me with a ten-der smile,
               'MARIA,' said he, will not, I hope, be jealous of this new-sprung affec-tion for a person so worthy. I was silent; for what indeed could I say? Mr. Harley's merits are too great for

praise—for my poor praise. My uncle seemed to have a just sense of them; and for this I could not but rejoice.
               Mr. Greville, who sat musing for some time, at last said, The appear-ance of young Harley in these parts surprises me. I know he took leave of his family a week ago, in order to go on board the—Indiaman, which I thought had failed by this time. Perhaps I may get some in-telligence from Allen; I'll go to him. He did so, and returned again in a quarter of an hour; during which time my uncle and I had not spoke a word to each other.
               'ALLEN tells me,' said Mr. Greville, that he met Mr. Harley when he had got about half way to the Hall. He called out to him in a joyful tone, and told him all was safe. He com-plained of the hurt in his hand, and said, he would stop at his house, and

get his journeyman, if he was come home, to put some dressings upon it. Mr. Allen begged he would stay till he came back if he did not find his man at home. Mr. Harley replied, that he had not a moment to spare; that he was going to hire a post-chaise at the Rose-Inn, and intended to travel all night, being apprehensive that the ship would fail without him;his fa-ther's sudden illness having detained him longer than he expected.
               
               'So, then,' interrupted my uncle, in a tone of deep distress, 'he is gone!'
               'No, no, I hope not,' replied Mr. Greville; I have dispatched Allen on horseback, with directions, if he finds the youth at his house, as I doubt not but he will, to tell him that he must not stir from thence till I have seen him, which shall be early in the morn-ing. Allen can accommodate him with a bed.
               
               
                  
'THIS will not do,' cried my uncle vehemently, this voyage must be pre-vented, or I shall never enjoy a quiet moment. Bid Martin get on horse-back instantly; and if he does not find Harley at Allen's, let him go on with all speed to the Rose-Inn. Dear Greville hasten him; mean time I will write a line myself to Harley. Maria, give me pen, ink and paper.
               
               MY uncle's impetuosity put us all in motion. Mr. Greville hastened to give Martin his orders; I brought my uncle what he desired; he sat up in his bed, and made shift to scrawl a few lines. Here is is a copy of them:
               
                  
                     TO MR. HARLEY.
                     WORTHY young man! you have saved my life; but if you would not embitter the remainder of it, think no more of your voyage to India; return

with my messenger, and expect for the future to find a father, an affectionate father, in
                     
                        JOHN HARLEY.
                     
                  
               
               Mr. Greville inclosed this note in one from himself; and Martin, who seemed excessively pleased with his com-mission, assured us he would not return without the blessed young gentleman that had preserved his master.
               SIR John seemed now quite exhausted with the different agitations his mind had suffered this evening; and a few minutes after Martin's departure, fell into a profound sleep. I wished Mr. Greville a good night, and retired to my chamber, where I have ever since been employed in writing to you.
               Mr. Greville told me at parting, that he would sit up an hour or two longer,

in expectation of Martin's return, who, if he is not here by that time, said he, we may conclude he did not meet Har-ley at Allen's, and is gone after him to the inn.
               WELL, we may now conclude that Martin has not succeeded, for he might have been here long ere this time. I hear Mr. Greville crossing the gallery, to go to his own chamber, so he has given up all hope. He calls to me as he passes by my door, seeing a light still in my chamber.—Sure he has heard some news.
               THIS is what Mr. Greville told me through the door, for I would not open it, being all undressed.
               MARTIN has sent a man home with the horse he rode out with; and in a note to Mr. Greville informs him, that Mr. Harley had called at Allen's, and got his hand dressed, which he had hurt

by a fall from his horse, and immedi-ately afterwards set out for the inn. Thither Martin followed; and hearing that Mr. Harley was gone away a quar-ter of an hour before in a post-chaise, he thought he could not do a more ac-ceptable piece of service to his master than to follow him, and endeavour to overtake him: accordingly he ordered post-horses and a guide, and was just ready to set out when his messenger came away. Mr. Greville added, in a melancholy accent, that he feared all this would end at last in disappointment and regret. Indeed I fear so too, and am in pain for my uncle, who will be most sensibly afflicted: so now, my dear Euphemia, being not too happy to sleep, I will wish you a good night, and retire to bed.
            
            
               

               LETTER XXVI. MISS HARLEY, IN CONTINUATION.
               I ROSE early this morning, and had the satisfaction to hear that my uncle had had a good night, and was still asleep. Mr. Greville being also up, and in my uncle's library, I joined him there. He was beginning to rally me on the subject of Mr. Harley; but pre-sently altered his tone, being strongly apprehensive that the youth would be on board, and the ship failed before Martin could overtake him.
               'Poor fellow!' said he with a sigh, he is too good to be a favourite with Fortune, who seldom bestows any

thing upon the virtuous, because she knows she cannot bribe them with her gifts.
               
               MY uncle having sent to desire we would drink our chocolate by his bed-side, we attended him immediately. He was very low spirited, having heard from his valet that Martin was not returned. Mr. Greville read his billet to him, which was not calculated to remove his fears of the bad success of his expedition. He was full of uneasy reflections; he railed at fortune, he railed at himself, but still he was more inclined to find fault with his stars than himself.
               MR. Greville put him in mind of the great danger he had so lately escaped, by means so unlikely and unexpected.
               'YES,' replied my uncle, my life is preserved, but he who preserved it is out of the reach of my gratitude, which will be a continual source of

hastened on board our separate vessels, and made a great deal of way in the night; but in the morning we were again becalmed, and as we moved slowly along the liquid plain, which was as smooth as glass, we were at leisure to admire the magnificent scene that pre-sented itself to our eyes. —The river here being very narrow, running be-tween a ridge of mountains on each side, whose tops, covered with groves of lofty trees, seemed to hide their heads in the clouds, while their sloping sides were adorned with the most beautiful ver-dure, and trees of many species un-known to us. The awful gloom from the surrounding shades, the solemn still-ness, inspired a soft and pleasing melan-choly, which we enjoyed in silence, be-ing, as the poet says, "rapt in pensive musing"
                  MISS Bellenden, mean time, diverted herself with asking our skipper a thou-sand silly questions; and he, in the

this place. She has actually taken a great deal of pains to acquire as much knowledge of the Dutch language as to enable her to address some trifling con-versation to these uncouth visitants, with whom the young ladies are so much disgusted, that they have contriv-ed to keep them out of the assembly Mrs. Bellenden holds every fortnight, which is now pretty numerous, from the resort of many strangers of fashion to this city.
               AMONG these Mr. Euston holds a distinguished rank; elegant in his per-son, polite in his manners, and engag-ing in his address: he throws off the philosopher in the charming circle form-ed by the Colonel's daughters. Miss Bellenden has thought him worthy of her chains, and calls forth all her attrac-tions to enslave him. The dignified Louisa looks as if his adorations might be endured; and Clara, without seem-ing to have the least design upon his

heart, aims only at improving her un-derstanding, by listening with the most respectful attention to all he says, when any opportunity offers to engage him in conversation.
               Two nights ago Mrs. Bellenden gave a ball and supper, on occasion of the arrival of a young gentleman, son to the late governor of New-York, who is ap-pointed third lieutenant to the Colonel. We had some music; all the young la-dies sing and play, and Mrs. Bellenden does both excellently.
               MR. Neville and myself were among the performers; but nobody thought of asking the philosophic Mr. Euston to make one. Mrs. Bellenden, however, heedfully observing him during the per-formance of Dryden's Ode on St. Ceci-lia's Day, exclaimed— I am sure Mr. Euston understands music! — He smiled.
               
                  
'Ah! I thought so,' pursued she; come, Sir, I insist upon your joining us. Miss Bellenden rose immedi-ately from the harpsichord, and offered her place; and Mr. Neville presented his German flute. Mr. Euston chose the harpsichord; and sitting down, sung that beautiful little song of Ben John-son's in the Silent Woman, which you know I admire so much.
               
                  Still to be fine, still to be drest,
                  As you were going to a feast:
                  Still to be powdered, still perfum'd,
                  Lady, it is to be presum'd,
                  Tho' art's hid causes are not found,
                  All is not genuine, all not sound:
                  Give me a look, give me a face
                  That makes simplicity a grace;
                  Robes loosely flowing, hair as free,
                  Such sweet neglect more taketh me,
                  Than all th' adulteries of art—
                  They strike mine eyes, but not my heart.
               
               THE company were so delighted with the long and the performance, that we

encored it three times. This little in-cident unravelled a mystery which had hitherto puzzled us all. Mr. Euston's long stay at Albany, and his assiduous attendance at the Fort, created some-thing more than a suspicion, that his heart had been surprised by the charms of one of the young ladies; but he was so much upon his guard, that it was not possible to guess which was the dis-tinguished fair one.
               HE sung the last stanza with so much feeling, such pointed expression in his eyes, and such particular application to Clara, that his preference of her was no longer a secret. The elegant simpli-city of her dress brought her exactly within the poet's description; a white lutestring robe, so fitted to her shape, as to disguise nothing of its admirable symmetry; the graceful folds, not dis-torted by the Gothic invention of a hoop, swept the ground, but with no

enormous train, like that of a tragedy queen. A girdle of black velvet, bor-dered with small pearls, circled her slender waist; her hair was loosely tied up behind with a knot of pale pink rib-bon, and some strings of pearls, of the same size with those bound round her girdle, confined its shining ringlets from fall-ing too low over her forehead and temples.
               THIS dress, in which nothing seemed designed for ornament, but all for use, formed a striking contrast with that of Miss Bellenden's, where flowers, fea-thers, fringes, streamers, flounces, trimmings, formed an assemblage of gay colours and figures, on which, as Young observes,
               "The dazzled eyes could find no rest."
               
                  
MISS Louisa was dressed with more propriety, but she was fine; and her deportment, like her dress, stately.
               MR. Euston's manner was too parti-cular to escape notice—Miss Bellenden reddened—Clara seemed wholly uncon-cerned.
               
                  WHAT an odious old-fashioned song, said the mortified beauty, was that the preaching gentleman gave us; and the music was as bad as the words. I defended both. —Clara was silent; but her eyes, which are great talkers, spoke sufficiently plain.
               
                  I DO not doubt but Clara thinks she has made a conquest, said Miss Bellenden, spitefully; but I am sure nobody will envy her.
               
               'Ah! why,' repeated Clara, look-ing earnestly at her sister,

                     "Will Beauty blunt on fops her fatal dart;
                     "Nor claim the triumph of a letter'd heart?"
                  
               
               'A LETTER'D heart!' exclaimed Miss Bellenden, laughing aloud. For

Heaven's sake! what is a letter'd heart? I protest I will ask Mr. Euston himself; he is so wise, he knows every thing—he shall tell me what a letter'd heart is.
               
               CLARA, anxious that her sister should not expose her ignorance, yet not daring to contradict her, gave me a beseeching look.
               'No, no,' said I, holding her, he will laugh at us.
               
               'AH!' replied Miss Bellenden, I thought it was nonsense. But pray, dear Clara, let us have no more of your rhimes; indeed they make you appear very silly; and you know my mamma cannot endure your reading those books so much.
               
               IT is true, that Clara is fond of quot-ing her beloved poets; but she does it so aptly, her voice is so harmonious,

and her expression so just and beautiful, yet without the least affectation, or even consciousness of her powers of charming in this way, that every one, except her mother and sister, are de-lighted, when she either reads or re-peats.
               MR. Euston, though not a declared lover, has the marks strongly on him. —He scarce ever loses sight of his young charmer. —The ladies are sure to meet him wherever they go; this hap-pens by chance, to be sure, as he would have it appear. —And chance was very favourable to us on an occasion, which I am going to acquaint you with. For, since I must always be writing to you, and the simple tenor of my life affords no great and striking events to interest your curiosity, you must give me leave to entertain you, by selecting from those little occurrences, which every day pro-duces, such as are more worthy your attention.
               
                  
You must know, then, that among the many contrivances we form, to vary our amusements in this place, Clara, who is a little romantic, proposed one, which met with general approbation: — This was, to make an excursion into the woods, which we beheld so beauti-ful in prospect, from the ramparts of the Fort, and to pass an afternoon amidst their shades.
               MRS. Bellenden not opposing our scheme, we set out early after dinner; the young ladies, Mrs. Benson, and myself, attended by Miss Bellenden's maid, and two men-servants, who car-ried a large basket, filled with every thing necessary for tea. Clara soon found out a proper place. —It was a lit-tle valley, surrounded with losty trees. The servants filled the tea-kettle at a spring of delicate water, with which these woods abound; and lighted a fire at a convenient distance, while we seated

ourselves, as well as we could, and be-gan our different employments.
               MISS Bellenden produced her net-ting, Louisa her flower-piece, Mrs. Benson and I our plain-work, and Clara her book. This was a novel, newly published in your world; and because it has uncommon merit, I suppose you have read it. Mr. Euston presented it to Clara; and told us, that Cecilia is the performance of a young lady, whose elegant genius is generally admired.
               MANY of the incidents in this very sensible novel are extremely affecting, and made me weep like a child. I am not ashamed to own, that I have been much moved by such agreeable fictions; and that it was not for real evils 1 shed tears, but the ingenious fancies of an-other person, that excited these strong emotions. This has been called a ty-rannical power, which the senses usurp over reason; and proves, that the

course of their conversation, informed her, that even among these wilds some inhabitants were to be found, who lived there secluded from all converse with their species, except, sometimes, a strag-gling Indian or two would stumble, by chance, upon their dwellings in the la-byrinth of the woods. They subsisted, he said, upon the milk of their cows, some game, when they were able to catch it, and the spontaneous fruits of the earth.
                  OUR curiosity was strongly excited by this account; we were impatient to see these persons, whose manners, we sup-posed, must be as savage as their way of life.
                  THE skipper attended us on shore. — And Mrs. Bellenden, as lively and en-terprising as the youngest of us, walked the wild, fearless and untired; but no human creature could we see; and, after traversing many a rugged path, and

neighbourhood of the imagination is extremely contagious to the intellectual part.
               CLARA was permitted by Miss Bel-lenden to read to us, while our tea was preparing.
               IN the midst of this pleasing entertain-ment, we were alarmed with a hideous noise, which, to our terrified imagina-tion seemed like the howling of wild beasts. Miss Bellenden screamed aloud, her sisters echoed her cries, and clung round Mrs. Benson and me, hiding their faces in our bosoms. We were half dead with fear ourselves, yet en-deavoured to comfort the young ladies.
               'THESE are Indians, Madam,' said one of the men-servants to me; and by their shouting I imagine they are drunk. They will be upon us, pre-sently, I suppose. For Heaven's sake! do not discover any signs of fear; you will enrage them if you do.
               
               
                  
I HAD been told this before; and therefore earnestly recommended it to our young friends, to appear as com-posed as possible.
               THEY had just raised their heads, and dried their eyes, when three savages bolted out of the wood, and presented their hideous figures to our eyes. As soon as they perceived us, they set up a frightful yell, and stood still, gaz-ing on us with fixed attention.
               LOUISA and Clara, not with standing all their efforts to appear calm, even sobbed with the violence of their emo-tions. Miss Bellenden, though pale and trembling, adjusted her hair, and drew herself up, with an air that shewed her consciousness of her charms. Such is the force of habit, that even in this moment of terror, her thoughts were not wholly diverted from their usual course, and the desire of charming was always uppermost.
               
                  
THE two men-servants took no notice of the savage intruders, but appeared to be very busy about the tea; and Mrs. Benson, very complaisantly, presented them with some cakes, which they ac-cepted with a kind of surly satisfaction. She then offered them some tea; they tasted it, and returned the cups, shaking their heads; and made signs which we did not understand; but one of the foot-men told us they wanted rum.
               I BID him make them comprehend, that we had not any; at which they looked displeased, and talked to each other. It appeared to us, that they supposed we had some of this darling liquor, and would not part with any to them; and this thought encreased our apprehensions; besides, we heard one of our servants say, in a whisper to his companion, They are deadly drunk, I am afraid they will be mischie-vous.
               
               
                  
WE knew not what to do—to stay was dreadful—and if we offered to go, it was probable they would hinder us. However, Mrs. Benson, in order to sound their intentions, bid the servants put up the tea equipage in the bas-ket.
               THE Indians looked angry at this mo-tion; and one of them, moving from the place where they had both, till now, stood like statues, kicked the bas-ket with his foot, and threw it down, seeming mightily pleased with the crash of the china.
               THE young ladies, no longer able to restrain their fears, screamed aloud. The Indians looked at them with a fierce and menacing air, and moved towards us—We gave ourselves over for lost.— When, to our inexpressible joy, Mr. Euston appeared, brought thither by Miss Bellenden's maid, whom we had

not missed; and who, upon the first ap-pearance of the Indians, left us; and ran towards the Fort, in order to pro-cure some assistance, if necessary.
               MR. Euston, whom the screams he had heard very much alarmed, ap-proached us with great anxiety in his looks. He addressed his enquiries in general, but his eyes were almost always turned upon Clara. Finding, by our answers, that the savages had behaved peaceably enough, he entered into some conversation with them, in their own language; after which he informed us that these Indians were stragglers from a large party of their friends, a tribe of the Iroquois Indians, who had come down the river to celebrate one of their festivals, in the neighbourhood of Al-bany. He told us, we had nothing to fear, those nations being our good al-lies; that when they were intoxicated with liquor, they were apt to be trouble-some;

but if they had known who we were, they would have behaved with more civility.
               WE soon found, by their altered looks and manners, that Mr. Euston had given them some information con-cerning us. They gathered up the fragments of the china they had broke, and gazed on them with wishing eyes; but did not offer to take any, till Mrs. Benson made signs to them, that they might have them; this present seemed very acceptable; and finding that we were preparing to go, they marched before us, officiously clearing our path from the underwood and broken boughs that obstructed our walk. They accom-panied us to the gates of the Fort, and then took leave of us, with many tokens of reverence and respect.
               WE had now so effectually overcome our fears, that when Mr. Euston pro-posed our going the next day to visit

the Indians little camp, we eagerly ac-cepted it. The Colonel, however, chose to be of the party; this drew in Mrs. Bellenden, and Mr. Neville, and all the officers that were not upon duty, attended us; which, with some ser-vants, made up a large train.
               THE Indians were assembled in a little plain; a great number of huts might be seen among the trees. These huts consisted of three poles, covered on the top with the bark of trees, and lined with their branches, to keep out the sun. The women and children sat at the entrance of the huts. — Their hus-bands and fathers lay indolently along within, smoaking or drinking.
               THE young men were differently em-ployed; some in dancing, others in shooting at a mark with their arrows, and not a few busy in preparing the feast.
               
                  
SEVERAL large kettles, full of veni-son, were suspended by a rope, fastened to two trees at a convenient distance, between which a large fire was kindled. As soon as our company appeared, they instantly quitted their sports and em-ployments, and crouding together, formed a circle, and continued gazing on us in a profound silence.
               MR. Euston approached them, and pointing to Colonel Bellenden, told them who he was. The Indians, con-sidering this visit from the great chief, as they called him, as a high honour, prepared, in token of respect, to enter-tain him with a dance. They kindled a large fire in the midst of the plain, threw their mantles over their shoulders, each holding up a large knife in one hand, they danced round the fire in a ring, their feet keeping time to a slow and barbarous strain, and their eyes fixed on the ground. This ceremony, which we thought very frightful, but

with which we affected to appear ex-tremely pleased, lasted half an hour.
               AS soon as the Indians had finished their dance, they resumed their former sports, and we mixed among the wo-men, some of whom were tolerably handsome. We took notice of the children; and were delighted to hear the women speak, though we could not understand them, the tone of their voices was so exquisitely sweet and har-monious.
               WHILE we were ranging from hut to hut, Miss Bellenden observed two young Indians at a distance, leaning against a tree with a discontented air. — Their figures were pleasing, and their dress mighty smart; their heads were adorned with feathers; their ears loaded with strings of wampum, and their mantles trimmed with several rows of tinsel lace. These young men had neither joined the dance, nor mixed in any of

the sports. Curious to know the cause of their exclusion, we went up to them; and Mr. Euston asked them, Why they continued apart from the rest?
               WITHOUT changing their posture, and scarce raising their eyes to look on us, they told him, that not being of the party, they had no right to eat, and therefore had no inclination to dance.
               WE now searched our pockets for some trifles, to present to these poor ne-glected young savages. One of us pro-duced a small pen-knife, another a lit-tle snuff-box, Miss Bellenden made an offering of her pocket-glass, and Louisa gave a knot of ribbons; Clara blushed, because she could find nothing in her pocket but her Pastor Fido, which, as she was now studying Italian with great application, she always carried about her; not willing, however, to appear less liberal than the rest of the com-pany,

climbing up many a steep ascent, we were upon the point of giving over our fruitless search, when we heard the tinkling of a bell; we followed the found, and presently discovered a cow, paceing slowly along a winding path in the woods, which, we supposed, led to some habitation.
                  WE pursued her tract, and in a few moments came to a delightful spot, en-tirely cleared of under-wood, shaded with trees of a most beautiful foliage, with flowering shrubs between, and a luxurious growth of honeysuckles twin-ing round their trunks. A spring of the clearest water ran meandering amongst their roots, and meeting with a hol-low, which seemed to have been a little assisted by art, formed a bason that sup-plied the necessities of the family.
                  AT a small distance stood an oven built of clay; a large platter, formed of the same materials, hardened in the

she presented her cambric pocket handkerchief with a bashful air, which the Indian who received it immediately tore in two, tying a piece round each arm. We lest them extremely de-lighted with our civility, and returned to the Fort. Adieu, my dear Maria, I must close my letter here — A sloop is this instant going off for New-York, and will take my packet.
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXVIII. MRS. BENSON TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  MADAM,
               
               IT shall never be laid to my charge that you speak of me favourably, and that I hear of it without gratitude; a good opinion lays one under an obli-gation from whomsoever it comes; but when judgment like yours com-mends, not to be vain would be to be above human frailty. He who said Socrates was prouder of one word spoke by the oracle in his favour, than of all the praises the worlds bestowed upon him, speaks my sentiments. In return for your making me vain, Ma-dam,

which, the cause considered, I can scarce allow to be a fault, I will make you happy by informing you, that your valued and amiable friend is a mother, and has given us a lovely boy, who is called after a young gentleman, whom we hope has been for some time the happiest man in the world.
               I WRITE this by Mrs. Neville's bed-side, who is, with some little alteration of the old phrase on this occasion, bet-ter than could be expected.
               To explain this I must tell you, that when the affair was all over, the lady in bed, and in a sweet sleep, I retired to take some rest, having been up the whole night; but was soon waked by a loud and confused noise of many tongues speaking all at once. Among these I distinguished Mr. Neville's, who by the oaths he threw out in quick suc-cession, I understood to be in a violent rage.
               
                  
ALARMED and confounded at a cla-mour so preposterous at such a time, I flew down stairs: at the entrance of Mrs. Neville's chamber I met Mr. Ne-ville, who seizing my arm with a dreadful gripe, exclaimed— Oh! Ma-dam, come in, see what these Dutch devils have done, —they have killed my wife!
               
               I ENTERED the room, trembling, and saw one part of it newly scoured, and streams of water running over the other, which issued from a large pail that had been overturned.
               While Mr. Neville continued curs-ing and raving at the nurse, who, being entitled by her age and her wealth to wear a forehead cloth, a distinction which the matrons here are extremely fond of, considered herself as highly af-fronted by his behaviour. I enquired of Fanny, who stood by in great agi-tation,

the meaning of the strange ap-pearances I beheld.
               SHE told me the nurse, as soon as I was retired, had called up the house-maid, and ordered the room to be scoured. I remonstrated against it in vain, pursued Fanny, weeping, and said it would kill my lady—that it was not the custom in our country. But finding that I could not prevail, I called my master, who was so shocked at their having wetted the room, which he said would kill his wife with cold, that he kicked down the pail in a rage, and set it all afloat as you see.
               
               I ORDERED a large fire to be made in the room; and, collecting all the carpets in the house, laid them one upon another on the floor. Mrs. Ne-ville was anxious only for her child. I opposed very bad arguments to her rea-sonable fears, but it was absolutely ne-cessary

to quiet her mind; as for Mr. Neville, he continued to rail and swear.
               
                  DID you ever hear of such a savage custom? said he; what! scour the chamber of a lying-in woman!
               
               'THE greatest mischief,' I replied, is likely to happen from the pail of water that was thrown down.
               
               'AYE,' said he, that was unfortu-nate, to be sure; but it was very na-tural for me to be in, a passion you know, when my wife's life was endan-gered by that old Dutch woman's ab-surdity.
               
               To persuade Mr. Neville that he can ever be wrong is a talk no human un-derstanding is equal to. I suffered him therefore to march off in triumph, at having silenced me with so complete a defence, and took care to prevent any

future blunders of the nurse, who only followed the custom of her country, to which we were strangers, and therefore could not guard against.
               MRS. Neville and the child are per-fectly well. She makes an admirable nurse, and loses none of her delicacy by doing the duty of a mother. This little stranger has been received with great joy by the father, who having now an heir to his uncle's estate, is not appre-hensive of its going out of his line.
               MRS. Neville has given you an ac-count, Madam, of our adventure in the woods with the two drunken savages; her situation made me tremble for the consequences of the fright she must ne-cessarily have been in, which, however, she concealed so well, as to make me tolerably easy; but our little boy bears under his left breast the distinct mark of a bow and arrow, the arms born by one

of these savages. This power of the imagination has been denied with such force of argument by some learned writers, that nothing but the evidence of my own eyes could force my assent to the possibility of it.
               A TROUBLESOME affair has fallen out within these few days, which I have been fortunate enough to conceal from my friend, whose keenness of observa-tion it is difficult to elude.
               MR. Neville and Lieutenant Blood had a dispute about some trifle, which was managed with such heat on both sides as to produce a quarrel; and a challenge ensued on the part of Mr. Neville. The day, the hour, and the place of meeting were all settled, but happily the colonel was informed of the design time enough to prevent it, and put them both under an arrest.
               
                  
THE only difficulty now was to recon-cile them, that nothing of the kind might be apprehended for the future. The colonel undertook Mr. Blood, who on such occasions, being endowed with that docility with which the valiant re-proach the wife, was prevailed upon by his commander's arguments, enforced by his authority, to lay aside his wrath. I had more trouble with Mr. Neville, who is passionate and obstinate, but I carried my point at last, by reasons partly serious, partly jesting.
               'IF Heaven,' said I, had given you three or four lives, you might at any time venture one, and sometimes, in a fit of valour, let one go, knowing you have another in store; but to be pro-digal in poverty, and to be careless of the only head you have, when no art can make you a new one, is unreason-able to the last degree. Mr. Neville at length agreed to let the Colonel set-tle

the difference; and all was made up over a bottle of wine at the Fort.
               I HAVE now, Madam, acquainted you with every thing that has passed here worthy your notice; and have nothing to add, but that I am with the greatest esteem and respect, your obedient ser-vant,
               
                  C. BENSON.
               
            
            
               

sun, stood upon the top, full of wild pigeons, of which, in this season of the year, it seems there is great plenty; they had been baked in the oven, which was preparing a second dish to furnish out the repast, consisting of peaches, which grow wild in such plenty, that they feed their hogs with them all over this country.
                  WE now ventured to enter the cot-tage; the sides of which were of clay, supported on the out-side by thick branches of trees strongly fastened to-gether, the roof thatched very firmly, and the chimney very well contrived, and formed of bricks, which seemed to have been the work of the same archi-tect.
                  I TOOK notice, that the fire-place was of an enormous size; the skipper said, not larger than was needful. The winters here are intensely cold, it seems; and the inhabitants of this cottage can,

               LETTER XXXIX. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               I REMEMBER I once told you, my dear Maria, that I was resolved to turn philosopher, and so be revenged on Fortune for all her cruelties to me. I am now called to a new trial, which yet is not so severe as some I have al-ready sustained; but you, who on all occasions feel for me, perhaps, more than I do for myself, will think it suffi-ciently mortifying.
               I HAD just began to taste something like happiness. —My dear little boy re-pays my care, with every advantage a fond mother can desire, — health, beauty, sweetness of temper, and early reason;

a wise and faithful friend at home; some agreeable companions abroad; and a growing taste for the climate, and the wild yet not unpleasing scenes around me.
               HOW truly has it been said, that the limits of our joy is but the absence of some degree of sorrow. Within these few days Mr. Neville has informed me, that he has obtained a promise of Colonel Bellenden, to be appointed to the com-mand of a fort in Schonectady.
               THIS is a little town, distant about thirty miles from Albany, inhabited only by some Dutch traders. Seldom visited by any strangers, but Indians, who straggle hither, not only from the five nations of the Iroquois, our allies, but the savages of Canada, and other barbarous nations.
               WHETHER impelled by that restlessness of temper, which makes every change,

even for the worse, desireable; or the strange pride, of being greatest where all is little, I know not, but Mr. Ne-ville is fixed in his resolution; and when he acquainted me with the approaching change in my situation, it was not to hear my opinion, to ask my advice, or to sooth me into a consent, but barely to signify his will to me; to which I offered no opposition, well knowing that it would produce no other effect, but ill humour, and unjust reproach.
               WHEN Mr. Neville left me, after this unwelcome communication, Mrs. Ben-son, alarmed at the fullenness of his as-pect as he passed by her, came eagerly to my chamber, to enquire the cause of his apparent dissatisfaction; when I told her what had passed, the paused for a few moments, casting on me now and then a soft and sympathising look — then recollecting herself, she took my hand, which she tenderly prest—
               
                  
'My dear child,' said the, of evils; the least is the best. Your days will pass less unhappily in this, I will sup-pose, wild solitude, than they can possibly do here; though here you have some agreeable society, and some elegant amusements. Mr. Neville's discontent would embitter all; nor would you be free from a little self-accusation, although you could carry your point, if it cannot be done with-out violating that obedience which you have solemnly vowed at the al-tar.
               
               'ALL the evil in the world, my dear,' pursued she, consists, as I have some-where read, in the disagreement be-tween the object and the appetite; as when a person has what he desires not, or desires what he has nor, or desires amiss. He that composes his spirit to the present accident, hath a variety of instances for his virtue, but none to

trouble him; because his desires are not at war with his present fortune. You have heard the philosopher, went she on, smiling, 'now hear the friend.
               
                  DOUBT not but I will follow you to this savage solitude; and we shall be able to strike out amusements, which, as they will depend entirely upon our-selves, will always be within our reach. —We have books, we have music, and ideas I hope, to furnish out an agreeable and profitable conversation. Your little boy will soon be of an age to exercise you in higher cares than those of a tender and diligent nurse. Our judgment is formed by experi-ence; the principles of truth unfold themselves by degrees with the na-tural progress of reason. —That pro-gress, in this sweet plant, you will watch, direct, and improve; and hav-ing no temptations to divert your at-tention from so delightful, so laudable

an employment, you will with the more ease perform the task, which God and nature have assigned you.
               
               IT was thus that this worthy woman reasoned with me, soothed me, and re-conciled my will to a dispensation, which my heart murmured at before; so that when Mrs. Bellenden came to condole with me, upon a separation so un-expected, and offered, if I would consent to it, to manage matters so with the Colonel as to prevent this wild scheme, (as she called it,) of my husband's, taking place, I earnestly intreated her to form no obstacle to his designs, declaring my voluntary acquiescence to them.
               THIS lady is too good a wife to dis-approve of my conduct on this occasion. She promised me to make my banish-ment as tolerable as possible, by a fre-quent intercourse of visits. I smiled, and pointing to the now dreary prospect around us, for winter, which in this

country sets in with a sudden transition from extreme heat to intense cold, had already covered the ground with snow, at least three feet deep. —One pure ex-pance of white meets the dazzled eye, as far as its sight can reach; the branches of the trees, loaded with snow, look like enormous plumes of feathers spangled with gems, formed by the frost. That beautiful river, where we used to see innumerable elegant little hoops, failing to and from New-York, is now become an icy plain, and bears on its frozen bosom deep loaded car-riages, called sledges, drawn by horses, which seem to fly over the glassy sur-face.
               'SEE, Madam,' said I, what a stern appearance Nature has put on; can friendship find a way through those pathless woods, to visit the poor exile at Schonectady?
               
               
                  

                  NEVER doubt it, my dear Mrs. Ne-ville, replied the good lady, those pathless woods shall yet afford us a passage to you, when we need it, but happily that will not be till spring; for Lieutenant G— is not to be relieved till then. This was pleasing news to all, but Mr. Neville, who is impatient to enter upon his new com-mand.
               ALAS! my dear Maria, you can have no conception of the rigor of a North American winter. We have had a fall of snow, which continued three days, which now lies upon the ground, to the depth of five feet, and is frozen so hard that it feels like the solid earth. We are, it seems, to expect no abatement of this extreme rigor these five months; but the constant serenity of a cloudless sky, and the enlivening rays of the sun, increase that cheerfulness which we owe to our now well-braced nerves: but it is cold, intensely cold; I can scarce

keep myself tolerably warm, though I sit by a fire, where half the forest is blazing.
               MRS. Benson looks over my shoulder as I am writing, and tells me, laughing, that metaphor is carried very high—But seriously, although my standish is placed upon the steel hearth, it is with diffi-culty the ink is kept from freezing, and slakes of black ice frequently fall out of my pen upon the paper. — This will ac-count for some of the many blots you meet with.
               I WAS interrupted by a visit from Mr. Euston. He is much altered—Clara's attractions have proved too powerful for his philosophy. He reasons less, though he talks more than he used to do; but all his discourse bears some analogy to the present disposition of his heart; and, whatever be the subject, it leads him insensibly to the object that fills his thoughts. Hitherto he has declared

himself no otherwise, than by assidui-ties, and the silent rhetoric of looks and sighs. But he has a rival, whom he must either supplant, or yield to; and this circumstance will decide the mat-ter.
               WITH this rival I would fain make you acquainted; if I knew how to des-cribe a creature, to whom no distinction can belong for more than ten minutes together. He is every thing and no-thing. —Mrs. Benson says, he is more fool than wise, and more a wag than fool. At the very moment, when he has been talking so much to the pur-pose that you would. pronounce him a sensible young fellow, he throws out something so wretchedly silly, as to de-serve the appellation of a fool. One while the stupid solemnity of his coun-tenance excites a laugh, at another, the archness of his look and satirical smiles, make one afraid of him.
               
                  

with very little labour, supply themselves with plenty of fuel.
                  IN one corner was their bed, com-posed of dry leaves and bear skins. On some rudely fashioned shelves, we saw several large clay vessels full of milk, which had thrown up a very rich cream. We were very desirous of taking some away with us for our tea, but was at a loss what to put it in. —Miss Clara, searching about, found some cocoa-nut shells, which had been sawed in two, and were ranged like tea-cups on a shelf; we filled one of these with cream, which we skimmed with a wooden spoon we saw there; and having deposited some half-crowns and shillings, as payment for what we had taken, were preparing to depart, when the Dutchman, looking at us with a mixture of contempt and sur-prise in his countenance, exclaimed— 'No, no, this must not be' and was sweeping all the money, except one shil-ling, into his hat, when Mrs. Bellen-den
HE is son to the late Governor, and nephew to the Earl of H —, by whose interest he was appointed, third lieutenant to Colonel Bellenden; and came from England to take possession of his new post. He has a fine face, and a figure remarkably elegant; his man-ners are often polite, and often clownish; his address sometimes courtly, and some-times aukward; in a word, he is a per-fect contradiction. But you will be better able to form an idea of him, from a few traits, which my memory furnishes me with for your informa-tion.
               A FEW days after his arrival, being at the Fort, where a large company was assembled, and where the beauty of his person, the elegance of his dress, and the politenes of his behaviour, engaged every ones attention, Miss Bellenden happened to drop her glove; he took it up, and presented it to her with a grace that was infinitely pleasing, entreating

her at the same time to permit him the honour of drawing it on; she smiled and held out her arm, on which, white as it is, a few freckles appeared.
               Mr. C— looked earnestly on it for a minute, then exclaimed—
               
                  HEAVENS! why you are spotted like a toad. She blushed, and frowned. Those persons who were near enough to hear what he said, expressed in their looks the utmost astonishment.
               CLARA, who sat next him, laughed; upon which Mr. C—, finding Miss Bellenden sat sullen and silent, and would not even look at him, turned to her sister, and with the easiest and most gallant air imaginable, entered into a conversation with her full of sprightliness, and of turns, which, if they could not be called witty, were at least very like wit. Clara took occasion to rally him upon the coarse speech he had made to

her sister, but he defended himself with such an arch simplicity, as quite con-founded her.
               COLONEL Bellenden knows not how to treat him; respectable on account of his birth and connexions, he has a cer-tain air of grandeur diffused over his whole person, that keeps contempt at a distance, in spite of all his absurdities.
               ON the day that he was to be pre-sented to the troops, who were drawn up upon the parade, headed by their officers, with colours flying, drums beating, and all the pomp and circum-stance of military ceremonial, he ap-peared, instead of regimentals, in white and silver, and a plume of feathers in his hat without a cockade. The Colonel perceived him before he came to the gates, and hastily ran to prevent his entering, and exposing himself to the derision of the soldiers.
               
                  

                  WHAT is the meaning or your ap-pearing in this dress, Sir, said he, with an indignant frown; Do you not know what is to be done to-day?
               
               
                  WE are to have a ball, Sir; are we not? replied Mr.C—, with an air highly respectful, but not in the least disconcerted. The Colonel was abso-lutely taken in by the steady composure of his looks, and the seeming simplicity of his answer.
               'WHAT strange misapprehension,' said he, is this! Go, Sir, put on your regimentals, and appear in your pro-per character. He then desired Mr. Neville to accompany him, and inform him what was to be done.
               Mr. C— retired, making a low obeisance; and in a short time after-wards returned, dressed en militaire.
               
               
                  
NOTHING could exceed the elegance and dignity of his figure in this dress— there was something so noble in his air, so interesting in his countenance, that every eye beheld him with pleasure.
               THE deep respect with which he re-ceived his pike from the colonel was accompanied with equal dignity; and the grace that appeared in his motions and attitude, when he took his post, drew a kind look of approbation from his benevolent commander. But what was his confusion and disappointment when this young man, forgetting his duty and his station, faint with heat, and fatigued as it should seem with holding his pike, gave it into the hand of a serjeant, who stood nearest him, and quitting his rank, ran towards the ladies, snatched a fan out of Miss Bel-lenden's hand, and began to fan him-self with the utmost composure, amidst the general astonishment his extravagant action occasioned.
               
                  
AT first all eyes were fixed on him with silent wonder; then an ill sup-pressed laugh ran through the ranks; the officers caught the contagion, but quickly recovered themselves, attentive to the motions of the colonel, who for a moment stood gazing on the strange youth with a severe and steady eye; then advancing towards him—
               'Boy,' whispered he to him, a fool's cap and bells would better become you than this respectable dress and manly profession. Then calling Mr. Neville, he spoke to him in a low voice; and turning again to Mr. C—, who by this time had given Miss Bellenden her fan with his usual graceful manner—
               'Go, Sir,' said he, follow this of-ficer, and learn how ill the behaviour of a buffoon sits upon a gentleman and a soldier.
               
               Mr.C— either was, or affected an ex-treme surprise in his looks at this repri-mand

but, silent and submissive, he bowed profoundly low to the colonel, then to the ladies, and went off the pa-rade with Mr. Neville.
               THE business of the day, concluding thus ridiculously, afforded us sufficient matter for discourse. Mr. Neville placed a centinel at the door of Mr. C.'s lodgings, and informed him he was put under an arrest. After some ridiculous enquiries concerning the nature of his offence, and the duration of his confine-ment, he sent his respectful compliments to the commandant; and ordering his servant to bring his flute, Mr. Neville left him entertaining himself very agree-ably.
               COLONEL Bellenden sent for him the next day, and they had a private confe-rence, that lasted near two hours. I sup-pose he softened the colonel by his sub-mission; for he appeared to be received

into some degree of favour. The sol-diers, to a man, are loud in his praise, for he ordered a noble largess to be distributed among them; and they can see no faults in an officer who is so liberal.
               HE met with some mortifications, however, in Mrs. Bellenden's circle that evening. She looked grave upon him; Miss Bellenden treated him with con-tempt — Louisa shunned him — Clara, moved by the natural sweetness of her disposition, took pity on him, and suf-fered him to engross her conversation the whole night. This kindness com-pleted the conquest of his heart; he is become seriously in love with her, and much less extravagant in his behaviour than usual. I can perceive that Mr. Euston is uneasy, notwithstanding his endeavours to conceal it.
               
                  
'OUR new Cymon,' said he to me one day with a forced laugh, improves daily. — 'Not so much,' replied I, as to give him hopes of obtaining his Iphigenia.
               
               'WHY not,' said he, the miracle would not be new, though he were to become a wise man. Love, which has sometimes made a philosopher a fool, may make a fool a philosopher.
               
               THE people of this country have be-gun their winter amusements. Nothing is to be seen on the river but sledges full of happy parties:—these are the only carriages in use in this severe season.
               THERE is an odd custom among the younger and meaner sort, which it is impossible to reconcile with good order and decency.
               A COMPANY of a dozen young Dutch-men, and as many girls, agree to go

out upon a froolick as they call it. These are distributed into six sledges, two couples in a sledge: as they go at a pro-digious rate, they sometimes travel forty and fifty miles in a day, to the differ-ent farm-houses they propose to visit.
               As soon as they appear, all hands are set to work, to provide an entertain-ment for them; and great is the slaughter among the poultry and pigs to furnish out the feast. They sit long at table, and conclude the evening with dancing, for they always carry a fidler along with them.
               WHEN they are disposed to go to rest, the largest room in the house is pre-pared for their reception. They spread before an enormous fire a quantity of mats and carpets, over which they lay feather beds and coverlets. The company lie down in their clothes, and sleep as well as they can, till morning,

observing what he was about, or-dered him, in a peremptory tone, to put it back; which he did, with a sor-rowful look, shrugging up his shoul-ders, and shaking his head at the same time.
                  WE now heard a coarse voice, which, however, seemed to be that of a woman, calling aloud; at which we were a little frightened; but the skipper told us, it was the mistress of the cottage calling her cow by name; we went out to meet her; but the poor creature was in so much astonishment and terror at our ap-pearance, that she seemed ready to fall to the ground.
                  A CHILD about two years old, which she held in her arms, seeing us approach, almost stunned us with its screams; and even the cow, who, obedient to the call of its mistress, was hastening to her, no sooner saw us, than, as if struck with a

when a plentiful breakfast of tea, cream, hot cakes, and hung beef, is provided for them; after which they drive away to their next stage, which is generally at a great distance, where they meet with the same welcome and, equal hos-pitality.
               IN this manner they traverse the country, spending sometimes a week, sometimes a fortnight, in these excur-sions; the farmers, wherever they, chuse to stop, being, by an ancient custom, obliged to receive them, and treat them well.
               I WENT out yesterday for the first time in our new winter carriage. Mrs. Benson, Miss Clara, and Mr. Euston, made up my party, for Mr. Neville was upon guard. We were well wrapped up in furrs, and our feet defended from the piercing cold by several bear-skins, that were laid at the bottom of the sledge.

Happy was it for us that Mr. Euston was with us, for an accident happened that might have had the most danger-ous consequences.
               OUR road lay through the woods: as we flew along, (for so the motion of these vehicles over the frozen snow may be called) suddenly I perceived the two fore paws of an animal upon the lower part of the sledge, on that side where I sat. The driver that instant lashing his horses, the creature by this increased velocity lost his hold: Mr. Euston, at the same moment, seized a loaded horse-pistol, which was carried by the servant who sat behind the carriage, and jumped out. We then perceived our danger. The furious bear, for a bear it was, had followed the sledge, and was come almost near enough to spring upon us, when our gallant friend, opposing himself to its assault, levelled his piece,

and took so sure an aim, as laid the fierce creature weltering in its blood at his feet.
               THE explosion of the gun, repeated by a thousand echoes, the hideous howl-ing of the dying animal, mixed with our screams, filled the wild solitude around us with sounds more dreadful than imagination can conceive. We were by this time at a considerable distance; for our driver did not slacken his pace; and had not the sledge been overturned, passing over the body of a large tree, that lay across the road, which in his terror he did not observe, we should have been out of sight.
               NONE of us received the least hurt by this accident; for the overturning of a sledge is seldom attended with any dan-ger, being open on each side, and hav-ing no top.
               
                  
MR. Euston now came up to us, and anxiously enquired if we were safe. We congratulated him upon his victory; and with the most heart-felt gratitude thanked him for our preservation. Clara said little; but that little was accompa-nied with a look so expressive, as seem-ed to have a powerful effect upon her lover's heart, for he gazed on her for a moment with extreme tenderness, and heard not one word that Mrs. Ben-son and I said to him about his combat.
               AT length he helped us into our car-riage; and, as he was stepping into it himself, Clara grasped my hand eagerly and whispered—'Ah! Madam, he bleeds.'
               'He does indeed,' said I, greatly alarmed, perceiving then, for the first time, that one of his legs was covered with blood. — 'You are hurt, Sir,' said I.
               
                  
'I HAVE got a scratch,' replied he, smiling; the creature made an at-tack upon my leg, but my fire had the good fortune to take place before I received much damage.
               
               'YOU must give us leave, however,' said Mrs. Benson, to bind up your wound with what linen we can col-lect. We all contributed; Clara, who till then had looked pale as death, now blushed excessively as she offered her help. Mr. Euston suffered us to do as we pleased— his whole at-tention was fixed upon my amiable young friend. We ordered the driver to make what haste he could back to the Fort, where his wound was dressed by the surgeon of the garrison, who eased us of our fears by declaring that it was not in the least dangerous.
               THE colonel and his lady were full of acknowledgments to this gentleman

for his gallant defence of us; and in-deed we had all reason to be grateful; for had he not by springing out of the sledge exposed himself singly to the assault of the ferocious animal, it is uncertain which of us might have been seized upon.
               SUCH accidents as this, however, are very rare so near any of the settlements, and in the day too. But love, Mrs. Benson says, laughing, was determin-ed to favour so respectable a votary, by affording him an opportunity of shewing how well he deserved the pre-ference which Clara, notwithstanding all her bashfulness and reserve, seems disposed to give him over his young rival. But this rival is countenanced by Mrs. Bellenden, who, seduced by the splendour of his family, and the large fortune he is likely to inherit, is willing to overlook all his extravagan-cies. The colonel, I believe, if left to his own judgment, would favour Mr.

Euston, and prefer an easy indepen-dence for his daughter, with a man of his character, to the superior advantages of birth and fortune, clogged with the absurdities of Mr. C—.
               I HEARD him speak highly in his praise one day to Mrs. Bellenden, who does not seem to relish his conversation.
               
                  WHAT was formerly said of a great man, said he, to whom I had the honour to be known, may be very well applied to Mr. Euston. As nature has given him the good qua-lities that cannot be acquired by study, so his own study hath procured him all the good qualities that are not the gifts of nature. — This was a fine eulogium, my dear Maria; and I took care the worthy man should not be ignorant of it.
               I HAVE a very pretty letter from young Mansel, with one enclosed from

his mother, full of the most affection-ate acknowledgments for my kindness to her son. She has sent me some very valuable presents, which prove how much her grateful disposition has over-rated the little services I was able to do the amiable youth she is so justly fond of.
               COLONEL Bellenden sends for my letter to enclose in his packet, which is this moment setting out for New-York. Some ships are expected to sail from thence in a few days. Adieu, then, my dear Maria; my ever loved, my ever valued friend, Adieu!
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XL. MRS. NEVILLE TO MRS. HARLEY.
               I WAS almost reduced to despair, my dear Maria, when I heard that seve-ral ships were come from England; and after waiting three weeks, in anxious expectation, no letter from you appeared. But oneThis Letter does not appear. has now come to comfort me; and that I got it at length, after so long a delay, I owe to the remorse of a man unknown, who being but half wicked, contented himself with only opening it, but would not by any means that I should lose it.
               
                  
How do I rejoice, that all your little difficulties are over, and that you have been for some months the happy wife of the worthiest and most amiable young man in the world.
               I LOVE YOU dearly, for the matronly style in which you make your enquiries after my little boy; and I do not think I need offer you any apology for enter-taining you with nursery tales—of the perilous adventures we have atchieved against the small-pox, measles, cutting of teeth, and other rocks and quick-fands, to which the poor little bark of infancy is exposed. And I have no doubt but you will believe me, when I tell you, that my Edward is very hand-some, surprisingly witty, and is the most agreeable companion in the world. I pass the greatest part of my time with him, and never think the time so passed is tedious.
               
                  

panic likewise, it turned about, and trotted back into the woods.
                  IT was impossible to help laugh-ing at the general consternation our appearance had occasioned. We would fain have entered into some conversation with the good woman, but, besides that she did not understand a word of English, and we could not talk Dutch, when we offered to go near her, she would draw back a few paces in evident terror.
                  OUR conductor having spoke to her a few minutes in Dutch, she seemed better reconciled to us, and paid her respects often, in somewhat between a bow and a curtsey. We shewed her the cream we had taken, and pointed to the money we had left in return for it; to which we added something more; and observing that the poor woman was wretchedly clothed, and that the in-fant
BUT all is hurry and bustle now in Albany; the town is full of strangers of fashion; nothing but balls and en-tertainments at the fort. The Gover-nor is soon expected here, in order to meet in congress our good allies, the Iroquois, and pay them the usual sub-sidies, in blankets, hatchets, iron-ket-tles, glass jewels, and the like; a ce-remony which is renewed every third year.
               GREAT numbers of these Indians are already arrived. Already we behold a large town rising in a plain, behind the fort, consisting of houses made of branches of trees, interwoven with each other, and fastened to a number of stakes. These people subsist upon the produce of hunting, fishing, and some sponta-neous fruits. We sometimes visit the women and children in their huts, and make them little presents; but we never go but in large companies, and well at-tended;

for most of the men have a sa-vage fierceness in their looks, that is very terrible, though no real danger is to be apprehended.
               MRS. Benson and I are in great, af-fliction —Mr. Euston has left Albany, and will soon leave the whole province, as he proposes to return to England this summer. It is no difficult matter to perceive, that he has left his heart be-hind him; and although he pleaded pressing affairs, which demanded his presence at home, yet it is certain, that the ill success of his passion for Clara, is the true cause of his sudden departure.
               I LEARN, from my young friend, that he had, in the most respectful manner imaginable, solicited Mrs. Bellenden to favour his suit, and procure the Colo-nel's consent; giving such an account of his family, his fortune, and character, which, as they knew to be true, by the

testimony of the first persons in the pro-vince, they could form no reasonable objection to.
               MRS. Bellenden, however, received his proposals with great coldness, though with her usual politeness; and being pressed for a decisive answer, frankly owned, she had other views for Miss Clara, and begged he would desist from all future pretensions to her. He bowed, was silent, and from that mo-ment avoided all occasions of entertain-ing the young lady particularly.
               THE evening before he left Albany he spent with me; and notwithstanding an apparent depression of spirits, his conversation was so agreeable and in-structive, as to fill me with the deepest regret for the loss of it.
               I WAS at the fort the next morning, when he came to take leave of the fa-mily.

Miss Bellenden, when she saw him enter the room, whispered me ex-ultingly—
               'THANK Heaven! the Preacher, (so she always calls him) is going to leave us.
               
               THE Colonel pressed his hand affec-tionately, and expressed much concern at his leaving Albany; Mrs. Bellenden said the civilist things in the world upon the occasion. He addressed himself to Miss Bellenden and Louisa, with an easy po-lite air; but his compliment to Clara was confused, inarticulate, and accom-panied with evident emotion.
               SHE curtsied low, with an air of deep respect, without once raising her eyes, or uttering a word. As soon as he was gone, she withdrew, and was followed by a sarcastic laugh from her eldest sister, who is very angry that her triumphs are lessened, by the con-quests

made by this little girl, who possesses the power of pleasing in a higher degree than any one I ever saw.
               MR. C— is more pert than ever since the departure of Mr. Euston, in whose company he had sensibility enough to appear awed and abashed. Mrs. Bellenden is continually giving him les-sons of decorum, and he promises to practice them all, in hopes of pleasing Miss Clara, whose coldness and reserve to him are increased since the absence of his rival. He has made a formal ap-plication to the Colonel for his consent to address his youngest daughter; and was told, that he must first procure the appro-bation of his friends. This he immedi-ately set about, by writing to the Go-vernor, under whose direction he is placed, intreating him to propose the affair to his mother, and the Earl of H—, his uncle.
               
                  
THE Governor has taken no other notice of his request, than to send or-ders for his leaving Albany immediately, and returning to New-York.
               IN his Excellency's letter to the Co-lonel, upon this occasion, he hints at the reason of his sudden order. The Colo-nel answered with that noble frankness which marks his character; and gave him an account of the young man's ap-plication, and the answer he had thought proper to give him; treating the mat-ter, however, in so careless a manner, as gave him to understand, that he had scarce considered it as meriting any serious attention.
               MRS. Bellenden charges the Gover-nor with unpoliteness on this occasion, and want of due respect to her husband; whose birth, she hints, is equal if not superior to that of the Governor; al-though he holds but the second rank in the province.
               
                  
IT is certain, that the immediate or-der he sent for the young man's leaving Albany, seemed suggested by a very unnecessary caution, if we consider the noble principles which influence all the actions, of Colonel Bellenden. His ge-nerous character could not be unknown to the Governor; and Mrs. Bellenden is, possibly, not much in the wrong, when she insinuates, that his extreme caution was the result of a thorough ac-quaintance with his own heart, which would not suffer him to be scrupulous, if an advantageous offer for one of his daughters was made him.
               WHEN Mr. C— received the Governor's letter, he flew to the Fort, and entered Mrs. Bellenden's apartment with it open in his hand. She was be-ginning to condole with the disappointed lover, when he interrupted her by ex-claiming, Was there ever any thing so mortifying, Madam? here am I commanded to return to New-York;

and so I shall lose the fine sight you will have here soon. This meeting with the Indians must needs be very enter-taining, and would have afforded me something to talk of, when I returned to England. I never will forgive the Governor for playing me this trick.
               
               MRS. Bellenden, amazed and con-founded at this new absurdity, looked at him for a moment with great con-tempt.
               'I KNOW not,' said she, at last, whe-ther you will have any thing to talk of when you return to England, but I am sure, whoever has seen and con-versed with you, will have something to talk of as long as they live.
               
               HE bowed with the most satisfied air imaginable; then begged permission to wait upon Miss Clara.
               
                  

                  WHY, what have you to say to her, Sir? said Mrs. Bellenden.
               'SAY to her, Madam!' replied he, why she has heard, I suppose, that I am ordered back to New-York.
               
               'AND what then?' said Mrs. Bel-lenden.
               'WHAT then, Madam!' repeated he, staring at her with signs of surprise.—
               'THIS order does not affect her,' re-sumed the lady, 
                     she will not lose the fine sight.—She smiled.—The youth looked a little disconcerted.
               'To be plain with you, Mr. C—,' pursued she, Clara has received orders from her father, to see you no more. When your relations think proper to make any proposals to Mr. Bellenden, it will then be time enough to consi-der

whether we will accept them or not.
               
               SOME company coming in, prevented any further discourse upon the subject. Mr. C— being to set out that af-ternoon, Mrs. Bellenden invited him to dinner; and as I was taking leave of her, she followed me to the door of her apartment, and, in a whisper, desired me to take Clara home with me, and to tell her, she was permitted to pass the day at my house. This offer was highly acceptable, both to the young lady and myself. The ridiculous character of her lover afforded us great diversion; and I could perceive she was in transports at being thus freed from his addresses.
               MRS. Bellenden has since told me, that Mr. C— had not the least ap-pearance of a despairing lover all dinner time, where he eat very heartily, and talked a great deal of nothing, as usual.
               
                  

was more than half naked, we col-lected our cambrick pocket-handker-chiefs together, and even added our aprons, and gave her.
                  SHE received our gifts with strong expressions of gratitude, and accom-panied us part of our way to the boat, often calling on her husband, who, how-ever, did not appear, and who was pro-bably not within hearing.
                  THE condition of these poor people seems to be bad; and I do not find that they receive much relief from the wealthy owners of the rich plantati-ons, which are in the neighbourhood of these high lands. The many that need, and the many that deny pity, make up the bulk of mankind.
               
               
                  
                     Albany.
                  
                  OUR navigation down this delightful river lasted eight days; it is true, we
THIS young man's volubility is really surprising. The reason Hudibras gives, why those who talk on trifles speak with the greatest fluency, is, that the tongue is like a race-horse, which runs the fas-ter the less weight it carries; and Mr. C— never fails to distance all his opponents.
               BUT scarce was the cloth removed, and the servants retired, when suddenly starting up, he, with a melancholy ear-nestness in his looks, begged the Colo-nel to give him audience for a few mo-ments in his closet—the Colonel com-plied. As soon as they were entered, he shut the door, and falling down upon his knees, with his hands clasped, and tears in his eyes, he implored the Colo-nel to give his consent, that the chap-lain might marry hirn to Miss Clara, be-fore he went away. The Colonel en-deavoured to raise him, and smiling, said, he asked a thing which his honour would not permit him to grant. But

to get rid of his importunities, told him, that if my Lord H— would write to him, and give his free consent to his marriage with his daughter, he should have liberty to see her; but as her free consent was no less necessary, he must next endeavour to gain that.
               THE young man, as if all difficulties were now removed, rose up in a trans-port, kissed his hand, and returning to the room where he had left Mrs. Bel-lenden and her two daughters, took leave of them very politely; the Colo-nel accompanying him to the water-side, where he staid till he saw him em-bark, on board the sloop that waited for him.
               YESTERDAY the arrival of the Gover-nor was announced, by the firing of the cannon of the Fort. The river was covered with the sloops that carried his train, which was increased by a crowd of persons, whom curiosity induced to

join them. Mrs. Bellenden took me in her coach to the water-side, to see the manner of his reception. His Excel-lency had reason to be pleased with Co-lonel Bellenden's attention on this oc-casion; he had never been welcomed, it was said, with equal distinction. I was struck with this circumstance, so much to the honour of our commandant. Mrs. Bellenden and her daughters were in raptures, when the Colonel, at the head of the troops, saluted the Governor as he passed. This ceremony, which is in itself very graceful, was performed by the Colonel with peculiar elegance, to which the dignity of his person and air greatly contributed.
               THE Governor was attended by an immense crowd, to the house that had been provided for him; for he absolutely refused to accept of an apartment in the Fort, for fear of incommoding the fa-mily. He took notice to those about him, of the particularly honourable re-ception,

Colonel Bellenden had given him. And that he might not be out-done in generosity, took the very extra-ordinary resolution of paying him a visit that same evening; accordingly, he slipped away from the obsequious crowd, and attended only by five or six gentlemen of his train, took his way on foot to the Fort.
               I WAS walking with the ladies upon the ramparts, and the Colonel had just joined us, when the centinels at the gate, sent to inform him, that the Go-vernor was coming up the Fort-hill.
               THE Colonel immediately ordered the guard to turn out to receive him; but Mr. Blood, the lieutenant who mounted guard that day, was not to be found.
               COLONEL Bellenden, who without consi-dering his rank, thought only of paying the Governor the accustomed honours,

performed the duty of a lieutenant upon guard, headed the men himself, and saluted the Governor as he entered the gates.
               MR. Mountague, surprised, ran up to him with some precipitation; and laying hold of his pike, which he him-self gave into the hands of a soldier, em-braced him with the warmest expressi-ons of kindness and respect, and arm in arm they walked together into the house; where the Colonel introduced him to his wife and family.
               THE Governor, who is a very well bred man, soon dispersed, by the po-liteness of his compliments, the cloud upon Mrs. Bellenden's brow, who re-tained some resentment in her heart against him, for the supposed slight they had received on Mr. C—'s account. His Excellency looked earnestly at Clara, and singling her out, entered into some conversation with her. He

afterwards said, to a gentleman in his company, who repeated it to Mr. Ne-ville, that he was surprised C—, who was a blockhead, had taste enough to fall in love with her.
               HE was willing, as it should seem, to prove that he did not condemn his taste; for when Mr. Blood, by the Colonel's orders, went to receive the watch-word from the Governor, the gallant old gen-tleman gave this young lady's name for the word; and, by his directions, the lieutenant repeated it aloud to the Colo-nel, before all the company, saying—
               'SIR, the word is—Clara.'
               THIS piece of gallantry produced different effects on the company; Mrs. Bellenden looked pleased, Miss Bellen-den bit her lips almost through with spite, Clara blushed, all were surprised, but Mr. Blood thought proper to as-sume a disapproving sneer.
               
                  
'YOUR Excellency,' said the Colo-nel, has paid a dangerous compliment to the ladies; remember, it was a woman that betrayed the capitol.
               
               'AYE,' replied Mr. Mountague, wiih a side glance at Mr. Blood, whose impertinent looks had not escaped his notice, but it was a goose that saved it—You may depend upon your lieu-tenant, I suppose, Colonel?
               
               MR. Blood left the room, with fury in his countenance; and afterwards de-clared to Mr. Neville, that if Mr. Montague had not been commander in chief, he would have challenged him, for calling him, by implication, a goose. He continues violently out of humour, blusters, and talks big.
               MRS. Benson diverts herself, and every one else, with the singularities of this doughty lieutenant. The whole man, says she, as a wit once ob-served

of such another Drawcansir, con-sists only of a pair of black menacing brows, and two fierce mustachios; and, therefore, utterly to defeat him, there needs only three or four clips of a pair of scissars. It is not possible to be afraid of him in earnest, for all his big looks. She thinks he hath choler enough, but does not believe he has any heart. She reckons him in the number of beasts that are skittish and rusty, but not furi-ous and dangerous. The Colonel told her, he had been often in the field. I believe it, she replied, but then it has been rather to feed than to fight.
               
               
                  I WAS present to-day at the first meeting between the Governor and the chiefs of the Indian tribes. The assem-bly was held in a large hall. —The Go-vernor sat in state, attended by all the officers and the gentlemen of his train; our commandant sat on his right hand;

the mayor, and the other magistrates, on his left. The Indian chiefs, who were placed opposite to him, were vener-able old men; they spoke in turn by their interpreter, and delivered them-selves gracefully enough. I regretted that I did not uhderstand their language; I am told it is highly figurative. Their tone of voice is soft and agreeable; and their passions, as it should seem, very obe-dient; for although many matters were discussed, which included complaints, reproaches, and even threats, yet all was uttered with great gravity and com-posure.
                  THE next day, the Governor gave them his answer. All was amicably settled; and on the third day, the go-vernment's presents, to the amount of five hundred pounds, were distributed among the tribes. The ceremony con-cluded with one of their war dances, at which none of us women chose to be present.
                  
                     
THEY are now preparing to return home; a circumstance which no one regrets. The rum, which was given them in large quantities, I think, very injudiciously, produces a great many disorders among them, and made them very disagreeable neighbours.
               
               
                  ALBANY is now quite deserted. — The Governor is gone, and has carried away with him all our gaiety. We have lived for these ten days past, in a conti-nual succession of balls, entertainments, and parties of pleasure; but they are over, and have left a melancholy void, which cannot be filled up with our usual simple amusements. Miss Bellenden is fretful, Louisa solemn, and Clara silent and pensive.
                  MY departure from this place, is fixed for next month. —A new source of disquiet among our little society, in

protracted it to this time, by the fre-quent excursions we made on shore. — Some of these I have given you an ac-count of, which, I am afraid, will ap-pear rather tedious; for it is no easy matter to entertain eyes that are not accustomed to fix upon vulgar objects, and to administer pleasure to a mind that is actuated only by lawful passions.
                  THE Colonel was received here with much ceremony: the cannon from the fort was fired; the soldiers, headed by their officers, were drawn up on the beach; the mayor, with the principal citizens, attended his landing, and con-ducted him to the fort, where the com-manding officer always resides.
                  THIS is a regular fortification, situated upon a steep hill, which, overlooks the town, and has within it a large and ele-gant house for the commander, and convenient barracks for the soldiers, with a guard-room, and a handsome

which the absence of Mrs. Benson and myself, will be very sensibly felt, be-cause there are none to fill our places. However, Miss Bellenden will be easily comforted, for she has obtained leave of the Colonel and her mother, to spend three months at New-York: Miss Louisa goes with her. They are to be under the care of the wife of one of the prin-cipal merchants there, who is very de-serving of such a trust.
                  CLARA thinks herself happy, in being indulged in her request of remaining at home; she has lost much of her usual sprightliness; a soft and gentle melan-choly appears in her looks, and runs through all her conversation. It is the opinion of her family, and her friends, that her heart has received a deep, im-pression in favour of Mr. Euston; but this circumstance, which her modesty and reserve have concealed from herself; no one would be indelicate enough to hint to her. His acknowledged merit,

and the respectful passion he expressed for her, might well produce this effect. I believe Mrs. Bellenden now thinks, she was rather too precipitate in rejecting his proposals, since her favourite scheme has not taken place.
                  MR. Euston is actually gone to Eng-land; Clara was present when the Co-lonel mentioned it, as a piece of news he had just heard; every one carefully avoided looking at her. As I sat close to her, I could hear her hem away a sigh; she left the room on some pretence soon af-terwards, and when she returned, no other alteration appeared in her counte-nance, than that her seriousness was a little encreased.
                  MRS. Bellenden, with a view to divert her daughter, as well as to oblige me, has given her leave to be of my party to Schonectady. Mr. Neville proposed this little excursion, in order to take a view of the fort he is to command there, and

to acquire some knowledge of the place, and the inhabitants among whom we are soon to reside.
                  FROM thence we are to go to Fort-Hunter; where we shall have an oppor-tunity of becoming acquainted with the Mohawks, a tribe of the Iroquois, who are converted to Christianity, and have their village, or castle, as they call it, in the neighbourhood of that fort. We reckon upon being absent a week upon this excursion.
                  MRS. Bellenden insists upon having my little boy with her, till my return; he will be attended by Fanny, of whom he is excessively fond, and whose care and tenderness I can depend upon; so that I have nothing to make me uneasy, but a separation, which, however, will be but for a short time. I shall now close this packet, and leave it with the Colonel, that if any opportunity offers, while I am away, of sending it to New-York

it may not be lost. I ever am, my dear Maria, your's most affec-tionately,
               
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XLI. MRS. NEVILLE TO MRS. HARLEY.
               
                  Schonectady.
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               I NEVER go far from home without carrying with me materials for writ-ing, that I may seize every opportunity of conversing with you in idea, at least; an employment which constitutes one of the greatest pleasures of my life.
               WE arrived here, after a very plea-sant journey, early in the evening. Lieutenant Granger came out to meet us, and conducted us to his little for-tress, which we found a very simple sructure. The town, or rather village,

(for so it is in appearance) consists of a small number of houses, built in the Dutch taste, and inhabited only by per-sons who carry on a trade with our In-dian allies. —No language but Dutch is spoke here. There are some planta-tions pleasantly situated, and the country about is romantic and picturesque.
               MRS. Granger is a Dutch woman, a little more polished than her neigh-bours; an advantage which she owes to the conversation and instructions of her husband, who is a civil well bred man. She talks English tolerably well, and gave me all the information I could ex-pect concerning the place, the people, and the manner of living here.
               OBSERVING that I sighed two or three times during her discourse, she told me, that to be sure, it was not so fine a place as Albany, and the people were not so rich, nor lived so grand, but that my husband might save a great

deal of money here, and that you know, said she, is the chief thing to be con-sidered in this world.
               I COULD not help smiling at this re-mark, which she took for a sign that I understood the force of her argument perfectly well.
               I DO not find that I shall be tempted to make any acquaintance here, unless it is with an old lady, of whom she gave me this account; that she is an English woman, the widow of an officer who once commanded here, and whom she has survived near twenty years.
               'WHEN her husband died,' said Mrs. Granger, she resolved never to leave the place, but to die here herself, that she might be buried with him; so she built herself a pretty little house near the skirts of the town, and lives upon her pension and the profits of her negroes work: she has four of them, and they

love her so well, that they think they can never work hard enough for her. But she is a strange sort of a woman, for she will take but half of their earn-ings; the other half she lodges in safe hands, that it may be a provision for them when she dies, when she intends they shall be free.
               
               
                  SHE has other odd fancies too; for when she stands godmother to a child, as soon as it is three years old, she takes it, whether boy or girl, and breeds it up till it is ten years old, teaching it English and French, and writing and accompts, for she is very learned. She is never without one of these god-children in the house with her. My husband thinks it a great favour when she will allow him to visit her, which is but seldom, for she does not love company, and is never without a book in her hand; and every year she has a cargo of them comes from New-York.
               
               
                  
To meet with a person of such a de-scription in this solitary place, is surely a fortunate circumstance. I hope I shall not find her difficult of access, for most eagerly shall I solicit her acquaintance.
               MRS. Benson and Mr. Neville are very busy in projecting alterations and improvements in the house and garden. The security one derives from living in a fortress in this wild country, and among these savage inhabitants, con-tribute not a little to reconcile me to my situation; and, all things considered, my condition will not by the wise be thought bad.
               WE have been here two days. Our hospitable host is very unwilling to part with us, and pressed us much to visit the Falls of Cohas in his company. Accordingly, we set out the next morn-ing in a kind of covered waggon, in which our whole party was very well accommo-dated. We had clear uninterrupted

sunshine, not a cloud appearing above the horizon, and very little wind at all. However, when we came near the Fall, there was a continual drizzling rain, occasioned by the vapours which rose from the water during its fall, and was carried about by the wind, so that our clothes were wetted as if there had been a shower of rain. This cataract, which is in the river Mohawk before it falls into Hudson's river, is said to be very remarkable. Both above and below are solid rocks; the rock there, Mr. Granger told us, is three hundred yards broad. At the fall there is a rock crossways in the river, running every where equally high, and crossing in a straight line with that side that forms the fall: it represents, as it were, a wall towards the other side, which is not quite perpendicular. The heighth of this rock over which the water rolls, ap-pears to be about four-and-twenty yards. We carried a cold collation with us, and dined very comfortably in

apartment for the lieutenant upon duty.
                  MRS. Bellenden had reason to be satisfied with the care and diligence of her servants; who had been sent some weeks before with the baggage. —She found her apartments in very good or-der; and I left her and the young ladies in high spirits, delighted with the new and strange objects around them, and retired to a ready furnished house in the town, which Mr. Neville had taken care to have provided for me.
                  THIS town is worse built than New-York; few of the houses have an elegant appearance on the out-side, but an ex-cessive neatness reigns within. The language, the manners, the dress, all Dutch.
                  DURING the whole time of my resi-dence in New-York, I had never seen any of the savages; but they are often to

a hut, built for the accommodation of travellers, whose curiosity induces them to visit this place; and got home early in the evening, sufficiently fatigued with our journey.
               
                  
                     Fort Hunter.
                  
                  WE reached this place early in the afternoon. The river, which is navi-gable for several miles beyond it, af-forded us a most delightful passage, though in a canoe which was rowed with paddles by four careful Dutchmen, who observed a profound silence all the time. We were often willing to interrupt it, by asking several questions which curiosity suggested, but to no purpose, for they were not disposed to be in the least communicative.
                  THIS frail and simple vessel, which was nothing more than a large tree hol-lowed, at the bottom of which we sat upon mats and bear skins, carried us swiftly up the stream, while on each side our eyes wandered over the wild but

charming scenes of the romantic shores, detatched woods, adding beauty to the tops of the verdant mountains, cast a sweet yet dreadful gloom on either hand; and, assisted by the gentle dashing of the little oars, disposed the mind to no unpleasing melancholy.
                  CLARA, lost in thought, was only roused from her reverie by the shouts of a number of Indians, who were ranged along the shore near, the place where we were to land. Several of them jump-ed officiously into the river, and drew the canoe on shore. Mr. Butler, who loves parade it seems, received the daughter of the commandant with great ceremony. The flag was displayed on the bastion; and the guard drawn up; a great croud of Indians followed us to the gates, and some of the chiefs were permitted to enter, one of whom, in a set speech of several minutes, addressed to Clara, invited us, as we were told by Mr. Butler, to their castle.
                  
                     
TO-DAY, being Sunday, we heard di-vine service in the Mohawk chapel, which is a pretty neat building. A great deal of finery is displayed on the pulpit and the altar, and there is some fine wrought plate for the communion table.
                  THE chaplain preached in Dutch. Every sentence of the sermon was re-peated to the Mohawks in their own language by an interpreter. The com-mon-prayer and the Psalms are translat-ed into the Mohawk tongue, and I ob-served that many of the Indians had their books in their hands.
                  I NEVER heard the Psalms sung more delightfully. The voices of the men are strong and clear; those of the wo-men exquisitely melodious. We walk often on the ramparts, from whence we have a fine view of the country and the Indian plantations, where all the work is done by the women, the sole

employment of the men being hunting and fishing; and when they have brought in game sufficient to supply their families, they spend the rest of their time in drinking and smoaking in their huts, relating their past exploits in war, and planning new expeditions.
                  THESE poor females work in the fields with one or more infants at their backs; and thus encumbered, bring home heavy burdens, their husbands being too lazy and too insolent to partake their labours.
                  We went to visit the Indian town to-day, well accompanied; for Captain Butler ordered some of the soldiers to attend us, in appearance to do us ho-nour, but in reality to quiet our weak apprehensions, which he had in vain endeavoured to convince us was very ill founded. But it was not possible to persuade us we were safe without a

guard, among such a great number of savages, whose appearance we thought very frightful.
                  Wa were obliged, in order to avoid giving offence by an appearance of pre-ference, to enter the houses or wig-wams, as the Indians call them, of all who invited us. Most of these wigwams were large enough to accommodate several families, each of which occu-pied no more than a square of eight or ten feet, that contained their bed, and a few other necessaries. The fire-place, which is in the middle of the hut, and is common to all, had a large opening in the roof to let out the smoke, of which however sufficient remained to blind us.
                  THE squaus, so the Indian women are called, were extremely pleased with the notice we took of their children; and, in return for the presents we made them,

gave us garters composed of wampom, strung in figures, and dyed of the most beautiful colours imaginable.
                  THE principal chief of this nation has a house built and furnished in the Eu-ropean taste, for he is fond of imitating our manners; and here we actually drank tea; the squau, his lady, being ambitious to entertain us.
                  THIS Indian chief thought proper to confer the honour of adoption upon Miss Clara, as his brother did upon me. This is considered as a high mark of respect among them, which conferred upon us all the rights and claims of a Mo-hawk by birth. We each of us receiv-ed an Indian name upon this occasion. Their names always bear a relation to some real or imputed quality of body or mind. Clara's signified the morning star, and mine an ear of Indian wheat, denoting fruitfulness, for my present situation was not unnoticed by them.
                  
                     
THE ceremony concluded with one of their terrific dances, which we be-held from the ramparts of the Fort. Mr. Neville procured a quantity of their darling liquor rum, which he sent to them for their feast: it made them very quarrelsome, as usual; but we, safe behind our walls, suffered no inconve-nience from them.
               
               
                  
                     Albany.
                  
                  WE returned here yesterday even-ing, and I had the pleasure to resign my fair charge to her mother, in good health, and tolerable spirits, receiving in return her hostage, as she called my little boy, who was so delighted to see me again, that he almost smothered me with kisses, and lisped out a thousand prettinesses to engage me always to stay with him, for it seems he took my ab-sence very heavily.
                  
                     
WE have received here an alarming account of an intended insurrection of the negroes at New-York: the plot was happily discovered before it was ripe for execution. We hear of no-thing but informations, prosecutions, tortures, and death. Should the in-fection spread, the danger here would be very great, where the negroes are still more numerous than at New-York. I had but one black servant in my house, a woman, and her I have sent away. There is no safety, I think, any where but in the Fort; and Mrs. Bellenden has been so good as to accommodate me with an apartment in it, where I shall remain till we remove to Schonectady, and there I shall be within walls and ramparts again. The Colonel's daugh-ters left New York but three days be-fore the conspiracy was discovered.
                  
                     
I AM now settled at Schonectady. My dear Mrs. Benson came here some days before me; and I found my house fitted up with an elegant neatness, which left me nothing to wish for on that article.
                  MR. Neville has been at as great an expence in improvements, as if he was to settle here for the remainder of his days. It is our opinion of things that is the measure of their value: like Caesar, he had rather be the first man in a village than the second in Rome; nor is he happy only in the gratification of his ambition, he contrives to amuse himself in a way that suits his taste:—He likes field sports, his bottle, and the pleasures of the table. He makes frequent ex-cursions to Albany and Fort Hunter; and spends much of his time at the neighbouring plantations, where, if he does not meet with polite manners, and sensible conversation, he is sure of find-ing

good cheer, excellent wine, and un-restrained mirth.
                  MEANTIME I enjoy, in its highest perfection, what my favourite poet em-phatically calls
The feast of reason and the flow of soul,
in the society of my dear Mrs. Benson, that wise and affectionate friend. With the widow lady I mentioned to you we are become very intimate; for she is extremely aimiable in her manners, and possesses a large share of good sense, im-proved by reading and reflection.
                  WITH such companions, with your dear animated letters, which make you present with me; with that never-fail-ing, that extatic source of delight, my lovely boy, now rising to my fondest hopes — this wild, this savage region blooms a paradise.
                  
                     

            EUPHEMIA.
            BY Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
            
            IN FOUR VOLUMES. VOL. III.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND; AND J. EVANS, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
            M, DCC, XC.
         
      
      
         
            

be met with here. The Indian trade is very considerable, and has enriched many of the inhabitants of Albany; who at present, however, do not make the enormous profits they did formerly. The indians, under such excellent mas-ters of traffic as the Dutch, have ac-quired a knowledge of the successful artifices of trade, and are sometimes a match even for them in knavery.
                  THEY take great liberties with the town's people, entering their houses freely, if they find the doors open, and seating themselves wherever they like best, remain several hours together without being disturbed.
                  I HAD as yet seen an Indian only from my window. When going one day into my kitchen, to give some orders to my cook, I was extremely alarmed to see one of these savages seated by the fire, smoking his pipe very composedly. His appearance had driven away all my ser-vants,
WITH this account of my present situarion, which I know will be welcome to you, I will close my letterS, for a ser-vant is just arrived from Albany, sent by the Colonel, to let me know that he is to send off some dispatches to-morrow to New-York, and will enclose any let-ters I have ready, that may be sent by the first ship that sails for England. Adieu, then, my dear Maria. Need I tell you that I am and ever will be yours most affectionately,
               
               
                  EUPHEMIA NEVILLE
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XLII. MRS. BENSON TO MRS. HARLEY.
               
                  DEAR MADAM,
               
               YOUR reproaches for our long si-lence would be just, had any thing but the severest of all calamities, pro-duced this seeming neglect. Your ami-able, and now unhappy friend, Madam, concluded her last letter to you in a strain, not only of content, but joy. — Her will wholly resigned to her present fortune, her heart glowing with the most delightful hopes of the future, she was eager to communicate, to her be-loved friend, part of the transports that filled her breast. Ah! what a reverse, in the space of a few months, did she

experience! But take the melancholy tale in order, since I have now acquired composure enough to give you all the circumstances of it.
               A FRIEND of Mr. Neville's, whom some private affairs had brought to New-York, accepted his invitation to stay a few days with us at Schonectady. Mr. Neville carried him to every place wor-thy his notice; the Falls of Cohas he had not yet seen, and a day was fixed upon for this little excursion. Mrs. Neville would willingly have avoided being of the party, the little Maria not being yet weaned; but Mr. Neville having resolved to take his son with him, the tender anxious mother would not stay behind.
               ALL our party were in high spirits, except Mrs. Neville; her heart seemed to labour with some unknown oppres-sion, her speech was often interrupted with sighs, an air of melancholy over-spread her face. I asked her several

times, if she was well: she assured me she felt no other disorder, but a strange tremor on her spirits, for which she could not account.
               OBSERVING Mr. Neville to appear dissatisfied, at her being less chearful than usual, she endeavoured to dispel the gloom that hung upon her, and met his contracted brow with her wonted smile of complacency.
               I MARKED the painful effort—I saw the starting tears that glistened in those eyes, which she turned upon him with an assumed chearfulness. Uneasy and apprehensive, I whispered, My dear Euphemia, you are not well. 
                  I am well, indeed I am, she replied; but my spirits are uncommonly low to-day, that is all.
               
               OUR guest having sufficiently satis-fied his curiosity with the view of the cataract, our servants spread a cloth

upon the rustic table, in the hut where we had dined before; and a cold col-lation being provided, we all sat down to it. But the keenness of that appetite, which I had borrowed from the air, and unusual exercise, was instantly checked, when I perceived that Mrs. Neville could not eat, but trifled with her knife and fork, in order to escape observation.
               THE gentlemen drank their wine pretty freely; meantime, my dear Eu-phemia, heavy from fatigue, and yet more with the unusual weight that op-pressed her mind, gave the smiling in-fant, that hong upon her breast, into Fanny's arms, who sat next her; and reclining her head upon a mossy pillow, fell into a profound sleep.
               MR. Neville now rose up, and pro-posed to his friend to walk into the woods, till the servants had dined, and the carriages were ready for our depar-ture.

They took little Edward with them, that his innocent prattle might not interrupt his mother's repose; and, attended only by Mr. Neville's own ser-vant, they set out upon their walk.
               MRS. Neville slept sound and easy; I was happy in the hope, that this salu-tary rest would restore her strength and spirits. When Fanny said, softly, Are you not surprised, Madam, that Mr. Neville stays so long? I had never thought of this circumstance; I looked at my watch, and was astonished to find it so late.
               THAT instant Mr. Neville entered the hut; with wild impatience in his look and accent, he enquired if Edward was with us.
               'WITH us!' said I, trembling, did he not go with you?
               
               
                  
'OH! Sutton,' said Mr. Neville to his friend, who had followed him, my boy is not here!
               
               THIS exclamation was uttered so loud, that it awoke Mrs. Neville; her hus-band seeing her open her eyes, rushed out of the hut, and was followed by his friend. Fanny and I remained mo-tionless; fear and amazement strongly pictured in her face, and, I suppose, in mine; for Mrs. Neville, surprised at her husband's abrupt departure, turned towards us to ask the reason; but at the first glance, she uttered a piercing shriek.
               'AH! I understand those looks,' said she, turning her eyes alternately upon Fanny and me; some dreadful acci-dent has happened—My dear boy! my Edward! is he dead? Oh! tell me, I conjure you, pursued she, clasping her hands together, tell me the truth— is my child dead? Her supplicating

look and action, pierced my heart. 'Heaven forbid!' was all I could say. 'Then he is not dead,' said she; Heaven by praised! I breathe again; from what agonizing pangs am I re-lieved! Oh! if you knew what I felt in that dreadful moment of suspence, which realized all the strange forebod-ings that have tortured my imagina-tion this day.
               
               Mr. Neville's servant that moment appeared at the door, and rolling his eager enquiring eyes about the place, exclaimed—
               
                  OH! he is not here! he is lost! I shall go mad!
               
               MRS. Neville starting up, cried, who is lost? —My child! tell me—
               
               'OH! detain me not, Madam,' said he, for she held him by the arm; let me go in search of him, I will find

him, or never return. He broke from her loosened hold; she rushed out after him, with a distracted pace. Un-able to follow her, I received the sleep-ing infant out of Fanny's arms, who flew after her miserable mistress, and both were in an instant concealed from my sight by the impervious woods.
               THUS desolate, alone, my heart torn with anguish, expecting every moment to hear of some new calamity, no crea-ture of whom I could make any inqui-ries, for all our people had dispersed themselves about the forest in search of the dear lost boy; trembling lest the baby should awake, and prest by wants I had no means of supplying, rent my afflicted heart with its tender wailings, I abandoned myself, I own it, I aban-doned myself, for a few moments, to despair.
               REFLECTION at length returned, and brought with it sober councils.
               
                  
'Is this,' said I to myself, the part of a Christian, to shrink thus meanly in the hour of trial? where is that confidence in the goodness, that resignation to the will of God, which, till I was called upon to exert, I thought I possessed? Alas! in health and happy days, it is easy to talk of put-ting our trust in God; we readily trust him for life when we have health, for necessaries when we have compe-tence, and for deliverance when we have escaped from any danger; but when dangers assault, when calamities op-press us, we forget that he is powerful to save, and compassionate to relieve.
               
               I PURSUED this train of thought; and every moment, as a pious resignation gained upon my soul, I blessed, I adored the sacred power of religion, that could thus produce good out of evil, and make my present affliction the means of attaining eternal happiness.
               
                  

but a black woman, employed in the drudgery of the kitchen; and, in-deed, that appearance was shocking enough to justify their fears.
                  HE had a fierce and menacing look; his copper-coloured face was painted in round spots of red, yellow, and black; his hair strewed with some kind of powder of a deep red, which looked like blood streaming from different wounds in his head; his ears were stretched to an enormous length by the weight of the strange ornaments he wore in them, pieces of tin, glass, strings of shells, brass rings, and even slips of woollen cloth of several colours, which hung down to his shoulders.
                  HIS dress was a shirt made of Osna-burgh linen, a short petticoat of the same, which reached to his knees, in the manner of the Scotch highlanders, and, over all, a mantle of coarse flannel, which, being a beau, was adorned with
THE calm uninterrupted sleep of the infant, afforded in my altered mind, matter for gratitude and praise; for how could I have stilled its cries, or procure proper food for it in this desert, unused, as it had hitherto been, to any nourish-ment but its fond mother's milk. —It slept, while I wept over it with tender-ness, and prayed with servor.
               AT length I heard the sound of steps; I turned my eager eyes, my beloved Eu-phemia appeared, Mr. Sutton and her faithful Fanny supporting her. Now quick, now slow, was her flaultering pace; her countenance pale as death; her eyes, one instant raised to Heaven with supplicating tears, the next in wild despondence fixed on the ground; her closed hands wringing each other as if she would burst their sinews.
               SHE threw herself on the bank beside me, without uttering a word; one ten-der glance she cast upon her sleeping in-sant

in my arms, then burst into a flood of tears.
               MR. Sutton begged her to compose herself if possible, saying, he would go again into the woods, and never give over his search, till he could bring her some news of her son. He went away instantly; and I took occasion from his last word, to draw some motives of con-solation for her.
               
                  OH! do not amuse me with false hopes, said she; I shall never more see my child. He is, doubt it not, he is a prey to savage beasts, or savage men, still worse than beasts. Oh! thou delight of my heart and eyes, was this the fate to which thou wert born? —Mangled—torn—devoured—
               
               AT this sad thought she shrieked aloud, and sunk lifeless into Fanny's arms. With difficulty we recovered

her; but it was but for a moment; successive fainting fits made us tremble for her life.
               STILL I indulged some gleams of hope, that the sweet boy might yet be found. But when Mr. Neville returned, his frantic looks proclaimed the irremida-ble calamity.
               'HE is lost!' groaned he out, he is gone! —for ever gone!
               
               'AH!' cried I, 'see here,' pointing to his wife, who lay pale and motionless on Fanny's knees. —He gazed on her for a moment—
               'WHAT is to be done?' said he; tell me, advise me.
               
               'BY all means,' said Mr. Sutton, let Mrs. Neville be carried home; place her in the carriage, thus insensi-ble

as she is; believe it, when she re-covers sense and thought, it will be difficult to get her from hence.
               
               THIS, in the sad extremity to which we were reduced, was the best thing that could be done. Fanny got into the coach, and received her, still faint-ing, in her arms; I placed myself op-posite to them with the child, whose sleep seemed, by Providence, to be pro-longed for our comfort.
               MR. Neville declared he would not leave the place, but continue his search till he found his son dead or alive. His friend staid with him, and the unhappy servant to whose care the child had been entrusted.
               THIS man, in his looks and beha-viour, expressed the most poignant re-morse and agonizing grief; accusing him-self, with floods of tears, as being the cause of what had happened. It seems the

little boy, tired with walking, desired to sit down under a tree, till his father and Mr. Sutton, who chose to go further, re-turned; William sat down with him. Overcome with the heat, and lulled by the dashing sound of the cataract, which may be heard at a great distance, they fell asleep.
               THE man awakening, missed the child; and not yet much alarmed, sup-posing he had only strayed a few paces from him, called him several times aloud, and ran about in search of him. Not finding him, his fears increased; he wandered through the woods, still call-ing him in vain: then fondly hoping, that he should meet him, perhaps, in the place where he had so unfortunately fallen asleep, he returned thither; but instead of the child, saw Mr. Sutton and his master, who were looking for them.
               
                  
MR. Neville seeing him alone, ex-claimed, with an eager look and tone, 'Where is Edward?' The man, con-founded, terrified, amazed, answered not a word. Mr. Neville, in a transport of fear and rage, seized him by the col-lar, and giving him a violent shake, 'Rascal,' said he, have you lost my son?
               
               'OH! Sir,' cried the trembling wretch, the child, tired with walking, fell asleep upon my knees; unhappily, I dropt asleep likewise, and when I waked, he was gone; I have been in search of him ever since.
               
               MR. Neville, now worked up almost to a delirium of fury, drew his sword, and had not Mr. Sutton held his arm, the poor fellow had fallen a victim to the tempest that raged within his soul.
               'LET us go in search of your child,' said his friend to him; let us take dif-ferent ways.
               
               
                  

                  WHAT, hope of finding him safe in these wild woods! said the sighing fa-ther: Ere this he is become a prey to some furious animal, or some human savage. —My fears distract me.
               
               WITH a furious pace he rushed into the thickest of the woods, calling his son. Mr. Sutton took a different path; as did the weeping servant. Alas! all were unsuccessful.
               THE motion of the carriage, aided by some drops that Fanny applied, at length brought Mrs. Neville out of her faint-ing fit. With her senses, recollection —dreaful recollection! returned. She appeared not to consider where she was, or whither she was going, but groaned as if in the agonies of death. I begged her not to banish hope; that there was at least a possibility the child might be safe; that Mr. Neville and his friend were still in search of him; that en-quiries would be made at every farm-house

for many miles around, and that so many persons would be employed in seeking him; that we were sure of hav-ing some intelligence.
               'COULD you think it possible,' said she, that I should ever be so trans-cendently miserable as to wish I may hear my boy is dead by a fall, by a sudden fit, or that he is drowned; but, oh! to have him torn in pieces by wild beasts, or mangled by those savage hunters of men, who, when hunger presses, devour their species. —Can I think that this is his fate, and not be mad? Talk not to me of hope. —Oh! when I think what my child has suffered, and is, perhaps, suffering now! —Again her spirits, her senses forsook her. Scarce did it seem charity to use any efforts to recover her from this state of insen-sibility.
               
                  
IN these temporary deaths, from which our cares rescued her only to fall into them again, was this melancholy journey passed. At length we reached the Fort; we carried her up to her chamber, we put her to bed; a violent fever seized her; her ravings shewed the horrid images that filled her imagi-nation.
               SOMETIMES she fancied she saw her son in the paws of a wild beast; some-times sprawling upon the lance of some ferocious Indian, writhing in the ago-nies of death. Her cries, her heart-rending complaints, filled all who heard her with the deepest anguish. Mrs. Lawson shared in all my sorrows and all my fatigue on this sad event.
               FROM the Bellenden family we experienced every effort of tender sym-pathizing friendship. A very skilful phy-sician was, by their means, brought

from New-York. He gave us little hope, and her death was hourly ex-pected.
               MR. Neville returned, after an ab-sence of eight days, which he had spent in incessant wanderings, with beating heart. We crouded round him as soon. as he appeared:-''Tis all over,' said he; there is no more room for hope or fear—my boy is dead.
               
               'THE manner,' cried I, almost breathless with terror— tell us the man-ner of his death.
               
               'HEAVEN be praised!' said he, that was not so horrid as I feared — he was drowned—he had strayed too near the river, he fell in. A countryman, (for William has not been heard of since) saw the lifeless corse of the dear in-nocent carried away by the stream. — A burst of grief here stopped his speech for a moment; then recovering— Tell

several narrow borders of scarlet list— He had a large knife hanging at a kind of girdle, unsheathed, ready for mis-chief, as I thought.
                  THIS tremenduous object continued to smoke his pipe, without taking any notice of me, while I stood motionless with surprise and fear. When the black girl came up close to me, whispering, in her gibberish, You must be no fraid of Indian, my lady, said she, if Indian see you fraid of him, he be quite mad.
                  
                  THIS hint made me endeavour to recollect myself; and, all trembling as I was, I ventured to approach him, and very humbly dropt him a curtsey, which he returned with a nod, crying, Hoh, hoh! in a voice, however, less terrible than his looks.
                  I THEN ordered some cold meat and bread to be set before him, at which he

me your tale of horror now, said he; 'my wife, where is she?'
               MRS. Lawson with some caution in-formed him of her condition, and would have prevented him from going into her chamber, but the physician was of opi-nion that the sight of him might have an effect very contrary to what we fear-ed. She had known none of us for se-veral days, and still continued to rave, and paint those horrid scenes that filled her tortured imagination.
               MR. Neville just shewed himself. She started—she screamed—he retired. She rose up in her bed, and eagerly drew back the curtain.
               'WHERE is he?' said she; did I not see him?
               
               'WHO, my dear Euphemia,' said I, 'who did you see?'
               
                  
'MY husband,' she replied; where is he gone? why will you not let him come to me?
               
               TRANSPORTED at this instance of her returning reason, I called to him to ap-proach. She seized his hand with an eager pressure—
               
                  HAVE you found his mangled limbs? said she: have you buried him? Was he, Oh! tell me, was he not devoured?
               
               MR. Neville was silent, not knowing what to say to her, when the physician interposed—
               'TELL her the truth,' said he; the truth will be less dreadful than the horrid ideas that possess her fancy.
               
               'MY dear Euphemia,' said Mr. Ne-ville, be patient, be resigned — our child was drowned. — She paused a

moment; then looking earnestly at him —
               'You say he was drowned,' said she; 'are you sure of it?' The physician whispered— 'Say you saw him dead.'
               'ALAS!' said he, I am too sure of it.
               
               'Now then I may weep,' said she, after a pause of a moment— now I may grieve; it is sorrow now, before it was distraction. Oh! my dear boy, you are dead, I shall never see you more; but you was not devoured. She threw her arms about my neck as I was leaning over her; and hiding her face in my bosom, burst into tears.
               OH! how I blest the salutary shower; and, although I felt that the strong agony of sorrow shook her whole frame as I held her in my arms, yet, while her tears bedewed my bosom, I was chear-ed

with the hope of a favourable change in her distemper.
               FATIGUED at length, and almost fainting, her head sunk upon her pil-low, she closed her eyes, and but for the frequent sighs that forced their way, we should have thought, her dead.
               THE physician, who had caused a composing medicine to be prepared for her, now gave it her himself. She swallowed it without uttering a word or opening her eyes, and soon afterwards fell into a profound sleep, that lasted several hours.
               THIS first symptom of her amend-ment was followed by others that con-firmed our hopes. When she awoke she knew us all; desired to see the little Maria, who had been consigned to Fanny's care, and was perfectly well. She kissed and blessed her; spoke with great tenderness to her husband, and

thanked Mrs. Lawson for her friendly attention. To me she spoke not, but held my hand fast clasped in hers, and sometimes pressed it to her lips. She often sighed, and I could observe tears steal down her cheeks continually.
               IN this calm silent sorrow she remain-ed several days; meantime her fever abated fast; the physician pronounced her out of danger; and all we had now to do, he said, was to endeavour to recruit her strength and spirits. Mrs. Bellen-den came herself to fetch her to Al-bany; and it seemed to be the chief bu-siness of the whole family to soothe, to comfort, and amuse her.
               PATIENT now as suffering infancy, and full of devout resignation, her grief is calm, sedate, and silent; but still she grieves. She has lost her usual chear-fulness, but the sensiblity of her heart is increased; always tender and com-passionate, she is now more so than

ever, and feels for the woes of others as if she had none of her own to lament.
               I LOVE, I admire her if possible more than ever. Well has it been said, that adversity is the shining time of the wise and good. None are more miserable than those who never experienced cala-mity; how can it be known whether they be good or bad? Such virtues as are only faculties and dispositions, de-serve little praise; but every act of vir-tue has in itself the principles of its own reward.
               SUCH arguments as these I pressed upon my dear Euphemia, when I apprehend-ed her grief for the loss of her son would exceed the bounds her good sense and piety seemed to prescribe to it. I put her in mind of the noble stand she made against immoderate sorrow, when she lost her excellent mother; a loss that was followed by many cruel disappoint-ments and mortifications.
               
                  
'ALAS!' she replied, it is but an accidental fortitude we can boast, when we bear misfortunes so unequally. I know—I feel my weakness, but I am not able to overcome it. The sighs and tears that accompanied this con-fession, proved its truth.'
               'No affliction, my child,' said I, is greater than despair; it turns a natural evil into an intolerable one, and con-stitutes the punishment to which the wicked are condemned.
               
               WHEN I found a calm and steady re-signation take the place of that poignant anguish which had so long filled her heart: When I saw her return to her usual employments, if not with equal vicacity, yet with an air serene and com-posed: When I saw her cares for the little Maria give full employment for her maternal tenderness, without any of those sad retrospective thoughts which used to cast a damp upon the pleasure

she received from the innocent caresses of this lovely child: then my hopes of her returning peace were confirm-ed. I congratulated her upon a change, so ardently desired by her friends, so salutary for herself. Never shall I forget her look and accent when she thus answered me: —
               
                  MY dear Mrs. Benson; those who will not suffer their portion of misery here, deserve to be something less than human, but nothing better.
               
               THUS, Madam, have I fulfilled the sad task my situation imposed upon me, of giving you this sad narrative. You will weep—you will mourn for the sufferings of your amiable friend; but when you have paid that tender tribute to her misfortunes, remember, that she is no longer in the first paroxisms of her grief; that while your imagination repre-sents her sinking beneath their weight, reason and religion have produced that


resignation, which philosophy teaches, but which true piety alone can reach.
               THAT heaven may preserve you from such severe trials, is my first and ardent wish; that your fortitude and patience may be equal to her's, my next. I am, with great truth, Madam, your faithful humble servant,
               
                  BENSON.
               
            
            END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
         
      
   


seemed greatly pleased; and making him another curtsey, with trembling knees, for I was still dreadfully fright-ened, I went to find Mrs. Benson, and related my adventure; she, not at all dismayed, was eager to take a view of my savage guest; her courage embold-ened Fanny and the cook. The Indian, without minding them, eat like a wolf, and when he was satisfied, fell fast asleep.
                  WE knew not how to get him away; when, fortunately, Mr. Neville came in. We told him in what perplexity we were; and he immediately marched into the kitchen, making, on purpose, a great noise on his entrance, which roused the Indian, who, seeing him dressed in regimentals, for he was just come off guard, started up, shook hands with him very cordially, and went away.
                  THEY pay great respect to the mili-tary, and never presume to come unin-vited

into their houses; a circumstance I was extremely glad to hear; for such intrusion, if frequent, would have made me very miserable.
                  THIS city, as I have already observed, carries on a great trade wirh the Indians, who barter furrs for blankets, Osnaburgh shirts, guns, hatchets, knives, kettles, powder and shot, and many other arti-cles. Here the treaties, and other transactions, between us and the Iro-quois Indians are negociated. And every third year, the governor of New-York comes here to meet them, and re-new the alliance.
                  THIS nation, or rather combination of five nations, united by an ancient and inviolable league among themselves, are the oldest, the most steady, and most effectual ally we have found among the Indians. By their unanimity, firmness, military skill, and policy, they have raised themselves to be the most

formidable power in all America. They have reduced a great number of other nations under their dominion; and a territory twice as large as the kingdom of France.
                  THE five nations of the Iroquois compose the most celebrated common-wealth of Indians in America.
                  THE nations of America are at a great distance from each other, with a vast desert frontier, and hid in the bosom of hideous, and almost boundless forests. The Mohawks, a tribe of the Iroquois, who dwell nearest our settlements, are converted to christianity, and conse-quently, in some degree, civilized. The government pays a clergyman, who officiates in their chapel, which was built for them by Queen Anne, who likewise presented them with a fine set of alter-plate, and other decorations for it.
                  
                     
There is a fort here, called by the name of a former governor, in which there is a small garrison, commanded by a lieutenant, who may be relieved every year; but the present officer, Mr. Butler, either because he is fond of command, or the emoluments arising from it, pe-titioned to be continued in it, and has actually lived there ten years. The In-dians love him, and have presented him with lands to a considerable value. — They have been equally generous to their spiritual pastor, who is likewise a great favorite with them.
                  IT is these Mohawks who come amongst us so frequently at Albany. Though converts to our faith, they pre-serve most of their ancient customs. — Religion seems to have but little in-fluence upon their conduct and manners. Their virtues are their own; their vices often copied from their enlightened allies.
                  
                     
THE Indians are tall, their limbs strait and well proportioned, their bodies are strong, but of a species of strength, it is said, rather fitted for much hard-ship, than to continue long at any ser-vile work, by which they are quickly consumed. Their heads are flattened by art, their features are regular, but their countenance fierce; they have long black lank hair, no beards, their skins a reddish brown, a colour admired among them, and improved by the constant use of bear's-grease and paint.
                  THE whole fashion of their lives is of a piece, hardy, poor, and squalid; and their education, from their infancy, is solely directed to fit their bodies for this mode of life, and to form their minds to a capacity of enduring and in-flicting the greatest evils.
                  THEIR only occupations are war and hunting; agriculture is left to the wo-men;

for merchandize they have the greatest contempt. When their hunt-ing season is past, the fatigues of which they suffer with much patience, and in which they exert great ingenuity, they pass the rest of their time in an entire indolence—sleep half the day in their huts, and observe no bounds in eating. Drinking they were not addicted to, having no spirituous liquors among them; but since they have acquired this taste, it has given a spur to their indus-try, and enjoyment to their repose.
                  THIS is the principal end of all their treaties with us; and from this they suf-fer inexpressible calamities; for having once begun to drink, they observe no measure, but continue a succession of drunkenness as long as the means of procuring liquor lasts. —Even the Mo-hawk christians are guilty of this excess; and, when intoxicated, are capable of committing the greatest cruelties.
                  
                     
THEY are grave even to sadness in their deportment, upon any serious oc-casion; observant of those in company, and respectful to the old. Their tem-per cool and deliberate; never in haste to speak before they have well considered the matter, and are sure the person who spoke before them has finished all he had to say. They express great con-tempt for the vivacity of the Europeans, who interrupt each other, and fre-quently speak all together. The tone of their voice is soft and agreeable; that of the women, I am told, is won-derfully sweet and harmonious.
                  ALL I have told you of the Indians, and much more that I have yet to tell you, you must not imagine is the result of my own observations, for which I have had but few opportunities yet; but the substance of some conversations with a very sensible man, whom Mr. Neville met with at the Colonel's, and intro-duced to my acquaintance. He came

            EUPHEMIA.
            
               LETTER XXXV. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               I AM still in this delightful soli-tude; Mrs. Montague, on account of a slight indisposition of the governor, could make me but a short visit: but finding my health so much mended since I have been here, she very obligingly pressed me to continue a week longer; and left me the key of a closet which contains her books, among which she said I might possibly find some that would please me. They are indeed generally well chosen.
               
                  

to America merely to gratify a curiosity, which has carried him over half the world, I believe, and is but lately re-turned from Oswego, a factory on the lake Ontario, which is at a great dis-tance from hence. We have a fort there, by which most of the Indians pass in their way to Montreal.
                  IN this wild region, inhabited only by savages, did Mr. Euston pass a whole year. The officer who commanded the detachment sent thither to relieve the small garrison being his friend, he ac-companied him in his tedious march; and came back with him when he also was relieved in his turn.
                  IT seemed to me surprising that a man, formed by nature, and enabled by fortune, to enjoy all the elegances of life, could voluntary waste so great a part of his time among a race of beings, in appearance so truly wretched. He smiled at the compassion, mixed with

horror, which I testified for their condition; and combated my notions in a manner so new and amusing, that I cannot forbear giving you a specimen of some of his arguments, which, he told me, were all drawn from the cele-brated Abbé Reynal. It is in the nature of man, says that sensible and elegant writer, pursued he, that we must look for his means of happiness. What does he want to be as happy as he can be? —present subsistence; and if he thinks of futurity—the hopes, and certainty of enjoying that blessing. The savage who has not been driven into, nor confined within the frigid zones by civilized societies, is not in want of this first of necessaries; if he lays in no stores, it is because the earth and the seas are reservoirs, always open to supply his wants—fish and game are to be had all the year, and will supply the want of fertility in the dead seasons.
                  
                  
                     

                     THE savage indeed, says the ele-gant writer whose words I quote, has no house well secured from the access of external air, or commodious fire-places; but his furrs answer all the purposes of the roof, the garment, and the stove. He works but for his own occasions; sleeps when he is weary, and is a stranger to watchings and restless nights. War is a matter of choice to him; danger, like labour, is a con-dition of his nature, not a profession annexed to his birth—a national duty, not a domestic servitude.
                  
                  
                     THE savage is serious, but not me-lancholy; his countenance seldom bears the impression of those passions and disorders, that leave such shocking and fatal traits on ours. He cannot seel the want of what he does not de-sire; nor can he desire what he is ignorant of. Most of the convenlences of life are remedies for evils he does

not feel. He seldom experiences any of that weariness that arises from unsa-tisfied desires; or that emptiness and uneasiness of mind, that is the offspring of prejudice and vanity. In a word, the savage is subject to none but na-tural evils.
                  
                  My philosopher, observing I listened to him with pleasure, went on with his quotations. What greater happiness than this, says the Abbé, does the civil-ized man enjoy? His food is more wholesome and delicate than that of the savage; he has softer clothes, and a habitation better secured against the inclemencies of the weather. But should he live under a government, where ty-ranny must be endured under the name of authority—to what outrages is not the civilized man exposed! If he is possessed of any property, he knows not how far he may call it his own; when he must, divide the produce between the courtier, who may attack

his estate; the lawyer, who must be paid for teaching him how to preserve it; the soldier, who may lay it waste; and the collector, who comes to levy unlimited taxes.
                  
                  IT must be confessed, this picture, though a little overcharged, is not ill drawn. Mr. Neville listens with great pleasure to this gentleman's account of the customs and manners of the American nations. He is so fond of change of scene, and of varying his modes of life, that I should not be surprised to find him envying Mr. Butler's situation, and soliciting to have his turn in that command, in order to enjoy the new and untried pleasures of an abode on the lake Ontario.
                  THE ladies of the fort have had full employment, for some weeks past, in receiving the visits of all the Dutch families who have pretensions to the honour of being received there. Their

manners, their dress, their conversation, are so strange, so uncouth, so rudely fa-miliar, that I am not surprised at the disgust they create. Mrs. Bellenden, who is perfectly well bred, and who ranks politeness, I believe, amongst the cardinal virtues, conceals, with the ut-most caution, her dislike of these strange visitants; and the less they seem intitled to her delicate attentions, she is the more assiduous in practising them, as if she hoped to civilize them by example. —Meantime they stare, and are con-founded when she addresses them, and either do not answer at all, or in a man-ner so rude and strange, that she blushes, is confused, and silent.
                  MISS Bellenden seldom speaks, but her looks express a contempt of her company, which her mother often checks by a significant glance. As for Clara, she continues to be extremely busy with her knotting, apparently to prevent the ludicrous ideas, that are ex-cited

in her mind, from appearing in her countenance; but the archness of her stolen glances do not escape the notice of her mamma, who seems ex-tremely apprehensive, lest the young ladies should fail in any article of polite-ness to her unpolished guests.
                  MRS. Benson understands the Dutch language sufficiently to enable her to keep up a little conversation with these ladies, which is a great relief to Mrs. Bellenden, and equal pleasure to them; who, although they can all speak English, yet are very shy in conversing in that language, so that they discoursed chiefly with each other.
                  My rank not giving me the privilege of being as slow in returning their visits as Mrs. Bellenden, Mrs. Benson and I have already paid our respects to several of the chief families here. We were entertained in a very hospitable manner, which, it seems, is the custom of the

place; for immediately after the tea equipage was removed, a large table was brought out, and covered with a damask table cloth, exquisitely white and fine; upon this table were placed several sorts of cakes, and tea-bread, with pats of the most delicate butter, plates of hung-beef and ham, shaved ex-tremely fine, wet and dry sweetmeats, every kind of fruit in season, pistacchio and other nuts, all ready cracked with an instrument for that purpose; the liquors were cyder, mead, and Madeira wine. — All these things were served in the finest china and glass; and if we did not eat heartily, it was not for want of example, for our good hosts shewed as keen an appetite for this, their third meal since the morning, as if they had not till then broke their fast.
                  OUR thin European regale of a dish of tea, and a slice of cake, must have appeared very parsimonious to persons accustomed to such plentiful afternoon

collations; and I resolved, when I was visited next by my new friends, I would endeavour to treat them in their own way. But Mrs. Bellenden was to-tally against complying with this custom; not from an over-attention to oeconomy, for she is hospitable in the highest de-gree, but because it seemed a great of-fence to delicacy, and against every rule of decorum, to turn a visit into a coarse substantial meal.
                  THIS lady is indeed not only hospita-ble, but has a taste for expence, which, in some measure, defeats the purpose for which the Colonel, her husband, left his native country, at an age somewhat advanced, to pass the remainder of his days in America, that he might save fortunes for his children.
                  THE distinguished rank the Colonel holds in this province, obliges him to observe certain forms, which indeed in-clude a considerable expence, but which

is made much more considerable by the high notions Mrs. Bellenden entertains of what his station requires of him. On all public days, it is usual for the mayor, the aldermen, and the principal inha-bitants of the city, to appear at the fort in their best dress to compliment the commandant; on these occasions, not only cake and wine are, by Mrs. Bellenden's orders, handed about in great plenty, but there is always a ball at night, and an elegant supper for a select party. Besides this, her table is open to all strangers of any fashion, who visit Albany; and there is now a greater, resort than ever, drawn by the beauty of the young ladies, and the hos-pitable and elegant manners of the com-mandant and his lady.
                  IT is chiefly of such strangers that the assembly, Mrs. Bellenden holds every fortnight, is composed; for ex-cept the officers and their wives, and two or three of the most polished per-sons
New York.
               HERE I am, again, in the midst of balls, concerts, long dinners, late sup-pers, and a perpetual succession of visits. Miss Bellenden declares it is a charm-ing place: she is universally admired, but has not made one conquest—a cir-cumstance that often attends mere beauty.
               IN three days, however, we are to set out for Albany. Miss Bellenden hangs her fair head at this intelligence. That town is remarkable for nothing but the great trade it carries on with the In-dians. The inhabitants are chiefly Dutch, and keep up the customs and manners of their ancestors—the ancient settlers. The officers and their fami-lies must furnish all the gay society she is likely to find there. It is true, her pride will be soothed. Her father is commandant there, and first commis-sioner

sons in the place, none of the inhabit-ants are either qualified, or indeed desirous, to assist at these entertain-ments.
                  THE Colonel, always keeping his laudable purpose in view, would wil-lingly draw his expences within a nar-rower circle, that is, such as he thinks merely ostentatious; but whatever his rank really requires, he willingly assents to; and to the calls of generosity and benevolence he attends with unres-trained liberality.
                  ONE instance I must give you, my dear Maria, of this worthy man's hu-manity and greatness of soul.
                  Soon after his arrival here, his first lieutenant, who held the command during his absence, presented him a list of men in his own company, who being, on account of their age and in-firmities, judged wholly unfit for the

easiest duty, were ordered home to be re-ceived into Chelsea hospital.
                  THE Colonel, hearing that some of these soldiers were near an hundred years of age, desired to see them particularly; accordingly they were all presented to him in the great hall, where the ladies of the fort, myself, and some other com-pany, were assembled to view them.
                  OF this venerable group, the youngest was eighty-two years old; several were an hundred, and one was an hundred and ten. Here was a strong proof of the goodness of the climate; and it is said, and experience has proved it true, that the Europeans who come hither young generally live to a very great age.
                  THESE old men looked surprisingly healthy; but they seemed discontented, and even sad. The Colonel, after con-versing with each of them a few mo-ments, at length observed the melan-choly

air of their countenances, and asked them the cause. —One of the oldest then came forward, and making a low reverence,
                  'SIR,' said he, my companions and I are in great trouble, and if your Honour will be pleased to listen to our grievances, we shall be bound to pray for your Honour.
                  
                  'LISTEN to your grievances!' inter-rupted the Colonel, with an affectionate tone, Aye, my good friends, and re-dress them too, if in my power.
                  
                  'OH, SIR,' replied the old man, we have all heard, before you came, that you are a noble gentleman. —God bless you for your kind speech. This, please your Honour, is our very hard case—
                  
                  
                     I AND my companions here, Sir, were young fellows when we left Old England; and yet we have seen some

sarvice too—and we have been upon hard sarvice in our time here too, and fought wich French and Indians, and spilt our blood for Old England and this here America, which is all one as our native land to us now. We married wives here, and have children and grand-children, and great-grand-children; and all we love is here, and we are used to the climate; so that it is a great hardship to be sent to die from our friends.
                  
                  
                     SOME years ago, please your Honour, seventeen of our comrades were sent over, very old men they were, and eleven of them died on board the ship, and never set foot on land; and the other six did not live many weeks after they came on shore. And it is likely it will be the same with us, for we are very old; and if we should be strong enough to bear the voyage, and the change of climate, we shall break our hearts at leaving our children and friends.
                  
                  
                     
THE poor old soldier ended his sim-ple and affecting oration with another low reverence, and retired backward to his rank. We could perceive a tear or two drop on his silver beard. His com-panions discovered great emotion all the time he was speaking; and they all waited the Colonel's answer with ap-parent anxiety.
                  THE Colonel, approaching them with an air of ineffable sweetnese and bene-volence, bid them not be uneasiy; he would consider their case, and they should have no reason to complain.
                  THEY were beginning to express their joy and gratitude, in praises and blessings on their commander, when the lieute-nant I mentioned before, whose name is Blood, a name well suited to his nature I believe, went hastily up to the Colo-nel; the old men, observing this mo-tion, became silent on a sudden, and

beheld him with looks, in which fear and aversion were strongly marked.
                  'SIR,' said Mr. Blood to the Colonel, permit me the liberty of representing to you the consequence of these men's petition. —They have been on the su-perannuated list for several months, ex-cused from duty, and are consigned to Chelsea-hospital. Their names are struck out of the muster-roll, and their places supplied by six effective men who have been enlisted in their stead, so that your company is com-plete; and if these men are not sent to England, their pay must, for the future, come out of your own pocket.
                  
                  THE Colonel with a smile, not wholly free from contempt, made no reply, but turned from him; and addressing himself to the anxious veterans—
                  'MY friends,' said he, this matter depends wholly upon me I find; there|'fore

I am not willing to leave you a moment in suspence. None of you shall be sent to England; you shall stay here among your friends, and end your days in ease and quiet. Your pay shall run on as usual; and now you may withdraw, and drink the King's health. Saying this, he or-dered a servant to conduct them to the butler's pantry, and directed that they should have a plentiful repast, and a proper quantity of liquor.
                  THE gratitude of these old men was now too great for words; but their em-phatic silence, accompanied with tears, and eyes and hands listed up to Heaven in mental prayer for their benefactor, af-fected us all extremely. Every eye was fixed on the Colonel, with an expression of admiration and delight; every tongue congratulated him upon the heart-felt satisfaction he had, by this noble act, both given and received. But Mr. Blood, sullenly silent, scowled scorn

and anger from his black-beetle brows, and bowing more carelessly than became him, withdrew.
                  MR. Neville tells me, this officer is universally hated by the soldiers, for his pride, rapaciousness, and severity. He has lived here many years, and being the oldest lieutenant in the service, when the commandant dies the command of the garrison, and all the forces here, de-volves upon him, till another is ap-pointed by the King, and arrives here.
                  HE has had the good luck to survive four of his commanders, and, during each interval of another appointment, has enjoyed all the power and emolu-ments of their post. Hence he seems to claim a prescriptive right to possess this dignity, and has been heard to boast, that Colonel Bellenden, who does not seem built for duration, he says, will not long keep him out of it.
                  
                     
HEAVEN grant he may be mistaken! What a pity that the life of a man, who is an honour to human nature, should be short. Yet surely, he who may compute his existence, not by the num-ber of his years, but his good actions, may be truly said to live long; for good actions are the seeds of immorta-lity.
                  I AM transported with joy, my dear Maria! I have a letter from you this moment; it was brought in the Colo-nel's packet. Oh! how generous, how kind, to be thus diligent in writing to me. I have locked myself up, and am visible to no eye, that I may enjoy un-interrupted the dear luxury of conver-sing with you.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXVI. MISS HARLEY TO MRS. NEVILLE.
               
                  MY DEAR EUPHEMIA,
               
               IT is now five months since you left England: time has not lessened my regrets for our separation, nor weaken-ed the ardor of my unavailing wishes for the blessing of your society. I re-member all the arguments your good sense employed to comfort me; I ap-prove them all, but I can apply none of them yet. My uncle rallies, reproaches, and even threatens me for the obstinacy of my grief for your loss. He tells me it will have a dangerous effect upon Mr. Harley, who has rea-son

likewise in civil affairs. He will live in great state; but she will not be happy. However the Colonel, at his lady's request, has taken a house in this city, which he proposes to visit once a year; and Miss Bellenden is a little com-forted by this arrangement.
               WE are to perform this long voyage, of a hundred and fifty miles, on Hud-son's river, in one of those little yachts, great numbers of which are continually sailing between New-York and Albany with the Indian trade. We went on board one of them this morning, in or-der to examine the accommodations we are likely to meet with; for calms, or contrary winds, sometimes lengthen this passage to a week or ten days. These vessels are made extremely con-venient for passengers. —There are two cabins in each, destined for their use, one has six beds, three on each side; the space in the middle, contains a large table, chairs, and other conveniences;

to be jealous of a friendship that leaves him but the second place in my affection. But, without settling the ar-ticle of precedence in this case, I referred him to what Mr. Harley said a few days after your departure, as it was repeated to me by Mr. Greville.
               
                  MISS Harley's sensibility on this oc-casion, said he, is the foundation of all my hopes. From a heart so capable of a sincere attachment, the man who is so happy as to be her choice, may expect all the refinements of a delicate passion, with all the perma-nence of a generous friendship.
               
               THIS young man has, by his amiable qualities, so endeared himself to my uncle, that he is uneasy when he is ab-sent, even for a day; but to the claims of a mother, neither his gratitude nor his love can render him in the smallest degree inattentive. Sir John has obli-ged him to fix his residence at the Hall;

but he never fails to visit Mrs. Harley three or four times a week, and often stays a night at her house.
               I HAVE been twice to wait on her, and was received with a profusion of kindness. She affected to call me daughter, and the young ladies caressed me like a sister. With their caresses indeed I was much pleased, and re-turned them very affectionately; but, whether I was prejudiced against Mrs. Harley's sincerity by the ac-count I had received of the early part of her conduct, or that the professions she made me wanted that ingenuous and cordial air which carries them directly to the heart, I received them with fewer marks of gratitude than were due to them, if sincere; but I made up in respect what I wanted in tenderness, and my acknowledgments, such as they were, passed current with a heart which seemed too little interested in them to take the trouble of distinguishing be-tween appearances and reality.
               
                  
This lady, my dear Euphemia, has been very beautiful; the has one of those mischief-making faces which have produced much disorder in the world, and which, but too often, make an effectual apology for the faults of the head and heart. I took notice that she blushed when I delivered her a compli-ment from my uncle, which at that time I thought I could easily account for, but which I have since better un-derstood.
               WHEN we returned from this visit, Sir John was very particular in his en-quiries concerning the brothers and sisters of Mrs. Harley; but in what re-garded Mr. Harley he appeared ex-tremely cold and indifferent. She soon after, at my desire, received an invitation to spend some days at the Hall with her young family.
               MR. Harley set out in my uncle's coach to conduct her, and Mr. Gre-ville

drove me in the phaeton as far as — to meet them. During our ride, he-was very urgent with me to give him my opinion of Mrs. Harley▪ but in this case I kept within a re-serve, which I thought due to the cha-racter in which I was shortly to regard this lady.
               'COME, come,' said he, I know you have too much sincerity to deceive the world, and too much understand-ing to be deceived yourself. You will never be a favourite with your mother-in-law that is to be—it is impossible to be virtuous with the approbation of those who are not so themselves; but you may be very easy with her, pro-vided you can be contented with ap-pearances.
               
               
                  All commerce with the world in general, pursued he, is merely amuse-ment, and tends to make one believe that people only meet together to im-pose

upon each other: the reasonable sew are friends, and see each other as they are; the rest are only ac-quaintances, and make up one great masquerade.
               
               MR. Greville having gone thus far, which was plainly with an intention to put me upon my guard against those natural impulses of affection and confi-dence, which young and innocent minds are apt too freely to indulge towards persons with whom they are newly connected, and which, when not re-turned with equal sincerity, produce discontent, complaints, and sometimes indecent quarrels and reproaches; chang-ed the discourse to subjects more agree-able, till the coach, with our expected guests, appeared in view.
               MR. Harley, who rode on horseback, no sooner perceived the phaeton, than he galloped up to us with a speed and impetuosity, which made Mr, Greville

look at me, and smile. The carriages met, and stopped: after a few compli-ments had passed, I desired Mrs. Har-ley to permit me to accompany her in the coach the rest of the way. She ap-peared to take this as I wished, an in-stance of respect; for which Mr. Harley, in gratitude, I suppose, thought fit to kiss my hand with a most lover-like ardour, as he helped me into the coach.
               THE children were rejoiced to see me; and Mrs. Harley said a great many obliging things, and was in high spirits. I was surprised at her deportment; the occasion indeed seemed to call for for-titude, which she doubtless possessed in an uncommon degree. She was soon to see a man whom she had deceived, in-jured, and forsaken, yet to whose gene-rosity she must owe her future subsist-ence, and the establishment of her children. These circumstances did not appear to excite any uneasy reflexions,

or produce the least perplexity in her behaviour.
               I WATCHED her looks when the coach drove up the avenue; they were per-fectly serene. My uncle very politely, but not without some little discompo-sure, came to help her out of the coach. With an unaltered cheek, and an air perfectly easy, she gave him her hand; and as he led her up the stairs, address-ed some indifferent conversation to him, which he answered with great gravity.
               As soon as we entered the room, she presented her two daughters and her little boy to him. The girls are pretty and genteel. He gave them an oblig-ing reception, and caressed the boy, who is extremely like his brother.
               DURING this ceremony Mr. Greville remained silent, observing all that passed with a fixed attention. Mr. Harley had

drawn me to a window, to listen to some tender trifles, which, I consess, interested me much less than the scene between Mrs. Harley and my uncle.
               SHE had not neglected her dress, which, being second mourning, admit-ed some elegances very advantageous to her person; and she seemed still con-scious of its attractions, and to think they had not yet lost all their force upon a heart which was once enslaved by them.
               SIR John, taken up with the chil-dren, had not yet met her looks, which, armed with all their fascinating powers, were level led full at him, as he now, for the first time, railed his eyes to her sace; but he stood the shock with such unaffected composure and indif-ference, as seemed to mortify her a little; however, she soon recovered her-self, and the conversation becoming ge-neral

my uncle mixed in it with his usual good humour and politeness.
               At night, when I left her in her apartment, she embraced me with great tenderness, and seemed perfectly satis-fied with the progress she had made that day in her design of pleasing; for va-nity is easily fed, and the many little engaging arts she practised, to draw my uncle's notice upon her, sometimes pro-duced their effect, and gave to those attentions, which politeness demanded of him, a certain gallant air, which she explained as she pleased;.
               SHE had continued a fortnight at the Hall, without giving the least intima-tion when she meant to put an end to her visit. Her design upon my uncle's heart seemed apparent; Mr. Greville looked grave upon it.—And one day, after heedfully observing her manner, he drew me aside to a window.
               
                  
'WHAT can this woman mean,' said he, by the airs she gives herself? Har-ley had need to look about him; or he may have the singular good fortune to be cut out of his succession, by the selfish views of a mother.
               
               THIS was carrying his suspicions very far. I combated them for the honour of my sex. But reflecting upon Mrs. Harley's ungenerous conduct in the early part of her life, the thing did not seem improbable.
               MR. Greville protracted his visit to an unconscionable length, as he himself observed, that he might not leave his friend exposed without succour to such a dangerous attack. I could perceive that his presence often checked Mrs. Harley in her career of coquetry, and that she wished his abscence most de-voutly; for he watched her motions so assiduously, that she could, never, gain

the furniture of the beds, chairs, and windows is of delicate figured calico. Nothing can exceed the neatness which reigns in every part of these little ves-sels; the boards, even on the deck, are as nice as those of a lady's dressing-room.
               ALTHOUGH the Colonel has sent most of his servants already to Albany, yet our company is still large enough to re-quire three of these yachts to convey us. It is settled, that Mrs. Bellenden, the three young ladies, myself, and Mrs. Bellenden's woman, are to go in one sloop; Mrs. Benson, with Fanny and some female servants, will occupy the cabin in another; the Colonel, with Mr. Neville, and some officers from New-York, who, out of respect, attend him to Albany, will lead the van. To-morrow will be devoted to farewel vi-sits; and the next day we shall em-bark.
               
                  

an opportunity of being with Sir John alone.
               HE was boasting of his dexterous ma-nagement, on this occasion, one day as he was standing with me at one of the windows of my dressing-room, which overlooked the terrace, when I pointed out to him Mrs. Harley and my uncle walking together, engaged, as it seemed, in a very serious conversation.
               'How could this happen?' said he, with some emotion. I left Sir John in his library; and Mrs. Harley, you said, complained of some indisposition this morning. Well, I am resolved to interrupt them, however. He took his hat immediately, and crossing the terrace, as if he meant to go into one of the alleys, my uncle called to him, and he joined them, not greatly to the satisfaction of Mrs. Harley, as he told me afterwards, which appeared too plainly by her looks.
               
                  
THESE tête-à-tête airings became, at length very frequent; and Mr. Har-ley, charmed with the good intelligence that subsisted between his mother and Sir John, implored me to consent to his making use of her growing interest with him, to press the conclusion of our marriage; a subject he could not take the liberty to enter upon himself. This, for obvious reasons, I would not consent to; so that there were some discontented faces among us. I could not approve of Mrs. Harley's behaviour; Mr. Gre-ville was enraged at it; and her son seemed apprehensive of delays, without knowing why.
               THINGS were in this state, when one day, after a long conversation with Mrs. Harley in private, my uncle sent for me into his library, and immediately afterwards, desired a servant to tell Mr. Greville he wanted to speak with him. Upon his entrance, my uncle shutting the door after him, took his hand, and

leading him up to the window where I stood, wondering what this preparation was to end in.
               'I WISHED to consult you both,' said he, upon a matter which presses my thoughts very much. I know not whether what I have resolved on will meet with your approbation; but I am sure I mean well; and the world—
               
               'PRITHEE, my good friend,' said Mr. Greville, interrupting him impa-tiently, tell us the matter without any further preface. If you have resolved, why let the world talk. —It is not the first time it has talked, you know.
               
               'OF what?' replied my uncle, a lit-tle surprised. The world knows no-thing of my intentions in this case.
               
               'OH, no,' said Mr. Greville, smiling, but the world is very good at guessing sometimes.
               
               
                  
'You are part of this world,' said my uncle, tell me what hae you guessed, that I may know whether I have answered, or fallen short of your expectations.
               
               'I GUESS then,' said Mr. Greville, that in this business, you have followed your inclinations; and in that re-spect, I am sure, you have not fallen short of my expectations.
               
               My uncle did not perceive that these words were spoken rather peevishly; he took them in a very favourable sense; and with a smile of complacency, re-plied—
               
                  IT would be a very sensible mortifi-cation to me to be condemned by a judgment, which it would lie heavy on my conscience not to subscribe to. My dear Edward, I am afraid, mur-murs in secret, that I have delayed his happiness so long.
               
               
                  
'IT is a maxim with me,' said Mr. Greville, never to be long in doing that which can be done but once. But I can answer for your Edward, that, with all the impatience of a lover, he has all the submission and reverence of a son. However, I hope he will never be more than your nephew.
               
               'How is that?' said my uncle, hastily, I protest, I do not understand what you drive at, Greville. But if, as Edward's friend, you are chagrined at my delaying his marriage, hear my reasons. —I was willing, before this event took place, to set him entirely at ease with regard to the situation of his mother and his family; and by mak-ing them independent, to prevent any further claims upon him, which, per-haps, might not be regulated by reason on one side, nor prudence on the other.
               
               
                  

                  FOR this purpose, I have sought op-portunities of engaging Mrs. Harley's attention on this subject; but it is hard to guess at this woman's meaning. An affair of such importance to her she treats with the most childish carless-ness, and turns the discourse upon subjects which have not the least con-nexion with it, and trisles in so egre-gious a manner, that I was almost out of patience with her.
               
               
                  THIS morning, however, I de-manded her attention, in a decisive tone, to what I had to say to her, on subjects of importance to herself and her family. I began with telling her, my resolution to complete the marriage between my niece and her son (her worthy son I justly called him) in a few weeks.
               
               'BY the way, Maria,' pursued my uncle, looking at me (which this last hint had, as you may imagine, thrown me

into a little confusion) I believe you are not so great a favourite with her as you might reasonably expect, for she received this plain declaration of my intentions, with a cold civility that surprised me.
               
               I SMILED, and was silent; but Mr. Greville said, Aye, aye, this is natural enough; it is ourselves that we gene-rally love in others; but where there is no resemblance, there is no founda-tion for partiality.
               
               'I BELIEVE you are right,' replied my uncle. However, I passed over this circumstance, and proceeded to tell her, that I had resolved to settle two thousand pounds on each of her daughters, and, if she had no objec-tion, would place them at the same boarding-school where my niece was brought up, and take the expence of their education upon myself. As for little Charles, who is really a promising

boy, Greville, I told her, it was my intention to breed him up a scholar; that he should be educated in my own house, under the tuition of my chap-lain, till he was fit for the university; and as I designed him, with her con-currence, for the church, I would keep the living of—, which his father had possessed, vacant for him; and for future preferment, he would have all his brother's interest.
               
               'To all this,' pursued my uncle, Mrs. Harley made no other answer than to bow her head; which appeared a sacrifice to politeness, rather than an expression of approbation; so that being a little embarrassed by her be-haviour, I entered rather abruptly in-to an explanation of my intentions with regard to herself.
               
               'YOUR income, Madam,' said I, I propose to increase, by a settlement of two hundred pounds a year, which I

hope you will think adequate to your occasions; and now, these necessary preliminaries being settled, we have nothing to do but to make preparations for the marriage of our children.
               
               WHILE my uncle was speaking, se-veral self-accusing glances passed be-tween Mr. Greville and me; although we had never explicitly declared to each other the suspicions these long and pri-vate conversations with Mrs. Harley had suggested; yet, conscious that we had really entertained such injuriousthoughts of him, our hearts upbraided us with injustice; and my emotions impelled me to cast myself at his feet, to implore his pardon for my offence.
               I CHECKED this involuntary transport, however; but was delighted to see Mr. Greville give way to his sensibility; he embraced my uncle eagerly, crying, You have acted like yourself, wisely, nobly, greatly!
               
               
                  
'OH! mighty well,' said my uncle, I am glad you are pleased. But what think you was the lady's answer? Why truly, she paused a little, dropt me a formal curtsey, and said, she would consider of what I had been saying.
               
               'WHY truly,' said Mr. Greville, it required some time to deliberate, whe-ther she would accept a genteel portion for her daughters; a plentiful income for herself; and a certain provision for her little son. —The matter was some-thing difficult.
               
               'WELL, I have done my part,' in-terrupted my uncle. And now, my dear Greville, find out Edward, and bring him to me; and as for you, niece, I shall leave it to your lover to prevail upon you to fix an early day for his, and, I hope, your happiness. —I curtsied in silence, and left the room.
               
                  

                  
                     Albany.
                  
                  NOT one line have I been able to write to my dear Maria for these ten days past. Our voyage lasted eight days, because we would have it so. — I will explain this circumstance to you in due time. And now being tolera-bly well settled, and having full leisure for the sweetest employment of my life, conversing (so I will call it) with you —I will go on with my usual prolixity.
                  AFTER a tedious day spent in the ceremonial of leave-taking, we retired early to rest, hoping to go on board quietly in the morning, without any further parade; but in this we were mistaken. —All the officers, and many of the principal gentlemen in the place, came to wait upon the Colonel, and at-tend him to the water side: some ladies also paid the same compliment to Mrs.
RETIRING to my own apartment, I saw Mr. Harley crossing the gallery to go into his mother's chamber. He did not see me, and I took no notice of him, being unwilling to interrupt a conversation that was likely to lead to a discovery of his mother's sentiments, which appeared to me to be very mis-terious. I sat alone till the hour of tea approached; when I went into the drawing-room, where I found Mr. Har-ley alone, leaning on the back of a chair, his arms folded and lost in thought. On my entrance, he started up, and running to me, took my hand, which he kissed with great emotion.
               'HAVE you heard, my Maria,' said he, how your generous, your noble uncle, means to provide for my mo-ther and her family? 'I have,' said I, and I hope Mrs. Harley is quite sa-tisfied with his plan. He cast his eyes down in some confusion, and was

silent a moment; then dropping my hand with an air of despondency—
               'HOW will it be possible for me,' ex-claimed he, to bear her answer to Sir John! —Would you think it, my dear Maria, my mother, brought up in the principles of the Roman Catholic religion, is so bigoted to her mode of faith, that, rather than not carry her point, she will risk the displeasure of her benefactor, and the loss of her children's hopes; and is unkind enough to insist upon my acquainting Sir John with her intentidns.
               
               'And what are these intentions?' said I.
               'To retire to France,' replied he, with my brother and sisters; and take upon herself the care of their education.
               
               
                  

                  AND so she means to make your sisters nuns, and your brother a friar, said Mr. Greville, who had stolen upon us unobserved, and heard Mr. Harley's last words. 'But come,' pursued he, I have been looking for you, Sir John expects you in the library; he has or-dered coffee there, so we shall not at-tend your tea-table this afternoon, young lady, said he to me.
               THEY went away together; and I sent to let Mrs. Harley know I waited tea for her; she excused herself on account of some indisposition; but her daugh-ters, and her little son came to me.
               THE passages of the day gave my thoughts such full employment, that I was but a dull companion for my little visit-ors; so I went with them into the gar-den, and leaving them to stroll about as they pleased, retired to an alcove to indulge my meditations. I had not

been here more than half an hour, when I saw Mr. Harley, joy sparkling in his eyes, advancing hastily towards me; I rose to meet him at the entrance of the alcove; but he prevented my going out; and taking my hand, which he pressed to his lips, with equal tenderness and re-spect, led me back to my seat, at the same instant throwing himself at my feet. I desired him to rise, with a smile, which he well understood.
               
                  OH! pardon the transports of a lover, said he, who finding himself authorised to press you to conclude his happiness, can think no posture too humble for such a request. Do not, my adored Maria, be less favour-able to my ardent wishes than your uncle. —He bids me bring him your consent for an early day, to conclude our marriage. Can you, will you not answer his generous intentions? 
                  Me-thinks, said I, Mrs. Harley ought to decide in this matter—I will be

directed by her. 
                  Say rather by your uncle, interrupted he, your more than father, my glorious friend and benefactor, say by him. 'Well then,' resumed I, let my uncle determine for me.
               
               THIS concession produced new trans-ports; which I checked, by asking him, how Sir John had received Mrs. Harley's proposals?
               'Mr. Greville,' said he, took upon him to acquaint Sir John with my mother's fatal insatuation. —And how, said I eagerly, how has he de-termined in consequence of it?
               
               'LIKE himself,' replied he, with equal dignity and justice. —He con-sents to my sisters going to France with my mother, since she will have it so; but insists upon her leaving my brother to my care, as my father with his last breath directed. I foresee,

said he, sighing, that this will produce some contest between my mother and me. Having always been used to pay her the utmost submission and respect, it will be a painful task to contradict her.
               
               'But surely,' replied I, the con-sideration of her own interest, and that of the child, will have some weight with her, besides the will of her late husband.
               
               'AH! against that,' interrupted Mr. Harley, she pleads the will of Heaven. Her church allows no salvation out of its own pale; and she thinks it would be a less misfortune to see her child poor and dependent, than a heretic.
               
               'SHE is to be pitied,' said I, since her error is founded upon principle. He pressed my hand with ardour, upon my saying this.
               
                  
'HOW excellently good are you,' said he, to view in so favourable a light my mother's conduct on this occasion. I never was so happy as to enjoy an equal portion of her affection with any of her other children—but I love her most tenderly; and must re-gret a separation, which being her choice, proves her indifference to-wards me.
               
               I WAS greatly moved with the affecti-onate manner in which, he spoke these words, heightened by a look of extreme sensibility. This cloud, however, was soon dispersed by the sunshine, as he called it, of his present fortune; and, till we joined our little companions, he breathed nothing but the warmest essu-sions of gratitude, love, and joy.
               Mr. Greville, in the mean time, had paid a visit to Mrs. Harley, in her own apartment; and had disposed her, by arguments which he well knew how to

enforce, to an aquiescence with my uncle's intentions with regard to her little son; it was a sullen acquiescence, however; for she appeared at supper with looks so cold and reserved, as dis-concerted us all.
               SIR John, in a formal accent, and a look composed to great gravity, told her, that if she had no objection, he had fixed upon this day fortnight for the celebration of our marriage. Cer-tainly, she said, she could have no ob-jection; and turning to me, made me some common-place compliments, but delivered with surprising coolness.
               MY uncle added, that he intended the ceremony should pass with great privacy; and that all our parade should be reserved for our appearance in town, the ensuing winter, whither he proposed to accompany us.
               
                  
DEAR generous man! My heart overflowed with gratitude; which was sufficiently apparent in my looks, I be-lieve; for he several times smiled upon me with great complacency. Mr. Har-ley's acknowledgments were expressed with a fervor which seemed to move him much, and were answered by a most affectionate embrace.
               MY uncle settles upon Mr. Harley twelve hundred pounds a year. —We are to live with him at the Hall; and it is in our own choice to spend the whole, or part, of every winter in London; a permission I shall seldom make use of; because the air of that crowded city does not agree with his health; and it is equally my inclination, and my duty, to be absent from him as little as possible.
               WHILE all these arrangements were making, Mrs. Harley appeared to take

very little interest in them, and kept a profound silence. Her son could with difficulty conceal his confusion at this behaviour; he often turned his expres-sive eyes upon her, full of respectful expostulation; which she did not, or would nor, understand. When we se-parated for the night, she told Sir John, that as her son's marriage was to be ce-lebrated so soon, it would be necessary for her to go home for a few days, in order to make some preparations for her own and her daughters appearance; and that she proposed to set out early in the morning. My uncle made no op-position to this design, so suddenly taken up, but gave orders for the coach to attend her at what hour she pleased, together with Martin and two of the footmen. She thanked him with a cold politeness; and when I waited on her to her chamber, told me, with a forced smile, that she hoped I would have no objection to her son's accompanying her, at least part of the way.
               
                  

Bellenden; in a word, we had a nume-rous train.
                  CAPTAIN Wilmot brought my sweet Edmund to take leave of me again. I thought I should never get loose from his arms; he hung about me in tears, even sobbing with the violence of his emotions; the Captain, at last, forced him away.
                  THE cannon from the battery saluted the Colonel's yacht as it passed; and the ladies of the fort family (for that is the phrase here), did us the honour to come out, and waved their handker-chiefs to us. We had little wind, but that favourable; and we sailed slowly along upon the most delightful river imaginable, the shores on each side ex-hibiting a prospect, sometimes all beau-tifully wild and romantic, sometimes rich with flourishing plantations, and elegant mansions.
                  
                     
I BLUSHED, and answered with some confusion, Surely, Madam, I can have no objection to Mr. Harley's do-ing what his affection and his duty require of him.
               
               
                  OH! you are very obliging, my dear Miss, said she, and curtseying very ceremoniously, wished me a good. night.
               I DESIRED to know, at what hour she intended to set out in the morning, that I might attend her at breakfast. She said, she would send to me as soon as she was risen; and we parted.
               I ROSE earlier than usual the next morning, but still not time enough to see Mrs. Harley; for my maid informed me, she had been gone half an hour; for as soon as I had left her at night, she sent for her son, and desired him to give directions for the coach to be ready at five o'clock. He had acquainted my

uncle with his intentions, of conducting his mother as far, as — in her way home, and promised to return by dinner time. Mrs. Harley's behaviour had been so extraordinary, that I ex-pected my uncle would have taken some notice of it to me; but, whatever his thoughts were, he kept them to him-self.
               MR. Greville told me, that he was convinced, her sullenness was occasi-oned by the disappointment of her de-signs upon Sir John. Her confidence in her own charms, said he, is pro-digiously great; and the power they once had over the heart of my friend, persuaded her, that it would be no difficult matter to revive a passion, which the resentment he had preserved against her husband, for supplanting him, by continuing his whole life, proved that it had never been quite extinguished.
               
               
                  

                  SELFISH and interested, to the last degree, a title had allurements suffi-cient to make her insensible to the in-jury she was preparing for the most amiable and most deserving of sons, by cutting him, perhaps, out of the succession; and, perhaps, the pro-spect, in case she had succeeded, of a long minority, had its weight with her. I know, pursued he, Sir John views her conduct in the same light that I do; but he has too much delicacy to explain himself.
               
               IT was painful to me to feel, for the mother of Mr. Harley, those emotions of contempt and dislike, which such a conduct naturally inspired. I could not conceal my astonishment at it.
               'THIS woman,' said he, never had any sensibility. They who blush not at their faults, but add confidence to their guilt, have no motive left to re-store them to the practice of virtue.
               
               
                  
MR. Harley did not return to dinner; at which we were not much surprised; as it was natural to suppose, that in con-ducting his mother on her way, he might exceed the limits he proposed to himself. But when night came, and he did not appear, my uncle became un-easy; and I, I own it, was gretly alarmed. I retired to my chamber, to conceal emotions it was not in my power to suppress. Either he neglects me, thought I, or some fatal accident has happened to him.
               I PASSED a considerable time in this state of anxiety, when one of the foot-men came back, and related, that Mr. Harley had been sddenly taken ill at an inn, where they stopped for some re-freshment; and that his mother had thought proper to take him home to her own house.
               As not a single line came from Mr. Harley on this occasion, we concluded

he must certainly be in a very danger-ous way. The servant either could not, or would not, give us any certain ac-count, so that we all passed an uneasy night.
               THE next day, just as my uncle was going to send one of the grooms to Mrs. Harley's, we saw Martin arrive. My uncle and Mr. Greville had not pa-tience to wait till he entered the house, but hastened to meet him. I remained in the room where they had left me in great anxiety, and trembling for the event.
               MR. Greville returned in a minute— 'Do not be alarmed,' said he, hastily, our friend is in no danger; though he is indisposed—I flew to tell you this, which is all. I have yet heard. He left me instantly, to go to my uncle; who had ordered Martin to follow him to his library, where he was giving him an account of what had happened.
               
                  
THE few words he had uttered, seemed to have removed a mountain from my breast, I began to breathe again; and for a few minutes enjoyed some little composure; but doubts and fears re-turned, and I was beginning to relapse into all my former inquietude, when Mr. Greville again entered; and draw-ing a chair close to me— 'Now,' said he, you shall know all that has passed.
               
               'AH!' said I, with an emotion which I was not aware of, you have deceived me—What is become of Mr. Harley? What fatal accident has happened? — He smiled. That smile relieved my fears; but awakened me to a sense of shame, at the transport to which I had so indiscreetly given way.
               'NOTHING,' said Mr. Greville, gravely, observing my confusion, that we suffer, is so bad as what we fear. Mr. Har-ley is not well enough to be with us

to-day, but we shall certainly see him to-morrow. Martin tells us, that his disorder was occasioned by a contest he was obliged to sustain with his mother, whose violent temper is well known. She obliged him, after they had travelled a few miles, to dis-mount, and come into the coach to her. —There an altercation ensued, so very lively, as to be heard distinctly by the servants, and particularly by Martin, who rode sometimes very near the coach. The subject was, Sir John's ungenerous use of the power her dependent situation gave him over her, in taking her youngest son out of her hands. She seemed disposed to contest this point with him: and upon Mr. Harley modestly, yet steadily, insisting upon his fulfilling the last in-junctions of his father, with regard to this child, his mother set no bounds to her rage, but loaded him with the severest reproaches.
               
               
                  

                  MR. Harley finding all his expostu-lations, intreaties, and submissions, were employed in vain to bring her to a better temper, reminded her of his promise to return to the Hall to dinner; and stopping the coach, or-dered the servant, who led his horse, to come up.
               
               
                  A VERY good inn being in sight; Mrs. Harley peremptorily insisted upon his dining with her on the road; which he complied with, in hopes, as it should seem, of leaving her more composed. But after dinner, the storm began with more violence than before. She ordered him, with an imprious air, to accompany her home. He pleaded his promise to Sir John; and assured her, if she would permit him to leave her then, he would re-turn to her the next day. This me-dium she refused; and continuing to rail, in the most indecent terms, against all he most loved and revered

in the world, a thousand conflicting passions seemed to rend his heart; his tongue maintained a respectful silence, but his inward agitations were apparently very violent.
               
               
                  MRS. Harley now ordered the horses to be put to the coach, and with an imperious air bid her son, as he handed her into it, to come in like-wise; he begged to be excused; and mounting his horse, rode on before, so swiftly, that he was presently out of sight. A heavy shower of rain now fell, and continued so long, and with such violence, that it was appre-hended Mr. Harley would suffer greatly, unless he found shelter some-where, which was not likely, as there was no inn upon the road, from thence to the parsonage house.
               
               
                  THE coachman drove furiosly, in order to overtake him; and accord-ingly they came up with him; but he

had alighted, tied his horse to a tree, under which he stood himself, drenched through with the rain. In this wet condition, he was prevailed upon to come into the coach; and after an hour's ride they reached the parsonage house. Mr. Harley, who had not ut-tered a single word all the time he was in the coach, desired a bed to be pre-pared for him; and bowing low to his mother, retired; apparently so ill, that she thought it necessary to send for the apothecary of the village, who, after visiting him, pronounced him to be feverish, and ordered him some medicines. Martin, however, rode to the next town to get a physician; who thought his sever rather high, but did not apprehend any dangerous con-sequences from it. He had a tolerable night, it seems; and the next morn-ing calling Martin to his bed-side, directed him what account he was to give to Sir John concerning the ac-cident that detained him. Accord-ingly
WHEN dinner-time approached, the skipper (for that is the title given to the Dutch commander of these little vessels) told us, that if we chose to dine on shore, he would come to an anchor near any spot we liked best; that the trees would afford us shade, and the mossy banks a table and seats. We all approved of this hint; Clara especi-ally, who is a little romantic.
                  WE pitched upon a very pastoral scene, and the boat carried us on shore; we sent it immediately to fetch Mrs. Benson; and soon afterwards the Co-lonel, who from his yacht had ob-served what was doing, joined us with his company. We had a very elegant cold collation; for our good friends at New-York had, unknown to us, sent a profusion of delicacies to increase our stores.
                  WE did not part till the evening, when, a fresh breeze springing up, we

Sir John is but half-informed of the truth, added Mr. Greville, and what I have told you, the honest and dis;creet old man imparted to me in private.
               
               MR. Greville accounts very naturally for this violent conduct in Mrs. Harley. —Her pride, mortified by the indiffer-ence of Sir John; her ambitious views disappointed, she proposed to herself a malicious pleasure in interrupting that happiness which she could not participate.
               I CANNOT help agreeing with Mr. Greville, that a woman so rash, fo selfish, and imprudent, is not fit to have the guidance of any of her children. But she will never yield to persuasions. It is superfluous to employ reason with those that have none, says he; she must be forced to comply. Extremes are always dangerous; but they be-come wise means, when they are ne-cessary.

It is true, indeed, they never work by halves, but will decide the matter one way or other.
               
               My uncle could not be satisfied with the favourable account Martin brought of Mr. Harley's present condition; he seemed determined to go and see him, and to carry his own physician with him; but Mr. Greville, apprehensive that Mrs. Harley might give him some disgust, prevailed upon him to lay aside all thoughts of this journey him-self, and consent to his going with the doctor; who was immediately sent to; and they both went away early in the morning.
               This was a melancholy interval. Fear is a great magnifier of evils, —My uncle reasoned so long upon the pro-bable consequences of what had hap-pened to Mr. Harley, that he almost reduced me to despair. The doctor's return restored us to some degree of

tranquillity; he affured us, that Mr. Harley was in no degree of danger, and that we might expecl to see him the next day, Mr. Greville staying to ac-company him. His arrival was impa-tiently expected by my uncle, who obliged me to walk with him several times down the avenue, in hopes of meeting the carriage.
               ALAS! it came not that day, nor the next; but the servants, who were dis-patched each day to the parsonage-house, always brought us favourable accounts from Mr. Greyille, which, however, contributed but little to the relief of our anxiety; and my uncle, now determined to set out himself, which I no longer opposed. While his post-chaise was getting ready, we took our usual melan-choly walk, and, to our inexpressible joy, the carriage appeared in sight. — My uncle left me, and, forgetting his gout, actually ran towards it.
               
                  
MR. Harley got out, and threw him-self into his arms. When I came up to them, I was amazed at the alteration I perceived in his countenance. Joy, at the sight of me, overspread his face with a faint blush, which instantly gave place to an ashy paleness. —His eyes had lost their sparkling vivacity; but they still retained that melting softness with which his partiality always beheld me.
               THE sight of him, thus altered, af-fected me so much, that I could have, wept like an infant, had not shame re-strained me. My uncle would needs support him as he walked to the house. Mr. Greville, as we followed them, took an opportunity to tell me, that Mrs. Harley was much altered in her behaviour; that she was perfectly com-plaisant, docile, and obliging; and ready to approve of every arrangement, in her own and her children's affairs, which Sir John should think fit to pro-pose.
               
                  
'WEAK persons,' he observed, never yield at the time they ought to do. It was not possible for her to recover the ground she had lost by her former violence; but as her present conduct seemed to promise no farther opposi-tion, we had reason to be contended.
               
               SIR John took not the least notice of her behaviour to Mr. Harley, but em-ployed all his attention in forwarding his recovery; and, indeed, he mends so fast, that we have reason to hope, his health will soon be perfectly re-esta-blished.
               My dear Euphemia, good fortune, as well as evil accidents, seldom come alone. I have this moment your dear, your welcome packet. Sir John's agent in London took care to forward it to me by one of his clerks, who is to take back what letters I have ready.
               
                  
A SHIP for New-York, he tells me, being to sail immediately, I have but just time to run it over; and, to my inex-pressible satisfaction, I find you have had an agreeable voyage, are well, and not unhappy. What a feast do you pre-pare for me, by writing thus to the mo-ment, and making me present to all the occurrences of your life. —All, all are of consequence to me! Heaven grant, that you may never send me less pleasing news! You cannot complain, nor be unhappy, by yourself alone; I partake of all your good or evil fortune; and feel so lively a reflexion of any uneasi-ness you suffer, that there needs but one blow to give two wounds.
               My uncle interrupts me, to tell me, the messenger waits for my packet. —He sends a thousand kind remem-brances to you. You know what a favourite you are with Mr. Greville; he forgot, that it is not decent for a wise man to be transported with joy

or grief, on any occasion whatever, but the news of your health, and safe arrival at your destined port, threw him so much off his guard, that he discovered little less sensibility than myself.
               MR. Harley would fain have me believe, that he admires and loves you as much as I do; but that is impossible, because, he does not know you as well. —But he begs me to tell you, that he joins with me, in every fond and tender wish for your health and happiness. —Adieu, my ever loved and valued friend—Adieu!
               
                  MARIA HARLEY.
               
               
                  P. S. You must make me acquainted with your kind and sensible friend, Mrs. Benson, whose affectionate attachment to you entitles her to my love and respect. Poor Fanny! she has writ-ten me a very pretty letter; remem-ber

me kindly to her. Her lover be-wails her absence with unaffected far-row, and, I am persuaded, will never forget her. — This circumstance you may either disclose, or conceal from her, as your prudence shall judge best.
               
            
            
               

               LETTER XXXVII. MRS. NEVILLE TO MISS HARLEY.
               
                  MY DEAR MARIA,
               
               WERE it possible for me to be less interested than 1 am in all your concerns, yet your agreeable narrative would have acted very powerfully upon my hopes and fears. When I reflect upon some passages you have related, I cannot helpsmiling at the blunders which distance produces. At the very mo-ment when I had reason to fear that fortune was preparing some obstacles to your happiness, that happiness was al-ready secured; and I hope and believe, that you were then the wife of that no-ble and generous youth who only could deserve you.
               
                  
I shall be very glad to hear that Mrs. Harley pursues her intention of retiring to France; a mother-in-law of her complexion will be best conciliated at a distance. Ceremony between per-sons so nearly connected, but ill supplies the place of cordiality and friendship, and leaves a craving void in the heart, which will sometimes be filled with peevishness and discontent; and a for-mal civility is all that can subsist between characters so opposite as yours and hers.
               IN Mrs. Bellenden, this acquired qua-lity of politeness is almost a virtue; and indeed it has the semblance of many— it makes her patient with absurdity, gen-tle with impertinence, forgiving with rudeness, and easy with all persons and on all occasions. You would admire her pleasing behaviour, and the grace with which she accommodates herself to the boorish manners of the men, and the awkward ignorance of the women of

            SOPHIA. BY Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
         
         
            

            SOPHIA.
            
               
                  CHAP. I. The different characters of two sisters.
               HARRIOT and Sophia were the daughters of a gentle-man, who, having spent a good paternal inheritance before he was five and thirty, was reduced to live upon the moderate salary of a place at court, which his friends procured him to get rid of his im-portunities. The same imprudence by which he had been governed in affairs of less importance, directed him

               
                  CHAP. VII. Sophia takes a very extraordinary re-solution. Mr. Herbert encourages her in it.
               SOPHIA, as if afraid she had said too much, stopped abrupt-ly, and, fixing her eyes on the ground, continued silent, and lost in thought.
               Mr. Herbert, who had well con-sidered the purport of her words, passed over what he thought would give her too much pain to be ex-plicit upon, and answered in great concern,
Then my fears are true! Sir Charles is not disposed to act like a man of honour.
               
               A sudden blush glowed in the cheeks of Sophia at the mention of Sir Charles's name; but it was not a blush of softness and confusion.

Anger and disdain took the place of that sweet complacency, which was the usual expression of her counte-nance, and with a voice somewhat raised, she replied eagerly,
               
                  Sir Charles I believe has de-ceived me; but him I can de-spise—Yet do not imagine, Sir, that he has dared to insult me by any unworthy proposals: if he has any unjustifiable views upon me, he has not had presumption enough to make me acquainted with them, otherwise than by neglecting to convince me that they are honourable; but he practises upon the easy credulity of my mother. He lays snares for her gratitude by an interested generosity, as I now too plainly perceive; and he has the art to make her so much his friend, that she will not listen to any

thing I say, which implies the least doubt of his honour.
               
               Mr. Herbert sighed, and cast down his eyes. Sophia continued in great emotion:
It is impossible for me, Sir, to make you comprehend all the difficulties of my situation. A man who takes every form to ensnare my affections, but none to convince my judgment, impor-tunes me continually with decla-rations of tenderness, and com-plaints of my coldness and indif-ference: what can I do? what ought I to answer to such dis-course? In this perplexity, why will not my mother come to my assistance? her years, her autho-rity as a parent, give her a right to require such an explanation from Sir Charles as may free me from doubts, which although reason suggests, delicacy permits

me not to make appear; but such is my misfortune, that I cannot persuade my mother there is the least foundation for my fears. She is obstinate in her good opinion of Sir Charles; and I am reduced to the sad necessity of either acting in open contra-diction to her sentiments and commands, or of continuing in a state of humiliating suspence, to which my character must at last fall a sacrifice.
               
               "That, my dear child," inter-rupted Mr. Herbert,
is a point which ought to be considered. I would not mention it to you first; but since your own good sense has led the way to it, I will frankly own that I am afraid, innocent and good as you are, the censures of the world will not spare you, if you continue to receive Sir Charles's visits, doubt-ful

as his intentions now appear to every one: I know Mrs. Darnley judges of the sincerity of his professions to you, by the generosity he has shewn in the presents he has heaped upon her: —but, my dear child, that ge-nerosity was always suspected by me.
               
               "I confess," said Sophia, blush-ing,
I once thought favourably of him, for the attention he shew-ed to make my mother's life easy; but if his liberality to her be in-deed, as you seem to think, a snare, what opinion ought I to form of his motives for a late offer he has made her, and which at first dazzled me, so noble and so disinterested did it appear!
               
               "I know no offer but one," interrupted Mr. Herbert hastily,
which you ought even to have listened to.
               
               
                  

                  Then the secret admonitions of my heart were right!
cried Sophia with an accent that at once expressed exultation and grief.
               
                  But what was this offer, child,
said Mr. Herbert?
I am impatient to know it.
               
               
                  I will tell you the whole affair as it happened,
resumed Sophia;
but you must not be surprised, that my mother was pleased with Sir Charles's offer. He has been her benefactor, and has a claim to her regard: it would be strange if she had not a good opinion of him. You know what that celebrated divine says, whose writings you have made me acquainted with: Charity it-self commands us where we know no ill, to think well of all; but friendship, that goes always a pitch higher, gives a man a peculiar right and claim to the good opi-nion

of his friend. My mother may be mistaken in the judg-ment she has formed of Sir Charles; but it is her friendship for him, a friendship founded upon gratitude for the good offi-ces he has done her, that has given rise to this mistake.
               
               Sophia, in her eagerness to justify her mother, forgot that she had raised Mr. Herbert's curiosity, and left it unsatisfied; and the good old man, charmed with the filial ten-derness she shewed upon this occa-sion, listened to her with compla-cency, though not with conviction. At length she suddenly recollected herself, and entered upon her story; but a certain hesitation in her speech, accompanied with a bashful air that made her withdraw her eyes from him, to fix them upon the ground, intimated plainly enough her own sentiments of the

affair she was going to acquaint him with.
               "You know, Sir," said she,
Sir Charles has had a fit of ill-ness lately, which alarmed all his friends. My mother was parti-cularly attentive to him upon this occasion, and I believe he was sensibly affected with her kind concern for him. When he recovered, he begged my mo-ther, my sister, and myself, would accompany him in a little excursion to Hampstead to take the air. We dined there, and returning home early in the evening, as we passed through Brook-street, he ordered the coach to stop at the door of a very genteel house, which ap-peared to be newly painted and fitted up. Sir Charles desired us to go in with him and look at it, and give him our opinion of the

furniture. Nothing could be more elegant and genteel, and we told him so; at which he ap-peared extremely pleased, for all had been done, he said, accord-ing to his directions.
               
               
                  He came home with us, and drank tea; after which he had a private conversation with my mother, which lasted about a quarter of an hour; and when they returned to the room where they had left my sister and I, Sir Charles appeared to me to have an unusual thought-fulness in his countenance, and my mother looked as if she had been weeping; yet there was at the same time, an expression of satisfaction in her face.
               
               
                  He went away immediately, when my mother, eager to give vent to the emotions which filled

her heart, exclaimed, Oh, So-phia, how much are you obliged to the generous affection of that man!
               
               "You may imagine, Sir," pur-sued Sophia, in a sweet confusion,
that I was greatly affected with these words. I begged my mo-ther to explain herself. Sir Charles,
said she,
has made you a present of that house which we went to view this af-ternoon; and here,
added she, giving me a paper,
is a deed by which he has settled three hun-dred pounds a year upon you.
               
               
                  I was silent, so was my sister, who looked at me as if impatient to know my thoughts of this extraordinary generosity. My thoughts indeed were so perplex-ed, my notions of this manner of acting so confused and uncer-tain, that I knew not what to

likewise in the choice of a wife: the woman he married had no merit but beauty, and brought with her to the house of a man whose fortune was already ruined, nothing but a taste for luxury and expence, without the means of gratifying it.
               Harriot, the eldest daughter of this couple, was, like her mother, a beauty, and upon that account, as well as the conformity of her tem-per and inclinations to hers, en-grossed all her affection.
               Sophia she affected to despise, be-cause she wanted in an equal degree those personal attractions, which in her opinion constituted the whole of female perfection. Mere common judges, however, allowed her person to be agreeable; people of discern-ment and taste pronounced her some-thing more. There was diffused throughout the whole person of So-phia a certain secret charm, a natu-ral

say. My mother told us Sir Charles had declared to her, that his late illness had given him oc-casion for many uneasy reflections upon my account; that he shud-dered with horror when he con-sidered the unhappy state of my fortune, and to what difficulties I should have been exposed if he had died; and that, for the sa-tisfaction of his own mind, he had made that settlement upon me, that whatever happened I might be out of the reach of ne-cessity.
               
               "I am afraid, Sir," pursued So-phia with a little confusion in her countenance,
that you will con-demn me when I tell you I was so struck at first with the seem-ing candor and tenderness of Sir Charles's motives for this act of generosity, that none but the most

grateful sentiments rose in my mind.
               
               "No, my dear," replied Mr. Herbert,
I do not condemn you: this snare was artfully laid; but when was it that your heart, or rather your reason, gave you those secret admonitions you spoke of?
               
               "Immediately," said Sophia:
a moment's reflection upon the conduct of Sir Charles served to shew me that some latent design lay concealed under this specious offer; but I am obliged to my sister for giving me a more distinct notion of it than my own confused ideas could furnish me with.
               
               
                  Then you desired to know her opinion,
said Mr. Herbert.
               "Certainly," resumed Sophia,
this conversation passed in her

presence, and as my elder sister she had a right to be con-sulted.
               
               "Pray what did she say?" asked Mr. Herbert impatiently.
               "You know, Sir," said Sophia, with a gentle smile,
my sister takes every opportunity to rally me about my pretensions to wit: she told me it was great conde-scension in me, who thought my-self wiser than all the world be-sides, to ask her advice upon this occasion; and that she would not expose herself to my con-tempt, by declaring her opinion, any farther than that she supposed Sir Charles did not consider this as a marriage-settlement.
               
               "These last words," pursued So-phia, whose face was now covered with a deeper blush,
let in so much light upon my mind, that I was ashamed and angry with myself

for having doubted a moment of Sir Charles's insincerity. I thank-ed my sister, and told her she should see that I would profit by the hint she had given me.
               
               "I wish," interrupted Mr. Her-bert,
that she may profit as much by you: but people of good un-derstanding learn more from the ignorant than the ignorant do from them, because the wise avoid the follies of fools, but fools will not follow the example of the wise: but what did Mrs. Darnley say to this?
               
               
                  I never saw her so angry with my sister before,
replied Sophia:
she said several severe things to her, which made her leave the room in great emotion; and when we were alone, I endeavoured to con-vince my mother that it was not fit I should make myself a de-pendant upon Sir Charles, by ac-cepting

such considerable pre-sents: she was, however, of a different opinion, because Sir Charles's behaviour had been al-ways respectful in the highest de-gree to me, and because the man-ner in which he made this offer, left no room to suspect that he had any other design in it but to secure a provision for me, in case any thing should happen to him.
               
               
                  Your mother imposes upon her-self,
replied Mr. Herbert;
but I hope, my dear child, you think more justly.
               
               
                  You may judge of my senti-ments, Sir,
answered Sophia,
by the resolution I have taken: I wished to consult you; but as I had no opportunity for it, I satis-fied myself with doing what I thought you would approve. My mother, prest by my argu-ments,

told me in a peevish way that I might act as I thought proper: upon which I retired, and, satisfied with this permis-sion, I enclosed the settlement in a cover directed to Sir Charles. I had just sealed it, and was going to send it away, when my mother came into my room: I perceived she was desirous to renew the conversation about Sir Charles; but I carefully avoided it, for fear she should re-tract the permission she had given me to act as I pleased upon this occasion. My reserve piqued her so much, that she forbore to enter upon the subject again; but as I had no opportunity of sending any letter that night without her knowledge, I was obliged to go to bed much richer than I desired to be; and the next morning, when we were at

breakfast, a letter was brought me from Sir Charles, dated four o'clock, in which he informed me that he was just setting out in a post-chaise for Bath. His uncle, who lies there at the point of death, has it seems earnestly de-sired to see him, and the messen-ger told him he had not a minute to lose.
               
               "I am sorry," interrupted Mr. Herbert,
that he did not get your letter before he went.
               
               Sophia then taking it out of her pocket, gave it to him, and begged he would contrive some way to have it safely delivered to Sir Charles;
and now, added she, my heart is easy on that side, and I have no-thing to do but to arm myself with fortitude to bear the ten-der reproaches of a mother, whose anxiety for my interest makes her see this affair in a very

different light from that in which you and I behold it.
               
               Mr. Herbert put the letter care-fully into his pocket-book, and pro-mised her it should be conveyed to Sir Charles; then taking her hand, which he pressed affectionately,
You have another sacrifice yet to make, my dear good child,
said he,
and I hope it will not cost you much to make it. You must resolve to see Sir Charles no more: it is not fit you should receive his visits, since you suspect his de-signs are not honourable, and you have but too much cause for suspicion. It is not enough to be virtuous: we must appear so likewise; we owe the world a good example, the world, which oftener rewards the appearances of merit, than merit itself. It will be impossible for you to avoid seeing Sir Charles some-times,

if you continue with your mother: you have no authority to forbid his visits here; and whether you share them or not, they will be all placed to your account. Are you willing, Miss Sophia, to go into the country, and I will board you in the fa-mily of a worthy clergyman, who is my friend? His wife and daughters will be agreeable com-panions for you; you will find books enough in his study to em-ploy those hours which you de-vote to reading, and his conver-sation will be always a source of instruction and delight.
               
               Sophia, with tears in her eyes, and a look so expressive that it con-veyed a stronger idea of the grateful sentiments which filled her heart, than any words could do, thanked the good old man for his generous offer, and told him she was ready to

leave London whenever he pleased: but unwilling to be an incumbrance upon his little fortune, she intreated him to be diligent in his enquiries for a place for her, that she might early inure herself to the humble condition which Providence thought fit to allot for her.
               Mr. Herbert, entering into her delicate scruples, promised to pro-cure her a proper establishment; and it was agreed between them that he should acquaint her mother the next day with the resolution the had taken, and endeavour to pro-cure her consent to it.
            
            
               

grace which cannot be defined; she was not indeed so beautiful as her sister, but she was more attrac-tive; her complexion was not so fair as Harriot's, nor her features so re-gular, but together they were full of charms: her eyes were particularly fine, large, and full of fire, but that fire tempered with a tenderness so bewitching, as insensibly made its way to the heart. Harriot had beauty, but Sophia had something more; she had graces.
               One of the most beautiful fictions of Homer, says the celebrated Mon-tesquieu, is that of the girdle which gave Venus the power of pleasing. Nothing is more proper to give us an idea of the magick and force of the graces, which seem to be given to a person by some invisible power, and are distinguished from beauty it-self.
               Harriot's charms produced at the

               
                  CHAP. VIII. Mr. Herbert and Sophia carry their Point with great Difficulty.
               MR. Herbert well knew all the difficulties of this task, and prepared himself to sustain the storm which he expected would fall upon him. He visited Mrs. Darn-ley in the morning, and finding her alone, entered at once into the affair, by telling her that he had performed the commission Miss Sophia had given him; that a friend of his who was going to Bath would take care to deliver her letter to her unworthy lover, who, added he, will be convinced, by her re-turning his settlement, that she has a just notion of his base designs, and despises him as well for his falshood and presumption, as for

the mean opinion he has entertained of her.
               The old gentleman, who was perfectly well acquainted with Mrs. Darnley's character, and had stu-died his part, would not give her time to recover from the astonish-ment his first words had thrown her into, which was strongly im-pressed upon her countenance, and which seemed to deprive her of the power of speech; but added, with an air natural enough,
Your con-duct, Mrs. Darnley, deserves the highest praises; indeed I know not which to admire most, your disinterestedness, prudence, and judgment; or Miss Sophia's rea-dy obedience, and the noble sa-crifice she makes to her honour and reputation. You knew her virtue might be securely depend-ed upon, and you permitted her to act as she thought proper with

regard to the insidious offer Sir Charles made her: thus, by trans-ferring all the merit of a refusal to her, you reflect a double lustre upon your own, and she has fully answered your intentions by re-jecting that offer with the con-tempt it deserved.
               
               While Mr. Herbert went on in this strain, Mrs. Darnley insensibly forgot her resentment; her features assumed all that complacency which gratified vanity and self-applause could impress upon them: and al-though she was conscious her sen-timents were very different from those which Mr. Herbert attributed to her, yet, as she had really spoke those words to Sophia which had given her a pretence to act as she had done, she concluded his praises were sincere, and enjoyed them as much as if she had deserved them.
               
                  
It was her business now, how-ever vexed at her daughter's folly, as she conceived it, to seem highly satisfied with her conduct, since what she had done could not be recalled; yet inwardly fretting at the loss of so noble a present, all her dissimulation could not hinder her from saying, that although she approved of Sophia's refusal, yet she could not help thinking she had been very precipitate, and that she ought to have waited till Sir Charles returned; and not have sent, but have given him back his settlement.
               Mr. Herbert, without answering to that point, told her, that what now remained for her prudence to do was, to take away all founda-tion for slander, by peremptorily forbidding Sir Charles's future vi-sits; (here Mrs. Darnley began to frown)
for since it is plain to us

all, madam,
pursued he, with-out seeming to perceive her emo-tion,
that marriage is not his in-tention, by being allowed to continue his addresses, miss So-phia's character will suffer great-ly in the opinion of the world; and the wisdom and discretion by which you have hitherto been governed in this affair, will not secure you from very unfavour-able censures. To shew there-fore how much you are in earnest to prevent them, I think it is absolutely necessary that you should send your daughter out of this man's way.
               
               Mrs. Darnley, who thought she had an unanswerable objection to make to this scheme, in-terrupted him eagerly,
You know my circumstances, Mr. Herbert, you know I cannot af-ford to send my daughter from

me; how am I to dispose of her, pray?
               
               
                  Let not that care trouble you, madam,
replied Mr. Herbert,
I will take all this expence upon myself: I love Miss Sophia as well as if she was my own child; and slender as my income is, I will be at the charge of her maintenance till fortune and her own merit place her in a better situation.
               
               Mr. Herbert then acquainted her with the name and character of the clergyman in whose family he in-tended to place Sophia: he added, that the village to which she was going being at no great distance, she might hear from her frequent-ly, and sometimes visit her, without much expence or inconvenience.
               Mrs. Darnley having nothing that was reasonable to oppose to these kind and generous offers, had

recourse to rage and exclamation. She told Mr. Herbert that he had no right to interpose in the affairs of her family; that he should not dispose of her daughter as he pleas-ed; that she would exert the au-thority of a parent, and no officious meddler should rob her of her child.
               Mr. Herbert now found it ne-cessary to change his method with this interested mother,
Take care, madam,
said he, with a severe look,
how far you carry your op-position in this case: the world has its eyes upon your conduct; do not give it reason to say that your daughter is more prudent and cautious than you are; nor force her to do that without your consent which you ought to be the first to advise her to.
               
               "Without my consent!" re-plied Mrs. Darnley, almost breath-less

with rage;
will she go with-out my consent, say you; have you alienated her affections from me so far? I will soon know that.
               
               Then rising with a furious air, she called Sophia, who came into the room, trembling, and in the utmost agitation. The melancho-ly that appeared in her counte-nance, the paleness and disorder, the consequences of a sleepless night, which she had passed in various and afflicting thoughts, made Mr. Herbert apprehensive that her mother's obstinacy would prove too hard for her gentle dis-position; and that her heart, thus assaulted with the most powerful of all passions, love and filial ten-derness, would insensibly betray her into a consent to stay.
               Mrs. Darnley giving her a look of indignation, exclaimed with the

sarcastic severity with which she used formerly to treat her;
So my wise, my dutiful daughter! you cannot bear, it seems, to live with your mother; you are resolved to run away from me, are you?
               
               "Madam," replied Sophia, with a firmness that disconcerted Mrs. Darnley, as much as it pleasingly surprised Mr. Herbert,
it is not you I am running away from, as you unkindly say, I am going into the country to free myself from the pursuits of a man who has imposed upon your goodness, and my credulity; one who I am convinced, seeks my disho-nour, and whose ensnaring ad-dresses have already, I am afraid, given a wound to my reputa-tion, which nothing but the re-solution I have taken to avoid him can heal.
               
               
                  
Poor Sophia, who had with diffi-culty prevailed over her own soft-ness to speak in this determined manner, could not bear to see the confusion into which her answer had thrown her mother; but sigh-ing deeply, she retired towards the window, and wiped away the tears that fell from her charming eyes.
               Mrs. Darnley, who observed her emotion, and well knew how to take advantage of that amiable weakness in her temper, which made any opposition, however just and necessary, painful to her, de-sired Mr. Herbert to leave her alone with her daughter, adding that his presence was a constraint upon them both.
               Sophia, hearing this, and dread-ing lest he should leave her to sus-tain the storm alone, went towards her mother, and with the most

first sight all the effect they were ca-pable of; a second look of Sophia was more dangerous than the first, for grace is seldomer found in the face than the manners; and, as our man-ner is formed every moment, a new surprise is perpetually creating. A woman can be beautiful but one way, she can be graceful a thousand.
               Harriot was formed to be the ad-miration of the many; Sophia the passion of the few, the sweet sensi-bility of her countenance, the pow-erful expression of her eyes, the soft elegance of her shape and motion, a melodious voice, whose varied ac-cents enforced the sensible things she always said, were beauties not capa-ble of striking vulgar minds; and which were sure to be eclipsed by the dazling lustre of her sister's com-plexion, and the fire of two bright eyes, whose looks were as quick and unsettled as her thoughts.
               
                  

persuasive look and accent, begged her not to part in anger from Mr. Herbert.
               "I cannot forgive Mr. Herbert," said Mrs Darnley,
for supposing I am less concerned for your ho-nour than he is. I see no necessi-ty for your going into the coun-try; your reputation is safe while you are under my care; it is time enough to send you out of Sir Charles's way when we are convinced his designs are not honourable. Mr. Herbert, by filling your head with groundless apprehensions, will be the ruin of your fortune.
               
               
                  Sir Charles's dissembled affec-tion for me,
interrupted Sophia,
will be the ruin of my character. There is no way to convince the world that I am not the willing dupe of his artifices, but by fly-ing from him as far as I can: do

not, my dear mamma,
pursued she, bursting into tears,
oppose my going; my peace of mind, my reputation depend upon it.
               
               
                  You shall go when I think proper,
replied Mrs. Darnley; "and as for you, Sir," turning to Mr. Herbert,
I desire you will not interpose any farther in this matter.
               
               "Indeed I must, madam," said the good old man, encouraged by a look Sophia gave him;
I consider myself as guardian to your daughter, and in that quality I pretend to some right to regulate her conduct on an occasion which requires a guardian's care and authority.
               
               "Ridiculous!" exclaimed Mrs. Darnley, with a malignant sneer,
what a jest! to call yourself guardian to a girl who has not a shilling to depend upon.
               
               
                  

                  I am the guardian of her ho-nour and reputation,
said Mr. Herbert:
these make up her for-tune: and with these she is richer than if she possessed thousands without them.
               
               "And do you, Miss," said Mrs. Darnley to her daughter, with a scornful air,
do you allow this foolish claim? Are you this gen-tleman's ward, pray?
               
               "Come, madam," said Mr. Her-bert, willing to spare Sophia the pain of answering her question,
be persuaded that I have the ten-derness of a parent, as well as guardian, for your daughter: it is absolutely necessary she should see Sir Charles no more; and the most effectual method she can take to shun him, and to preserve her character, is to leave a place where she will be continually exposed to his importunity. I

hope she will be able to procure your consent to her going to-morrow. I shall be here in the morning with a post-chaise, and will conduct her myself to the house of my friend, whom I have already prepared by a letter to receive her.
               
               Mr. Herbert, without waiting for any answer, bowed and left the room. Sophia followed him to the door, and by a speaking glance as-sured him he might depend upon her perseverance.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. IX. In which Sophia shews less of the He-roine than the Woman.
               AS soon as Mr. Herbert went away, Harriot, who had been listening, and had heard all that past, entered the room. The vir-tue and strength of mind her sister shewed in the design she had form-ed of flying from Sir Charles Stan-ley excited her envy; and she would have joined with her mother in en-deavouring to prevail upon her to stay, to prevent the superiority such a conduct gave her, had not that envy found a more sensible gratifi-cation in the thought that Sophia would no longer receive the ado-rations of the young baronet; and that all her towering hopes would

be changed to disappointment and grief.
               The discontinuance of those pre-sents which Sir Charles so liberally bestowed on them, evidently on Sophia's account, and which had hitherto enabled them to live in af-fluence, affected her but little; for vanity is a more powerful pas-sion than interest in the heart of a coquet; and the pleasure of seeing her sister mortified and deserted by her lover, outweighed all other con-siderations: besides, she was not without hopes that when Sophia was out of the way, her own charms would regain all their former in-fluence over the heart of Sir Charles.
               She came prepared, therefore, to support her in her resolution of go-ing into the country; but Mrs. Darnley, who did not enter into her views, and who had no other

attention but to secure to herself that ease and affluence she at pre-sent enjoyed, expected Harriot would use her utmost efforts to pre-vent her sister from disobliging a man whose liberality was the source of their happiness.
               She complained to her in a ten-der manner of Sophia's unkindness; she exaggerated the ill consequences that might be apprehended from the affront she put on Sir Charles, by thus avowing the most injurious sus-picions of him; and declared she expected nothing less than to be reduced by the loss of her pen-sion to that state of misery from which he had formerly relieved her.
               Sophia melted into tears at these words; but a moment's reflection convinced her, that her mo-ther's apprehensions were altogether groundless: Sir Charles was not ca-pable

of so mean a revenge; and Sophia, on this occasion, defended him with so much ardor, that Miss Darnley could not help indulging her malice, by throwing out some severe sarcasms upon the violence of her affection for a man whom she affected to despise.
               Sophia blushed; but answered calmly,
Well, sister, if I love Sir Charles Stanley, I have the more merit in leaving him.
               
               
                  Oh, not a bit the more for that,
replied Harriot;
for, as I read in one of your books just now, Virtue would not go so far, if pride did not bear her com-pany.
                  
               
               
                  You might also have read, sis-ter,
said Sophia,
that no woman is envious of another's virtue who is conscious of her own.
               
               This retort threw Harriot into so violent a rage, that Sophia, who

knew what excesses she was ca-pable of, left the room, and retired to pack up her cloaths, that she might be ready when Mr. Herbert called for her.
               In this employment Mrs. Darn-ley gave her no interruption; for Harriot having quitted her mother in a huff, because she did not join with her against Sophia, she was left at liberty to pursue her own reflections. After long doubt and perplexity in what manner to act, she resolved to consent that Sophia should depart; for she saw plainly that it would not be in her power to prevent it, and she was willing to derive some merit from the ne-cessity she was under of complying. She considered that if Sir Charles really loved her daughter, her flight on such motives would rather in-crease than lessen his passion; and that all his resentment for being de-prived

of her sight would fall upon Mr. Herbert, who alone was in fault.
               Mrs. Darnley, as has been be-fore observed, was not of a temper to anticipate misfortunes, or to give herself much uneasiness about evils in futurity: she always hoped the best, not because she had any well-grounded reasons for it, but because it was much more pleasing to hope than to fear.
               Sophia, when she saw her next, found her surprisingly altered: she not only no longer opposed her de-parture, but even seemed desirous of it; and this she thought a mas-ter-piece of cunning which could not fail of gaining Mr. Herbert's good opinion; never once reflect-ing that her former opposition de-prived her of all the merit of a vo-luntary compliance.
               This change in Mrs. Darnley left Sophia no more difficulties to
While Harriot was receiving the improvement of a polite education, Sophia was left to form herself as well as she could; happily for her a just taste and solid judgment supplied the place of teachers, precept, and example. The hours that Harriot wasted in dress, company, and gay amusements, were by Sophia devoted to reading.
               A good old gentleman, who was nearly related to her father, perceiv-ing this taste in her, encouraged it by his praises, and furnished her with the means of gratifying it, by constantly supplying her with such books as were best calculated to im-prove her morals and understanding. His admiration encreasing in propor-tion as he had opportunities of ob-serving her merit, he undertook to teach her the French and Italian lan-guages, in which she soon made a surprising progress; and by the time

encounter but what she found in her own heart. Industrious to de-ceive herself, she had imputed all the uneasy emotions there to the grief of leaving her mother contra-ry to her inclination: she had now her free consent to go, yet still those perturbations remained. She thanked her mother for her indul-gence: she took her hand, and tenderly pressed it to her lips, tears at the same time flowing fast from her eyes.
               Mrs. Darnley was cruel enough to shew that she understood the cause of this sudden passion. "What," said she,
to the poor blushing Sophia, after all the clut-ter you have made about leaving Sir Charles, does your heart fail you now you come to the trial?
               
               Sophia, abashed and silent, hid her glowing face with her hand-kerchief;

and having with some dif-ficulty represt another gush of tears, assumed composure enough to tell her mother that she hoped she should never want fortitude to do her duty.
               "To be sure," replied Mrs. Darnley,
with asneer, one so wise as you can never mistake your duty.
               
               Sophia however understood hers so well that she did not offer to re-criminate upon this occasion; for Mrs. Darnley was but a shallow po-litician, and was thrown so much off her guard by the vexation she felt, that an affair on which she built such great hopes had taken so different a turn, that she gave plain indications of her displeasure, and that her consent to her daughter's going was indeed extorted from her.
               Sophia had many of these assaults to sustain, as well from Harriot as

Mrs. Darnley, during the re-mainder of that day; but they were of use to her. Her pride was concerned to prevent giving a real cause for such sarcasms as her sister in particular threw out: opposition kept up her spirits, and preserved her mind from yielding to that ten-der grief which the idea of parting for ever from Sir Charles excited.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. X. The Description of two Rural Beauties.
               WHEN Mr. Herbert came the next morning, Mrs. Darnley, who had no better part to play, had recourse again to dissi-mulation, and expressed great wil-lingness to send her daughter away; but the good man, who saw the feint in her overacted satisfaction, suffered her to imagine that she had effectually imposed upon him.
               Sophia wept when she took leave of her mother, and returned the cold salute her sister gave her with an affectionate embrace. She sigh-ed deeply as Mr. Herbert helped her into the post-chaise; and con-tinued pensive and silent for several minutes, not daring to raise her

eyes up to her kind conductor, lest he should read in them what passed in her heart.
               Mr. Herbert, who guessed what she felt on this occasion, was sensi-bly affected with that soft melan-choly, so easy to be discovered in her countenance, notwithstanding all her endeavours to conceal it. He wished to comfort her, but the subject was too delicate to be men-tioned: kind and indulgent as he was, he began to think his admired Sophia carried her concern on this occasion too far; so true that obser-vations is, that the case of tried virtue is harder than that of untried: we require from it as debts continual exertions of its power, and if we are at any time disappointed in our ex-pectations, we blame with resent-ment as if we had been deceived.
               Sophia's sensibility, however, was very excusable; in flying from Sir

Charles she had done all that the most rigid virtue could demand; for as yet she had only suspicions against him; and this man, whose generous gift she had returned with silent scorn, whom she had avoid-ed as an enemy, had hitherto be-haved to her with all the tender-ness of a lover, and all the benevo-lence of a friend. It was under that amiable idea that he now pre-sented himself to her imagination; her pride and her resentment were appeased by the sacrifice she had made in her abrupt departure, and every unkind thought of him was changed to tender regret for his loss.
               Mr. Herbert, by not attempting to divert the course of her reflec-tions, soon drew her out of her revery: his silence and reserve first intimated to her the impropriety of her behaviour. She immediately

assumed her usual composure, and during the remainder of their little journey, she appeared as chearful and serene as if nothing extraordi-nary had happened.
               The good curate with whom she was to lodge having rode out to meet his friend and his fair guest, joined them when they had come within three miles of his house. Mr. Herbert, who had descried him at a little distance, shewed him to Sophia: "There, my dear," said he,
is a man who, with more pie-ty and learning than would serve to make ten bishops, is oblig-ed to hire himself out at the rate of sixty pounds a year, to do the duty of the parish church, the rector of which enjoys three lu-crative benefices, without pray-ing or preaching above five times in a twelvemonth.
               
               Mr. Lawson, for that was the

curate's name, had now galloped up to the chaise, which Mr. Her-bert had ordered the post-boy to stop, and many kind salutations passed between the two friends.
               Sophia was particularly pleased with the candor and benevolonce which appeared in the looks and behaviour of the good clergyman; who gazed on her attentively, and found the good opinion he had en-tertained of her from Mr. Her-bert's representations fully confirm-ed. The bewitching sweetness in her voice and eyes, the spirit that animated her looks, and the pecu-liar elegance of her person and ad-dress, produced their usual effects, and filled Mr. Lawson's heart with sentiments of tenderness, esteem, and respect for her.
               Mrs. Lawson and her two daughters received her with that true politeness which is founded on

good sense and good nature. Both the young women were extremely agreeable in their persons, and So-phia contemplated with admiration the neat simplicity of their dress, their artless beauty, and native sweetness of manners. Health dyed their cheeks with blushes more beautiful than those the fine lady borrows from paint; innocence and chearfulness lighted up smiles in their faces, as powerful as those of the most finished coquet; and good humour and a sincere desire of obliging, gave graces to their be-haviour which ceremony but poor-ly imitates.
               These were Sophia's observations to Mr. Herbert, who seized the first opportunity of speaking to her apart, to ask her opinion of her new companions. He was rejoiced to hear her express great satisfaction in her new situation, and not doubting

but time and absence, assisted by her own good sense and virtue, would banish Sir Charles Stan-ley entirely from her remembrance; he scrupled not to leave her at the end of three days, after hav-ing tenderly recommended her to the care of this little worthy family, every individual of which already loved her with extreme af-fection.
               Sophia was indeed so much de-lighted with the new scene of life she had entered upon, and her fancy was at first so struck with the novelty of all the objects she beheld, that the continual dissipa-tion of her thoughts left no room for the idea of the baronet: but this deceitful calm lasted not long. She soon found by experi-ence, that the silence and solitude of the country were more proper to nourish love than to destroy it;

she had reached her fifteenth year, she had read all the best authors in them, as well as in her own.
               By this unwearied application to reading, her mind became a beauti-ful store-house of ideas: hence she derived the power and the habit of constant reflection, which at once enlarged her understanding, and con-firmed her in the principles of piety and virtue.
               As she grew older the manage-ment of the family entirely devolved upon her; for her mother had no taste for any thing but pleasure, and her sister was taught to consider her-self as a fine lady, whose beauty could not fail to make her fortune, and whose sole care it ought to be to dress to the greatest advantage, and make her appearance in every place where she might encrease the number of her admirers.
               Sophia, in acquitting herself of

and that groves and meads, the nightingale's song, and the rivulet's murmur, were food for tender me-lancholy, and the soft reveries of imagination.
               Mr. Lawson's house was most ro-manticly situated on the borders of a spacious park; from whose opulent owner he rented a small farm, which supplied his fami-ly with almost all the necessaries of life. Mrs. Lawson his wife, brought him a very small for-tune, but a great stock of virtue, good sense, and prudence. She had seen enough of the world to polish her manners without cor-rupting her heart; and having lived most part of her time in the country, she understood rural af-fairs perfectly well, and superintend-ed all the business of their little farm. Their two daughters were at once the best house-wifes, and

the most accomplished young wo-men in that part of the country. Mr. Lawson took upon himself the delightful task of improving their minds, and giving them a taste for useful knowledge: and their mother, besides instructing them in all the economical duties suit-able to their humble fortunes, form-ed them to those decencies of manners and propriety of beha-viour, which she had acquired by a genteel education, and the con-versation of persons of rank. In the affairs of the family, each of the young women had their par-ticular province assigned them. Dolly, the eldest, presided in the dairy; and Fanny, so was the youngest called, assisted in the ma-nagement of the house. Sophia soon entertained a friendship for them both; but a powerful incli-nation attached her particularly to

Dolly. There was in the coun-tenance of this young woman a cer-tain sweetness and sensibility that pleased Sophia extremely; and though she had all that chearful-ness which youth, health, and in-nocence inspire, yet the pensiveness that would sometimes steal over her sweet features, the gentle sighs that would now and then escape her, excited a partial tender-ness for her in the heart of Sophia.
               She took pleasure in assisting her in her little employments. Dolly insensibly lost that awe which the presence of the fair Londoner first inspired, and repaid her tenderness with that warmth of affection which only young and innocent minds are capable of feeling.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XI. Sophia makes an interesting Disco-very.
               SOPHIA, instructed by her own experience, soon discovered that her young friend was in love; but neither of them disclosed the secret of their hearts to each other. Dolly was with-held by bashful timidity, Sophia by delicate reserve. Fond as they were of each other's company, yet the want of this mutual confi-dence made them sometime chuse to be alone. Sophia having one evening strayed in the wood, wholly absorbed in melancholy thoughts, lost her way, and was in some per-plexity how to recover the path that led to Mr. Lawson's house; when looking anxiously around her, she saw Dolly at a distance, sitting un-der

a tree. Overjoyed to meet her so luckily, she was running up to her, but stopped upon the appear-ance of a young man, who, seeing Dolly, flew towards her with the utmost eagerness, and with such an expression of joyful surprize in his countenance, as persuaded her this meeting was accidental.
               Sophia, not willing to interrupt their conversation, passed on softly behind the trees, unobserved by Dolly, who continued in the same pensive attitude; but being now nearer to her, she perceived she was weeping excessively.
               Sophia, who was greatly affected at this fight, could not help accom-panying her tears with some of her own; and not daring to stir a step farther, for fear of being seen by the youth, she resolved to take advantage of her situation, to know

the occasion of Dolly's extraordi-nary affliction.
               The poor girl was so wrapt in thought, that she neither saw nor heard the approach of her lover, who called to her in the tenderest accent imaginable,
My dear Dolly, is it you? Won't you look at me? Won't you speak to me? What have I done to make you angry, my love? Don't go,
(for upon hearing his voice she started from her seat, and seemed desirous to avoid him)
don't go, my dear Dolly,
said he, following her, (and she went slowly enough)
don't drive me to despair.
               
               
                  What would you have me do, Mr. William,
said she, stopping and turning gently towards him;
you know my father has forbid me to speak to you, and I would die rather than disoblige him:

you may thank your proud rich aunt for all this. Pray let me go,
pursued she, making some faint efforts to withdraw her hand, which he had seized and held fast in his,
you must forget me, Wil-liam, as I have resolved to forget you,
added she sighing, and turning away her head, lest he should see the tears that fell from her eyes.
               Cruel as these words sounded in the ears of the passionate William, yet he found something in her voice and actions that comforted him; "No, my dear Dolly," said he, endeavouring to look in her averted face,
I will not believe that you have resolved to forget me; you can no more forget me, than I can you, and I shall love you as long as I live—I know you say this only to grieve me; you do not mean it.
               
               
                  
"Yes, I do mean it," replied Dolly, in a peevish accent, vexed that he had seen her tears.
I know my duty, and you shall find that I can obey my father.
While she spoke this, she struggled so much in earnest to free her hand from his, that fearing to offend her, he dropped it with a submissive air.
               Dolly having now no pretence for staying any longer, bid him farewell in a faltering voice, and went on, though with a slow pace, towards her father's house. The youth con-tinued for a moment motionless as a statue, with a countenance pale as death, and his eyes, which were suffused with tears, fixed on the parting virgin.
               "What," cried he at last, in the most plaintive tone imaginable,
can you really leave me thus? go then, my dear unkind Dolly, I

will trouble you no more with my hateful presence; I wish you happy, but if you hear that any strange mischief has befallen me, be assured you are the cause of it.
               
               He followed her as he spoke, and Dolly no longer able to continue her assumed rigour, stopped when he approached her, and burst into tears. The lover felt all his hopes revive at this sight, and taking her hand, which he kissed a thousand times, he uttered the tenderest vows of love and constancy; to which she listened in silence, only now and then softly sighing; at length she disengaged her hand, and gently begged him to leave her, lest he should be seen by any of the family. The happy youth, once more con-vinced of her affection for him, obeyed without a murmur.
               
                  
Dolly, as soon as he had quitted her, ran hastily towards home; but he, as if every step was leading him to his grave, moved slowly on, of-ten looking back, and often stop-ping: so that Sophia, who was afraid she would not be able to overtake her friend, was obliged to hazard being seen by him, and fol-lowed Dolly with all the speed she could. As soon as she was near enough to be heard, she called out to her to stay. Dolly stopt, but was in so much confusion at the thought of having been seen by Miss Darn-ley, with her lover, that she had not courage to go and meet her. "Ah, Miss Dolly," said Sophia smiling,
I have made a discovery; but I do assure you it was as ac-cidental as your meeting with that handsome youth, who I find is your lover.
               
               
                  

the duties of a house-keeper to her mother, shewed that the highest in-tellectual improvements were not in-compatible with the humbler cares of domestic life: every thing that went through her hands received a grace and propriety from the good sense by which she was directed; nor did her attention to family-affairs break in upon her darling amusement reading.
               People who know how to employ their time well are good economists of it. Sophia laid out hers in such exact proportions, that she had al-ways sufficient for the several em-ployments she was engaged in: the business of her life, like that of na-ture, was performed without noise, hurry, or confusion.
               The death of Mr. Darnley threw this little family into a deplorable state of indigence, which was felt the more severely, as they had hi-therto
"Yes, indeed," replied Dolly, whose face was covered with blushes,
my meeting with that young man was not designed, at least on my part: but surely you jest, Miss Darnley, when you call him handsome: do you really think him handsome?
               
               "Upon my word I do," said So-phia;
he is one of the prettiest youths I ever saw; and if the professions of men may be re-lied on,
added she, with a sigh,
he certainly loves you; but, my dear Dolly, by what I could learn from your conversation, he has not your father's consent to make his addresses to you; I was sorry to hear that, Dolly, because I perceive, my dear, that you like him.
               
               Dolly now held down her head, and blushed more than before, but continued silent.
Perhaps you

will think me impertinent,
re-sumed Sophia,
for speaking so freely about your affairs; but I love you dearly, Miss Dolly.
— "And I," interrupted Dolly,
throwing one of her arms about Sophia's neck, and kissing her cheek, love you, Miss Darnley, better a thousand times than ever I loved any body, except my father and mother and my sis-ter.
               
               "Well, well," said Sophia,
I won't dispute that point with you now; but if you love me so much as you say, my dear Dolly, why have you made a secret of this affair? friends do not use to be so reserved with each other.
               
               "Perhaps," said Dolly, smiling a little archly,
you have taught me to be reserved by your ex-ample; but indeed,
added she,
with a graver look and accent,

I am not worthy to be your confidant; you are my superior in every thing: It would be pre-sumption in me to desire to know your secrets.
               
               
                  You shall know every thing that concerns me,
interrupted Sophia,
which can be of use to you, and add weight to that ad-vice I shall take the liberty to give you upon this occasion: I am far from being happy, my dear Dol-ly, and I blush to say it; it has been in the power of a deceitful man greatly to disturb my peace.
               
               Sophia here wiped her charming eyes, and Dolly who wept sympa-thetically for her, and for herself, exclaimed,
Is there a man in the world who could be false to you? alas! what have I to expect?
               
               "Come, my dear," said Sophia,
leading her to the root of a large tree, let us sit down here, we

shall not be called to supper yet, you have time enough to give me some account of this young man, whom I should be glad to find worthy of you: tell me how your acquaintance began, and what are your father's reasons for forbidding your correspon-dence.
               
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XII. The Beginning of a very simple Story.
               DOLLY, though encouraged by the sweet condescension of So-phia, who, to inspire her with con-fidence, freely acknowledged the situation of her own heart, blushed so much, and was in such apparent confusion, that Sophia was con-cerned at having made her a request which gave her so much pain to comply with.
               At length the innocent girl, looking up to her with a bashful air, said,
I should be ashamed, dear miss, to own my weakness to you, if I did not know that you are too generous to think the worse of me for it: to be sure I have a great value for Mr.

William; but I was not so foolish as to be taken with his hand-someness only, tho' indeed he is very handsome, and I am de-lighted to find that you think him so; but Mr. William, as my father can tell you, madam, is a very fine scholar: he was edu-cated in a great school at London, and there is not a young squire in all this country who has half his learning, or knows how to behave himself so genteely as he does, though his father is but a farmer: however, he is rich, and he has but one child besides Mr. William, and that is a sickly boy, and not likely to live; so that Mr. William, it is thought, will have all.
               
               "I should imagine then," said Sophia,
that this young man would not be a bad match for you?
               
               
                  
"A bad match!" replied Dolly, sighing:
no certainly; but his aunt looks higher for him: yet there was a time when she was well enough pleased with his liking me.
               
               "What is his aunt," said Sophia,
and how does it happen that she has any authority over him?
               
               
                  Why you must know, ma-dam,
answered Dolly,
that his aunt is very rich; when she was a young woman, a great lady took a fancy to her, and kept her as her companion a great many years, and when she died, she left her all her cloaths and jewels, and a prodigious deal of money: she never would marry, for she was crossed in love they say in her youth, and that makes her so ill-natured and spiteful, I believe, to young people; but notwith-standing that, I cannot help lov-ing

her, because she was always so fond of Mr. William: she is his god-mother, and when he was about ten years old she sent for him to London, and declared she would provide for him as her own; and indeed she acted like a mother towards him: she put him to school, and maintained him like a gentleman; and when he grew up, she would have made a gentleman of him; for she had a great desire that he should be an officer.
               
               
                  Mr. William at that time was very fond of being an officer too; but as he was very dutiful and obedient to his father, (indeed Miss Sophia he is one of the best young men in the world,) he desired leave to consult him first; so about a year ago he came to visit his father, and has never been at London since; and

he had not been long in the country before he changed his mind as to being an officer, and declared he would be a farmer like his father, and live a country life.
               
               "Ah Dolly," said Sophia smil-ing,
I suspect you were the cause of this change, my friend.
               
               "Why indeed," replied Dolly,
he has since told me so: but perhaps he flattered me when he said it; for, ah my dear Miss, I remember what you said just now about the deceitfulness of men, and I tremble lest Mr. William should be like the rest.
               
               "Well, my dear," interrupted Sophia,
go on with your story; I am impatient to know when you saw each other first, and how your acquaintance began.
               
               "You know, madam," said Dol-ly,
my father keeps us very re-tired:

I had no opportunity of seeing Mr. William but at church; we had heard that far-mer Gibbons had a fine son come from London, and the Sunday af-terwards when we were at church, my sister, who is a giddy wild girl, as you know, kept staring about, in hopes of seeing him. At last she pulled me hasti-ly, and whispered, look, look, Dolly, there is farmer Gibbons just come in, and I am sure he has got his London son with him, see what a handsome young man he is, and how genteely he is drest!
               
               
                  Well, madam, I looked up, and to be sure I met Mr. Wil-liam's eyes full upon me; I felt my face glow like fire; for as soon as I looked upon him, he made me a low bow. My sister courtefied; but for my part, I

lived in an affluence of all things, and the debts which an ex-pence so ill proportioned to their in-come had obliged Mr. Darnley to contract, left the unhappy widow and her children without any resource. The plate, furniture, and every thing valuable were seized by the creditors. Mrs. Darnley and her daughters retired to a private lodg-ing, where the first days were passed in weak despondence on the part of the mother, in passionate repinings on that of the eldest daughter, and by Sophia in decent sorrow and pious resignation.
               Mrs. Darnley however, by a natu-ral consequence of her thoughtless temper, soon recovered her former gaiety. Present evils only were ca-pable of affecting her; reflection and forecast never disturbed the settled calm of her mind. If the wants of one day were supplied, she did not

don't know whether I courtesied or not: I was never so confused in my life, and during the whole time we were at church, I scarce ever durst raise my eyes; for I was sure to find Mr. William looking into our pew.
               
               
                  I suppose you was not displeas-ed with him,
said Sophia,
for taking so much notice of you?
               
               
                  I do not know whether I was or not,
replied Dolly;
but I know that I was in a strange con-fusion during all church-time; yet I observed that Mr. William did not go out when the rest of the congregation did, but staid behind, which made my sister laugh, for he looked foolish enough standing alone. But he staid to have an opportunity of making us another bow; for it is my father's custom, as soon as he has dismissed the people, to

come into our pew and take us home with him. I never shall forget how respectfully Mr. William saluted my father as he passed him. I now made amends for my former neglect of him, and returned the bow he made me with a very low courtesy.
               
               
                  Fanny and I talked of him all the way home: I took delight in hearing her praise him; and al-though I was never used to dis-guise my thoughts before, yet I knew not how it was, but I was ashamed to speak so freely of him as she did, and yet I am sure I thought as well of him.
               
               "I dare say you did," said So-phia, smiling; "but my dear," pursued she in a graver accent,
this was a very sudden impression. Suppose this young man whose person captivated you so much,

had been wild and dissolute, as many young men are; how would you have excused yourself for that early prejudice in his favour, which you took in so readily at your eyes, without consulting your judgment in the least?
               
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XIII. Dolly continues her Story.
               DOLLY, fixing her bashful looks on the ground, remained silent for a moment; then sighing, answered,
I am sure if I had not believed Mr. William good and virtuous, I should never have liked him, though he had been a hundred times handsomer than he is; but it was impossible to look on him and think him otherwise; and if you had ob-served him well, Miss Darnley, his countenance has so much sweetness and candor in it, as my father once said, that you could not have thought ill of him.
               
               "It is not always safe," said So-phia, sighing likewise,
to trust to

appearances: men's actions as well as their looks often deceive us; and you must allow, my dear Dolly, that there is danger in these sudden attachments; but when did you see this pretty youth again?
               
               "Not till the next Sunday," replied Dolly;
and though you should chide me never so much, yet I must tell you that this seemed the longest week I ever knew in my life. I did not doubt but he would be at church again, and I longed impatiently for Sunday. At last Sunday came; we went with my father as usual to church, and would you be-lieve it, Miss Darnley, though I wished so much to see Mr. Wil-liam, yet now I dreaded meeting him, and trembled so when I came into church, that I was obliged to take hold of Fanny

to keep me from falling. She soon discovered him, and pulled me in order to make me look up: he had placed himself in our way, so that we passed close by him. He made us a very low bow, and my mother, who had not seen him before, smiled and looked extremely pleased with him; for to be sure, Madam, she could not help admiring him.
               
               
                  Well, I was very uneasy all the time we were in church; for Fanny whispered me that my sweet-heart,
for so she called Mr. William,
minded nothing but me. This made me blush exces-sively, and I was afraid my mo-ther would take notice of his staring and my confusion; so that (heaven forgive me) I was glad when the sermon was ended. He made us his usual compliment at our going out, but I did not

look up: however, I was impati-ent to be alone with Fanny, that I might talk of him, and in the evening we walked towards the Park. Just as we had placed ourselves under a tree, we saw a fine drest gentleman, a visiter of the Squire's as we supposed, coming up to us: upon which we rose and walked homewards; but the gentleman followed us, and coming close to me, stared impudently under my hat, and swearing a great oath, said I was a pretty girl, and he would have a kiss. Fanny seeing him take me by the arm, screamed aloud; but I, pretending not to be frightened, though I trembled sadly, civilly begged him to let me go. He did not regard what I said, but was extremely rude: so that I now began to scream as loud as Fanny, struggling all the

time to get from him, but in vain, and now who should come to my assistance but Mr. Willi-am: I saw him flying across a field, and my heart told me it was he, before he came near enough for me to know him.
               
               
                  As soon as Fanny perceived him, she ran to him, and begged him to help me; but he did not need intreaty; he flew like a bird to the place where I was, and left Fanny far behind. The rude gentleman bad him be gone, and threatened him severely; for he had taken the hand I had at liberty, which I gladly gave him, and insisted upon his letting me go: and now, my dear Miss Darnley, all my fears were for him, for the gentleman declared that if he did not go about his business, he would run him through the body, and actually

drew his sword; I thought I should have died at that terrible sight; my sister run towards home crying like one distracted; and as for me, though the man had let go my hand, and I might have run away, yet I could not bear to leave Mr. William to the mercy of that cruel wretch; and I did what at another time I should have blushed to have done. I took his hand and pulled him with all my force away; but he, en-raged at being called puppy by the gentleman, who continued swearing, that he would do him a mischief, if he did not leave the place, begged me to make the best of my way home; and turning furiously to him who was brandishing his sword about, he knocked him down with one stroke of a cudgel which he fortunately had in his hand,

and snatching his sword from him, he threw it among the bushes.
               
               
                  Upon my word (said Sophia) your William's character rises upon me every moment: this was a very gallant action, and I do not wonder at your liking him now.
               
               
                  Ah, Miss (cried Dolly) if you had seen how he looked when he came back to me, if you had heard the fine things he said—Well, you may imagine I thanked him for the kindness he had done me, and he protest-ed he would with pleasure lose his life for my sake. I think I could have listened to him for ever; but now my father ap-peared in sight. My sister had alarmed him greatly with her ac-count of what had happened, and he was coming hastily to my as-sistance,

consider what inconveniences the next might produce. As for Harriot she found resources of comfort in the exalted ideas she had of her own charms; and having already laid it down as a maxim, that poverty was the most shameful thing in the world, she formed her resolutions accord-ingly.
               Sophia, as soon as her grief for the loss of her father had subsided, be-gan to consider of some plan for their future subsistence. She forbore how-ever to communicate her thoughts on this subject to her mother and sister, who had always affected to treat every thing she said with contempt, the mean disguise which envy had assumed to hide their consciousness of her superior merit; but she open-ed her mind to the good old gentle-man, to whom she had been obliged for many of her improvements. She told him that being by his generous

followed by my mother and all the family. As soon as we perceived them coming we mended our pace; for we had walked very slowly hitherto: then it was that Mr. William, who had not spoke so plainly be-fore, told me how much he loved me, and begged I would give him leave to see me sometimes. I replied, that depended upon my father, and this was prudent, was it not, my dear Miss Darn-ley?
               
               "Indeed it was," answered So-phia, "but what said your lover?"
               "He sighed, Madam," resumed Dolly,
and said he was afraid my father would not think him worthy of me: he owned he was no otherwise worthy of me than from the great affection he bore me, and then—But here I

fear you will think him too bold and perhaps blame me.
               
               "I hope not," said Sophia.
               "Why, Madam," continued Dolly,
he took my hand and kissed it a thousand times; and tho' I did all I could to be sure to pull it away, yet he would not part with it, till my father was so near that he was afraid he would observe him; and then he let it go, and begged me in a whisper not to hate him. Bless me, what a strange request that was, Miss Darnley! how could I hate one to whom I had been so greatly obliged! I was ready to burst into tears at the very thought, and told him I was so far from hating him, that—
               
               
                  Pray go on, my dear (said So-phia) observing she hesitated and was silent.
               
               
                  
"I told him, Madam," resumed she,
that I would always regard him as long as I lived.—I did not say too much, did I?
               
               "I suppose," said Sophia,
you gave him to understand that it was in gratitude for the service he had done you.
               
               "To be sure," said Dolly,
I put it in that light. Well I am glad you approve of my behavi-our, Miss Darnley; so, as I was telling you, my father came up to us, and thanked Mr. William for having rescued his daughter; he then asked him what he had done with the rude fellow? Mr. William told him he had given him a lucky stroke with his cud-gel, which made him measure his length on the ground; but,
                  said he (and sure that shewed excessive good nature) I hope I have not hurt him much:
               
               
                  

                  My father said he would go and see; and then shaking Mr. William kindly by the hand, he called him a brave youth, and said he hoped they should be better acquainted—Oh! how glad was I to hear him say so: My mother too was vastly civil to him; and as for Fanny, I thought she would have hugged him, she was so pleased with him for his kindness to me. My mother insisted upon his staying to drink tea with us, and as soon as my father came back, we all went in toge-ther.
               
               
                  Pray what became of the poor vanquished knight?
said Sophia, smiling.
               "Oh, I forgot to tell you," re-sumed Dolly,
that my father said he saw him creeping along as if he was sorely bruised with

his fall, supporting himself with his sword, which it seems he had found. We were all glad it was no worse, and Mr. William having accepted my mother's in-vitation, he staid with us till the evening was pretty far ad-vanced; and then my father ac-companied him part of his way home, and at parting, as he told us, desired to see him often.
               
               
                  He was not backward, you may be sure, in complying with his request: he came so often, that my father was surprised; and besides, my sister and I scarce ever went out to walk but we met him; so that one would have imagined he lived in the fields about our house. My mother at last suspected the truth, and questioned me about him, and I told her all that he had ever said to me; and not long after-wards

he took an opportunity to open his heart to my father, and asked his permission to make his addresses to me. With such modesty and good sense he spoke, that my father was extremely pleased with him: but told him that he must consult his friends, and know whether they approved of it, and then he would consi-der of his proposal. Mr. William, as he afterwards told me, wrote to his aunt first; for he was well assured that his father would agree to any thing which she thought for his advantage.
               
               
                  He had a very favourable an-swer from Mrs. Gibbons, for she had changed her mind also, with regard to his being an officer, as war was then talked of; and she was afraid of his being sent abroad. He shewed me her let-ter, and she told him in it, that

since he was resolved to settle in the country, she approved of his marrying; and was glad he had not fixed his affections upon some homespun farmer's daughter, but had chosen a gen-tlewoman, and one who was well brought up. She added, that she intended to come into the country, in a few weeks; and if she found the young lady (so she called me) answered his description, she would hasten the marriage, and settle us hand-somely.—Oh! how pleased was I with this letter, and how did it rejoice Mr. William!
               
               
                  I should never have done, were I to tell you all the tender things he said to me. Mr. Gibbons, at his son's desire, came to my father, and begged him to give his consent, which he obtained; for my father had well considered

the affair before: and nothing was wanting but Mrs. Gibbon's arrival to make us all happy. Mr. William thought every hour an age till she came, and prest her continually in his letters to hasten her journey.
               
               
                  Alas! if he had known what was to happen, he would not have been so impatient; for soon after she came, all our fine hopes were blasted; and I have now nothing to expect but mise-ry.
               
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XIV. Sir Charles makes his appearance again.
               POOR Dolly was so oppressed with grief, when she came to this part of her story, that she was unable to proceed, and burst into tears. The tender Sophia, who was greatly affected with the anguish she saw her in, employed every sooth-ing art to comfort her. And Dolly being a little composed, was going to continue her story, when she saw her sister looking about for them; Sophia and she immediately rose up and joined Fanny, who rallied them both upon their fondness for lonely places; but perceiving that Dolly had been weeping, she im-mediately became grave, and ac-commodated her looks and beha-viour

to the gentle melancholy of her sister.
               Sophia, from the state of her own mind, was but too much dis-posed to sympathize with the love-sick Dolly: these softening conver-sations were ill calculated to banish from her remembrance the first ob-ject of her innocent affections; and who, with all his faults, she still loved. Dolly's story awakened a thousand tender ideas, and recalled to her memory every part of Sir Charles's conduct which had any resemblance to that of the faithful and passionate William.
               She dwelt with tender regret up-on these pleasing images, and for a while forgot how necessary it was for her peace, to suppress every thought of Sir Charles, that tended to lessen her just resentment against him.
               
                  

cares qualified to undertake the edu-cation of a young lady, she was de-sirous of being received into the fa-mily of some person of distinction in the quality of governess to the daugh-ters of it, that she might at once se-cure to herself a decent establish-ment, and be enabled to assist her mother. She hinted that if her sister could be also prevailed upon to enter into the service of a lady of quality, they might jointly contribute their endeavours to make their mo-ther's life comfortable.
               Mr. Herbert praised her design, and promised to mention it to Mrs. Darnley, to whom he conceived he might speak with the greater free-dom, as his near relation to her husband, and the long friendship which had subsisted between them, gave him a right to interest himself in their affairs. The first words he uttered produced such an emotion in
But, good and pious as she was, the passion she could not wholly subdue, she regulated by reason and virtue; for, as an eminent Divine says,
Although it is not in our power to make affliction no af-fliction; yet we may take off the edge of it, by a steady view of those divine joys prepared for us in another state.
               
               It was quite otherwise with Sir Sir Charles: for the guilty, if un-happy, are doubly so; because they are deprived of those resources of comfort, which the virtuous are sure to find in the consciousness of hav-ing acted well.
               Sir Charles, upon finding his set-tlement sent back to him, in such a manner, as shewed not only the most obstinate resolution to reject his offers, but also a settled con-tempt for the offerer, became a prey

to the most violent passions: rage, grief, affronted pride, love ill re-quited, and disappointed hope, tor-mented him by turns; nor was jea-lousy without a place in his heart; the chaste, the innocent, the re-served Sophia, became suspected by the man, who in vain attempted to corrupt her; so true it is, that li-bertinism gives such a colour to the actions of others, as takes away all distinction between virtue and vice.
               Love, he argued, is either re-warded with a reciprocal affection, or with an inward and secret con-tempt; therefore he imputed So-phia's rejection of his offers, not to her disapprobation of the intention of them, but to want of affection for his person; and from her youth, and the tender sensibility of her heart, he concluded, that since he had failed in making an impression on it, it was already bestowed upon

another; one while he resolved to think no more of her, and repay her indifference and disdain with si-lence and neglect; the next mo-ment, dreading lest he had lost her for ever, he regretted his having alarmed her with too early a disco-very of his intentions, and some-times his passion transported him so far, as to make him think seriously of offering her his hand: then start-ing at his own weakness, and ap-prehensive of the consequences, he sought to arm himself against that tenderness which suggested so mad a design, by reflecting on her indif-ference towards him, and account-ing for it in such a manner, as fix-ed the sharpest stings of jealousy in his mind.
               Thus various and perplexed were his thoughts and designs; and he was incapable of resolving upon any thing, except to see her; and so

was his impatience, that he would have set out for London the mo-ment he received the fatal paper, but decency would not permit him to leave his uncle, who was in a dying condition, and wished only to expire in his arms.
               The poor man, however, linger-ed a week longer, during which Sir Charles passed some of the most melancholy hours he had ever known; at length his uncle's death left him at liberty to return to Lon-don, which he did immediately, and alighted at Mrs. Darnley's house. Upon hearing she was at home, he did not send in his name, but walked up stairs with a beating heart; he found Mrs. Darnley and Harriot together, but not seeing the person whom he only wished to see, he cast a melancholy look round the room, and answering, in a confused and dejected manner, the mother's

excessive politeness, and the cold civility of the daughter, he threw himself into a chair with a deep sigh, and was silent.
               So evident a discomposure pleased Mrs. Darnley as much as it mor-tified Harriot. As for Sir Charles, pride and resentment hindered him at first from enquiring for Sophia; but his anxiety and impatience to hear of her, soon prevailed over all other considerations; and though he asked for her with an affected care-lessness, yet his eyes, and the tone of his voice betrayed him.
               Mrs. Darnley told him, that she was gone into the country:
Very much against my inclination,
said she:
but Mr. Herbert, who you know, Sir, has great power over her, more I think than I have, would have it so.
               
               Sir Charles growing pale as death, replied, in great emotion,
What!

gone into the country? Where is she gone? to whom? why did she go? Against your inclina-tion, did you say, Madam? what could possibly induce her to this? You surprize me excessively.
               
               Harriot, who did not chuse to be present at the explanation of this affair, now rose up, and went out of the room, smiling sarcastically, as she passed by Sir Charles, and bridling with all the triumph of conscious beauty. He, who was in a bad humour, beheld her airs not only with indifference but con-tempt, which he suffered to appear pretty plain in his countenance; for he thought it but just to mortify her for her ill usage of her sister, with-out considering that he himself was far more guilty, in that respect, towards the amiable Sophia, and equally deserved to be hated by her.
               
                  
When Harriot was gone, Mrs. Darnley instantly renewed the con-versation concerning Sophia; and finding that the young baronet list-ened to her, with eager attention, she gave him a full account of all that had happened during his ab-sence: she represented Sophia as hav-ing followed implicitly the direc-tions of Mr. Herbert, whom she called a busy, meddling, officious, old man; and as the behaviour of her daughter, at her going away, gave sufficient room to believe, that her heart suffered greatly by the ef-fort she made, she dwelt upon every circumstance that tended to shew the concern she was under; and did not scruple to exaggerate, where she thought it would be pleasing.
               Sir Charles, though he inwardly rejoiced at what he heard, yet dis-sembled so well, that no signs of it appeared in his countenance. He

now seemed to listen with much indifference, and coldly said, he was sorry Miss Sophia would not permit him to make her easy.
               The tranquillity he affected, a-larmed Mrs. Darnley: she who was ever ready to judge by appearances, concluded that all was over, and that the baronet was irrecoverably lost; but had her judgment been more acute, she would have per-ceived, that he was still deeply in-terested in every thing that related to Sophia. The questions he ask-ed were not such as curiosity sug-gests, but the tender anxiety of doubting love. Mrs. Darnley in-formed him of all he wished to hear; Sophia had indeed fled from him, but not without reluctance and grief: she was at present re-moved from his sight, but she was removed to silence and solitude; and she carried with her a fond im-pression,

which solitude would not fail to increase.
               Thus satisfied, he put an end to his visit, with all imaginable com-posure, leaving Mrs. Darnley in doubt, whether she should see him again, and more enraged than ever with Mr. Herbert, whose fatal coun-sels had overthrown all her hopes.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XV. Dolly meets her Lover unexpectedly.
               IT was not long before Sophia had an account of Sir Charles's visit from her mother, who, for-getting the part she had acted be-fore, wrote her a letter full of in-vectives against her obstinacy and disobedience, and bitter upbraid-ings of her folly, for losing by her ill-timed pride the heart of such a man as Sir Charles.
               She told her, with a kind of ex-ultation, that he had entirely for-gotten her, and repeated every cir-cumstance of his behaviour while he was with her, and every word he had spoke, as all tending to shew his indifference; but though this was done to mortify Sophia, and make her repent of her precipitate

            SOPHIA. BY Mrs. CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
            In TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.
            LONDON: Printed for JAMES FLETCHER, in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCCLXII.
         
         
            

Mrs. Darnley's countenance, as con-vinced him that what he had farther to say would not be favourably re-ceived. She coloured, drew herself up with an air of dignity, looking at the same time at her eldest daughter with a scornful smile.
               Mr. Herbert, however, continued his discourse, when Harriot, with a pertness which she took for wit, interrupted him by a loud laugh, and asked him, if going to service was the best provision he could think of for Mr. Darnley's daughters?
               Mr. Herbert, turning hastily to her, replied with a look of great gra-vity, and in a calm accent,
Have you, miss, thought of any thing better?
               
               Harriot, without being disconcert-ed, retorted very briskly,
People who have nothing but advice to offer to their friends in distress,

departure, yet her discernment, and that facility which lovers have, in flattering their own wishes, pointed out to her many things in this minute relation, which served rather to nourish hope than destroy it.
               Mrs. Darnley added, as the fi-nishing stroke, that Sir Charles looked pale and thin; she attribut-ed this alteration in his health to efforts he had made to banish her from his heart, and thence inferred that a resolution which had cost him so much trouble to confirm, would not be easily broke through; and that she had no reason to ex-pect he would ever desire to see her more.
               Sophia could not read this part of the letter without tears, tears that flowed from tender sensibility, accompanied with a sensation which was neither grief nor joy, but com-posed

of both: that Sir Charles should resolve to forget her was in-deed afflicting, but that this reso-lution should cost him struggles so painful as to affect his health, could not but raise her depressed hopes, since it shewed the difficulty of the attempt, and consequently that the success was doubtful.
               This letter gave so much employ-ment to her thoughts, that to be at liberty to indulge them she took her evening walk without sollicit-ing the company of her beloved Dolly, and wandered far into the wood, attracted by those romantic shades which afford such soothing pleasure to a love-sick mind. Here, while she meditated on her mother's letter, and read it over and over, still seeking, and still finding some-thing new in it to engage her at-tention, she heard the voices of some persons talking behind her,

and suddenly recollecting Dolly's adventure, she began to be alarmed at the distance to which she had unwarily strayed, and turned her steps hastily towards home.
               Mean time a sudden gust of wind blew off her hat, and carried it se-veral paces back: she turned, in order to recover it, and saw it taken up by a genteel young man, who on a nearer approach she knew to be the lover of her young friend. Pleased at this encounter, she ad-vanced to receive her hat from him, which he gave her with a blushing grace, awed by the dignity of her mein, and that sparkling in-telligence which beamed in her eyes, and seemed to penetrate into his inmost soul; for Sophia, who was deeply interested for her inno-cent and unhappy friend, consider-ed him attentively, and was desi-rous of entering into some conver-sation

with him, that she might be enabled to form a more exact judg-ment of his understanding and manners than she could from the accounts of the partial Dolly.
               While she was talking to him they were joined by an ancient gen-tlewoman, who accosting Sophia, told her in an affected style and for-mal accent, that her nephew was very happy in having had an oppor-tunity to do her this little piece of service.
               Sophia, who saw an old woman, apparently opprest with the infirmi-ties of years, drest in all the ridi-culous foppery of the last age, was so little pleased with her, that she would have answered this compli-ment with great coldness, had not the desire and hope of being ser-viceable to her friend made her conquer her growing disgust; she therefore resolved to improve this

opportunity of commencing an ac-quaintance with the aunt of young William, and met her advances with her usual sweetness and affa-bility, so that the old woman was quite charmed with her; and be-ing very desirous to gain her good opinion, and to shew her breeding, of which she was extremely vain, overwhelmed her with troublesome ceremony; and, to display her un-derstanding, of which she was e-qually proud, murdered so many hard words, that her discourse was scarcely intelligible.
               Sophia would fain have drawn in the youth to partake of their con-versation, but his aunt's volubility left him very little to say; yet in that little Sophia thought she dis-covered both good sense and polite-ness.
               The evening being now pretty far advanced, Sophia thought it time

to separate, and took leave of her new acquaintance. Their parting was protracted by so many courte-sies and compliments from the old lady, that her patience was almost wearied out; at last she got free from her, and quickened her pace towards home, when on a sudden she heard her in a tremulous voice calling out,
Madam, madam, pray stop one moment.
Sophia look-ed back, and seeing Mrs. Gibbons come tottering up to her with more speed than was consistent with her weakness, she met her half way, and smiling, asked her why she had turned back.
               "Oh, madam," replied she, I
am ready to sink with confusion! what a solsim in good breeding have I committed! to be sure you will think I have been used to converse with savages only.
So-phia,

not able to guess what this speech tended to, looked at Mr. Gibbons as if she wished for an explanation.
               "My aunt, madam," said the youth, (blushing a little at the old woman's affectation,)
is concern-ed that you should walk home alone, and that I cannot offer my service to attend you, being obliged to lead her, as you see.
               
               "That is not all, nephew," said the ceremonious gentlewoman:
you do not tell the young lady the true cause of the dilemnia I am in: I would not leave you, madam,
pursued she,
till I saw you safe home, but you live with a family who has affronted me, and I cannot endure to come within sight of the house. I ne-ver can forgive an affront, that would be to shew I do not un-derstand the laws of good breed-ing:

but I thank heaven no body can charge me with that, I was very early instituted into polite life; but some people are not to be assessed with.
               
               "I hope," said Sophia, (scarce able to compose her countenance to any tolerable degree of serious-ness)
that none of Mr. Lawson's family have given you cause of complaint: they seem to me in-capable of affronting any one, much more a person that
—
               "Oh, dear madam," interrupted the old lady, courtesying low,
you do me a great deal of honour; but you will find, nay you must have observed already, that Mrs. Lawson is vulgar, very vulgar, she knows nothing of decorums.
               
               
                  I am very sorry for this mis-understanding between you,
said Sophia,
and I should think it a very great happiness if I could

be any way useful in renewing your friendship.
               
               "Oh," cried Mrs. Gibbons,
you might as well think of join-ing the Antipoles, madam, as of bringing us together again; and I am grieved beyond measure when I think that it is impossible for me to wait on you.
               
               "However," answered Sophia,
you will have no objection, I hope, to my coming to see you.
               
               
                  Oh! I must not admit of that by any means, madam,
replied Mrs. Gibbons,
you came last into the country, and you are entitled to the first visit; I would not for the world break through the laws of politeness; I am sorry you have so indifferent an opinion of my breeding.
               
               Sophia perceiving that the old gentlewoman was a little discom-posed,

for this article of good breed-ing was a tender point with her, endeavoured to bring her into good humour, by some well-timed com-pliments, and once more took leave of her; but Mrs. Gibbons now in-sisted upon her nephew's seeing her safe home, saying,
She would rest herself under a tree till he came back.
               
               Sophia but faintly declined this civility, for she feared to offend her again; and the joy that spark-led in William's eyes when his aunt made this offer of his attend-ance, made her unwilling to disap-point him of the hope of seeing his mistress; so after much ceremony on the part of Mrs. Gibbons, they separated.
               As they walked, Sophia took oc-casion to express her concern for the violent resentment his aunt had

ought to be silent till they are ask-ed for it.
               
               "Good advice, Miss," replied the old gentleman with the same composure,
is what every body cannot, and many will not give; and it is at, least an instance of friendship to hazard it, where one may be almost sure of its giving offence.
But, continued he, turn-ing to Sophia,
my young pupil here has, I hope, not profited so little by her reading as to be igno-rant of the value of good counsel; and I promise her she shall not only command the best that I am ca-pable of giving, but every other assistance she may stand in need of.
Saying this, he bowed and went away, without any attempts from Mrs. Darnley to detain him.
               Poor Sophia, who was supposed by her silence to have acquiesced in the old gentleman's proposal, was ex-posed

entertained against Mr. Lawson's family, and which seemed to make a reconciliation hopeless.
               The youth told her, that nothing could be more trivial than the ac-cident that had occasioned it; "and yet," pursued he, sighing deeply,
slight as it is, the con-sequences are likely to be fatal enough.
               
               During their conversation Sophia discovered so much good sense and delicacy of sentiment in the young William, that she more than ever pitied the fate of these poor lovers, whose happiness was sacrificed to the capricious temper of an affect-ed old woman: she assured him she would neglect no opportunity to improve her acquaintance with his aunt: "And perhaps," said she, with an inchanting smile, that expressed the benevolence of her heart,
I may be so fortunate as

to effect a reconciliation between her and my Dolly's family.
               
               Mr. Gibbons thanked her in transports of joy and gratitude; and now Dolly and her sister, who had walked out in search of Sophia, ap-pearing in sight, she mended her pace, in order to come up with them soon; for in the ardent glances that William sent towards his mistress, she read his impatience to speak to her.
               Dolly, who was in the utmost surprise, to see Sophia thus accom-panied, took no notice of William; but avoiding, with a sweet bashful-ness, his earnest and passionate looks, she fixed her eyes on Miss Darnley, as if she wished to hear from her by what chance they had met.
               "I know," said Sophia to her smiling,
that you did not expect to see me so agreeably engaged; but Mr. Gibbons can inform you

how his aunt, whom we left in the forest yonder, and I became acquainted.
She then addressed some discourse to Fanny, to give the lovers an opportunity of talking to each other.
               Dolly asked a thousand questions concerning their meeting, and his aunt's behaviour to Miss Darnley; but the passionate youth leaving it to Sophia to satisfy her curiosity, employed the few moments he had to stay with her in tender assur-ances of his own unaltered affec-tion, and complaints of her in-difference.
               "Surely," said Dolly, with tears in her eyes,
I ought not to be blamed for obeying my father.
               
               "Ah, my dear Dolly," replied William,
our affections are not in the power of our fathers;

and if you hate me now be-cause your father commands you to do so, you never loved me.
               
               "Hate you," cried Dolly;
no, Mr. William, my father never bid me hate you; and if he had I am sure I could not have obey-ed him: he only commanded me to forget you.
               
               "Only to forget me!" repeated William in a melancholy tone:
then you think that little, Dol-ly; and perhaps you will be able to obey him; but be assured I would rather be hated by you than forgotten.
               
               "That is strange, indeed," said Dolly, smiling through her tears.
               
                  You would not think it strange,
replied the youth, in an accent that expressed at once

grief and resentment,
if you had ever loved. Ah Dolly! are all your tender promises come to this! little did I imagine I should ever see you altered thus! but I will trouble you no more,
added he, sighing, as if his heart would break;
I will endeavour to follow your example: per-haps it is not so difficult a thing as I imagined to cure one's self of love; you have shewn me it is possible, and if I fail in the attempt, I can be but miserable, and that you have made me now.
As he spoke these words, he turned half from her, and let fall some tears.
               Dolly, who had no intention to make him uneasy, was excessively affected with this sight, and not a little alarmed at what he had said: "And will you," said she, in the most moving tone imaginable;

                     
will you try to forget me? then indeed you will be false and perjured too, for you have sworn a thousand times that you would love me for ever.
               
               
                  Why should you wish to see me wretched,
said he;
you have resolved to love me no longer, and it is but reasonable that I should try to forget you.
               
               He would have proceeded in this strain; but turning to look on her, he saw her sweet face overspread with tears. "Oh my Dolly," cried he,
we are very cruel to each other; but I am most to blame: can you pardon me, my dearest: say you can; alas, I know I do not deserve it.
               
               Dolly's heart was so opprest, that she was not able to speak; but she held out her hand to her young lover, who seizing it eagerly, prest it to his lips,
Yes, I will love

you,
said he,
though you should hate me; I will love you to my latest breath.
               
               Dolly perceiving Sophia and her sister coming up to them, drew away her hand hastily; but look-ed on him at the same time, with inexpressible tenderness: Sophia told him with a smile, that she was afraid his aunt would be im-patient: upon which he made his bow, and hastened back to her.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XVI. Dolly concludes her Story.
               FANNY now left her sister alone with Miss Darnley, who perceiving that she had been weep-ing, asked her tenderly the cause.
Oh my dear miss, said the poor girl blushing and pressing her hand, if I had but a little of your prudence and good sense, I should obey my father better; but when one has once given one's heart, it is very difficult to recal it.
               
               "Very true, my dear," said So-phia;
therefore one ought not to be in haste to give it.
               
               "I hope," interrupted Dolly with an anxious look,
you have observed nothing in Mr. William to make you change your good opinion of him.
               
               
                  
"Quite the contrary," said So-phia,
I believe him to be a good, and I am sure he is a sensible youth: nay more, I believe he has a sincere regard for you; and that,
pursued she, sighing,
is saying a great deal, considering what reason I have to judge un-favourably of men: but, my dear, I would have you keep your passion so far subjected to your reason, as to make it not too difficult for you to obey your father, if he is fully determined to refuse his consent. I know,
added she, with a gentle smile,
That it is easier to be wife for others than for ourselves; but I know it is not impossible for a heart in love to follow the dictates of reason: I think so highly of Mr. Law-son's understanding and goodness, that I am persuaded he would not lay an unreasonable command

upon you, and by what I could collect from some hints dropt by Mrs. Gibbons, and the little discourse I had with your lover, the old gentlewoman is wholly to blame.
               
               "Did Mr. William tell you," said Dolly,
what was the occasi-on of their quarrel.
               
               "No," replied Sophia:
I should be glad to hear it from yourself.
               
               "Well," resumed Dolly,
tak-ing her under the arm, let us go to our dear oak then, and there we shall be out of sight; but I am impatient to know how you met, and what conversation you had.
Sophia satisfied her curi-osity, diverting herself a little with the old lady's hard words, and her strict regard to ceremony.
               "Ah," said Dolly,
it was those hard words, and the clut-ter

to a thousand reproaches for her meanness of spirit. She attempt-ed to shew the utility, and even the necessity of following his advice; but she found on this occasion, as she had on many others, that with some per-sons it is not safe to be reasonable. Her arguments were answered with rage and invective, which soon silen-ced her, and increased the triumph of her imperious sister.
               Mr. Herbert, apprehensive of the ill treatment she was likely to be exposed to, offered to place her in the family of a country clergyman, and to pay for her board till such a settlement as she desired could be procured for her; but the tender Sophia, not willing to leave her mo-ther while she could be of any use to her, gratefully declined his offer, still expecting that the increasing perplexity of their circumstances might bring her to relish his reason-able

she made about ceremony and decorum, that occasioned all our unhappiness; for as I told you, miss, she was well enough pleas-ed with her nephew's choice, saying, that he was in the right to marry like a gentleman, and prefer person and breeding to money: however, soon after she came into the country, she shew-ed herself a little dissatisfied with my education, and said, that as my father was a gentleman and a scholar, he ought to have taught his daughters a little Greek and Latin, to have distinguished them from meer country girls,
               
               "Your mother, I supppose," said Sophia,
laughed at this no-tion.
               
               "It does not become me," said Dolly, to blame my mother;
but to be sure she took great delight in ridiculing Mrs. Gibbons: in-deed

it was scarce possible to help smiling now and then at her hard words, and her formal po-liteness; but my mother, as Mr. William often told me with great concern, carried her raillery so far that his aunt would cer-tainly be offended with it at last; and so indeed she was, and grew every day cooler, with regard to the marriage. This disgusted my mother more, so every thing wore a melancholy appearance: at length Mrs. Gibbons broke out one day violently, upon my mother's sending a dish of tea to another gentlewoman before her. I saw a storm in her countenance, and dreading the consequence, I made haste to carry her, her dish myself, but she refused it scorn-fully, and then began to attack my mother in her strange lan-guage, upon her want of breed-ing,

and ignorance of the rules of precendency, that was her word. My mother at first only laughed, and rallied; but when the rest of our visitors was gone, and Mrs. Gibbons only remained, the quarrel grew serious. My mother, who was out of patience with her folly, said some severe things, which provoked Mrs. Gib-bons so much, that she rose up in a fury, and declared she would never more any have collection with such vulgar creatures. At that moment my father and Mr. Wil-liam, who had been walking to-gether, came into the room: they both were excessively sur-prised at the disorder which ap-peared among us: and poor Mr. William, who was most appre-hensive, turned as pale as death: he gave me a melancholy look, as fearing what had happened, and

had scarce courage enough to ask his aunt what was the matter? Mean time, my mother, in a laughing way gave my father an account of what had happened, repeating some of Mrs. Gibbons's strange words, and made the whole affair appear so ridiculous, that Mrs. Gibbons in a great fu-ry, flung out of the house, de-claring that from that moment she broke of any treatise of mar-riage between her nephew and me; and that if he continued to make his addresses to me, she would make a will, and leave all her money to a distant relation. Mr. William was obliged to fol-low his aunt; but he begged my father's leave to return as soon as he had seen her safe home. When he came back, he implored my father, with tears in his eyes, not to forbid his seeing me: he said

the loss of his aunt's fortune would give, him no concern if he durst hope that it would make no alteration in my father's reso-lutions, since his own little in-heritance was sufficient to main-tain us comfortably. My father was pleased with his generous af-fection for me, and said a great many obliging things to him, as did my mother likewise: so that we thought our misfortune not so bad; but the next day old far-mer Gibbons came plodding to our house, and with a great deal of con-fusion and aukwardness, told my father that he was very sorry for what had happened; but sister had changed her mind, and would not let her nephew marry, and he was afraid if he disobliged her she would leave all her money to strangers; so he begged him to give his son no encouragement,

but to tell him plainly he must obey his aunt and his father; and he said he was sure his son would mind what my father said to him more than any body else.
               
               
                  I am in pain for poor Mr. Lawson,
said Sophia.
What a boorish speech was this!
               
               "My father," resumed Dolly,
said afterwards, that if it had not been for the concern he felt for me and Mr. William, he should have been excessively diverted with the old man's simplicity; but he answered him gravely, and with great civility: he promised him that the affair should go no farther; that I should receive no more visits from his son; and that he would talk with him, and endeavour to make him sub-mit patiently to what his father and his aunt had determined for him. The old man thanked my

father a thousand times over for his kindness, and after a great many bows and scrapes he went away. My father was as good as his word: he laid his com-mands on me to think no more of Mr. William, and forbad me to see or speak to him; and when Mr. William came next, he took him with him into his study, and talked to him a long time. He acknowledged that Mr. William had oftener than once moved him even to tears; but for all that he did not relent, and we were not allowed so much as to speak to each other alone, for fear we should take any measures to meet in private. This I thought very severe,
pursued Dolly, sigh-ing,
we might at least have been indulged in taking leave, since we were to be separated for ever.
               
               
                  
"I cannot blame your father," said Sophia,
he was indispensably obliged to act as he did: it is to be wished, indeed, that Mrs. Lawson had passed over the poor woman's follies with more tem-per; but this cannot be helped now: perhaps I may be able to serve you. The old gentlewo-man seems to have taken a liking to me; I shall endeavour to im-prove it, that I may have an op-tunity to soften her: it is not im-possible but this matter may end well yet.
               
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. XVII. Mrs. Darnley and Harriot resolve to visit Sophia.
               POOR Dolly was ready enough to admit a hope so pleasing, and felt her heart more at ease than it had been a long time. As for William, his aunt's extravagant praises of Sophia, and some ex-pressions which she dropped, inti-mating that she should be pleased if he could make himself accept-able to so fine a lady, hinted to him a scheme which might afford him the means of seeing his mis-tress sometimes: he seemed there-fore to listen with satisfaction to these dark overtures made by his aunt, and upon her speaking still plainer, he said it would be pre-sumption in him to think that a

young lady so accomplished as Miss Darnley would look down upon him; and besides, he had no op-portunity of improving an ac-quaintance with her, being for-bid Mr. Lawson's house, at her request.
               The old woman, pleased to find he made so little opposition to her desire, told him,
That he would have opportunities enough of see-ing and conversing with the lady; she often walks out, said she, either in the forest or the fields about the house: cannot you throw yourself in her way, and accost her politely, as you very well know how; and, to felicitate your success, I will let her know that I am willing to receive the honour of a visit from her, though this is against all the rules of decorum, for it is my part to visit her first, she being

counsels, and that she might have the sanction of her consent to a step which prudence made neces-sary to be taken.
               A legacy of a hundred pounds be-ing left her by a young lady who tenderly loved her, and who died in her arms, she immediately presented it to her mother, by whom it was re-ceived with a transport of joy, but without any reflection upon the filial piety of her who gave it.
               Sophia's good friend, though he did not absolutely approve of this exalted strain of tenderness, yet did not fail to place the merit of it in the fullest light: but Harriot, who never heard any praises of her sister without a visible emotion, interrupted him, by saying, that Sophia had only done what she ought; and that she herself would have acted in the same manner, if the sum had been twenty times larger.
               
                  

the greatest stranger here: you shall deliver my message to her to-morrow yourself.
               
               The youth replied, coldly,
that it was possible he might not meet with her to-morrow: neverthe-less, he would go every day to the forest, and wherever it was likely she would walk, in hopes of see-ing her.
               
               Mrs. Gibbons, exulting in the hope of mortifying Mrs. Lawson, told her nephew,
That if he could succeed in his addresses to miss Darnley, and give her so fine a lady for a niece, she would set-tle the best part of her fortune on him immediately.
               
               William suffered her to please herself with these imaginations, hav-ing secured the liberty of going un-suspected, and as often as he pleas-ed, to those places where he could see his beloved Dolly; hitherto he

had not dared to indulge himself frequently in these stolen inter-views, lest his aunt being inform-ed of them should take measures to engage Mr. Lawson to keep his daughter under a greater restraint; but now he continually haunted the park, the wood, and the fields about Mr. Lawson's house: here he could not fail of often seeing his mistress, and sometimes of speaking to her unobserved by any one.
               Dolly never failed to chide him as often as this happened, for thus laying her under a necessity of dis-obeying her father's injunctions; but she took no pains to shun those places where she was almost sure of meeting him; and her chiding was so gentle, that he was convinced she was not greatly offended.
               Sophia happening to meet him

one morning, while he was thus sauntering about, she enquired for his aunt, and hearing from him how desirous the old gentlewoman was of seeing her, she who was full of her benevolent scheme, and eager to put it in execution, de-layed her visit no longer than till the afternoon.
               Mrs. Gibbons considered this as a proof of her nephew's sincerity, and was in so good a humour, that she listened without any signs of displeasure, to the praises which Sophia artfully introduced of Dolly; and even sometimes joined in them. Sophia thought this a very favour-able beginning, and went away full of hope that she should succeed in her design: but while she was thus endeavouring to make others happy, her sister was preparing a new mortification for her.
               Sir Charles continued to visit

Mrs. Darnley as usual: he passed some hours every day at her house, and while he applauded himself for the steadiness of his resolution, not to follow his mistress, he perceived not his own weakness in seeking every alleviation of her ab-sence. He went to the house where she had formerly dwelt, be-cause every object he saw in it brought her dear idea to his mind: he loved to turn over the books he had seen her read, to sit in those places where she used to sit: he was transported when he saw any thing that belonged to her; and when he was not observed by the inquisitive eyes of Harriot, he in-dulged his own in gazing upon So-phia's picture, faintly as it expressed the attractive graces of the original: he endured the trifling discourse of Mrs. Darnley, and the insipid gaiety of Harriot, and left all other

company and amusements to con-verse with them, that he might hear something concerning Sophia; for he had the art, without seeming to design it, to turn the discourse fre-quently upon her, and thus drew from the loquacious mother all he desired to know, without appearing to be interested in it.
               Mrs. Darnley knew not what judgment to form of his assiduity in visiting her, and vainly endeavoured to penetrate into his views. As for Harriot, who had no idea of those refinements of tenderness, which influenced Sir Charles's conduct on this occasion, she concluded that her charms had once more enslaved him, and exulted in her fancied conquest the more, as it was a triumph over her sister, who had been the occasion of so many mor-tifications to her.
               Nothing is so easy or so fallacious

as the belief that we are beloved and admired; our own vanity helps the deceit, where a deceit is in-tended: and a coquet who has a double portion of it, willingly de-ceives herself.
               Harriot was now fully persuaded that Sir Charles had forgot Sophia, and was wholly devoted to her. Impatient to insult her with the news of his change, she proposed to her mother to make her a visit: Mrs. Darnley immediately consent-ed, not because she was very desi-rous to see her daughter, but be-cause every thing that wore the face of amusement was always ac-ceptable to her. Sir Charles, upon being made acquainted with their intention, offered to accommodate them with his chariot; and al-though he only desired them coldly to present his compliments to So-phia, yet when he reflected that

they would soon see and converse with her, he could not help envy-ing their happiness; and it was with great difficulty he conquered himself so far as to forbear going with them.
            
            END of the FIRST VOLUME.
         
      
   

The same delicacy which induced Sophia to divest herself of any par-ticular right to this small legacy, made her see the misapplication of it without discovering the least mark of dislike. Harriot, who governed her mother absolutely, having represent-ed to her, that the obscurity in which they lived was not the means to pre-serve their old friends, or to acquire new ones, and that it was their bu-siness to appear again in the world, and put themselves in the way of for-tune, which could not be done with-out making a decent appearance at least; Mrs. Darnley, who thought this reasoning unanswerable, con-sented to their changing their present lodgings for others more genteel, and to whatever expences her eldest daughter judged necessary to secure the success of her scheme.
               Sophia lamented in secret this ex-cess of imprudence; and to avoid be-ing

a witness of it, as well as to free her mother from the expence of her maintenance, she resolved to accept of the first genteel place that offered; but the natural softness and timidity of her temper, made her delay as long as possible mentioning this design to her mother and sister, lest it should be construed into a tacit reproach of them for a conduct so very dif-ferent.
               Indeed her condition was greatly altered for the worse, since the pre-sent she had made of her legacy. Her mother and sister had never loved her with any great degree of affection, and their tenderness for her was now entirely lost in the uneasy conscious-ness of having owed an obligation to her, for which they could not resolve to be grateful. They no longer con-sidered her as an insignificant person whose approbation or dislike was of no sort of consequence, but as a saucy

censurer of their actions, who assum-ed to herself a superiority, on account of the paultry assistance she had af-forded them: every thing she said was construed into upbraidings of the benefit she had conferred upon them. If she offered her opinion upon any occasion, Harriot would say to her with a malicious sneer,
To be sure you think you have a right to give us laws, because we have had the misfortune to be obliged to you.
And Mrs. Darnley, working herself up to an agony of grief and resent-ment for the fancied insult, would lift up her eyes and cry,
How much is that mother to be pitied who lives to receive alms from her child!
               
               Poor Sophia used to answer no otherwise than by tears: but this was sure to aggravate her fault; for it was supposed that she wept and appeared afflicted only to shew peo-ple

what ungrateful returns she met with for her goodness.
               Thus did the unhappy Sophia, with the softest sensibility of heart, and tenderest affections, see herself excluded from the endearing testi-monies of a mother's fondness, only by being too worthy of them, and exposed to shocking suspicions of undutifulness, for an action that shewed the highest filial affection: so true it is, that great virtues can-not be understood by mean and little minds, and with such, not only lose all their lustre, but are too often mistaken for the contrary vices.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. II. The Triumph of the Graces.
               WHILE Sophia passed her time in melancholy reflecti-ons, Harriot, being by her generous gift enabled to make as shewy an appearance as her mourning habit would permit, again mixed in com-pany, and laid baits for admiration. Her beauty soon procured her a great number of lovers; her poverty made their approaches easy; and the weakness of her understanding, her insipid gaiety, and pert affectation of wit, encouraged the most licentious hopes, and exposed her to the most impertinent addresses.
               Among those who looking upon her as a conquest of no great difficul-ty formed the mortifying design of making a mistress of her, was Sir

Charles Stanley, a young baronet of a large estate, a most agreeable per-son, and engaging address: his fine qualities made him the delight of all who knew him, and even envy itself allowed him to be a man of the strictest honour and unblemished in-tegrity.
               Persons who connect the idea of virtue and goodness with such a cha-racter, would find it hard to con-ceive how a man who lives in a con-stant course of dissimulation with one part of his species, and who abuses the advantages he has received from nature and fortune, in subduing chas-tity, and ensnaring innocence, can possibly deserve, and establish a re-putation for honour! but such are the illusions of prejudice, and such the tyranny of custom, that he who is called a man of gallantry, is at the same time esteemed a man of ho-nour, though gallantry comprehends

            THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
            
               
                  CHAP. I. 
                  The different Characters of two Sisters. Page 1
               
                  

the worst kind of fraud, cruelty, and injustice.
               Sir Charles Stanley had been but too successful in his attempts upon beauty, to fear being rejected by Miss Darnley; and knowing her si-tuation, he resolved to engage her gratitude at least before he declared his designs. He had interest enough to procure the place her father en-joyed for a gentleman, who thought himself happy in obtaining it, though charged with an annuity of fourscore pounds a year for the widow of his predecessor.
               Sir Charles, in acquainting Miss Darnley with what he had done in favour of her mother, found himself under no necessity of insinuating his motive for the extraordinary interest he took in the affairs of this distrest family. Harriot's vanity anticipated any declaration of this sort, and the thanks she gave him were accompa-nied

with such an apparent consci-ousness of the power of her charms, as convinced him his work was al-ready more than half done.
               He was now received at Mrs. Darnley's in the quality of a declared lover of Harriot; and although a-midst all his assiduities he never men-tioned marriage, either the mother and daughter did not penetrate into his real designs, or were but too much disposed to favour them.
               The innocent heart of Sophia was at first overwhelmed with joy for the happy provision that had been made for her mother, and the prospect of such an advantageous match for her sister, when Mr. Herbert, who knew the world too well to be imposed up-on by these fine appearances, gently hinted to his young favourite, his ap-prehensions of the baronet's disho-nourable views.
               Her delicacy was so shocked by

this suspicion, that she could scarce forbear expressing some little resent-ment of it; but reflecting that this ardent lover of Harriot's had not yet made any proposals of marriage, her good sense immediately suggested to her, that such affected delays in a man who was absolutely indepen-dent, and with a woman whose situ-ation made it a point of delicacy to be early explicit on that head, could only proceed from intentions which he had not yet dared to own.
               Chance had so ordered it, that hi-therto she had never seen Sir Charles Stanley; whenever he came, she was either employed in the family affairs, or engaged with her books, which it was no easy matter to make her quit. Besides, as she had no share in his visits, and as her sister never shewed any inclination to introduce her to him, she thought it did not become her to intrude herself upon

his acquaintance. Sir Charles indeed, knowing that Mrs. Darnley had an-other daughter, used sometimes to enquire for her, but was neither sur-prised nor disappointed that she never appeared.
               Sophia, however, was determined to be in the way when he came next, that she might have an oppor-tunity of observing his behaviour to her sister; and fondly flattered her-self that she should discover nothing to the disadvantage of a person, whom her grateful heart had taught itself to love and esteem as their common benefactor.
               Sir Charles at the next visit found Sophia in the room with her sister. He instantly saw something in her looks and person which inspired him with more respect than he had been used to feel for Mrs. Darnley and Harriot; a dignity which she de-rived from innate virtue, and ex-alted

understanding. Struck with that inexplicable charm in her coun-tenance which made it impossible to look on her with indifference, he began to consider her with an at-tention which greatly disgusted Har-riot, who could not conceive that where she was present any other object was worthy notice.
               Sophia herself was a little discon-certed by the young baronet's so earnestly gazing on her; and, in or-der to divert his looks, opened a conversation in which her sister might bear a part. Then it was, that without designing it, she dis-played her whole power of charm-ing: that flow of wit which was so natural to her, the elegant pro-priety of her language, the deli-cacy of her sentiments, the ani-mated look which gave them new force, and sent them directly to the heart, and the moving graces of

the most harmonious voice in the world, were attractions, which, though generally lost on fools, sel-dom fail of their effect on the heart of a man of sense.
               Sir Charles was wrapt in wonder and delight; he had no eyes, no ears, but for Sophia: he scarce per-ceived that Harriot was in the room.
               The insolent beauty, astonished at such unusual neglect, varied her at-titude and her charms a thousand different ways to draw his attention; but found all was to no purpose. Had she been capable of serious re-flection, she might now have disco-vered what advantages her sister, though inferior to her in beauty, gained over her, by the force of her understanding: she might now have seen,

                     How beauty is excelled by modest grace,
                     And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
                  
                  

But too ignorant to know her own wants, and too conceited to imagine she had any, she was strangely perplexed how to account for so sudden an alteration in Sir Charles.
               Her uneasiness, however, grew so great, that she was not able to con-ceal it. She shifted her seat two or three times in a minute, bit her lips almost through, and frowned so intelligibly, that Sophia at last perceiving her agitation, suddenly recollected herself, and quitted the room upon pretence of business.
               When she was gone, Harriot drawing herself up, and assuming a look which expressed her confi-dence in the irresistible power of her charms, seemed resolved to make her lover repent the little no-tice he had taken of her in this visit by playing off a thousand scornful airs upon him; but she

was more mortified than ever, when upon turning her eyes towards him, in full expectation of finding his fixed upon her, she saw them bent upon the ground, and such a pen-siveness in his countenance, as all her rigors could never yet oc-casion.
               She was considering what to say to him to draw him out of this re-verie, when Sir Charles, on a sud-den raising his eyes, turned them towards the door with a look of mingled anxiety and impatience, and then, as if disappointed, sighed and addressed some indifferent con-versation to Harriot.
               The lady, now quite provoked, had recourse to an artifice which her shallow understanding suggested to her, as an infallible method of awakening his tenderness, and this was to make him jealous. With-out any preparation, therefore, she

introduced the name of Lord L—, a young nobleman who was just re-turned from his travels, and lavish-ing a thousand encomiums upon his person, and his elegant taste in dress, added,
That he was the best bred man in the world, and had entertained her so agreeably one night at the play, when hap-pening to come into a box where she was with a lady of her ac-quaintance, that they did not mind a word the players said, he was so diverting.
               
               Sir Charles coldly answered,
That Lord L— was a very pretty youth, and that he was intimate-ly acquainted with him.
               
               "Oh then," cried Harriot, with a great deal of affected joy,
I vow and protest you shall bring him to see me.
               
               
                  Indeed you must excuse me,

madam,
said Sir Charles with some quickness.
               Harriot, concluding her stratagem had taken effect, was quite trans-ported, and renewed her attacks, determined to make him suffer as much as possible; but the young baronet, whose thoughts were full of Sophia, and whose emotion at the request Harriot had made him, was occasioned by fears very diffe-rent from those she suspected, took no further notice of what she said, but interrupted her to ask how old her sister Sophia was?
               
                  I dare engage, replied Harriot, you would never have supposed her to be younger than I am.
               
               The baronet smiled, and looking at his watch, seemed surprised that it was so late, and took his leave.
               Miss Darnley following him to the door of the room, cried,
Re-member I lay my commands up-on

                  CHAP. II. 
                  The Triumph of the Graces. Page 19
               
                  CHAP. III. 
                  The Young Baronet declares his Passion. Page 32
               
                  CHAP. IV. 
                  In which Harriot makes a very contemptible Figure. Page 45
               
                  

you to bring my Lord L— to see me.
               
               Sir Charles answered her no otherwise than by a low bow, and she returned, delighted at the part-ing pang which she supposed she had given him. Vanity is extreme-ly ingenious in procuring gratifica-tions for itself.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. III. The Young Baronet declares his Passion.
               HARRIOT did not doubt but that she had tormented Sir Charles sufficiently; and it was the unshaken confidence which she had in the power of her charms, that hindered her from discovering the true cause of the new disgust she had conceived for her sister. How-ever, it was so great that she could scarcely speak to her civilly, or en-dure her in her sight: yet she found an increase of pleasure in talking to her mother when she was present, of the violent passion Sir Charles Stanley had for her, and in giving an exaggerated account of the professions he made her.
               
                  
Sophia did not listen to this sort of discourse with her usual complai-sance. Her mind became insen-sibly more disposed to suspect the sincerity of the baronet's passion for her sister: she grew pensive and me-lancholy, sought solitude more than ever, and loved reading less.
               This change, which her own in-nocence hid from herself, was quickly perceived by Mr. Herbert, who loved her with a parent's fond-ness, and thought nothing indiffe-rent which concerned her. He took occasion one day to mention Sir Charles Stanley to her, and asked her opinion of his person and un-derstanding, keeping his eyes fixed upon her at the same time, which disconcerted her so much that she blushed; and though she com-mended him greatly, yet it was easy to discover that she forbore to

say all the good she thought of him, for fear of saying too much.
               Mr. Herbert no longer doubted but this dangerous youth had made an impression on the innocent heart of Sophia, which was still igno-rant of its own emotions.
               He had perceived for some time that Sir Charles had changed the object of his pursuits: his visits now were always short, unless So-phia was in the way: he brought her all the new books and pam-phlets that were published which were worth her reading: he adopt-ed the purity and delicacy of her sentiments, declared himself always of the side she espoused: he talk-ed of virtue like a man who loved and practised it, and set all his own good qualities in the fairest light: he presented Harriot from time to time with fashionable trifles, and sent Sophia books enough to fur-nish

out a little library, consisting of the best authors, in English, French, and Italian, all elegantly bound, with proper cases for their reception: he praised whatever she approved, and appeared to have great respect and consideration for Mr. Herbert, because he observed she loved and esteemed him.
               That faithful friend of the vir-tuous Sophia trembled for her dan-ger, when he considered that by this artful management the baronet was strengthening himself every day in her good opinion, and seducing her affections under the appearance of meriting her esteem; yet he did not think it proper to give her even a hint of her situation. A young maid has passed over the first bounds of reservedness, who allows herself to think she is in love.
               Mr. Herbert would not familia-rize her with so dangerous an idea:

he knew her extreme modesty, her solid virtue; he was under no apprehensions that she would ever act unworthy of her cha-racter; but a heart so nicely sen-sible, so delicately tender as hers, he knew must suffer greatly from a disappointed passion; and this was what he wanted to prevent, not by wounding her delicacy with suggest-ing to her that she was in love, but by preserving her from the secret encroachments of that passion.
               He reminded her of the design she had formerly mentioned to him of entering into the service of a lady, and was rejoiced to find that she still continued her resolution. Harriot's natural insolence and ill temper, irritated by the change she now plainly saw in Sir Charles, made home so disagreeable to So-phia, that she wished impatiently for an opportunity of providing for

herself, that she might no longer live upon the bounty of her sister, who often insinuated that their mo-ther's annuity was her gift.
               Mr. Herbert, who had other rea-sons besides those urged, from free-ing her from so uneasy a depen-dence, promised to be diligent in his enquiries for something that would suit her.
               Neither Mrs. Darnley nor Har-riot now opposed this design, which soon came to the knowledge of Sir Charles, who had bribed a servant of the family to give him intelligence of every thing that passed in it.
               Impatient to prevent the execu-tion of it, and tortured by the bare apprehension of Sophia's absence; he resolved to break through that con-straint he had so long laid upon him-self, and acquaint her with his passion.
               But it was not easy to find an opportunity of speaking to her a-lone.

At length having contrived to get Harriot engaged to a play, and prevailed upon a maiden kins-woman of his to invite Mrs. Darn-ley to a party at whist, he went to the house at his usual hour of visit-ing this little family, and found Sophia at home, and without any company.
               Not all the confidence he derived from his rank and fortune, his fine understanding, and those personal graces which gave him but too much merit in the eyes of many women, could hinder him from trembling at the thought of that declaration he was about to make.
               As soon as he came into Sophia's presence he was awed, disconcerted, and unable to speak; such was the power of virtue, and such the force of a real passion! Two or three times he resolved to begin; but when he looked upon Sophia,

and saw in her charming eyes that sparkling intelligence which dis-played the treasures of the soul that animated them; when he observed the sweet severity of her modest countenance, the composed dignity of her behaviour, he durst not own a passion which had views less pure than the perfect creature that in-spired it.
               His conversation for near an hour was so confused, so disjointed, and interrupted by such frequent mu-fings, that Sophia was amazed, and thought it so disagreeable, and un-like what it used to be, that she was not sorry when he seemed dis-posed to put an end to his visit.
               Sir Charles indeed rose up to be gone, but with so deep a concern in his eyes as increased Sophia's perplexity. She attended him re-spectfully to the door of the room, when he suddenly turning back,

and taking her hand,
Do not hate me, said he, nor think ill of me, if I tell you that I love and adore you.
               
               Sophia in the utmost confusion at such a speech, disengaged her hand from his, and retiring a few steps back, bent her eyes on the ground, and continued silent.
               Sir Charles, emboldened by her confusion, made a tender, and at the same time, respectful declara-tion of the passion he had long felt for her.
               Sophia, not willing to hear him enlarge upon this subject, raised her eyes from the ground; her cheeks were indeed overspread with blushes, but there was a grave composure in her looks that seemed a bad omen to Sir Charles.
               
                  I have hitherto flattered myself, sir, said she, that you entertain-ed a favourable opinion of me,

                  CHAP. V. 
                  Sir Charles, by a proper Degree of Address and Assurance, extricates himself from a very pressing Difficulty. Page 59
               
                  CHAP. VI. 
                  Sophia entertains Hopes, and be-comes more unhappy. Page 79
               
                  CHAP. VII. 
                  Sophia takes a very extraordinary Resolution. Mr. Herbert en-courages her in it. Page 91
               
                  

how happens it then that I see myself to-day exposed to your raillery?
               
               The baronet was beginning a thousand protestations, but Sophia stopt him short.
If your pro-fessions to me are sincere, said she, what am I to think of those you made to my sister?
               
               Sir Charles expected this retort, and was the less perplexed by it, as he needed only to follow the dic-tates of truth to form such an an-swer as was proper to be given.
I acknowleged, said he, that I ad-mired your sister, and her beauty made as strong an impression upon me, as mere beauty can make upon a man who has a taste for higher excellencies. I sought Miss Darnley's acquaintance. I was so happy as to do her some little service. I wished to find in her those qualities that were

necessary to fix my heart—Par-don my freedom, Miss Sophia, the occasion requires that I should speak freely. Miss Darnley, upon a nearer acquaintance, did not answer the idea I had formed to myself of a woman whom I could love for life; and the pro-fessions I made her, as you are pleased to call them, were no more than expressions of gallan-try; a sort of homage which beauty, even when it does not touch the heart, exacts from the tongue. My heart was not so easy a conquest—tell me not of raillery, when I declare that none but yourself was ever capa-ble of inspiring me with a real passion.
               
               The arrival of Mr. Herbert proved a grateful interruption to Sophia, in whose innocent breast the tenderness and apparent sin-cerity

of this declaration raised emotions which she knew not how to disguise.
               Sir Charles, though grieved at this unseasonable visit, yet with-drew, not wholly despairing of success. He had heedfully observ-ed the changes in Sophia's face while he was speaking, and thought he had reason to hope that he was not indifferent to her. Loving her as he did with excessive tenderness, what pure and unmixed satisfaction would this thought have given him, had he not been conscious that his designs were unworthy of her! The secret upbraidings of his conscience disquieted him amidst all his flattering hopes of success; but custom, prejudice, the insolence of fortune, and the force of example, all conspired to suppress the pleadings of honour and justice in favour of the amiable

Sophia, and fixed him in the bar-barous resolution of attempting to corrupt that virtue which made her so worthy of his love.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. IV. In which Harriot makes a very con-temptible Figure.
               MR. Herbert having, as has been already mentioned, in-terrupted the conversation between Sir Charles and Sophia, was not surprised at the young baronet's ab-rupt departure, as he seemed pre-paring to go when he came in; but upon looking at Sophia, he per-ceived so many signs of confusion and perplexity in her countenance, that he did not doubt but the dis-course which his entrance had put an end to, had been a very inte-resting one. He waited a moment, in expectation that she would open herself to him; but finding that she continued silent and abashed, he gently took her hand, and looking

tenderly upon her,
Tell me, my child, said he, has not something extraordinary happened, which occasions this confusion I see you in?
               
               
                  Sir Charles has indeed been talking to me, replied Sophia blushing, in a very extraordinary manner, and such as I little ex-pected.
               
               Mr. Herbert pressed her to ex-plain herself, and she gave him an exact account of Sir Charles's dis-course to her, without losing a word; so faithful had her memory been to all he had said.
               Mr. Herbert listened to her at-tentively, and found something so like candor and sincerity in the ba-ronet's declaration, that he could not help being pleased with it. He had never indeed judged favourably of his views upon Harriot, but here the case was very different.
               
                  
Harriot's ignorance, vanity, and eager desire of being admired, ex-posed her to the attacks of liberti-nism, and excited presumptuous hopes.
               Sophia's good sense, modesty, and virtue, placed her out of the reach of temptation. No one could think it surprising that a man of sense should make the fortune of a woman who would do honour to his choice, and where there was such exalted merit as in Sophia, overlook the disparity of circum-stances.
               But justly might it be called in-fatuation and folly, to raise to rank and affluence a woman of Harriot's despicable turn; to make a com-panion for life of a handsome ideot, who thought the highest excellen-cies of the female character were to know how to dress, to dance, to sing, to flutter in a drawing-room,

or coquet at a play; who mistook pertness for wit, confidence for knowledge, and insolence for dignity.
               While he was revolving these thoughts in his mind, Sophia looked earnestly at him, pleased to observe that what the baronet had said seemed worthy his considera-tion.
               Mr. Herbert, who read in her looks that she wished to have his advice on this occasion, but would not ask it, lest she should seem to lay any stress upon Sir Charles's de-claration, told her it was very possi-ble the baronet was sincere in what he had said to her; that his man-ner of accounting for his quitting her sister, was both sensible and candid; that she ought not to be surprised at the preference he gave her over Miss Darnley, since she deserved it by the care she had taken

to improve her mind, and to acquire qualities which might procure the es-teem of all wise and virtuous persons.
               He warned her, however, not to trust too much to favourable ap-pearances, nor to suffer her incli-nations to be so far engaged by the agreeable person and specious beha-viour of Sir Charles Stanley, as to find it painful to renounce him, if he should hereafter shew himself unworthy of her good opinion.
               He advised her, when he talked to her in the same strain again, to refer him to her mother and to him for an answer; and told her that he would save her the confusion and perplexity of acquainting her mo-ther and sister with what had hap-pened, by taking that task upon himself.
               
                  You will, no doubt, added he, be exposed to some sallies of ill

temper from Miss Darnley, for robbing her of a lover; for envy is more irreconcileable than hatred: but let not your sensibility suffer much on her account; if you de-prive her of a lover, you do not deprive her of one she loves: she is too vain, too volatile, and too greedy of general admiration, to be affected with the loss of Sir Charles, any farther than as her pride is wounded by it: and one would imagine she had foreseen this desertion by the pains she has taken about a new conquest lately.
               
               Mr. Herbert was going on, when Mrs. Darnley knocked at the door. Sophia in extreme agitation, begged him to say nothing concerning Sir Charles that evening. He promised her he would not, and they all three conversed together upon indifferent

                  CHAP. VIII. 
                  Mr. Herbert and Sophia carry their Point with great Diffi-culty. Page 111
               
                  CHAP. IX. 
                  In which Sophia shews less of the Heroine than the Woman. Page 125
               
                  CHAP. X. 
                  The Description of two Rural Beauties. Page 134
               
                  

things, until Harriot returned from the play.
               Mr. Herbert then took leave of them, after inviting himself to breakfast the next morning; which threw Sophia into such terror and confusion, that she retired hastily to her own room to conceal her dis-order.
               Mr. Herbert came the next morning, according to his promise; and Sophia all trembling with her apprehensions retiring immediately after breakfast, he entered upon the business that had brought him thither; but sensible that what he had to say would prove extremely mortifying to miss Harriot, he thought it not amiss to sweeten the bitter bill he was preparing for her, by sacrificing a little flattery to her pride.
               
                  You fine ladies, said he, ad-dressing himself to her with a smile, are never weary of extend-ing

your conquests; but you use your power with so much ty-ranny that it is not surprising some of your slaves should as-sume courage at last, to break your chains. Do you know, my pretty cousin, that you have lost Sir Charles Stanley; and that he has offered that heart which you no doubt have despised, to your sister Sophia?
               
               Miss Darnley, who had bridled up at the beginning of this speech, lost all her assumed dignity towards the end of it: her face grew pale and red by turns; she fixed her eyes on the ground, her bosom heaved with the violence of her agitations, and tears, in spite of her, were ready to force their way.
               Sir Charles had indeed for a long time discontinued his addresses to her, and had suffered his inclina-tion for her sister to appear plainly

enough; but still her vanity sug-gested to her that this might be all a feint, and acted only with a view to alarm her fears, and oblige her to sacrifice all her other admirers to him.
               What Mr. Herbert had said therefore, struck her at first with astonishment and grief; but solici-tous to maintain the fancied superi-ority of her character, she endea-voured to repress her emotions; and taking the hint which he had de-signedly thrown out to her to save her confusion.
               
                  Sir Charles has acted very wisely, said she, putting on a scornful look, to quit me who al-ways despised him, for one who has been so little used to have lovers, that she will be ready to run mad with joy at the thoughts of such a conquest; but, after all, she has only my leavings.
               
               
                  
Mr. Herbert, though a little shocked at the grossness of her lan-guage, replied gravely,
However that may be, Miss, it is certain that he has made a very open, and to all appearance, sincere declaration of love to Miss So-phia, who not knowing how to mention this affair to her mother herself, commissioned me to ac-quaint her with it, that she may have directions how to behave to Sir Charles, and what to say to him.
               
               
                  One would have imagined, in-terrupted Miss Darnley eagerly, that she who sets up for so much wit, and reads so many books, might have known what to say to him.
               
               
                  Pray, Miss, said Mr. Herbert, what would you have had her say to Sir Charles?
               
               
                  

                  Why truly, replied she, I think she ought to have told him that he was very impertinent, and have shewn him the door.
               
               
                  Sure, Harriot, said Mrs. Darn-ley, who had been silent all this time, You forget that Sir Charles is our benefactor, and that I am obliged to him for all the little support I have.
               
               
                  It is not likely I should forget it, retorted Miss Darnley, since I am the person who am most obliged to him for what he has done; if I mistake not, it was upon my account that he in-terested himself in our affairs.
               
               
                  Well, well, Harriot, replied Mrs. Darnley, I have been told this often enough; but why should you be angry at this pros-pect of your sister's advance-ment?
               
               
                  

                  I angry at her advancement, madam! exclaimed Miss Har-riot, not I really: I wish the girl was provided for by a suita-ble match with all my heart; but as for Sir Charles, I would not have her set her foolish heart upon him; he is only laughing at her.
               
               
                  It may be so, said Mr. Her-bert, though I think Miss Sophia the last woman in the world whom a man would chuse to laugh at. However, this affair is worth a little consideration— Miss Sophia, madam, pursued he, addressing himself to Mrs. Darnley, intends to refer Sir Charles entirely to you. You will be the best judge whether the passion he professes is sincere, and his intentions honourable; and I can answer for my young cousin, that she will be wholly

governed by your advice, since it is impossible that you can give her any but what is most advan-tageous to her honour and hap-piness.
               
               Harriot, no longer able to sup-press her rage and envy, was thrown so far off her guard as to burst into tears.
I cannot bear to be thus insulted, cried she; and I declare if Sir Charles is permitted to go on with his foolery with that vain girl, I will quit the house.
               
               
                  Was there ever any one so un-reasonable as you are, Miss, said Mr. Herbert; have you not owned that you despised Sir Charles; and if your sister is a vain girl, will she not be sufficiently mortified by accepting your leavings, as you said just now?
               
               
                  I am speaking to my mother, sir, replied Harriot, with a con-temptuous frown; depend upon

it, Madam, pursued she, that I will not stay to be sacrificed to Mr. Herbert's favourite—either she shall be forbid to give Sir Charles any encouragement, who after all, is only laughing at her, or I will leave the house.
               
               Saying this, she flung out of the room, leaving her mother divided between anger and grief, and Mr. Herbert motionless with astonish-ment.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. V. Sir Charles, by a proper Degree of Address and Assurance, extricates himself from a very pressing diffi-culty.
               MR. Herbert having recovered from the astonishment into which he had been thrown by the strange behaviour of Miss Darnley, endeavoured to comfort her mo-ther, whose weak mind was more disposed to be alarmed at the threat she had uttered upon her quitting the room, than to resent such an insult to parental tenderness.
               After gently insinuating to her, that she ought to reduce her eldest daughter to reason, by a proper ex-ertion of her authority, he earnest-ly recommended to her to be parti-cularly attentive to an affair which

concerned the happiness of her youngest child, from whose piety and good sense she might promise herself so much comfort.
               He advised her to give Sir Charles Stanley an opportunity of explaining himself to her as soon as possible; and to make him comprehend, that he must not hope for permission to pay his addresses to Sophia, till he had satisfied her that his intentions were such, as she ought to ap-prove.
               Mrs. Darnley appeared so docile and complaisant upon this occa-sion, so ready to take advice, and so fully determined to be directed by it, that Mr. Herbert went away extremely well satisfied with her behaviour, and full of pleasing hopes for his beloved Sophia.
               Harriot, in the mean time, was tormenting her sister above stairs:

                  CHAP. XI. 
                  Sophia makes an interesting Dis-covery. Page 144
               
                  CHAP. XII. 
                  The Beginning of a very simple Story. Page 155
               
                  CHAP. XIII. 
                  Dolly continues her Story. Page 164
               
                  

she had entered her room with a heart full of bitterness, and a coun-tenance inflamed with rage, throw-ing the door after her with such violence, that Sophia letting fall her book, started up in great terror, and, in a trembling accent, asked what was the matter with her?
               Her own apprehensions had in-deed already suggested to her the cause of the disorder she appeared to be in, which it was not easy to discover, in that torrent of reproach and invective with which she strove to overwhelm her. Scornful and unjust reflections upon her person, bitter jests upon her pedantic af-fectation, and malignant insinuations of hypocrisy, were all thrown out with the utmost incoherence of passion; to which Sophia answered no otherwise than by a provoking serenity of countenance, and the most calm attention.
               
                  
That she was able to bear with such moderation the cruel insults of her sister, was not more the ef-fect of her natural sweetness of temper, than her good sense and de-licate turn of mind. The upper region of the air, says a sensible French writer, admits neither clouds nor tempests; the thunder, storms, and meteors, are formed below: such is the difference between a mean, and an exalted understand-ing.
               Harriot, who did not find her account in this behaviour, sought to rouse her rage by reproaches still more severe, till having ineffectually railed herself out of breath, she auk-wardly imitated her sister's compo-sure, folded her hands before her, and seating herself, asked her in a low but solemn tone of voice, whe-ther she would deign to answer her one plain question?
               
                  
Sophia then resuming her seat, told her with a look of mingled dignity and sweetness, that she was ready to answer her any question, and give her any satisfaction she could desire, provided she would re-press those indecent transports of anger, so unbecoming her sex and years.
               
                  Why, you little envious crea-ture,
said Harriot,
you do not surely, because you are two or three years younger than I am, pretend to insinuate that I am old?
               
               "No certainly," replied Sophia, half smiling;
my meaning is, that you are too young to adopt, as you do, all the peevishness of old age; but your question, sister,
pursued she—
               "Well then," said Harriot,
I ask you, how you have dared to say that Sir Charles Stanley was

tired of me, and preferred you to me?
               
               "Tired of you!" repeated So-phia, shocked at her coarseness and falshood,
I never was capable of making use of such an expres-sion, nor do I familiarize myself with ideas that need such strange language to convey them.
               
               Harriot, provoked almost to fren-zy by this hint, which her indis-creet conduct made but too just, flew down stairs to her mother, and with mingled sobs and excla-mations, told her, that Sophia had treated her like an infamous crea-ture, who had dishonoured herself and her family.
               Mrs. Darnley, though more fa-vourably disposed towards her young-est daughter, since she had been made acquainted with the baronet's affection for her, yet was on this occasion governed by her habitual

preference of Harriot; and sending for Sophia, she reproved her with great asperity for her insolent beha-viour to her sister.
               Sophia listened with reverence to her mother's reproofs; and after justifying herself, as she easily might, from the accusation her sister had brought against her, she added, that not being willing to be exposed to any farther persecutions on account of Sir Charles Stanley, whose since-rity she thought very doubtful, she was resolved not to wait any longer for a place, such as Mr. Herbert's tenderness was in search of for her, but to accept the first reputable one that offered.
               "I have not the vanity, madam," pursued she,
to imagine that a man of rank and fortune can seriously resolve to marry an in-digent young woman like me; and although I am humble e-nough

to go to service, I am too proud to listen to the addresses of any man who, from his supe-riority of fortune, thinks he has a right to keep me in doubt of his intentions, or, in a mean de-pendance upon a resolution which he has not perhaps regard enough for me to make.
               
               This discourse was not all relish-ed by Mrs. Darnley, who conceived that many inconveniencies were to be submitted to, for the enjoyment of affluence and pleasure; but So-phia, who had revolved in her mind all the mortifications a young wo-man is exposed to, whose poverty places her so greatly below her lo-ver; that she is to consider his pro-fessions as an honour, and be re-joiced at every indication of his sincerity; her delicacy was so much wounded by the bare apprehension of suffering what she thought an

indignity to her sex, that she was determined to give Sir Charles Stanley no encouragement, but to pursue her first design of seeking a decent establishment, suitable to the depressed state of her fortune.
               Mrs. Darnley, however, com-batted her resolution with argu-ments which she supposed absolutely conclusive; and added to them her commands not to think any more of so humiliating a design, which so offended Harriot, that she broke out again into tears, exclamations, and reproaches.
               Her mother would have found it a difficult task to have pacified her, had not a message from a lady, in-viting her to a concert that evening, obliged her to calm her mind, that her complexion might not suffer from those emotions of rage which she had hitherto taken no pains to repress.
               
                  
As soon as Harriot retired, to begin the labours of the toilet, Mrs. Darnley, with great mildness, re-presented to Sophia, that it was her duty to improve the affection Sir Charles expressed for her, since by that means it might be in her power to make her mother and her sister easy in their circumstances, and engage their love for ever.
               This was attacking Sophia on her weak side; she answered with the softest tenderness of look and accent,
That it was her highest ambition to make them happy.
               
               "Then I do not doubt, my child," said Mrs. Darnley,
but you will employ all your good sense to secure the conquest you have made.
               
               Sophia, melted almost to tears by these tender expressions, to which she had been so little used, assured her mother she would upon this

occasion act in such a manner as to deserve her kindness.
               Mrs. Darnley would have been better pleased if she had been less reserved, and had appeared more affected with the fine prospect that was opening for her; but it was not possible to press her farther. Na-ture here had transferred the pa-rent's rights to the child, and the gay, imprudent, ambitious mother, stood awed and abashed in the pre-sence of her worthier daughter.
               Sophia, who expected Sir Charles would renew his visit in the even-ing, past the rest of the day in uneasy perturbations. He entered the house just at the time that Har-riot, who had ordered a chair to be got for her, came fluttering down the stairs in full dress. As soon as she perceived him, her cheeks glow-ed with resentment; but affecting a careless inattention, she shot by him

with a half courtesy, and made to-wards the door: he followed, and accosting her with a grave but re-spectful air, desired she would per-mit him to lead her to her chair. Harriot, conveying all the scorn in-to her face which the expression of her pretty but unmeaning features were capable of, and rudely draw-ing away her hand, "Pray, Sir," said she,
carry your devores where they will be more acceptable; I am not disposed to be jested with any longer.
               
               Sir Charles, half-smiling, and bowing low, told her, that he re-spected her too much, as well upon her own account as upon Miss So-phia's, for whom indeed he had the most tender regard, to be guilty of the impertinence she accused him of.
               Harriot did not stay to hear more: offended in the highest degree at

                  CHAP. XIV. 
                  Sir Charles makes his appearance again. Page 179
               
                  CHAP. XV. 
                  Dolly meets her Lover unexpect-edly. Page 190
               
                  CHAP. XVI. 
                  Dolly concludes her Story. Page 208
               
                  

the manner in which he mentioned Sophia, she darted an angry look at him, and flung herself into her chair.
               It must be confessed that Sir Charles discovered upon this occa-sion a great share of that easy con-fidence which people are apt to de-rive from splendid fortunes and un-disputed rank; but as he wanted neither good sense, generosity, nor even delicacy, he would have found it difficult to own to a lady whom he had been used to address in the style of a lover, that his heart had received a new impression, if the contemptible character of Harriot had not authorized his desertion of her. Pride, ignorance, folly, and affectation, sink a woman so low in the eyes of men, that they easily dispense with themselves from a strict observance of those delicate attentions, and respectful regards,

which the sex in general claim by the laws of politeness, but which sense and discernment never pay to the trifling part of it.
               Sir Charles was likewise glad of an opportunity to shew Miss Darnley, that he did not think the little gal-lantry which had passed between them, entitled her to make him any reproaches; or to consider the passion he professed for her sister as an infidelity to her; and now find-ing himself more at ease from the frank acknowledgement he had made, he sent up his name, and was received by Mrs. Darnley with all the officious civility she was used to shew him.
               Sophia was in the room, and rose up at his entrance in a sweet con-fusion, which she endeavoured to conceal, by appearing extremely busy at a piece of needle-work.
               Sir Charles, after some trifling

conversation with her mother, ap-proached her, and complimented her with an easy air upon her being so usefully employed, when most other young ladies were abroad in search of amusement.
               Sophia, who was now a little re-covered, answered him with that wit and vivacity which was so na-tural to her; but looking up at the same time, she saw his eyes fixed upon her with a look so tender and passionate, as threw her back into all her former confusion, which en-creased every moment by the con-sciousness that it was plain to his observation.
               The young baronet, though he was charmed with her amiable modesty, yet endeavoured to relieve the concern he saw her under, by talking of indifferent matters, till Mrs. Darnley seeing them engaged in discourse, prudently withdrew,

when he instantly addressed her in language more tender and parti-cular.
               Sophia, shocked at her mother's indiscretion, and at his taking ad-vantage of it so abruptly, let all the weight of her resentment fall on him; and the poor lover was so awed by her frowns, and the sar-castic raillery which she mingled with expressions that shewed the most invincible indifference, that not daring to continue a discourse which offended her, and in too great concern to introduce another subject, he stood fixed in silence for several minutes, leaning on the back of her chair, while she plied her needle with the most earnest atten-tion, and felt her confusion decrease in proportion as his became more apparent.
               At length he walked slowly to the other end of the room, and

taking up a new book which he had sent her a few days before, he asked her opinion of it in a faulter-ing accent; and was extremely mortified to find she was so much at ease, as to answer him with all the readiness of wit and clearness of judgment imaginable.
               Another pause of silence ensued, during which Sophia heard him sigh softly several times, while he turned over the leaves of the book with such rapidity as shewed he scarce read a single line in any page of it.
               He was thus employed when Mrs. Darnley returned, who stood staring first at one, then at the other, strangely perplexed at their looks and silence, and appre-hensive that all was not right. Sophia now took an opportunity to retire, and met an angry glance

from her mother as she passed by her.
               Her departure roused Sir Charles out of his revery, he looked after her, and then turning to Mrs. Darnley, overcame his discontent so far as to be able to entertain her a quarter of an hour with his usual politeness; and finding So-phia did not appear again he took his leave.
               As soon as he was gone Mrs. Darnley called her daughter, and chid her severely for her rudeness in leaving the baronet.
               Sophia defended herself as well as she could, without owning the true cause of her disgust, which was her mother's so offi-ciously quitting the room; but Mrs. Darnley was so ill satisfied with her behaviour, that she complained of it to her friend

Mr. Herbert, who came in soon afterwards, telling him that So-phia's pride and ill temper would be the ruin of her fortune.
               The good man having heard the story but one way, thought Sophia a little to blame, till hav-ing an opportunity to discourse with her freely, he found the fault she had been charged with was no more than an excess of de-licacy, which was very pardon-able in her situation: he warned her, however, not to admit too readily apprehensions injurious to herself, which was in some de-gree debasing the dignity of her sex and character; but to make the baronet comprehend that es-teeming him as a man of honour, she considered his professions of regard to her as a claim upon her gratitude; and that, in con-sequence

she should without any reluctance receive the commands of her mother, and the advice of her friends in his favour.
            
            
               

               
                  CHAP. VI. Sophia entertains Hopes, and becomes more unhappy.
               POOR Sophia found herself but too well disposed to think fa-vourably of Sir Charles; her ten-derness had suffered greatly by the force she had put upon herself to behave to him in so disobliging a manner, and the uneasiness she saw him under, his silence, and con-fusion, and the sighs that escaped him, apparently without design, had affected her sensibly, and several days passing away without his ap-pearing again, she concluded he was irrecoverably prejudiced against her; the uneasiness this thought gave her, first hinted to herself the im-pression he had already made on her heart.
               
                  
Sir Charles indeed has been so much piqued by her behaviour as to form the resolution of seeing her no more; but when he supposed himself most capable of persisting in this resolution, he was nearest breaking through it, and suddenly yielding to the impulse of his ten-derness, he flew to her again more passionate than ever; this little ab-sence having only served to shew him how necessary she was to his happiness. When Sophia saw him enter the room, the agitations of her mind might be easily read in her artless countenance; a sentiment of joy for his return gave new fire to her eyes, and vivacity to her whole person; while a conscious-ness of the effect his presence pro-duced, and a painful doubt of his sincerity, and the rectitude of his intentions, alternately dyed her cheeks with blushes and paleness.
               
                  

                  CHAP. XVII. 
                  Mrs. Darnley and Harriot re-solve to visit Sophia. Page 219
            
         
      
      
         
            
The young baronet approached her trembling; but the unexpected softness with which she received him, increasing at once his passion and his hopes, he poured out his whole soul in the tenderest and most ardent professions of love, esteem, and admiration of her.
               Sophia listened to him with a complaisant attention; and having had sufficient time, while he was speaking, to compose and recollect herself, she told him in a modest but firm accent, that she was obliged to him for the favourable opinion he entertained of her; but that she did not think herself at liberty to hear, much less to answer to such discourse as he had thought proper to address to her, till she had the sanction of her mother's consent, and Mr. Herbert's appro-bation, whose truly parental regard

for her, made her look upon him as another father, who supplied the place of him she had lost.
               Sir Charles, more charmed with her than ever, was ready in his present flow of tender sentiments for her, to offer her his hand with an unreservedness that would have satisfied all her delicate scruples; but carried away by the force of habit, an insurmountable aversion to marriage, and the false but strongly impressed notion of refine-ments in an union of hearts, where love was the only tye, he could not resolve to give her a proof of his affection, which in his opinion was the likeliest way to destroy all the ardor of it; but careful not to alarm her, and apprehending no great severity of morals from the gay interested mother, he politely thanked her for the liberty she gave

him to make his passion known to Mrs. Darnley, and to solicit her consent to his happiness.
               Sophia observed with some con-cern, that he affected to take no notice of Mr. Herbert upon this occasion; but she would not allow herself to dwell long upon a thought so capable of raising doubts inju-rious to his honour; and satisfied with the frankness of his proceed-ing thus far, she suffered no marks of discontent or apprehension to appear in her countenance and be-haviour.
               Sir Charles did not sail to make such a general declaration of his sentiments to Mrs. Darnley as he thought sufficient to satisfy Sophia, without obliging himself to be more explicite; and in the mean time, having acquired a thorough know-ledge of Mrs. Darnley's character, he sought to engage her in his in-terest

by a boundless liberality, and by gratifying all those passions which make corruption easy. She loved dissipation; and all the pleasures and amusements that inventive luxury had found out to vary the short scene of life were at her com-mand; she had a high taste for the pleasures of the table, and therefore the most expensive wines, and choicest delicacies that earth, sea, and air could afford, were constant-ly supplied by him in the greatest profusion. No day ever passed without her receiving some consi-derable present, the value of which was inhanced by the delicacy with which it was made.
               The innocent Sophia construed all this munificence into proofs of the sincerity of his affection for her; for the young baronet, whe-ther awed by the dignity of her virtue, or that he judged it neces-sary

to secure the success of his de-signs, mingled with the ardor of his professions a behaviour so re-spectful and delicate, as removed all her apprehensions, and left her whole soul free to all the tender impressions a lively gratitude could make on it.
               Mr. Herbert, however, easily penetrated into Sir Charles's views; he saw with pain the progress he made every day in the affection of Sophia; but, by the speciousness of his conduct, he had established himself so firmly in her good opi-nion, that he judged any attempt to alarm her fears, while there seemed so little foundation for them, would miss its effect; and not doubting but ere it was long her own observation would furnish her with some cause for apprehen-sion, he contented himself for the present with keeping a vigilant eye

upon the conduct of Sir Charles and Mrs. Darnley, and with being ready to assist Sophia in her per-plexities, whenever she had recourse to him.
               The change there was now in the situation of this amiable girl, afforded him many opportunities of admiring the excellence of her character: she who formerly used to be treated with neglect and even harshness by her mother, was now distinguished with peculiar regard; her opinion always submitted to with deference, her inclinations consulted in all things, and a stu-dious endeavour to please her was to be seen in every word and action of Mrs. Darnley's, who af-fected to be as partially fond of her as she had once been of her sister.
               Even the haughty insolent Har-riot, keeping her rage and envy con-cealed

in her own breast, conde-scended to wear the appearance of kindness to her, while she shared with her mother in all those grati-fications which the lavish genero-sity of Sir Charles procured them, and which Sophia, still continuing her usual simplicity of life, could never be persuaded to partake of. Yet all this produced no altera-tion in Sophia; the same modesty and humility, the same sweetness of temper, and attention to oblige, distinguished her now as in her days of oppression.
               Mr. Herbert contemplated her with admiration and delight, and often with astonishment reflected upon the infatuation of Sir Charles, who could allow himself to be so far governed by fashionable preju-dices, and a libertine turn of mind, as to balance one moment whether he should give himself a lawful

claim to the affections of such a woman.
               Affairs continued in this state during three months, when the good old man, who watched over his young favourite with all the pious solicitude of her guardian angel, perceived that she was grown more melancholy and reserved than usual; he often heard her sigh, and fancied she had been weeping, and her fine eyes would appear some-times suffused with tears, even when she endeavoured to appear most chearful.
               He imagined that she had some-thing upon her mind which she wished to disclose to him; her looks seemed to intimate as much, and she frequently sought opportunities of being alone with him, and en-gaged him to pass those evenings with her, when her mother and sister were at any of the public en-tertainments.

Yet all those times, though her heart seemed labouring with some secret uneasiness which she would fain impart to him, she had not resolution enough to enter into any explanation.
               Mr. Herbert, who could have wished she had been more commu-nicative, resolved at length to spare her any farther struggles with her-self; and one day when he was alone with her, taking occasion to observe that she was not so chearful as usual, he asked her tenderly if any thing had happened to give her uneasiness; "Speak freely my child," said he to her,
and think you are speaking to a father.
               
               Sophia made no other answer at first than by bursting into tears, which seeming to relieve her a little, she raised her head, and looking upon the good man, who beheld her with a fixed attention,

"May I hope, sir," said she,
that you are still disposed to fulfil the kind promise you once made me —Oh take me from hence,
pur-sued she, relapsing into a new passion of tears,
place me in the situation to which my humble lot has called me; save me from the weakness of my own heart—I now see plainly the delusion into which I have fallen; but, alas! my mother does not see it— every thing here conspires against my peace.
               
            
            
               

            POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
            [Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]
         
         
            
Yet let me view thee; on that lovely Face
                  Let me with fond extatic Rapture gaze;
                  Let thy Voice charm me with its Magick Sound,
                  And my fond Soul with thrilling Pleasure wound;
                  For sweet's thy Beauties to my ravish'd Sight,
                  And thy dear Voice my list'ning Ears delight.
               
               
                  See on that Couch, with Nature's Bounties spread,
                  At Ease reclin'd, my lovely Shepherd's laid:
                  What Beauties in that smiling Form appear;
                  How soft, how mild, how more than heavenly fair.
                  Ye tender Virgins, awful Silence keep;
                  Ye sighing Gales prolong his balmy Sleep:
                  Thou sleep'st, my Love; but still thy waking Heart
                  Bears in my soft Inquietudes a Part.
                  My Image ever present with thee seems,
                  Haunts all thy Slumbers, and informs thy Dreams,
                  
                     
In ev'ry Wish, in ev'ry Thought I'm thine;
                  And oh! be thou for ever, ever mine.
               
               
                  Behold, he wakes, and here with Transport flies;
                  What streaming Glories sparkle from his Eyes:
                  Oh, turn them from me, hide their beauteous Beams;
                  The Sun with less refulgent Brightness gleams:
                  Do not such sweet, such magick Rays dispence,
                  Like pow'rful Sweets they overcome my Sense;
                  Oh, set me, as a Seal upon thy Heart,
                  Mark'd for my own, I claim the smallest Part;
                  Shou'dst Thou (but sure the wounding Thought is vain)
                  For any other lovely Maid complain;
                  Take from me, Heav'n, the fleeting Breath you gave,
                  For Love's as strong as Death, and pow'rful as the Grave.
               
            
            
               

               THE RIVAL NYMPHS. A TALE.
               
                  
                     CLarissa blest with ev'ry Grace,
                  A Shape divine, and charming Face,
                  Had triumph'd long o'er many a Swain,
                  And oft' been woo'd, but woo'd in vain;
                  Not so Amanda, blooming Youth,
                  Soft Innocence, and artless Truth,
                  Were all the Beauties she cou'd boast,
                  Not form'd by Nature for a Toast;
                  Yet some there were, who in her Mind
                  A thousand nameless Charms cou'd find:
                  
                     
She lov'd not Visits, Park, or Play,
                  But mop'd, and read her Time away;
                  Insensible to a Degree,
                  Her Heart was all her own, and free;
                  Yet oft of Love's soft pleasing Pains,
                  The Nymph wou'd write in melting Strains.
                  The lambent Flame that warm'd her Breast,
                  Each tender flowing Line confess'd;
                  
                     Moneses, whose enchanting Form
                  Was one continu'd endless Charm:
                  To whom indulgent Heav'n had join'd,
                  All that cou'd beautify a Mind;
                  Had often own'd bright Beauty's Power,
                  Had sigh'd and lov'd — for half an Hour.
                  But yet the lovely Youth confess'd,
                  Whoe'er could wound his destin'd Breast,
                  Her Charms must over Time prevail,
                  Her Wit must please when Beauty fail'd;
                  
                     
Yet since he cou'd not hope to find,
                  One blest with all those Charms of Mind;
                  He thought Clarissa worth his Care,
                  And all the Hours he had to spare;
                  Soft Vows, and tender speaking Eyes,
                  Pleading Looks, and melting Sighs;
                  Make the believing Maid approve
                  His false, but well dissembled Love.
                  But while Clarissa's Charms he own'd,
                  He with a secret Passion burn'd.
                  
                     Amanda found the Way to win
                  His Heart, and let her Image in;
                  His Pain the lovely Youth conceals,
                  All but what his Eyes reveals:
                  His Eyes, that all his Passion tell,
                  And speak the Love he felt so well.
               
               
                  
                     Amanda heard the Youth complain,
                  She heard and felt an equal Flame;
                  
                     
But still with native Shyness arm'd,
                  She shuns the lovely Swain she charm'd;
                  His Looks, his Sighs, his Actions move,
                  And in soft Language plead for Love.
               
               
                  
                     Clarissa still exults, and cries,
                  He's yet a Victim to my Eyes;
                  He neither will, nor can be free;
                  Me he still love's, and only Me:
                  Ah! cease to claim my charming Prize;
                  
                     Amanda, to the Fair replies,
                  Cou'd I, Clarissa, cou'd I boast,
                  The Hearts that to thy Charms are lost,
                  With Joy I wou'd them all resign,
                  To keep my lov'd Moneses mine.
               
               
                  In vain the Nymph declares her Flame,
                  
                     Clarissa still asserts her Claim;
                  
                     
And 'till the lov'd Moneses owns,
                  The conqu'ring Maid for whom he burns;
                  'Till he'll the happy Fair unfold,
                  The Sequel must remain untold.
               
            
            
               TO A LADY Singing.
               STILL sing, bright Maid, nor cease the pleasing Charm,
               Each Soul subdue, each tender Bosom warm;
               Such magick Sweetness to thy Voice is giv'n,
               We hear a Seraph, and we taste of Heav'n:
               
                  
Strange force of Harmony, whose Power controuls,
               The warring Passions, and informs our Souls,
               Soft soothing Sounds, by whose enchantment blest,
               Anger and Grief forsake the tranquil Breast;
               While soft Ideas rising in the Mind,
               Bids us in Love a gentle Tyrant find,
               And to his Sway the softned Soul's resign'd.
               Thus sung the Thracian Bard, while all around,
               The list'ning Beasts confess'd the magick Sound:
               Less sweet the Harmony Amphion made,
               When dancing Stones mov'd to the Notes he play'd;
               Or him, who bore by Dolphins to the Shore,
               Made Winds and Waves confess his magick Pow'r:
               Thou no less pow'rful o'er the Human Mind,
               As great a Triumph from thy Songs can find;
               Love and its pleasing Pains at once inspire,
               And fix in ev'ry Breast the latent Fire.
            
            
               

               A HYMN to VENUS, IN IMITATION of SAPHO.
               
               
                  VENUS, Queen of tender Fires,
                  Pleasing Pains, and soft Desires;
                  Sweet Enslaver of the Heart,
                  Here thy gentle Aid impart;
                  To my mourning Soul give Ease,
                  And bid my soft Complainings cease.
               
               
                  

                  II.
                  Hither beauteous Goddess move,
                  Leave a while th' Idalian Grove;
                  Once more to my transported Breast,
                  Come a mild, a grateful Guest;
                  There confirm thy pleasing Reign,
                  Free from Cares, and free from Pain.
               
               
                  III.
                  Oh! if e'er my artless Strains,
                  By Thee inspired, breath'd thy Pains;
                  Propitious now thy Suppliant hear,
                  And grant a Lover's ardent Pray'r?
                  Ah! let me not despairing mourn,
                  But meet a kind, a wish'd Return.
               
               
                  

            POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS. WRITTEN by a Young LADY.
            
               LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by S. PATERSON, at Shakespear's Head, opposite Durham-Yard, in the Strand. MDCCXLVII.
         
         
            

                  IV.
                  Make Philander feel my Pow'r,
                  Fear my Scorn, my Smiles adore,
                  Let the dear Deceiver know,
                  All the Pains he can bestow:
                  To me that valued Heart resign,
                  And fix the lovely Wand'rer mine.
               
            
            
               AMINTA and DELIA. A PASTORAL.
               
                  AMINTA.
                  THEE, gentle Maid, may ev'ry Muse inspire,
                  And Phoebus bless Thee with poetic Fire;
                  May thy soft Numbers ev'ry Bosom warm,
                  Melt into Love, and into Softness charm,
                  
                     
Around our peaceful Plains thy Praise is spread,
                  And Wreaths of Laurel crown thy youthful Head.
               
               
                  DELIA.
                  May ev'ry Grace and blooming Charm be thine,
                  And the dear Joys of Peace and Friendship mine:
                  
                     Aminta still my grateful Heart shall share,
                  Tho' lov'd Philander's Image triumphs there.
               
               
                  AMINTA.
                  Me gentle Damon loves, nor loves in vain,
                  With Joy I hear the charming Youth complain;
                  He! only he, to Tenderness can move,
                  Melt my soft Soul, and charm me into Love:
                  In vain I wou'd my secret Pain disguise,
                  He reads my Passion in my artless Eyes.
               
               
                  

                  DELIA.
                  From Fair to Fair the gay Philander rov'd,
                  Sigh'd without Cause, and for a Moment lov'd;
                  The charming Wanderer no more I fear,
                  For me he feels the tender Flame sincere.
               
               
                  AMINTA.
                  Soft as the Breeze which fans the silent Grove,
                  Are Damon's Accents when he talk
                        •
                      of Love;
                  Too well my fond consenting Looks reveal
                  The tender Passion I wou'd fain conceal:
                  Whene'er I hear the lovely Youth complain,
                  My Sighs and Blushes speak an equal Flame.
               
               
                  DELIA.
                  With skilful Hand, when my Philander plays,
                  And sings alternately in melting Lays;
                  
                     
The Woods to the soft Harmony resound,
                  And my Soul dwells on the enchanting Sound.
               
               
                  AMINTA.
                  When my lov'd Damon sings, how sweet the Strains;
                  Ecchoes, repeat them to the distant Plains;
                  Not Philomela, thro' the whisp'ring Trees,
                  Like that dear Shepherd's tuneful Voice can please.
               
               
                  DELIA.
                  No Arts I use to vex my faithful Swain,
                  Nor feign a Passion, nor affect Disdain:
                  When the dear Youth in plaintive Sounds wou'd move
                  My yielding Soul to Tenderness and Love;
                  He sees too well the struggling Passions rise,
                  Glow in my Cheeks, and Languish in my Eyes,
                  Knows the soft Meaning of each Look, and steals
                  The tender Thoughts, which Art in vain conceals.
               
               
                  

                  AMINTA.
                  When Damon's absent from my longing Eyes,
                  A thousand anxious Fears and Sorrows rise;
                  While to the Murmurs of you falling Stream
                  I sing, and Damon is the charming Theme.
               
               
                  DELIA.
                  The lovely Object of my soft Desire,
                  
                     Philander only can my Songs inspire;
                  For him my Numbers flow, my Shepherd's Praise
                  Adorns each Line, and smooths my artless Lays.
               
            
            
               

               ENVY. A SATIRE.
               IN Y—k's detested Isle, that Foe to Fame,
               That Bane of Glory, and a virtuous Name;
               Pale Envy dwells, and ev'ry Breast inspires,
               With mortal Hatred, and destructive Fires;
               Enthron'd She sits, with snaky Honours crown'd,
               And deals her impious Power all around;
               Deceit, on one hand, stands with cruel Smiles,
               Dissembled Truths, and soft successful Wiles;
               But, in her Hand, tho' half conceal'd, is view'd,
               The pointed Dagger, deep in Rage imbru'd:
               Scandal, on t'other hand, like Fame appears,
               Alike her Number both of Tongues and Ears:
               
                  
By these the fairest Reputation dies,
               And swift, and sure, the spreading Ruin flies,
               Round the fell Pow'r her anxious Votaries throng,
               Vain Age contemn'd, and unreguarded Young:
               These, who to Virtue, Wit, and Beauty lost;
               Here strive to blast the Fame they cannot boast;
               Goddess, they cry, if e'er thy Suppliants please,
               When Crowds they sacrifice to give thee Ease,
               To sooth thy Pains, when some distinguish'd Name,
               Rises to blast thee with an honest Fame;
               If by the happy Force of fraudful Lies,
               Sunk in Oblivion the bright Merit dies;
               If spotless Chastity to Shame betray'd;
               If charms, when blasted, in the blooming Maid,
               Deserve thy Smile,—the pleasing Mischief aid.
               Still GODDESS, in our Souls thy Pow'r increase,
               And to each pointed Scandal give Success.
               Pleas'd, she assents, and now each lab'ring Breast
               Is with the baneful Fury's Rage possess'd;
               
                  
Arm'd with deep Malice each reproachful Tongue
               Murders the Fair, the Innocent, and Young;
               With doubtful Hints a horrid Sense convey,
               And smile a faultless Character away.
               But now Artelia comes with stealing Pace,
               Gentle her Air, but Anguish clouds her Face;
               Merit uninjur'd, now demands her Grief,
               But future Scandal gives her Soul relief;
               Swift thro' the supplicating Crowd she press'd,
               And her bad Pray'r in Whispers is address'd:
               Goddess, who all my anxious Bosom fires,
               Who ev'ry Word and ev'ry Thought inspires;
               Still while thy potent Influence I feel,
               Let Friendship's soft Disguise my Aims conceal;
               And while I spread destructive Scandal round,
               Beneath that Masque let me securely wound.
               'Tis done — 'tis granted, fly, ye virtuous Few,
               Fly e'er her cruel Arts your Fame pursue;
               
                  
See Justice from the foul Infection flies,
               And frighted hence reseeks her native Skies.
               Far from the guilty Scene averts her Sight,
               Her own Philander can't retard her Flight;
               Tho' her bright Image, in his Breast he bears,
               And all her Beauties in his Form appears;
               Tho' in his Soul she lights her heav'nly Flame,
               And finds even here a Votary in him.
            
            
               TO MONESES Singing.
               BE hush'd as Death, Moneses sings,
               
                  Moneses strikes the sounding Strings;
               Let sacred Silence dwell around,
               And nought disturb the Magick Sound;
               
                  
Let not the softly whisp'ring Breeze
               Sob amidst the rustling Trees;
               Murmur, ye plaintive Streams, no more,
               But glide in Silence to the Shore:
               Even Philomel thy Note suspend,
               And to a sweeter Song attend;
               Ah! soft, ah! dang'rous, pow'rful Charm,
               An Angel's Voice, an Angel's Form;
               Attentive to the heav'nly Lay,
               I hear and gaze my Soul away;
               Now tender Wishes, melting Fires,
               Infant Pains, and young Desires,
               Steal into my softned Soul,
               And bend it to the sweet Controul;
               Yet, let me fly, e'er 'tis too late,
               The sweet Disease, and shun my Fate.
               But ah! that softly, dying Strain
               Arrests my Steps, I strive in vain.
               Again I to the Syren turn,
               Again with gentle Fires I burn;
               
                  

            TO The RIGHT HONOURABLE the Lady ISSABELLA FINCH, First Lady of the Bed-Chamber to their ROYAL HIGHNESSES the PRINCESSES.
            
               MADAM,
            
            THAT I presume to lay the follow-ing Trifles at your Ladyship's Feet, is not so much the Ambition of having a Patroness distinguish'd for so many shining Qualities as your Ladyship, as to have an Opportunity of acknowledging the Obli-gations you have conferr'd on me.—Yet, Madam, am I truly sensible of the ex-treme
Cease lovely Youth th' inchanting Sound,
               Too deep already is the Wound;
               Thro' all my Veins the Poison steals,
               My Heart the dear Infection feels:
               I faint, I die, by love opprest,
               The Sigh scarce heaves my panting Breast;
               Before my View dim Shadows rise,
               And hides Thee from my ravish'd Eyes:
               Thy Voice, like distant Sounds, I hear,
               It dies in murmurs on my Ear:
               In the too pow'rful Transport tost,
               Ev'n Thought, and ev'ry Sense is lost.
            
            
               

               THE LANGUAGE of the EYES TO LADY J— F—.
               
               
                  I.
                  IF forc'd by Tyrant Custom, we
                  The Anguish of our Souls conceal,
                  Our Eyes yet boast their Liberty;
                  Let them the tender Truths reveal;
                  In soft persuasive Glances speak our Grief,
                  And from that silent Language find Relief.
               
               
                  II.
                  Those sweet Betrayers of the Mind,
                  Can always lend their welcome Aid,
                  The Thoughts by harsh Restraint confin'd,
                  By them are all to View betray'd;
                  
                     
The doubtful War, which Hope and Fear maintain'd,
                  Are by those charming Orators explain'd.
               
               
                  III.
                  See Anger in that sparkling Eye,
                  This in soft Shades of Sorrow drest;
                  Love, smiling Hope, and tender Joy,
                  In those inchanting Looks exprest;
                  The conqu'ring Eyes correct the Lover's Heart,
                  And as they Smile or Frown, their Hopes and Fears impart.
               
               
                  IV.
                  Ye Fair, who strive with Darts to arm,
                  The languid Beauties of your Eyes,
                  Of Isabellas learn to charm,
                  Like hers the ravish'd Soul surprize;
                  Her Mind does all their glorious Beams dispense,
                  Bright as they are they owe their Rays to Sense.
               
            
            
               

               To AURELIA, on her at-tempting to write Verses.
               LONG had Aurelia vainly strove
               To write in melting Strains of Love;
               Ambitious of a Poet's Name,
               She wept, she sigh'd, she long'd for Fame;
               While of the great Design possest
               She thus the Delian God addrest:
               Brightest of heavenly Powers above,
               Immortal Son of thund'ring Jove;
               Oh glorious Deity impart
               To me the soft poetic Art;
               Vouchsafe to me thy sacred Fire,
               And with thyself my Soul inspire.
               
                  
She spake—the God indulgent hears
               The beauteous Maid, and grants her Prayers.
               On Clio turns his radiant Eyes,
               And to the tuneful Goddess cries,
               Fly hence to fair Aurelia's Aid,
               In heavenly Strains instruct the Maid:
               The Muse obeys the God's Commands
               With Joy, and swift as Thought descends,
               And at Aurelia's Side attends.
               Conscious of her new Power, the Maid
               With Thanks the glorious Gift repay'd:
               Now Waller's Sweetness, Granville's Fire,
               At once her tuneful Breast inspire:
               No more she vainly strives to please,
               The ready Numbers flow with ease:
               All soft, harmonious and divine;
               Apollo shines in every Line.
               The Delian God with Rapture fill'd,
               Upon his lovely Pupil smil'd.
               
                  

                  Daphne, his once-lov'd charming Care,
               Appear'd to him not half so fair:
               For the lost Nymph he mourns no more;
               Nor in his Songs her Loss deplore;
               But from the slighted Tree he tears
               It's Leaves, to deck Aurelia's Hairs.
               A Poet now by all she's own'd,
               And with immortal Honour crown'd.
            
            
               ON A LADY's Singing.
               HOW was I charm'd, when fair Harmonia sung!
               What heavenly Sweetness dwelt upon her Tongue!
               What melting Joys did her soft Song impart!
               Oh Pow'r of Musick, on a tender Heart!
               
                  
While she repeats the Lover's ardent Pains,
               My sympathising Soul with her complains:
               Soft flow the Tears; the gentle Sorrows rise,
               And my full Bosom heaves with strug'ling Sighs:
               But when a faithful, generous Pair's her Theme;
               When in soft Sounds she sings their mutual Flame,
               'Tis then I feel the Lover's soft Excess;
               Share in their Joy, and triumph in their Bliss;
               Wish I may thus to Tenderness be moved,
               And love like them, like them to be belov'd:
               Oh say, bright Virgin, by what powerful Art
               Thy Song gives real Raptures to the Heart,
               And makes the struggling Soul alternate prove
               The Joys of true, and Pangs of perjur'd Love:
               A Voice less fine than yours the Bard possest,
               Whose magick Sweetness moving Trees confest.
               On Mortals! thy superior Skill is shown,
               And Hearts subdu'd thy greater Power own.
            
            
               

               To FLAVIA, An ODE.
               
                  I.
                  IF Flavia in thy faultless Form
                  All that is Heavenly-fair we find,
                  If every Grace conspires to charm,
                  And speaks the Beauties of thy Mind.
               
               
                  II.
                  Why shouldst thou wonder, lovely Maid,
                  At the soft Passions you inspire?
                  Why those to hopeless Love betray'd,
                  Or these feel Friendship's sacred Fire?
               
               
                  

                  III.
                  Heedless thy charming Eyes enslave,
                  Nor know the smiling Deaths they dart;
                  Nought can the wretched Gazer save,
                  Or rescue his devoted Heart.
               
               
                  IV.
                  But ah to win the Soul is more,
                  And Friendship's nobler Fires impart,
                  The Work of some diviner Power,
                  And Reason wings th' unerring Dart.
               
               
                  V.
                  Let thy Adorers justly praise
                  The wond'rous Beauties of thy Face,
                  Extol thy Charms a thousand Ways,
                  And with thy Name their Numbers grace.
               
               
                  

                  VI.
                  Friendship a nobler Theme shall find,
                  And to th' admiring World display,
                  The Graces that adorn thy Mind,
                  A Subject that will ne'er decay.
               
               
                  VII.
                  When thy bright Eyes shall cease to wound,
                  And Age thy fading Charms embrace;
                  When in thy Looks no trace is found,
                  Of what the lovely Flavia was.
               
               
                  VIII.
                  The lasting Beauties of thy Mind,
                  The Muse in gentle Strains shall sing,
                  In thy fair Soul new Charms shall find,
                  To raise her Voice, and prune her Wing.
               
            
            
               

Honour your Protection will afford me, since your Approbation is sufficient to stamp a Value upon my other-ways tri-fling Performances. Your Ladyship's early Favour and Indulgence, as it was sufficient to satisfy the most boundless Vanity, gives you the strongest Claim to my perpetual Gratitude. Suffer me then, Madam, thus publickly to own your Ladyship's Good-ness, and to profess myself with the greatest Respect, 
            
               Your LADYSHIP's Most oblig'd and grateful Humble Servant, CHARLOTTE RAMSAY.
               
            
         
         
            

               A SONG.
               
                  I.
                  WHAT Torments must the Virgin prove
                  That feels the Pangs of hopeless Love?
                  What endless Cares must rack the Breast
                  That is by sure Despair possest.
               
               
                  II.
                  When Love in tender Bosoms reigns,
                  With all its soft, its pleasing Pains,
                  Why should it be a Crime to own
                  The fatal Flame we cannot shun.
               
               
                  III.
                  The Soul by Nature form'd sincere,
                  A slavish forc'd Disguise must wear;
                  
                     
Left the unthinking World reprove
                  The Heart that glows with generous Love.
               
               
                  IV.
                  But oh in vain the Sigh's represt,
                  That gently heaves the pensive Breast;
                  The glowing Blush, the falling Tear,
                  The conscious Wish, and silent Fear.
               
               
                  V.
                  Ye soft Betrayers aid my Flame,
                  And give my new Desires a Name:
                  Some Power my gentle Griefs redress,
                  Reveal, or make my Passion less.
               
            
            
               

               On reading HUTCHISON on the PASSIONS.
               
               THOU who thro' Nature's various Faults can rove,
               And shew what Springs the eager Passions move;
               Teach us to combat Anger, Grief and Fear,
               Recal the Sigh, and stop the falling Tear,
               Oh be thy soft Philosophy addrest,
               To the untroubled Ear and tranquil Breast:
               To these be all thy peaceful Notions taught,
               Who idly rove amidst a Calm of Thought:
               Whose Soul by Love or Hate were ne'er possest,
               Who ne'er were wretched, and who ne'er were blest:
               Whose fainter Wishes, Pleasures, Fears remain,
               Dreams but of Bliss, and Shadows of a Pain;
               
                  
Serenely stupid; so some shallow Stream
               Flows thro' the winding Valleys still the same:
               Whom no rude Wind can ever discompose,
               Who fears no Winter Rain, or falling Snows;
               But slowly down its flow'ry Borders creeps,
               And the soft Zephyr on its Bosom sleeps.
               Oh couldst thou teach the tortur'd Soul to know,
               With Patience, each Extream of human Woe;
               To bear with Ills, and unrepining prove
               The Frowns of Fortune, and the Racks of Love:
               Still should my Breast some quiet Moments share,
               Still rise superior to each threatning Care:
               Nor fear approaching Ills, or distant Woes,
               But in Philander's Absence find Repose.
            
            
               

               The QUESTION.
               
               SINCE freed from Love's enchanting Pains,
               Your Heart no longer wears my Chains;
               Since the gay Folly charms no more,
               And all the dear Delusion's o'er:
               Yet tell me, Damon, do you prove
               In Freedom, Joys so pure as Love?
               Alike unfelt its Pains or Sweets,
               Your Heart an equal Measure beats:
               No longer Hope and Fear maintain
               Within your Breast a doubtful Reign:
               Unpleas'd, nor caring if you please,
               Lost in a dull inactive Ease.
               Since then for this you could forego
               The Lover's sweetly-pleasing Woe;
               
                  
Forsake those bright enliv'ning Fires,
               Gay Hopes, and elegant Desires;
               The mutual Wish, the equal Flame,
               The Sorrows, Fears, and Hopes, the same.
               Oh say, what Joys can Freedom boast,
               Like those sweet Torments you have lost.
            
            
               The ADVICE, An ODE.
               
                  I.
                  BENEATH a Myrtle's spreading Shade,
                  The sadly weeping Delia lay;
                  Soft Zephyrs fann'd the pensive Maid,
                  And wasted every Sigh away.
               
               
                  

                  II.
                  Dear conscious Stream, she softly cry'd,
                  Whose plaintive Murmurs sooth my Pain;
                  How often on thy flow'ry Side
                  Did Damon at my Feet complain?
               
               
                  III.
                  Reclin'd in yonder silent Grove,
                  How did the lovely Youth protest
                  The softest, truest, fondest Love,
                  That ever warm'd a faithful Breast?
               
               
                  IV.
                  But ah those Vows no longer bind,
                  No more my gentle Sway he owns;
                  For some coy Nymph less fair and kind,
                  The dear Betrayer sighs and burns.
               
               
                  

                  V.
                  Thus mourn'd the fair neglected Maid,
                  When sprightly Cloe thither came;
                  And is it thus, she laughing said,
                  That Delia cures a slighted Flame?
               
               
                  VI.
                  No more indulge this fruitless Grief;
                  If Damon's false to you and Love,
                  The God that wounds can bring Relief,
                  Another may the first remove.
               
               
                  VII.
                  Believe me, Friend, the cruel Flame,
                  Which tortures now thy gentle Breast;
                  The Object chang'd will burn the same,
                  And you in mutual Love be blest.
               
               
                  

                  VIII.
                  
                     Strephon, who all this Time conceal'd,
                  The Virgin's soft Complaints had heard,
                  His beauteous Form at length reveal'd,
                  And thus his tender Vows preferr'd.
               
               
                  IX.
                  If Love like mine that can endure,
                  Tho' the dear Object be its Foe;
                  If Absence nor Disdain can cure
                  A hopeless Flame that burns in Woe.
               
               
                  X.
                  If such a pure, a constant Fire,
                  May hope for Pity in thy Breast,
                  
                     Strephon shall still the Heart inspire,
                  That once receiv'd him for a Guest.
               
               
                  

                  XI.
                  
                     Delia no more my Love shall fly,
                  But with returning Fondness own,
                  That Damon merits less than I,
                  Who never lov'd but her alone.
               
               
                  XII.
                  Amaz'd, confus'd, the blushing Maid
                  Found her wrong'd Lover still the same;
                  In vain she call'd her Pride to aid
                  Against the sweet returning Flame.
               
               
                  XIII.
                  That melting Voice, that heavenly Form,
                  Those Eyes that shone with soft Desire;
                  Each Grace inspires her Soul to charm,
                  And kindle up the latent Fire.
               
               
                  

            ERRATA.
            PAGE 53. Line 2. add read and. P. 56. l. 2. tutor'd read lectur'd. P. 62. l. 9. on read one. P. 64. l. 1. from read form. P. 65. l. 16. Suspension read Suspicion. P. 66. l. 4. un-melting read melting. P. 76. l. 13. thy read its. P. 77. l. 2. the pleasing read thy soothing. P. 79. 3. hunt read haunt.
            
         
      
      
         
            

                  XIV.
                  Fain she'd her tender Thoughts impart,
                  Her bashful Tongue the Task denies;
                  Impatient to be known, her Heart
                  Gives all its Softness to her Eyes.
               
               
                  XV.
                  In them soft Wishes stood confest,
                  Sweet Remorse, and conscious Love;
                  Every Fear her Soul possest,
                  And all that cou'd those Fears remove.
               
               
                  XVI.
                  Convinc'd, o'erjoy'd, the lovely Youth
                  Saw the reluctant pleasing Pain,
                  Vows at her Feet eternal Truth,
                  Blesses her Sway, and hugs his Chain.
               
            
            
               

               
                  ARDELIA to FLAVIA, An EPISTLE.
               THOU dearest Object of my fondest Love,
               What Words can speak the Misery I prove?
               Doom'd as I am by my relentless Fate,
               To bear the worst of dreaded Ills, your Hate.
               Lov'd tho' thou wert, in every Action just,
               Have I not wrong'd thee by unkind Distrust?
               Believ'd thee false, when Love and Truth were thine,
               And all the tender Joys of Friendship mine?
               Wretch that I am, my fatal Crime I know,
               And merit all the Anger you can show.
               
                  
Do hate me, loath me, drive me from your Breast,
               That Seat of Softness, Innocence, and Rest!
               Bid me my fatal Rashness ever mourn;
               Fly my loath'd Sight, and curse me with your Scorn.
               But oh! tho' Anger should each Grace transform,
               And change to Roughness every smiling Charm:
               Tho' those bright Eyes where Love and Sweetness shine,
               Shou'd with the coldest Glances look on mine:
               Tho' that harmonious, that enchanting Tongue,
               Where all the Force of soft Perswasion hung,
               Chide me in cruel Sounds, with Fury warm'd,
               And wound the Ears it has so often charm'd:
               Still wou'd I bear it all, with Patience bear,
               And whisper to my Soul your Triumph there.
               But sure, in Pity to my tender Pains,
               Some Spark of Friendship in thy Breast remains:
               
                  
To that I'll sue, the languid Flame to raise,
               And wake the sleeping Passion to a Blaze:
               Try every Art thy Anger to controul,
               And watch each yielding Moment in thy Soul;
               Some tender Fit of Softness in thy Breast,
               When Love's awake, and Anger charm'd to Rest.
               For sure my Flavia cannot always prove
               Deaf to the tender Prayers and Tears of Love.
               Oh teach me, thou fair Softness, to atone
               For all the Wrongs I've to thy Friendship done.
               With thy own Sweetness thy just Rage disarm,
               And learn me all thy well-known Power to charm.
               Direct me how to make my Vows believ'd,
               To move thy Pity, and thy Love retrieve.
               Oh with returning Ardour ever bless
               The Heart which you, and only you possess.
            
            
               

               An ODE To SLEEP
               
               
                  I.
                  COME, gentle God of soft Repose,
                  And charm my Soul to Rest;
                  In thy Embraces let me lose
                  The Cares that rack my Breast.
               
               
                  II.
                  Arise, ye dear Deceits, arise,
                  And drest in Damon's Form,
                  My long-expecting, wishing Eyes
                  With his Resemblance charm.
               
               
                  

                  III.
                  Those melting Sounds still let me hear,
                  Which did his Flame impart;
                  Which blest with Love my list'ning Ear,
                  And pierc'd my yielding Heart.
               
               
                  IV.
                  Why rove my Thoughts on fancied Bliss
                  Which only Dreams bestow;
                  For oh whene'er the Morn appears,
                  I wake to real Woe.
               
               
                  V.
                  The envious Light from my sad Eyes,
                  Drives all my Bliss away;
                  With Night the lovely Phantom flies,
                  And leaves me lost in Day.
               
               
                  

                  VI.
                  Since waking then I am distrest,
                  And Pleasure's fled with him;
                  If sleeping I can still be blest,
                  Let Life be all a Dream.
               
            
            
               An ODE, IN IMITATION of SAPHO.
               
               
                  I.
                  ME the loveliest truest Swain,
                  Often woo's, but woo's in vain;
                  Tender, soft, beseeching Eyes,
                  Pleading Tears, and melting Sighs:
                  
                     
Such soft Pains as Lovers feel,
                  Such his dying Looks reveal.
               
               
                  II.
                  Yet by Pride, by Shame with-held,
                  Every yielding Thought's repell'd:
                  Scarce the Sigh that heaves my Breast,
                  Scarce the falling Tear's represt:
                  Yet may artful Tongue denies
                  My Love, and contradicts my Eyes.
               
               
                  III.
                  If then, charming Youth, you'd know
                  All my Love, and all my Woe;
                  All my Heart, without Disguise,
                  Read it in my artless Eyes.
                  They'll in tender Language tell
                  What I wou'd in vain conceal.
               
               
                  

                  IV.
                  There each yielding Thought betray'd,
                  All my Hopes add Fears display'd:
                  The soft Flame which warms my Breast,
                  In each melting Look's confest:
                  While unstudied Glances prove,
                  All is Truth, and all is Love.
               
            
            
               A SONG.
               
                  I.
                  
                     DAMON in vain you strive to move;
                  'Tis true my Heart was form'd for Love,
                  And own its native Flame.
                  
                     
But such a Flame, so pure a Fire,
                  
                     Philander only can inspire,
                  And all its Softness claim.
               
               
                  II.
                  No more of cruel Scorn complain,
                  Too late, alas! you own'd your Pain,
                  Too late to find a Cure.
                  If Friendship to your Views be due,
                  Taste all the Ease that can bestow,
                  But Damon ask no more.
               
            
            
               

            POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
            
               A PASTORAL, FROM THE SONG of SOLOMON.
               
               
                  OH! tell me, thou who all my Soul inspires,
                  Source of my Joys, and Partner of my Fires,
                  By what clear Stream, or nigh what flow'ry Mead
                  Thy tender Flocks with wanton Pleasure feed:
                  Where does my Dear, my lovely Wand'rer stray;
                  Tell me, and guide my weary Steps that Way.
               
               
                  

               A PARODY ON AN ODE of HORACE, As TRANSLATED by Mr. FARQUHAR.
               
               IN Love, where Cares distract the Mind,
               Where Fear to smiling Hope is join'd;
               Where Grief the long-sought Joy precedes,
               And late Remorse that Joy invades;
               Show me among the happiest there,
               Who would not wish for Freedom here.
               
                  
In Freedom, Friend, the Wise delights,
               For this the Curtain-tutor'd Nights:
               For this she storms the peaceful Man,
               And curses nuptial Ties in vain.
               Since Love then is too weak to cure
               That female Vice, the Thirst of Power;
               Happy the Maid who guards her Heart
               Against the sweetly-painful Dart:
               Who charm'd by Liberty alone,
               Will no intruding Passion own.
               In Love what can we hope to find.
               But Pleasures that leave Stings behind?
               Delusive Hopes of Happiness,
               Airy Dreams of fancy'd Bliss?
               Which shadow-like will disappear,
               When the approaching Form comes near.
               Cease then to court a certain Ill,
               If free at present, keep so still.
               
                  
Forbear that meaning Glance to throw;
               The Dart which meditates the Foe
               May back upon thyself recoil,
               And catch thee in the artful Toil.
               Love o'er the abject Breast may reign,
               With all its light fantastic Train
               Of Wishes, Cares, and fond Desires,
               Fears and Hopes, and jealous Fires;
               Be mine from the soft Folly free,
               Freedom alone has Charms for me.
            
            
               The DREAM.
               AH stay, fair fleeting Form, I charge thee stay;
               Whither, ah whither wouldst thou glide away?
               
                  Ardelia calls thee, lovely cruel Shade!
               
                  Ardelia bids thee stay, thy once lov'd Maid!
               
                  
Alas! in vain I call, for see he flies;
               Flies my fond clasping Arms, and ardent Eyes.
               Not all my Prayers can the lov'd Form detain:
               My Sighs, my Tears, my Wishes are in vain.
               In gentle Slumbers, Morpheus, close my Eyes,
               And bid once more the lovely Phantom rise.
               Bid him in all those heavenly Charms appear;
               That melting Softness, that engaging Air,
               In that too powerful Sorrow let him shine,
               When first he gave his Heart and conquer'd mine.
               Hence then, ye Sorrows, from the fancied Scene,
               Despairs, eternal Sighs, and secret Pain,
               Shall wound no more, no Thought my Bliss destroy;
               No happy Rival interrupt my Joy:
               For oh! whate'er my cruel Fates Design,
               In Sleep Philander can be only mine.
            
            
               

               A SONG.
               
                  I.
                  IN Vain I strive with Female Art,
                  To hide the Motions of my Heart;
                  My Eyes my secret Flame declare,
                  And Damon reads his Triumph there.
               
               
                  II.
                  When from his fond, his ardent Gaze,
                  With Frowns I turn aside my Face;
                  My Cheeks with conscious Blushes glow,
                  And all my Soul's Disorder show.
               
               
                  III.
                  Or when with seeming Scorn I hear
                  The Youth his tender Vows prefer;
                  
                     
From my fond Breast reluctant steals
                  A Sigh, and all the Truth reveals.
               
               
                  IV.
                  Oh Love, all-powerful o'er the Mind,
                  Art thou to rigid rules confin'd?
                  And must the Heart that owns thy Sway,
                  That Tyrant Customs Laws obey?
               
               
                  V.
                  Oh! let me break the cruel Chain,
                  And freely own my tender Pain:
                  By harsh Restraint no longer sway'd,
                  Confirm whate'er my Eyes have said.
               
            
            
               

               The ART of COQUETTRY.
               
               YE lovely Maids, whose yet unpractis'd Hearts
               Ne'er felt the Force of Love's resistless Darts;
               Who justly set a Value on your Charms,
               Power all your Wish, but Beauty all your Arms:
               Who o'er Mankind wou'd fain exert your Sway,
               And teach the lordly Tyrant to obey.
               Attend my Rules to you alone addrest,
               Deep let them sink in every female Breast.
               The Queen of Love herself my Bosom fires,
               Assists my Numbers, and my Thoughts inspires.
               Me she instructed in each secret Art,
               How to enslave, and keep the vanquish'd Heart;
               When the stol'n Sigh to heave, or drop the Tear,
               The melting Languish, the obliging Fear;
               
                  
Half-stifled Wishes, broken, kind Replies,
               And all the various Motions of the Eyes.
               To teach the Fair by different Ways to move
               The soften'd Soul, and bend the Heart to Love.
               Proud of her Charms, and conscious of her Face,
               The haughty Beauty calls forth every Grace;
               With fierce Defiance throws the killing Dart,
               By Force she wins, by Force she keeps the Heart.
               The witty Fair on nobler Game pursues,
               Aims at the Head, but the rapt Soul subdues.
               The languid Nymph enslaves with softer Art,
               With sweet Neglect she steals into the Heart;
               Slowly she moves her swimming Eyes around,
               Conceals her Shaft, but meditates the Wound:
               Her gentle Languishments the Gazers move,
               Her Voice is Musick, and her Looks are Love.
               Tho' not to all Heaven does these Gifts impart,
               What's theirs by Nature may be yours by Art.
               
                  
But let your Airs be suited to your Face,
               Nor to a Languish tack a sprightly Grace.
               The short round Face, brisk Eyes, and auburn Hair,
               Must smiling Joy in every Motion wear;
               Her quick unsettled Glances deal around,
               Hide her Design, and seem by Chance to wound.
               Dark rolling Eyes a Languish may assume,
               And tender Looks and melting Airs become:
               The pensive Head upon the Hand reclin'd,
               As if some sweet Disorder fill'd the Mind.
               Let the heav'd Breast a struggling Sigh restrain,
               And seem to stop the falling Tear with Pain.
               The Youth, who all the soft Distress believes,
               Soon wants the kind Compassion which he gives.
               But Beauty, Wit, and Youth may sometimes fail,
               Nor always o'er the stubborn Soul prevail.
               Then let the fair One have recourse to Art,
               And, if not vanquish, undermine the Heart.
               
                  
First from your artful Looks with studious Care,
               From mild to grave, from tender to severe.
               Oft on the careless Youth your Glances dart,
               A tender Meaning let each Look impart.
               Whene'er he meets your Looks with modest Pride,
               And soft Confusion turn your Eyes aside,
               Let a soft Sigh steal out, as if by Chance,
               Then cautious turn, and steal another Glance.
               Caught by these Arts, with Pride and Hope elate,
               The destin'd Victim rushes on his Fate:
               Pleas'd, his imagin'd Victory pursues,
               And the kind Maid with soften'd Glances views;
               Contemplates now her Shape, her Air, her Face,
               And thinks each Feature wears an added Grace;
               'Till Gratitude, which first his Bosom proves,
               By slow Degrees is ripen'd into Love.
               'Tis harder still to fix than gain a Heart;
               What's won by Beauty, must be kept by Art.
               
                  

                  In vain I trace the Plains, each winding Grove;
                  No Swain directs me to my absent Love:
                  Close in the Covert of some Shade he lyes;
                  Some envious Shade conceals him from my Eyes:
                  Bear then my soft Complainings to his Ear;
                  Ye whis'pring Winds, let him my Accents hear;
                  The well-known Sounds will wake the ling'ring Swain,
                  And bring him panting to my Arms again.
               
               
                  Alas! not yet my cruel Love returns:
                  I rave; my Breast with jealous Fury burns:
                  Cold Tremblings seize on ev'ry vital Part;
                  The Blood runs freezing to my panting Heart;
                  Dim Shadows swim before my closing Sight,
                  And my griev'd Soul prepares to take its Flight.
               
               
                  Hark; what sweet Accents breaks the ambient Air;
                  Sure 'tis my Love's melodious Voice I hear:
                  
                     
Too kind a Treatment the blest Lover cloys,
               And oft Despair the growing Flame destroys:
               Sometimes with Smiles receive him, sometimes Tears,
               And wisely balance both his Hopes and Fears.
               Perhaps he mourns his ill-requited Pains,
               Condemns your Sway, and strives to break his Chains;
               Behaves as if he now your Scorn defy'd,
               And thinks at least he shall alarm your Pride:
               But with Indifference view the seeming Change,
               And let your Eyes after new Conquests range;
               While his torn Breast with jealous Fury burns,
               He hopes, despairs, hates, and adores by Turns;
               With Anguish now repents the weak Deceit,
               And powerful Passion bears him to your Feet.
               Strive not the jealous Lover to perplex,
               Ill suits Suspension with that haughty Sex;
               Rashly they judge, and always think the worst,
               And Love is often banish'd by Distrust.
               
                  
To these an open free Behaviour wear,
               Avoid Disguise, and seem at least sincere.
               Whene'er you meet affect a glad Surprize,
               And give unmelting Softness to your Eyes:
               By some unguarded Word your Love reveal,
               And anxiously the rising Blush conceal.
               By Arts like these the Jealous you deceive,
               Then most deluded when they most believe.
               But while in all you seek to raise Desire,
               Beware the fatal Passion you inspire:
               Each soft intruding Wish in Time reprove,
               And guard against the sweet Envader Love.
               Not for the tender were these Rules design'd,
               Who in their Faces show their yielding Mind:
               Eyes that a native Languishment can wear,
               Whose Smiles are artless, and whose Blush sincere;
               But the gay Nymph who Liberty can prize.
               And vindicate the Triumph of her Eyes:
               
                  
Who o'er Mankind a haughty Rule maintains,
               Whose Wit can manage what her Beauty gains:
               Such by these Arts their Empire may improve,
               And what they lost by Nature gain by Love.
            
            
               To MIRA. Inviting her to a RETREAT in the COUNTRY.
               
                  NOW Spring returning decks the Year
                  With all that's lovely, all that's fair;
                  The Fields in lively Green array'd,
                  With deeper Glooms the silent Shade;
                  
                     
Soft descends the gentle show'rs,
                  And wakes to Life the springing Flow'rs;
                  Hence ambrosial Sweets exhale,
                  And various Colours paint the Vale;
                  Refreshing Airs the Zephyrs blow,
                  The Streams with pleasing Murmurs flow;
                  While nightly 'midst the silent Plain
                  Thy fav'rite Bird renews her Strain,
                  Come then, my Mira, come and share
                  My Joys, and breath a purer Air.
                  Together let us range the Plains,
                  Amongst the rustick Nmyphs and Swains;
                  In rural Dress, devoid of Cure,
                  Give to the Winds our flowing Hair,
                  And round the Meadows gayly roam,
                  For Youth does sober Mirth become.
                  Now straining up you airy Height,
                  We'll entertain the wand'ring Sight,
                  
                     
With flow'ry Fields, and waving Woods,
                  Hills and Dales, and falling Floods:
                  Or to relieve the searching Eyes,
                  See distant Spires and Temples rise.
               
               
                  Come now, my Mira, let us rove
                  Together thro' the mazy Grove;
                  Here, while with gentle Pace we walk,
                  Beguile the Time with pleasing Talk:
                  Here show thy melting Eloquence,
                  Thy sprightly Wit, thy manly Sense;
                  Thy virtuous Notions void of Art,
                  And while you charm, correct the Heart.
               
               
                  Or now together careless laid,
                  Beneath a Cypress spreading Shade,
                  Our Thoughts to heavenly Numbers raise,
                  Repeating Pope's harmonious Lays,
                  
                     
Now Homer's awful Leaves turn o'er,
                  Or graver History explore;
                  Or study Plato's sacred Page,
                  Uncommon to our Sex and Age.
               
               
                  Now wand'ring by the Moon's pale Light,
                  Amidst the silent Shades of Night,
                  Where on the late deserted Plains
                  A pleasing Melancholy reigns;
                  Softly thro' the rustling Trees
                  Sobs the sweetly dying Breeze;
                  The Echo's catch the plaintive Sound,
                  And gentle Murmurs breathe around.
                  Now sing, my Friend, and let thy Strain
                  Recount the Arts of faithless Man:
                  Thy Notes, sweet Philomel, shall join,
                  And mix her soft Complaints with thine.
               
               
                  

                  But raise, my Mira, raise thy Song,
                  To Friendship nobler Strains belong.
                  Oh sing its tender chaste Desires,
                  Its equal, pure, and lasting Fires!
                  Such as in thy Bosom burns,
                  Such as my fond Soul returns.
                  Friendship is but Love refin'd,
                  Not weakens, but exalts the Mind;
                  And when its sacred Power we prove,
                  We guess how heavenly Spirits love.
               
            
            
               

               Verses wrote extempore on a Gentle-man's playing on the Flute.
               
                  I.
                  OH! cease thy too harmonious Strain,
                  Nor thus my ravish'd Soul surprize:
                  What new Ideas, pleasing Pains,
                  Does by the sweet Inchantment rise?
               
               
                  II.
                  Lull'd by the dear bewitching Sound,
                  Each jarring Passion's charm'd to rest;
                  Yet my Soul feels a pleasing Wound,
                  And sweet Disorders fill my Breast.
               
               
                  

                  III.
                  Forbear to show thy heavenly Art,
                  Nor aim a Conquest o'er my Mind;
                  By Musick soften'd to the Dart,
                  Love may an easy Entrance find.
               
            
            
               An EPISTLE TO MONESES, IN IMITATION of OVID.
               WHEN urg'd by Honour, from thy Sight I flew,
               And scarce would breath one tender soft adieu,
               
                  
From thy dear Face I turn'd my gazing Eyes,
               Supprest the Tears, and check'd the rising Sighs.
               Self-banish'd all Despairs worst Pangs I prove,
               I fled from you, but could not fly from Love.
               Oh do not then, my lovely Swain, accuse
               My Want of Truth, nor charge on me thy Woes:
               For every Pain which racks thy faithful Breast,
               A thousand more my anxious Soul opprest;
               Sorrows for which Description's all too faint,
               And equal Misery alone can paint.
               Dearer than Light to these fond Eyes you are,
               My first, my last, and still my only Care.
               My hapless Flame nor Time nor Absence cures,
               Still constant to the Vows which made me yours.
               Ah! why then in that sadly-pleasing Strain?
               Why does Moneses of his Wrongs complain?
               Forbear to send me what thy Muse inspir'd,
               By ill-requited Love, and Absence fir'd:
               
                  
Now to my Arms my charming Shepherd flies;
                  Heaven to my Arms, and Transport to my Eyes.
                  Oh! on thy panting Breast let me recline,
                  And let thy folding Arms around me twine;
                  With Vows of Love my anxious Fears controul,
                  And whisper Ease to my distracted Soul.
               
               
                  Arise, my Love, the dear Enslaver cries.
                  My beauteous Maid, my lovely Fair, arise;
                  For lo, the Rain is o'er, the Winter's past,
                  And balmy Sweets perfume the southern Blast,
                  Like thee, all Nature smiles; the Fields around,
                  Are with a new returning Verdure crown'd:
                  Hark what sweet Musick fills the vocal Grove;
                  Each feather'd Songster tunes its Notes to Love:
                  What Odours do these op'ning Buds exhale,
                  Yet cannot o'er thy greater Sweets prevail,
                  Or their enchanting Beauties thine excell.
                  
                     
Deep in my Soul thy soft Reproaches steal,
               And all thy Griefs redoubled there I feel;
               Still round my Heart plays the same lambient Flame,
               Each Wish, and every fond Desire the same.
               Nor can thy Pen one piercing Woe reveal,
               Which thy Ardelia does not equal feel.
               Ah, dear Idea of my lovely Swain!
               Ah, soft Remembrance of my former Pain!
               Why to my anxious Breast do you return?
               Why wake a Flame which must for ever burn?
               Still shall that lovely Image charm my View,
               And those dear Accents all my Grief renew:
               Still must I love, tho' Honour Love deny,
               And bids me from the dangerous Charmer fly.
               Ah then how vain, how fruitless all my Care?
               This welcome Absence, this confirm'd Despair?
               
                  
This cruel Contest between Love and Fame?
               These endless Pangs for which I want a Name?
               Why does Moneses still love on? Why share
               In all those Sorrows I alone should bear?
               All tender as thou wert, all soft and kind,
               I flew, and with thee left my Soul behind;
               I left thee, fancied Honour to pursue,
               Just to myself, but more unjust to you.
               Why then my Image dost thou still retain?
               Why for a Wretch unworthy thee complain?
               O rather hate me, drive me from your Breast,
               By Scorn and Hate be all thy Soul possest:
               Let thy fond Heart thy once-lov'd Chains resign,
               Compleat thy Cure, and O assist in mine.
               Why did I love? Why did my easy Heart
               Admit the dear, but ah too dangerous Dart?
               
                  
Why did I not the pleasing Torment shun?
               Why fondly listen to the pleasing Tongue?
               Quick to my Heart the subtle Poison stole,
               Charm'd all my Senses, and enslav'd my Soul;
               And less the Beauty of thy matchless Form,
               Then thy prevailing Eloquence could charm.
               Oh come once more, Moneses, and renew
               Those tender Vows, and I'll believe them true:
               Let me once more behold those melting Eyes,
               Where Love a thousand nameless Charms supplies:
               The soft Enchantment shall my Fears controul,
               And Love claim all his Empire in my Soul.
               Ah! whether would my boundless Wishes rove?
               Still, still am I enslav'd by guilty Love!
               Still shall its lawless Fires my Soul profane,
               And is my boasted Virtue but a Name?
               
                  
No; I'll forget thee, drive thee from my Breast,
               Thou dear Undoer of my Peace and Rest.
               Yet how forget, when every Thought is thine?
               Even Life itself were easier to resign.
               To lonely Shades in vain I fly for Ease,
               There secret sigh, and feed the sweet Disease.
               On thy dear Name I call, and all around
               The whisp'ring Winds repeat the charming Sound.
               'Tis thus I wear the anxious Hours away,
               'Till Night restores the Sorrows of the Day.
               Then does thy Image to my Eyes appear;
               But ah! with Looks averse, and Frowns severe;
               Still as you seem to chide me with your Eyes,
               My own in streaming Tears to yours replies,
               Oh stay, I cry, thou charming Phantom stay,
               Or with thee take my fleeting Soul away!
               
                  
In vain I call, my clasping Arms you shun,
               And waking find the dear Delusion gone.
               Thus, does Ardelia hunt thy boding Dream;
               Does she like thee all cold and cruel seem?
               Or does the pensive Shade soft Sorrows wear,
               Heave the faint Sigh, and shed the mimick Tear?
               On thy lov'd Breast her painful Head recline,
               And tell thee that her Torments equal thine.
               Why can I not this fatal Flame remove?
               Or why, O why is it a Crime to love?
               By Turns my Reason and my Passion sway,
               As Honour triumphs, and as Love betray;
               My tortur'd Breast conflicting Passions tear,
               And Love and Virtue wage unequal War:
               Now all its sacred Precepts I pursue,
               Lost for a while is every Thought of you.
               
                  
But oh! again the guilty Lover burns,
               And all the Woman in my Soul returns;
               Again my Bosom glows with soft Desire,
               And hope returning fans the fatal Fire.
               Seas rolls between us, but the active Mind
               Still springs to thee, and leaves its load behind.
               Oh should some happy Chance to us unknown,
               Without a Crime confirm me all thy own.
               Blest be these tender Griefs, these anxious Fears,
               These never-ceasing Sighs and flowing Tears!
               Oh! let my Soul the pleasing Hope retain,
               One Hour of Joy repays whole Years of Pain!
               To suff'ring Martyrs thus such Hopes are given;
               Such Views of promis'd Joys and future Heaven.
               For this resign'd they calmly meet their Fate,
               Conscious of Blessings in a happier State.
            
            
               

               An ODE.
               
                  I.
                  AH cease to grieve, fond fluttering Heart,
                  Thy charming Conqueror returns;
                  Hence every Doubt each Fear depart,
                  The Youth with equal Passion burns.
               
               
                  II.
                  Haste, gentle Winds, and waft him here,
                  Nor long my lov'd Philander keep;
                  Grant, Queen of Love, a Lover's Prayer,
                  Sooth into Smiles thy native Deep.
               
               
                  

                  III.
                  While I thy gentle Power address,
                  View the dear Object of my Care;
                  View him, bright Goddess, and confess
                  A lovelier Adonis there.
               
               
                  IV.
                  Then can my Vows be fruitless paid,
                  When in that love-inspiring Form;
                  Those melting Graces are display'd,
                  Which your celestial Breast cou'd warm.
               
               
                  V.
                  Come then, my Soul's Enslaver, come,
                  To these fond Eyes their Bliss restore;
                  Be these encircling Arms thy Home,
                  And fate shall never part us more.
               
            
            
               

               SONG.
               
                  IN Vain I strive to fly
                  This Soul consuming Care,
                  My Sorrows always nigh,
                  And present every where.
               
               
                  In vain I trace the Grove,
                  There no Repose I find;
                  What Place can banish Love
                  From the subjected Mind.
               
               
                  

                  That pensive-falling Stream,
                  Those Gales that whisper round,
                  Increase the fatal Flame,
                  And deeper fix the Wound.
               
               
                  The silent Shades of night,
                  Adds Horror to my Grief;
                  The gay Return of Light
                  To me brings no Relief.
               
            
            
               
That Lilly shines but with a borrow'd Grace,
                  And Roses blush to emulate thy Face;
                  Nor can the Violet's admired Dye
                  Match the bright Azure of thy shining Eye;
                  See where you tread, fresh blooming Flowers arise,
                  New Charms appear where'er you turn your Eyes;
                  For thee the Streams in softer Murmurs flow;
                  For thee sweet Airs the whisp'ring Zephirs blow;
                  For thee the Cedars form a grateful Shade,
                  And brighter Colours paint th' enamell'd Mead:
                  Oh! come then thro' these sweet Meanders stray;
                  Arise, my Love; my fair One, come away.
               
               
                  Yes, dearest Object of my soft Desire,
                  Thou sweet Inspirer of my endless Fire;
                  With thee I'll trace the Groves, each winding Mead,
                  And follow where thy charming Footsteps lead:
                  
                     

               In Answer to Consolatory Verses wrote by a Friend.
               WITH Ease Advice to virtuous Woe we give,
               But ah! how few by Stoick Rules can live?
               Virtue distrest in melting Verse appears;
               Beauteous in Misery, and adorn'd in Tears.
               But in the World 'tis view'd with other Eyes;
               Virtue in Rags is Beauty in Disguise;
               And can no more Contempt and Scorn disarm,
               Then a fair Face behind a Masque can charm.
               Whatever Gifts we may to Nature owe,
               Success is all our Merit here below.
               By Fortune favour'd Fools may rise to Fame;
               Without it Virtue is an empty Name.
            
            
               

               
                  SHALLUM to HILPAH, An EPISTLE. From the SPECTATOR.
               
               WHAT Thought can figure all my vast Distress?
               What Words the Anguish of my Soul express,
               When to my Rival you resign'd your Charms,
               And fill'd his richer, but less faithful Arms?
               Loathing the Sun's bright Rays to Shades I fly,
               And your dear Name to whisp'ring Zephyrs sigh,
               The whisp'ring Zephyrs your dear Name reply;
               These threescore Years and ten thy Loss I've mourn'd,
               While Tirzah's Hills my loud Complaint return'd.
               
                  
Dark gloomy Groves to raise have been my Care,
               Fit Scenes of hopeless Love, and black Despair.
               But now, oh—Hilpah Paradise appears,
               And a new Eden rises 'midst my Tears.
               Here opening Flowers the ravish'd Sense invade,
               There spreading Cedars form a grateful Shade.
               Soft gliding Streams, which murmur as they flow,
               And Gales that all Arabia's Odours blow.
               Come up then, my Belov'd! Oh come and grace
               This Spot of Earth, with a young lovely Race.
               Let a fair num'rous Offspring fill each Shade,
               And a-new-peopled World by thee be made.
               Remember, fair One, that the Age of Man
               Is but a thousand Years, and quickly gone:
               Beauty, tho' much admir'd, yet soon is past,
               Its transient Glories but some Centuries last:
               
                  
Like a tall Oak, which long on Tirzah's Height
               Display'd its growing Branches to the Sight;
               Now worn with Age it falls, nor thought of more,
               Unless some Root its Memory restore:
               Which with increasing Verdure still may rise,
               And like its Parent-Tree invade the Skies,
               Think well on this, then haste to make me blest;
               Be happy now, and leave to Fate the rest.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   


            
               Shakespear Illustrated: OR THE NOVELS and HISTORIES, On which the PLAYS of SHAKESPEAR Are Founded, COLLECTED and TRANSLATED from the ORIGINAL AUTHORS. WITH CRITICAL REMARKS. The THIRD and LAST VOLUME. BY THE Author of the FEMALE QUIXOTE.
            
               LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand, MDCCLIV.
         
         
            
This Controversy lasted so long, that my Mother being fatigued with talking, fell fast asleep. When, lo, the Goddess Venus appear-ed to her in a Dream, shining with celestial Charms; her Eyes expressed a certain Kind of amiable Severity; for Anger could have no dwelling on the Face of this charming Di-vinity, and with a Voice, majestically sweet, she thus accosted her.
               Whence Delia is this Contempt of a Power, who has been always favourable to thee? Hast thou forgot the Time when thy soft Heart first glowed with tender Fires for thy Andronius? then didst thou seek my Al-tars; then didst thou implore my Aid; I heard, and granted all thy Desires; and is it thus thou repayest me? but know, ungrateful Wo-man, thou shalt not escape the Vengeance of an affronted Deity; thou shalt bring forth a Son and Daughter, but thou shalt not live to taste the Joys of a Mother; the Moment of their Birth shall be the last of thy Life; nor shall my Vengeance stop here; thy wretched Offspring shall feel the Fury of my just Re-sentment; they both shall languish with the Pangs of hopeless Love, and be the Victims of that Power thou hast dared to despise.
               The Goddess ended, and vanished from her Sight, when immediately the heavenly Form of Jove's own Daughter, the Divine Minerva, appeared before her, awfully sweet she smiled, and with a grave, but melodious Accent, thus spoke to her:
               
                  

                  Helen, ludicrously to the injured Mene-laas, who had given him a free and soldier-like Greeting, discovers, in that Instance, neither the Manners of a Prince or Warrior; but this is only a Slip; for his Discourse, both be-fore and after it, is quite agreeable to his Cha-racter.
               The Silence of Troilus in this Scene is beau-tifully imagined. The Poet makes this pas-sionate Prince attend Hector to the Grecian Tents, whither he is invited only with a Design of seeing his beloved Cressida; but his Resent-ment towards the Enemies of his Country be-ing heightened by the Consideration of their having deprived him of his Mistress, he is incapable of mixing in the Conversation, or even of returning the Civilities of the Grecian Princes; he stands at a Distance, pensive, si-lent, wholly absorb'd in melancholly Reflections. The Grief of this young Lover is finely mark-ed by Agamemnon, in that short Question to Ulysses, pointing him out.
               What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
               However ridiculous, inconsistent, and con-trary to general Opinion, Shakespear has drawn the Character of Achilles in this Play; yet, in the following Lines he must have had Homer in his View. The Grecian Army is almost rout-ed by the Trojans, the Commanders in the ut-most Consternation, when Ulysses enters, and thus reassures them:

                     

                     Oh Courage, Courage, Princes! great Achilles
                     
                     Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing Ven-geance!
                     
                        Patroclus' Wounds have rous'd his drousy Blood.
                  
               
               Here Achilles is made of so much Import-ance to the Grecians, that, vanquished as they were, and flying from the Field, they no sooner heard that Achilles is arming, and coming to join them, than their Courage is reanimated; they renew the Fight, and Victory declares for them. Only Homer could have furnished Shake-spear with this Thought, nor with an Idea of Achilles's Grief for the Death of Patroclus, which in two Lines he has so pathetically de-scribed. The old Story which, in many Places he has faithfully copied, is absolutely silent here.
               The Speech of Calchas to the Grecian Prin-ces, demanding their Trojan Prisoner Antenor to be exchanged for his Daughter, Cressida, is almost literally taken from Chaucer.
               
               The Character of Pandarus, also, is bor-rowed from him, but much heightened by Shakespear: Part of the Conversation be-tween Pandarus and his Niece is copied exactly from Chaucer.
               
            
            
               

               PLAN OF King Richard the Second.
               THE Action of this Play begins with Bolingbroke's appealing the Duke of Norfolk on an Accusation of High Treason: The King, after having in vain at-tempted to reconcile them, permits them, ac-cording to the Custom of that Time, to de-cide the Contest with their Swords.
               On the Day appointed, the King and his Nobles being seated in the Lists, the two Champions appear in Armour, and the King, suddenly throwing down his Warder, forbids the Combat, and pronounces a Sentence of Banishment on both; but with this Difference, that Bolingbroke should remain in Exile during ten Years, four of which he afterwards remits, at the Intercession of his Father John of Gaunt;

but the Duke of Norfolk he commands, on Pain of Death, never to return.
               
                  John of Gaunt dying soon after, the King seizes his Plate, Money and Lands, to furnish Necessaries for the Irish War, in which he was then engaged; and, setting sail for Ireland, leaves his Kingdom in great Confusion. The King's injurious Treatment of the banished Bolingbroke, by thus depriving him of his legal Possessions, draws great Numbers to that Noble-man's Party, who being assisted likewise by a foreign Force, lands in England, and there de-claring, that his only Motives for returning to his native Country in Arms, were to get his undeserved Banishment repealed; to require the Restitution of those Goods of which he had been unjustly deprived, and to claim the Duke-dom of Lancaster, descended to him by the Death of his Father; he is joined by all the disaffected Nobility.
               The Duke of York his Uncle, and Guardian of the Realm in the King's Absence, having no Forces to oppose him, and conscious of the Wrongs he had suffered, remains neuter.
               The King returns, and falling into the Hands of Bolingbroke, is carried to London, prevailed upon to resign his Crown, and after-wards confined in Pomfret Castle.
               The Duke of Aumarle, Son to the Duke of York, the Abbot of Westminster, the Bishop of Carlisle, and some other Lords, join in a Con-spiracy

to murder the new King at Oxford. The Duke of York discovers it, by means of a Paper he had snatched from his Son; and, hastening to the King, reveals the Plot, and demands Justice on his Son; but Aumarle had been before him and secured his Pardon.
               
                  Bolingbroke, alarmed at this Conspiracy, drops some Words, which express a Wish that some one would dispatch King Richard; this being observed by Exton, he goes to Pomfret Castle, kills the unhappy King, and brings his Body to Bolingbroke; which puts an End to the Play.
               Tho' this Play is called, The Life and Death of Richard the Second, yet the Action of it takes in but little more than the two last Years of his Reign.
               
                  Shakespear seems to have consulted Holing-shed chiefly for the Facts on which it is built, and has followed him pretty closely. The Speech of the Bishop of Carlisle, in the fourth Act, is apparently copied from Holingshed.
               
               
                  Shakespear introduces the Duke of York, as bringing from King Richard a Resignation o
                     •
                   his Crown to Bolingbroke, who declaring that he will ascend the Regal Throne, Carlisle replies,
               
                  
                     CARLISLE.
                     Marry, Heaven forbid!
                     Worst in this Royal Presence may I speak,
                     
                        
Yet best beseeming me to speak the Truth▪
                     
                     Would God that any in this noble Presence
                     Were enough noble to be upright Judge
                     Of noble Richard; then true Nobleness would
                     Learn him Forbearance from so foul a Wrong.
                     What Subject can give Sentence on his King?
                     And who sits here that is not Richard's Sub-ject?
                     Thieves are not judg'd but they are by to hear,
                     Altho' apparent Guilt be seen in them;
                     And shall the Figure of God's Majesty,
                     His Captain, Steward, Deputy elect,
                     Anointed, crown'd, and planted many Years,
                     Be judg'd by subject and inferior Breath,
                     And he himself not present? Oh forbid it!
                     That in a Christian Climate, Souls refin'd,
                     Should shew so heinous, black, obscene a Deed.
                     I speak to Subjects, and a Subject speaks,
                     Stirr'd up by Heav'n, thus boldly for his King;
                     My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call King,
                     Is a foul Traitor to proud Hereford's King.
                     And if you crown him, let me prophesy,
                     The Blood of English shall manure the Ground,
                     And future Ages groan for this foul Act.
                     Peace shall go sleep with Turks and Infidels,
                     And in this Seat of Peace, tumultuous Wars
                     Shall Kin with Kin and Kind with Kind con-found.
                     Disorder, Horror, Fear, and Mutiny
                     Shall here inhabit, and this Land be call'd
                     The Field of Golgotha, and dead Men's Sculls.
                     Oh! if you rear this House against this House,
                     It will the wofullest Division prove
                     That ever fell upon this cursed Earth.
                     
                        
Prevent, resist it, let it not be so,
                     Left Children's Children cry against you, Woe.
                  
               
               Thus it stands in Holingshed, Page 512. "On Wednesday following Request was made by the Commons, That sith King Richard had resigned, and was lawfully deposed from his Royal Dignity, he might have Judgment de-creed against him, so as the Realm were not troubled by him; and that the Causes of his deposing might be published through the Realm for satisfying the People: Which Demand was granted.
               Whereupon the Bishop of Carlisle, a Man both learned, wise, and stout of Stomach, boldly shewed forth his Opinion concerning that Demand, affirming that there was none amongst them worthy or meet to give Judg-ment upon so worthy a Prince as King Richard was; whom they had taken for their Sovereign and Liege Lord, for the Space of two and twenty Years and more; and I assure you, said he, there is not so rank a Traitor, nor so er-rant a Thief, nor yet so cruel a Murderer ap-prehended or detained in Prison for his Offence, but he shall be brought before the Justice, to hear his Judgment; and wil ye proceed to the Judgment of an anointed King, heari
                     •
                  g neither his Answer nor Excuse? I say that the Duke of Lancaster, whom ye call King, hath more trespassed to King Richard and his Realm, than King Richard hath done either to him or us; for it is manifest and well known, that the Duke was banished the Realm by King

                  Richard and his Council, and by the Judgment of his own Father, for the Space of ten Years, for what Cause ye know; and yet, without Licence of King Richard, he is returned again into the Realm; and, what is worse, hath taken upon him the Name, Title, and Pre-heminence of King; and therefore, I say, that you have done manifest Wrong to proceed in any Thing against King Richard without calling him openly to his Answer and Defence."
               "As soon as the Bishop had ended this Tale, he was attached by the Earl Marshal and com-mitted to Ward in the Abbey of Saint Albans."
               
               It has been observed, that Shakespear, in his Historical Plays, was a close Copier of the Histories from whence he took them; yet, in Richard the Second, there are some Deviations and some Omissions that throw different Lights on the Characters of his Persons, and tend greatly to mislead our Judgments in the Opinions we Form of them.
               The Murder of the Duke, of Gloucester, Uncle to the King, is one of the Crimes that Bolingbroke charges on the Duke of Norfolk; the King, in many Passages of the Play, is said to have commanded it: The old Duke of Lan-caster upbraids him with having shed the Blood of the great Edward, and Richard's Silence to that Accusation is not only a tacit Confession of the Guilt, but a Proof that he had nothing to offer in Vindication of it.
               
                  
In the History it is not absolutely clear that King Richard had any part in the Death of his Uncle; but 'tis certain that the Duke of Gloucester was engaged in several Conspiracies against him, and that the King having disco-vered a dangerous One, in which not only his Crown and Dignity but his Life was aimed at, he found himself under a Necessity of seizing his disloyal Uncle; which he did by a well con-trived Stratagem at his own Castle, and sent him to Calais; where he confessed all his Trea-sons, and was assassinated, as some Report, by Richard's Order.
               
                  Shakespear's Silence, upon this Head, is very unfavourable to the Character of Richard, on whom, by that Means, he draws the Im-putation of a Murderer and Paracide; and yet, in his Misfortunes, he proposes him as an Ob-ject of Compassion, and makes Use of all his pathetic Powers to melt the Souls of the Audi-ence in his Favour.
               The Historians say that Bolingbroke, when in Banishment, was invited by the chief No-bility in England to return and force the Crown from Richard, whom they judged unworthy to Reign.
               
                  Shakespear takes no Notice of this Circum-stance, but makes Bolingbroke, on his Arrival, declare that he only came to demand a Restitu-tion of the Honours and Estates he had been

unjustly deprived of; and the Lords join him upon this Supposition.
               In the History we are told, that King Richard, finding himself abandoned by many of his Friends, his Welsh Army, on whom he had the greatest Confidence, dispersed, and Bolingbroke absolute Master of his People's Hearts, retired to Conway Castle, which he determined to hold as long as it was possible; thither the Earl of Northumberland came from Bolingbroke with Offers of Submission, on his Part, provided the King would pardon what was past, repeal his Banishment, and restore him to all his Rights and Dignities.
               King Richard, being persuaded to accept of these Conditions, and to go to Rutland to con-fer with Bolingbroke, falls into an Ambush pre-pared for him, and is led Prisoner to London.
               
               
                  Shakespear drops the Circumstance of the Ambush laid for the King, and represents Bolingbroke confering in a submissive Manner with him at Flint Castle; and the King, upon his Cousin's solemn Assurance of attempting nothing against his Crown and Dignity, wil-lingly accompanies him to London, where, at a meeting of the Parliament, he is deposed and the Crown offered to Bolingbroke.
               
               This Play affords several other Instances in which Shakespear's Inattention to the History is plainly proved; and is therefore the less par-donable, as the Subject of it is not one entire
The Goddess Pallas thanks thee, Delia, for the Concern thou hast expressed for her Honour, and, as a Reward, she promises thee to make thy Son and Daughter so powerful in Arms, that their Valour shall be the Won-der of their own, and the Admiration of all future Ages."
               This said, she disappeared, and my Mo-ther trembling with holy Awe, awaked.
               In less than a Month after, she was de-livered of me and a Twin-Brother, and, as the Goddess threatened, died immediately. My Father sinking under an Excess of Sorrow for her Loss, followed her in a few Months, leaving my Infant-Brother and myself to the Care of an Aunt, who was Abbess of a Nun-nery; with her we lived 'till we were twelve Years old, at which Age my Brother was car-ried to the Court of the King of Portugal, where, in a few Years, the heroic Actions he performed in War, gained him an immortal Glory, which yet was not sufficient to com-pensate for the Pains he has endured in Love.
               As for myself, I was removed from the Nunnery to the House of my Grandmother, under whose Care I had hardly reached my seventeenth Year, ere I was seen, and to my Misfortune, loved by the ungrateful Felix.
               
               This young Nobleman having beheld me walking on a Terras, which was behind my

Action, wrought up with a Variety of beautiful Incidents, which at once delight and instruct the Mind; but a Dramatick Narration of Hi-storical Facts, and a successive Series of Actions and Events which are only interesting as they are true, and only pleasing as they are grace-fully told.
               The Manner of Bolingbroke's appealing the Duke of Norfolk, the Order of the intended Combat, the very Words of the Appellant and Defendant, the Behaviour and Speech of the King on that Occasion, are exactly copied from Holingshed, as is likewise the Appeals of the Lords in the first Scene of the fourth Act.
               The Duke of York's Conduct, throughout the Play, is the same as the History represents it; only Shakespear has aggravated his Zeal to the new-made King, by introducing him ea-ger and solicitous to procure the Death of his Son Aumarle, for having engaged in a Conspi-racy against him.
               The Impropriety of making a Father press so ardently the Execution of a beloved Son, because that Son had joined with a Party that had resolved to dethrone an Usurper, and re-store the lawful King, is too glaring to need any Animadversion: But, because there is some-thing truly ludicrous in this very tragical Pas-sage, I shall transcribe it.
               
                  Aumarle finding his Father determined to disclose his Treason to the new King, hastens

to Court, and, procuring a private Audience; gets a Promise of Pardon from the King: While he is closetted with him, the Duke of York arrives, and loudly demands Admittance.
               
                  
                     YORK.
                     Open the Door, secure, fool-hardy King,
                     Shall I, for Love, speak Treason to thy Face?
                     Open the Door, or I will break it open.
                  
                  
                     Enter YORK.
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     What is the Matter, Uncle? speak, take Breath:
                     Tell us how near is Danger,
                     That we may arm us to encounter it?
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     Peruse this Writing here, and thou shalt know
                     The Treason that my Haste forbids me show.
                  
                  
                     AUMARLE.
                     Remember, as thou read'st, thy Promise past:
                     I do repent me, read not my Name there,
                     My Heart is not Confed'rate with my Hand.
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     Villain, it was, ere thy Hand set it down,
                     I tore it from the Traytor's Bosom, King,
                     Fear, and not Love, begets his Penitence!
                     Forget to pity him, lest thy Pity prove
                     A Serpent that will sting thee to the Heart.
                  
                  
                     

                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     O heinous, strong, and bold Conspiracy!
                     O loyal Father of a treach'rous Son;
                     Thou clear, immaculate, and silver Fountain,
                     From whence this Stream, thro' muddy Pas-sages,
                     Hath had his Current, and defil'd himself;
                     Thy Overflow of Good converts the Bad,
                     And thine abundant Goodness shall excuse
                     This deadly Blot in thy digressing Son.
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     So shall, my Virtue be his Vice's Bawd,
                     And he shall spend mine Honour with his Shame
                     As thriftless Sons their scraping Fathers' Gold.
                     Mine Honour lives, when his Dishonour dies,
                     Or my sham'd Life in his Dishonour lies:
                     Thou kill'st me in his Life; giving him Breath,
                     The Traytor lives, the true Man's put to Death.
                  
                  DUTCHESS within.
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     What, ho, my Liege! for Heaven's sake let me in.
                  
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     What shrill-voic'd Suppliant makes this eager Cry?
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     A Woman, and thine Aunt, great King! 'tis I.
                     
                        
Speak with me, pity me, open the Door;
                     A Beggar begs that never begg'd before.
                  
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     Our Scene is alter'd from a serious Thing,
                     And now chang'd to the Beggar and the King.
                     My dang'rous Cousin, let thy Mother in,
                     I know she's come to pray for your foul Sin.
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
                     More Sins for his Forgiveness prosper may;
                     This fester'd Joint cut off, the rest is sound;
                     This, let alone, will all the rest confound.
                  
                  
                     Enter DUTCHESS.
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     O King, believe not this hard-hearted Man,
                     Love loving not itself, none other can.
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     Thou frantick Woman, what dost thou do here?
                     Shall thy old Dugs once more a Traytor rear?
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     Sweet York be patient, hear me gentle Liege.
                  
                  Kneels.
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     Rise up, good Aunt.
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     Not yet I thee beseech;
                     
                        
For ever will I kneel upon my Knees,
                     And never see Day that the happy sees,
                     'Till thou give Joy; untill thou bid me Joy,
                     By pard'ning Rutland, my transgressing Boy.
                  
                  
                     AUMARLE.
                     Unto my Mother's Prayers I bend my Knee.
                  
                  Kneels.
                  
                     YORK.
                     Against them both, my true Joints bended be.
                     Kneels.
                     Ill may'st thou thrive, if thou grant any Grace.
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     Pleads he in earnest, Look upon his Face!
                     His Eyes do drop no Tears, his Prayer's in Jest,
                     His Words come from his Mouth, ours from our Breast.
                     He prays but faintly, and would be deny'd;
                     We pray with Heart and Soul, and all beside.
                     His weary Joints would gladly rise, I know;
                     Our Knees shall kneel, till to the Ground they grow:
                     His Pray'rs are full of false Hypocrisy;
                     Ours of true Zeal, and deep Integrity:
                     Our Pray'rs do out-pray his; then let them crave
                     That Mercy which true Prayers ought to have,
                  
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     Good Aunt stand up.
                  
                  
                     

                     DUTCHESS.
                     Nay, do not say, stand up;
                     But pardon first, say afterwards stand up;
                     And if I were thy Nurse, thy Tongue to teach,
                     Pardon should be the first Word of thy Speech.
                     I never long'd to hear a Word till now:
                     Say, Pardon, King; l
                           •
                        t Pity teach thee how.
                  
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     Good Aunt, stand up.
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     I do not sue to stand,
                     Pardon is all the Suit I have in Hand.
                  
                  
                     BOLINGBROKE.
                     I pardon him, as Heav'n shall pardon me.
                  
                  
                     DUTCHESS.
                     O happy Vantage of a kneeling Knee;
                     Yet I am sick for Fear; speak it again:
                     Twice saying Pardon, doth not pardon twain,
                     But makes one Pardon strong.
                     The Word is short, but not so short as sweet;
                     No Word like Pardon for Kings Mouth so meet.
                  
                  
                     YORK.
                     Speak it in French, say, King, Pardonnez moy.
                     
                  
               
               That little Fiction which Shakespear has in-troduced into this Play, is imagined with his usual Carelesness and Inattention to Probabi-lity. The Queen who, more than any other Person, is interested in every thing that relates

to the King her Husband, is, nevertheless, the last that hears of the Seizure of her Lord.
               In the second Act, she is informed of Bo-lingbroke's Invasion, and the Dissaffection of almost all the Nobility; and in the fourth, this sorrowful Queen is introduced in her Gar-den with two Ladies, who press her to dance.
               The Gardener and two Workmen enter-ing, she retires behind the Trees, in Hopes of learning some News of the State from them; nor is she deceived: From them she first hears of the Imprisonment and intended Deposition of the King her Husband.
               One might be surprised, perhaps, to hear from a Gardener's Mouth, a beautiful System of Politics, couched in a close and well-con-ceived Allegory, drawn from such Images as his Profession furnished him with, if the poor Fellow who works under his Directions did not allegorize as well as his Master, and les-sen the Wonder.
               
                  
                     SERVANT.
                     Why should we, in the Compass of a Pale,
                     Keep Law, and Form, and due Proportion,
                     Shewing, as in a Model, our firm State?
                     When our Sea-walled Garden (the whole Land)
                     Is full of Weeds, her fairest Flowers choak'd up,
                     Her Fruit-trees all unprun'd, her Hedges ruin'd,
                     
                        
Her Knots disorder'd, and her wholesome Herbs
                     Swarming with Caterpillars?
                  
               
               The Manner of King Richard's Death is differently related by the Historians. Shake-spear follows Thomas Walsingham's Account of that barbarous Parricide, as quoted by Holing-shed; how closely he has copied the Circum-stances, and even some of the Speeches, may be seen by comparing the Passages as they stand in the Historian and Poet.
               "One Writer, says Holingshed, Page 517, which seemeth to have great Knowledge of King Richard's Doings, saith, That King Hen-ry, sitting one Day at his Table, are sighing, said, Have I no faithful Friend which will de-liver me of him whose Life will be my Death, and whose Death will be the Preservation of my Life.
               This Saying was much noted of them which were present, and especially of one called Sir Pierce of Exton. This Knight incontinently departed from the Court, with eight strong Persons in his Company, and came to Pomfret, commanding the Esquire that was accustomed to serve and take the Assay before King Richard, to do so no more, saying, Let him eat now, for he shall not long eat.
               King Richard sat down to Dinner, and was served without Curtesy or Assay; whereupon much marvelling at the sudden Change, he de-manded

of the Esquire why he did not his Duty? Sir, said he, I am otherwise com-manded by Sir Pierce of Exton, which is new-ly come from King Henry.
               
               When King Richard heard that Word, he took the Carving Knife in his Hand, and struck the Esquire on the Head, saying, The Devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee to-gether, and with that Word Sir Pierce entered the Chamber well armed, with eight tall Men likewise armed, every one of them having a Bill in his Hand. King Richard perceiving this, put the Table from him, and stepping to the foremost Man, wrung the Bill out of his Hands, and so valiantly defended himself that he slew four of those that thus came to assail him. Sir Pierce, being half dismayed here-with, leaped into the Chair where King Ri-chard was wont to sit, while the other four Persons fought with him, and chased him about the Chamber; and, in Conclusion, as King Richard traversed his Ground from one Side of the Chamber to another, and coming by the Chair where Sir Pierce stood, he was felled with a Stroke of a Poll-ax, which Sir Pierce gave him upon the Head; and there-with rid him out of Life, without giving him Respite once to call to God for Mercy of his past Offences.
               It is said that Sir Pierce of Exton, after he had thus slain him, wept right bitterly, as one stricken with the Prick of a guilty Conscience

for murdering him whom he had so long time obeyed as King."
               
                  
                     Enter EXTON and a Servant,
                  
                  
                     EXTON
                     Didst thou not mark the King what Words he spake?
                     "Have I no Friend will rid me of this living Fear."
                     Was it not so?
                  
                  
                     SERVANT.
                     These were his very Words.
                  
                  
                     EXTON.
                     "Have I no Friend?"—quoth he; he spake it twice
                     And urg'd it twice together; did he not?
                  
                  
                     SERVANT.
                     He did.
                  
                  
                     EXTON.
                     And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
                     As who shall say—I would thou wert the Man,
                     That would divorce this Terror from my Heart;
                     Meaning the King at Pomfret. Come; lets go:
                     I am the King's Friend, and we'll rid his Foe.
                  
                  
                     

Grandmother's House, and not far distant from his, he took all Opportunities to make his Passion known to me by ardent Looks, which I not seeming to understand, he deter-mined to write to me, and practised so suc-cessfully upon the easy yielding Temper of one of my Maids, named Rosina, that she under-took to deliver his Letter to me.
               The crafty Wench made use of a thou-sand little Artifices to induce me to receive this Letter, and though I was not displeased with her Importunities, yet assuming a Coun-tenance as angry as I was able, I told her sternly, that were I not restrained by a Sense of what I owed my own Rank, and the Fear of the World's Censure, I would dismiss her from my Service, with the Infamy her Pre-sumption merited.
               Methinks I have the artful Girl this Mo-ment before my Eyes, cunningly dissembling the Grief and Confusion my Anger gave her with a counterfeited Smile.
               Believe me, Madam, said she, I meant no more by pressing you to take this Letter, than to make you laugh. I did not imagine you would be offended, but since, contrary to my Expectations, I find you are, I will trouble you no more on this Subject; saying this, she put the Letter again into her Pocket, and quit-ted my Chamber.
               
                  

                     Scene changed to the Prison at Pomfret.
                  
                     Enter to the KING the KEEPER with a Dish.
                  
                  
                     KEEPER.
                     Fellow, give place; here is no longer Stay.
                  
                  To the Groom.
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     If thou love me, 'tis Time thou wert away.
                  
                  
                     GROOM.
                     What my Tongue does not, that my Heart shall say. Exit.
                     
                  
                  
                     KEEPER.
                     My Lord, wilt please you to fall to,
                  
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     Taste of it first, as thou wert wont to do.
                  
                  
                     KEEPER.
                     My Lord, I dare not, for Sir Pearce of Exton,
                     
                     Who late came from the King, commands the contrary.
                  
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     The Devil take Henry of Lancaster, and thee,
                     Patience is State, and I am weary of it.
                  
                  Beats the Keeper.
                  
                     KEEPER.
                     Help, help, help.
                  
                  
                     

                     Enter EXTON and Servants.
                  
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     How now? what means Death in this rude Assault?
                     Wretch, thine own Hand yields thy Death's Instrument; Snatching a Sword.
                     
                     Go thou, and fill another Room in Hell.
                     
                        Kills another. Exton strikes him down.
                     
                     That Hand shall burn in never-quenching Fire,
                     That staggers thus my Person! Thy Pierce Hand
                     Hath with the Kings Blood, stain'd the Kings own Land!
                     Mount, mount my Soul, thy Seat is up on high;
                     Whilst my gross Flesh sinks downward, here to die!Dies.
                     
                  
                  
                     EXTON.
                     As full of Valour, as of Royal Blood;
                     Both have I spilt: Oh would the Deed were good!
                     For now the Devil, that told me, I did well,
                     Says, that this Deed is chronicled in Hell.
                     This dead King to the living King I'll bear;
                     Take hence the rest, and give them Burial here.
                  
               
               The History goes on to relate, that King Richard's Body was carried through the City to St. Paul's Cathedral with the Face uncovered and lay in that Manner three Days, exposed to the View of the People.
               
                  

                  Shakespear makes Exton bring the Corps in a Coffin to the Court, present it to the King, in the Presence of several of his Nobility, and tell him that his Commands had been obeyed.
               This absurdity is followed by the King's con-fessing that he had given such Orders, but that he now repented of them, and after driving the Murderer from his Presence, he weeps over the dead King, and pacifies his Consci-ence with a Vow to make a Voyage to the Holy Land to expiate his Guilt.
            
            
               

               PLAN Of the FIRST PART of Henry the Fourth.
               IN this Play Shakespear takes up the Histo-ry exactly where he left it in Richard the Second. Bolingbroke, now King Henry the Fourth, is prevented from making a Voy-age to the Holy Land, which he had vowed, by a Conspiracy formed against him by some of those Lords, whose Assistance had enabled him to usurp the Throne.
               The brave Piercy surnamed Hotspur, having refused to surrender his Scotch Prisoners taken in the Battle of Holmedon, to the King, who also in return denies to ransom his Brother in Law, Mortimer, from the Welsh Rebel Owen Glendower, a Quarrel ensues; Piercy and the other discontented Noblemen join with the

                  Scots and Glendower; they raise an Army and march to meet the King at Shrewsbury.
               
               The King sends to treat with the Rebels; Piercy, being disposed to listen to an Accom-modation, Commissions his Uncle, the Earl of Worcester, to propose Terms to the King.
               
                  Worcester, out of an Opinion that Henry could never be thoroughly reconciled to them, and would take an other Opportunity to be revenged, treacherously conceals the King's favourable Offers, and tells Piercy that he is resolved to fight.
               Then follows the Battle, in which, the brave Piercy is slain by the wild Prince of Wales: The King's Party is victorious; the treache-rous Worcester being made Prisoner, is con-demned to die, and the King, dividing his Forces, sends one Part, under the Command of his second Son, to meet the Earl of Nor-thumberland at York; and himself and the Prince of Wales march against the Rebel Glendower and the Earl of March.
               
               The Transactions contained in this Histori-cal Drama, are comprized in the Space of ten Months. The Action of it commences with the News of Hotspur's having defeated the Scots, under Archibald Earl of Douglas, at Holmedon; which Battle was fought on Holy-rood-Day, the 14th of September 1402: and is closed with the Defeat and Death of Hotspur at

                  Shrewsbury; which Engagement happened the 21st of July, 1403.
               
                  Shakespear has copied Holingshed very closely, as well in the Historical Facts as the Charac-ters of his Persons; Piercy's and Glendower's, are indeed greatly heightened, but both with wonderful Propriety and Beauty. The Epi-sodical Part of the Drama, which is made up of the extravagant Sallies of the Prince of Wales, and the inimitable Humour of Falstaff, is entirely of his own Invention. The Cha-racter of Prince Henry, tho' drawn after the Historians, is considerably improved by Shake-spear; and through the Veil of his Vices and Irregularities, we see a Dawn of Greatness and Virtue, that promises the future Splendor of his Life and Reign.
               The Poet has indeed deviated from History, in making this young Prince kill the gallant Piercy at the Battle of Shrewsbury. Accord-ing to them it is uncertain by whom he fell; however this Circumstance is beautifully ima-gined by Shakespear in order to exalt the Cha-racter of Prince Henry, which had before been obscured by the Glory of that Heroe.
               The King, in recounting the great Exploits of Hotspur, thus opposes his Character to that of his Son.
               
                  
                     K. HENRY.
                     Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
                     
                        
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
                     
                     Should be the Father of so blest a Son:
                     A Son, who is the Theme of Honour's Tongue:
                     Amongst a Grove, the very straightest Plant;
                     Who is sweet Fortune's Minion, and her Pride:
                     Whilst I, by looking on the Praise of him,
                     See riot and dishonour stain the Brow
                     Of my young Harry. O could it be proved
                     That some Night tripping Fairy had exchang'd
                     In Cradle-Cloaths, our Children where they lay,
                     And call'd mine Piercy, his Plantagenet!
                     
                     Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
                  
               
               But the Poet, even by making this Contrast, has still the Glory of his Favourite in View; the Conqueror of Piercy must needs be greater than Piercy himself. Prince Henry, therefore, must be acknowledged to be the Heroe of this Play; for the Lawrels of his Rival are all trans-fered to him, with the additional Wreath of having conquered that Rival.
            
            
               

               THE LIFE OF King Henry the Fifth.
               THE Transactions comprised in this Historical Play, commence about the latter End of the first, and terminate in the eighth Year of this King's Reign, when he married the Princess Catharine of France, and put an End to the Differences betwixt England and that Crown.
               The Siege and taking of Harfleur, the Bat-tle of Agincourt, the Peace concluded between King Henry and the French King, with the Marriage of the former to the Princess of France, are the principal Actions of this Play, and are taken from Holingshed's Chronicle, after whom the Characters are likewise drawn, with very little Variation.
               
                  
The Archbishop's Speech to King Henry, in the first Act, in which he explains his Title to the Crown of France, is closely copied from this Historian, Page 545.
               "Herein did he much enveie against the surmised and false fained Law Salike, which the Frenchmen allege ever against the Kings of England in barre of their just Title to the Crown of France. The verie Words of that supposed Law are these, In terram Salicam Mu-lieres ne succedant. That is to say, Into the Salike Land let not Women succeed. Which the French Glossers expound to be the Realme of France, and that this Law was made by King Pharamond; whereas yet their own Au-thors affirme, that the Land Salike is in Ger-many between the Rivers Elbe and Sala, and that when Charles the Great had overcome the Saxons, he placed there certain Frenchmen, which having in disdain the dishonest Manners of the German Women, made a Law that the Females should not succeed to any Inheritance within that Land, which at this Day is called Meisen: So that if this be true, this Law was not made for the Realme of France, nor the Frenchmen possessed the Land Salike, till four hundred and one and twenty Years after the Death of Pharamond, the supposed Author of this Salike Law; for this Pharamond deceased in the Year 426, and Charles the Great subdued the Saxons and placed the Frenchmen in those Parts, beyond the River of Sala, in the Year 805.
               
                  
Moreover, it appeareth by their own Writers, that King Pepen which deposed Chil-derike, claimed the Crown of France, as Heir general, for that he was descended of Blithila Daughter of King Clothair the first: Hugh Capet also, who usurped the Crown upon Charles. Duke of Loraine, the sole Heir-male of the Line and Stocke of Charles the Great, to make his Title seem true, and appear good, though indeed it was starke naught; conceived himself as Heir to the Ladie Lingard, Daughter to King Charlemain, Sonne to Lewis the Em-peror, that was Sonne to Charles the Great: King Lewis also the tenth, otherwise also cal-led Saint Lewis being verie Heir to the Usurper Hugh Capet, could never be satisfied in his Conscience how he might justly keep and pos-sesse the Crowne of France, till he was per-suaded and fully instructed that Queene Isabell his Grandmother was lineally descended of the Ladie Ormengard Daughter and Heir to the above named Charles Duke of Loraine; by the which Marriage, the Blood and Line of Charles the Great was again united and restored to the Crowne and Scepter of France: So that more clear than the Sun, it openly appeareth, that the Title of King Pepen, the Claim of Hugh Capet, the Possession of Lewis; yea, and the French Kings to this Day, are derived and con-veyed from the Heirs-female, though they would, under the Colour of such a feigned Law, barre the Kings and Princes of this Realme of England of their right and lawful Inheritance.
               
                  
Ah, how eagerly did my straining By pursue her Steps! I died with desire to see the Letter; but Pride and Modesty, that made me refuse it when she intreated me, now joined with Shame to keep me from requiring it after the Anger I had affected.
               All that Day I continued pensive and un-easy; at Night, when Rosina attended me in my Chamber, I waited with an anxious Im-patience for a Renewal of that Discourse with which I had seemed so much displeased in the Morning; but alas, I was disappointed, Ro-sina either was, or appeared resolved to mention the Letter no more. Yet to try if she would fasten upon any Occasion to offer it me again:
               And is it really so, Rosina, said I, that Don Felix, without having any Regard to my Honour, dare presume to write to me?
               "Alas, Madam, said she demurely, these Things will happen to young Ladies so love-ly as you; I am indeed concerned to find I have offended you by solliciting you to take his Letter, but it was occasioned by my Igno-rance of your Severity in these Matters; but I beseech you pardon me, for from this Moment I will never mention it to you again.
               This Steadiness cruelly mortified me, yet did I dissemble my Uneasiness while she was present; that Night seemed twice as long as usual; full of a Thousand perplexing Thoughts I waited anxiously for Day, without once close-ing
The Archbishop further alleged, out of the Book of Numbers, this Saying: When a Man dieth without a Son, let the Inheritance de-scend to his Daughter. At length having said sufficiently for the Proof of the King's just and lawful Title to the Crown of France, he ex-horted him to advance forth his Banner to fight for his Right, to conquer his Inheritance, to spare neither Blood, Sword, nor Fire, sith his War was just, his Cause good, and his Claim true; and to the Intent his loving Chaplains, and obedient Subjects of the Spiritualtie might shew themselves willing and desirous to aid his Majesty for the Recovery of his ancient Right and true Inheritance, the Archbishop declared that, in their Spiritual Convocation, they had granted to his Highness such a Summe of Mo-ney, as never, by no spiritual Persons, was to any Prince before those Days, given or ad-vanced." Holingshed.
               
               
                  
                     CANTERBURY.
                     Then hear me, gracious Sovereign, and you Peers
                     That owe your Lives, your Faith and Services
                     To this imperial Throne: There is no Bar
                     To make against your Highness' Claim to France,
                     
                     But this which they produce from Pharamond;
                     
                        In Terra Salicam Mulieres ne succedant;
                     No Woman shall succeed in Salike Land:
                     Which Salike Land the French unjustly gloze,
                     To be the Realm of France, and Pharamond,
                     
                     The Founder of this Law and female Bar:
                     
                        
Yet their own Authors faithfully affirm,
                     That the Land Salike lies in Germany,
                     
                     Between the Floods of Sala and of Elve:
                     
                     Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons,
                     
                     There left behind and settled certain French:
                     
                     Who holding in Disdain the German Women,
                     For some dishonest Manners of their Life,
                     Establish'd then this Law, to wit, no Female
                     Should be Inheretrix in Salick Land;
                     Which Salick, as I said, 'twixt Elve and Sala,
                     
                     Is at this Day in Germany called Meisens:
                     
                     Thus doth it well appear, the Salick Law
                     Was not devised for the Realm of France;
                     Nor did the French possess the Salick Land,
                     Untill four hundred one and twenty Years
                     After Defunction of King Pharamond,
                     
                     (Idly suppos'd the Founder of this Law)
                     Who died within the Year of our Redemption
                     Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
                     Subdu'd the Saxons, and did seat the French
                     
                     Beyond the River Sala, in the Year
                     Eight hundred five: Besides, their Writers say,
                     King Pepen, which deposed Childerick,
                     
                     Did, as Heir-general (being descended
                     Of Blithild, which was Daughter to King Clothair)
                     Make Claim and Title to the Crown of France.
                     
                     
                        Hugh Capet also, who usurp'd the Crown
                     Of Charles the Duke of Lorain, sole Heir-male
                     Of the true Line and Stock of Charles the Great,
                     To fine his Title with some Shews of Truth
                     
                        
(Though, in pure Truth, it was corrupt and naught)
                     Convey'd himself, as Heir to th'Lady Lingar
                     
                     Daughter to Charlemain, who was the Son
                     To Lewis the Emperor, which was the Son
                     Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the Ninth,
                     Who was sole Heir to the Usurper Capet,
                     
                     Could not keep Quiet in his Conscience,
                     Wearing the Crown of France, till satisfy'd
                     That fair Queen Isabel, his Grandmother,
                     Was lineal of the Lady Ermengere,
                     
                     Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lor-rain;
                     By the which Match the Line of Charles the Great
                     Was re-united to the Crown of France.
                     
                     So that, as clear as is the Summer's Sun,
                     King Pepin's Title, and Hugh Capet's Claim,
                     King Lewis, his Satisfaction, all appear
                     To hold in Right and Title of the Female:
                     So do the Kings of France until this Day.
                     Howbeit, they would hold up this Salick Law,
                     To bar your Highness, claiming from the Fe-male,
                     And rather choose to hide them in a Net,
                     Than amply to unbare their crooked Titles,
                     Usurp'd from you and your Progenitors.
                  
               
               In Shakespear, when the Conspiracy of Scroop, Cambridge, and Grey, is discovered to the King, after expostulating with them on their Treach-ery, he gives them up to punishment and dis-misses them from his Presence in the very Words of Holingshed:
                  
                     

                     Touching our Person seek we no Revenge;
                     But we our Kingdom's safety must so tender,
                     Whose ruin you three sought, that to her Laws
                     We do deliver you. Go therefore hence,
                     Poor miserable Wretches to your Death;
                     The Taste whereof God of his Mercy give
                     You Patience to endure, and true Repentance
                     Of all your dear Offences! bear them hence.
                  
               
               "Revenge herein touching my Person, tho' I seek not; yet for the Safeguard of my dear Friends, and for due Preservation of all Sorts, I am by Office to cause Example to be shewed: Get ye hence, therefore, you poor miserable Wretches, to the receiving of your just Re-ward, wherein God's Majesty give you Grace of his Mercy, and Repentance of your heinous Offences." Holingshed.
               
               In the Play, King Henry, after the taking of Harfleur, marches his Army, which was greatly reduced by Sickness and Fatigue, to-wards Calais, and is met by a Messenger from the French King; who, in his Master's Name, defies him to a Battle: Shakespear, in the lat-ter Part of the Kings Answer, again copies the Words of Holingshed,
                  
                     Go, bid thy Master well advise himself:
                     If we may pass we will; if we be hinder'd,
                     We shall your tawny Ground with your red Blood
                     Discolour, and so Mountjoy fare you well.
                     The Sum of all our Answer is but this:
                     
                        
We wou'd not seek a Battle as we are,
                     Yet, as we are, we say, we will not shun it.
                  
               
               "I will not seek your Master, at this Time, but, if he or his seek me, I will meet with them, God willing: If any of your Nation attempt once to stop me in my Journey towards Calais, at their Jeopardy be it; and yet wish I not any of you so unadvised as to be the Occasion that I dye your tawny Ground with your red Blood." Holingshed.
               
               
                  Shakespear. throughout this Play, has co-pied many of the Sentiments and even Words of Holingshed, sometimes almost literally, as in the above quoted Passages; at others he has just taken Hints which the Force of his own Imagination improves into the most striking Beauties, the following Passage of Holingshed furnished him with some of the noblest Thoughts that ever animated the Mind of a Heroe.
               The Historian says, Page 553, that a little Time before the Battle of Agincourt was fought, King Henry overheard a Soldier say to his Fel-low: I would to God there were with us now so many good Soldiers as are at this Hour within England.
                   To which the King replied: I would not wish a Man more here than I have; we are, indeed, in Comparison to the Enemies, but a few; but if God, of his Clemency, do favour us and our just Cause (as I trust he will) we shall Speed well enough: But let no Man ascribe Vic-tory to our own Strength and Might, but only to God's Assistance, to whom, I have

no doubt we shall worthily have Cause to give thanks therefore; and if so be that, for our Offences Sakes, we shall be deliver-ed into the Hands of our Enemies, the less Number we be the less Damage shall the Realm of England sustain. 
                        Holingshed.
                     
                  
               
               This Passage is thus improved by Shakespear: The Earl of Westmourland having been to take a View of the Enemies Forces, as they were drawn up in Order of Battle, alarmed at the Superiority of their Numbers, cries out as the King meets him,

                     Oh! that we now had here,
                     But one ten thousand of those Men in England,
                     
                     That do no Work to Day!
                  
               
               
                  
                     K. HENRY.
                     What's he that wishes so?
                     My Cousin Westmourland? No, my fair Cousin!
                     If we are marked to dye, we are enow
                     To do our Country loss; and if to live,
                     The fewer Men, the greater share of Honour.
                     God's Will, I pray thee wish not one Man more.
                     By Jove I am not covetous of Gold;
                     Nor care I, who doth feed upon my Cost;
                     It yerns me not, if Men my Garments wear;
                     Such outward Things dwell not in my Desire:
                     But, if it be a Sin to covet Honour,
                     I am the most offending Soul alive.
                     No, faith, my Lord, wish not a Man from England:
                     
                     
                        
God's Peace, I would not lose so great an Ho-nour
                     As one Man more, methinks would share from me,
                     For the best Hopes I have. Don't wish one more:
                     Rather proclaim it (Westmourland) through my Host,
                     That he, which hath no Stomach to this Fight,
                     Let him depart; his Passport shall be made,
                     And crowns for convoy put into his Purse:
                     We would not die in that Man's Company,
                     That fears his Fellowship to die with us.
                  
               
               In the first Act of this Play the Dauphin of France sends an insulting Message to King Henry accompanied with a Present of Tennis Balls as a Reproach for the wild Sallies of his Youth.
               There is no Foundation either in Hall or Holingshed for this Circumstance, Shakespear indeed took the out-lines of the Dauphin's Character from these Historians who represent him to be a light, arrogant, and vain-glorious Prince; but he has painted at full Length what they only drew in Miniture; and by adding, with great Propriety some of the Characteristic Follies of his Nation, given us a lively and humerous Picture of a Coxcomb Prince.
               The absurdity of making the Princess Ca-tharine the only Person in the French Court, who does not understand English, has been al-ready taken Notice of: And it must be confes-sed

that the great Henry makes but a miserable Figure as a Lover; no Language can be coarser than that in which he addresses the Princess, the first Time he sees her, Do you like me Kate, &amp;c. Yet the Dialogue is not without wit, livliness, and humour; but so utterly void of Propriety that we lose all Idea of the Dignity of the Persons who manage it, and, are readier to imagine we hear a common Soldier making love to an aukward Country Girl, than a King of England courting a Princess of France.
               
               
                  Shakespear, it is probable, took the Hint of the Dauphin's Present of Tennis Balls from the following old Ballad.
               
                  A Council grave our King did hold,
                  With many a Lord and Knight;
                  That they might truly understand,
                  That France did hold his Right.
               
               
                  Unto the King of France therefore
                  Ambassadors were sent,
                  That he might fully understand
                  His Mind and his Intent:
               
               
                  Desiring him in friendly wise,
                  His lawful Right to yield;
                  Or else he vow'd, by Dint of Sword
                  To win the same in Field.
               
               
                  The King of France with all his Lords,
                  Which heard his Message plain,
                  Unto our brave Ambassadors
                  Did answer in Disdain:
               
               
                  

                  And feigned our King was yet too young,
                  And of too tender Age;
                  Therefore we weigh not of his War,
                  Nor fear we his Courage.
               
               
                  His Knowledge is in Feats of Arms
                  As yet but very small;
                  His tender Joints much fitter were
                  To toss a Tennis Ball.
               
               
                  A Tun of Tennis Balls therefore,
                  In Pride and great Disdain,
                  He sent unto our Noble King,
                  To recompence his Pain.
               
               
                  Which Answer when our King did hear,
                  He waxed wroth in Heart;
                  And said, he would such Balls provide,
                  Should make all France to smart.
               
               
                  An Army then our King did raise,
                  Which was both good and strong;
                  And from Southampton is our King
                  With all his Navy gone.
               
               
                  In France he landed safe and sound,
                  With all his warlike Train;
                  And to the Town of Harfleur strait
                  He marched up a-main.
               
               
                  But when he had besieged the same,
                  Against their fenced Walls,
                  
                     
To batter down their stately Towers,
                  He sent his English Balls.
               
               
                  This done, our noble English King
                  March'd up and down the Land;
                  And not a Frenchman for his Life
                  Durst once his Force withstand.
               
               
                  Until he came to Agincourt;
                  Where as it was his Chance
                  To find the King in Readiness
                  With all his Power of France.
                  
               
               
                  A mighty Host he had prepar'd
                  Of armed Soldiers then;
                  Which were no less by just Account,
                  Than Forty Thousand Men.
               
               
                  Which Sight did much amaze our King;
                  For he and all his Host
                  Not passing Fifteen Thousand had,
                  Accounted at the most.
               
               
                  The King of France which well did know
                  The Number of our Men,
                  In vaunting Pride unto our Prince
                  Did send a Herald then.
               
               
                  To understand what he would give
                  For Ransom of his Life,
                  When he in Field should taken be
                  Amidst their bloody Strife.
               
               
                  

my Eyes. At length the Morning came, and Rosina, at her accustomed Hour, attending me at my Toilet, let fall the Letter near me, and, as I thought, on Purpose; which when I perceived, what is that you have dropt? said I, she answered, "it was nothing;" but I insist-ed upon seeing what had fallen.
               Bless me, Madam, said she, why should you be so desirous to see it? it is the Letter I would have given you Yesterday.
               I don't believe you, answered I, therefore give it me that I may convict you of a Fals-hood; immediately she put it into my Hands, assuring me, with an Emotion I knew to be feigned, that it was no other.
               You deceive me, cried I, still dissem-bling, it is a Letter to yourself, from one of your Lovers, and I am resolved to read it, that I may judge if he deserves your Favour; saying this, I opened the Letter, which, as I expected, was addressed from Don Felix to myself.
               The tender and passionate Sentiments it contained, so wrought upon the native Soft-ness of my Temper, that I could not resist the Desire I felt to return an Answer to it, that might give him Hopes of my future Fa-vour. I now asked Forgiveness of my Maid, for the Severity I had assumed, and wholly considing in her Truth and Affection, I com-municated the Contents of Don Felix's Letter

                  And then our King with chearful Heart,
                  This Answer soon bid make;
                  And said, Before this comes to pass,
                  Some of their Hearts shall quake.
               
               
                  And to their proud presumptuous Prince,
                  Declare this Thing, quoth he,
                  Mine own Heart's Blood shall pay the Price;
                  None else he gets of me.
               
               
                  With that bespoke the Duke of York;
                  O Noble King, quoth he,
                  The Leading of this Battle brave
                  Vouchsafe to give to me.
               
               
                  God a Mercy, Cousin York, quoth he,
                  I grant thee thy Request;
                  Then march thou on courageously,
                  And I will lead the rest.
               
               
                  Then came the bragging Frenchmen down
                  With greater Force and Might;
                  With whom our Noble King began
                  A hard and cruel Fight.
               
               
                  The Archers they discharged their Shafts,
                  As thick as Hail from Sky;
                  That many a Frenchman in the Field
                  That happy Day did die.
               
               
                  Ten Thousand Men that Day were slain
                  Of Enemies in the Field;
                  
                     
And as many Prisoners
                  That Day were forced to yield.
               
               
                  Thus had our King a happy Day,
                  And Victory over France;
                  And brought them quickly under Foot,
                  That late in Pride did prance.
               
               
                  The Lord preserve our Noble King,
                  And grant to him likewise
                  The upper Hand and Victory
                  Of all his Enemies.
               
            
            
               

               THE FIRST PART OF King Henry the Sixth.
               THE historical Transactions contained in this Play, take in the Compass of about thirty Years; they are all ex-tracted from Holingshed's Chronicle: But Shakespear, in this, as well as in the two fol-lowing Parts of this King's Reign, has not been very exact to the Date and Disposition of the Facts, shuffling them backwards and for-wards, out of the Order of Time in which they happened, as it best suited his Purpose. The Characters are almost all faithfully copied from the Historian; but the Poet has exagge-rated the Affection of Queen Margaret for the Duke of Suffolk, representing that Princess as engaged in a criminal Amour with the Duke, for which there is no Foundation in History.
               
                  
The Loves of the Queen and Duke of Suf-folk, which make the Subject of several Scenes in the Play, not being mentioned either by Hall or Holingshed, 'tis probable that Shake-spear saw some little Novel of the Lives of these two great Persons, from whence he copied such Incidents as he thought proper for the Embellishment of his Play; but, by introducing the Queen in the second Part, weeping and lamenting over the Head of her murdered Lover, which lyes on her Bosom, in the Presence of the King her Husband, and several Noblemen, he has either very injudici-ously copied, or very coarsly invented. For the absurdity of such a Behaviour must give dis-gust to the meanest and least intelligent Reader or Spectator.
               But if Shakespear has been misled by Ro-mance, or oral Tradition, to give such im-proper Manners to a Queen, and in a Histo-rical Play, contradict the known Facts on which it is founded, he has, on the other Hand, worked up the simple Relation of the Deaths of a Father and Son, in the History, into one of the most beautiful and affecting Episodes imaginable.
               
                  Holingshed after a circumstantial Detail of all the great Actions of the warlike Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, proceeds to give an Account of his Death and that of his Son's as they were endeavouring to raise the Siege of Chastillon in France.
               
               
                  
"The Frenchmen says he, Page 640, that lay at the Siege, perceiving, by those good Runners away, that the Earle approached, left the Siege, and retired in good Order into the Place which they had trenched, ditched and fortified with Ordnance. The Earle adver-tised how the Siege was removed, hasted for-ward towards his Enemies, doubting most lest they would have been quite fled and gone before his comming, but they fearing the Dis-pleasure of the French King, who was not far off, if they should have fled, abode the Earles comming, and so received him; who though he first with manfull Courage, and sore seight-ing, wan the entrie of their Camp; yet at length they compassed him about, and shooting him through the Thigh with an Hand-Gun, slue his Horse, and finallie killed him lying on the Ground whom they never durst look in the Face, while he stood on his Feet."
               "It was said, that after he perceived that there was no Remedy but present loss of the Battel, he councelled his Son Lord Lisle, to save him-self by Flight, sith the same could not redound to any great Reproach in him, this being the first Journey in which he had been present; many Words he used to persuade him to have saved his Life, but Nature so wrought in the Son, that neither desire of Life, nor fear of Death, could either Cause him to shrinke, or convey himself out of the Danger, and, so there manfully ended his Life with his said Father."
               
                  
On this Incident the following Scenes are founded, in which the Poet has given us the finest Pictures imaginable, of true Heroism, paternal Tenderness, and filial Love.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SCENE, a Field of Battle near Bourdeaux.
                           
                           
                              Enter TALBOT and his Son.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              O young John Talbot, I did send for thee,
                              To tutor thee in Stratagems of War,
                              That Talbot's Name might be in thee reviv'd,
                              When sapless Age, and weak unable Limbs
                              Should bring thy Fathe
                                    •
                                  to his drooping Chair.
                              But O malignant and ill-boding Stars!
                              Now art thou come unto a Feast of Death,
                              A terrible and unavoided Danger:
                              Therefore, dear Boy, mount on my swiftest Horse,
                              And I'll direct thee how thou shall escape
                              By sudden Flight. Come, dally not, be gone.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              Is my Name Talbot? Am I your Son?
                              And shall I fly? O if you love my Mother,
                              Dishonour not her honourable Name,
                              To make a Bastard, and a Slave of me.
                              The World will say, he is not Talbot's Blood
                              That basely fled, when Noble Talbot stood.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Fly to revenge my Death. if I be slain.
                           
                           
                              

                              JOHN.
                              He that flies so, will ne'er return again.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              If we both stay we both are sure to die.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              Then let me stay, and Father do you fly:
                              Your Loss is great, so your Regard should be;
                              My worth unknown, no Loss is known in me.
                              Upon my Death, the French can little boast;
                              In yours they will, in you all Hopes are lost.
                              Flight cannot stain the Honour you have won:
                              But mine it will, that no exploit have done.
                              You fled for Vantage every one will swear;
                              But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
                              There is no Hope that ever I will stay,
                              If the first Hour I shrink and run away:
                              Here, on my Knees, I beg mortality,
                              Rather than Life preserved with infamy.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Shall all thy Mother's Hope lye in one Tomb?
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              Ay rather than I'll shame my Mother's Womb,
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Upon my Blessing I command thee go.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              To fight I will, but not to flie the Foe.
                           
                           
                              

                              TALBOT.
                              Part of thy Father may be saved in thee,
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              No Part of him, but will be shame in me.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Thou never hadst Renown, nor can'st not lose it?
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              Yes, your renowned Name, shall Flight abuse it?
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Thy Father's Charge shall clear thee from that Stain.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              You cannot witness for me, being slain.
                              If Death be so apparent, then both fly.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              And leave my Followers here to fight and die!
                              My Age was never tainted with such Shame.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              And shall my Youth be guilty of such Blame?
                              No more can I be sever'd from your Side,
                              Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:
                              Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
                              For live I will not, if my Father die.
                           
                           
                              

                              TALBOT.
                              Then here I take my Leave, fair Son,
                              Born to eclipse thy Life this Afternoon.
                              Come, side by side, together live and die,
                              And Soul with Soul from France to Heaven fly.
                           
                           Exeunt.
                           
                              Alarm: Excursions, wherein Talbot's Son is hemm'd about, and Talbot rescues him.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              
                                 St. George and Victory! fight, Soldiers fight:
                              The Regent hath with Talbot broke his Word,
                              And left us to the Rage of France's Sword.
                              Where is John Talbot? Pause and take thy Breath,
                              I gave thee Life, and rescued thee from Death.
                           
                           
                              JOHN.
                              O twice my Father, twice am I thy Son:
                              The Life thou gave'st me first, wast lost and done;
                              Till with thy warlike Sword, despight of Fate,
                              To my determin'd Time thou gav'st new Date.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              When from the Dauphin's Crest thy Sword struck Fire,
                              It warm'd thy Father's Heart with proud De-sire,
                              Of bold fac'd Victory. Then leaden Age
                              Quicken'd with youthful Spleen and warlike Rage,
                              Beat down Alanson, Orleans, Burgundy,
                              
                              
                                 
And from the Pride of Gallia rescu'd thee.
                              The ireful Bastard, Orleans, that drew Blood
                              From thee, my Boy, and had the Maidenhood,
                              Of thy first Fight, I soon encountred;
                              And, interchanging blows, I quickly shed
                              Some of his Bastard Blood, and in his Disgrace
                              Bespoke him thus: Contaminated, base,
                              And misbegotten Blood, I spill of thine,
                              Mean and right poor, for that pure Blood of mine,
                              Which thou didst force from Talbot my brave Boy—
                              Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
                              Came in strong Rescue. Speak thy Father's Care,
                              Art thou not weary; John? how dost thou fare.
                              Wilt thou yet leave the Battle, Boy, and fly,
                              Now thou art seal'd the Son of Chivalry?
                              Fly to revenge my Death when I am dead,
                              The Help of one stands me in little Stead.
                              Oh too much folly is it, well I wot,
                              To hazard all our Lives in one small Boat!
                              If I die not to-day with Frenchmen's Rage,
                              To-morrow I shall die with mickle Age;
                              By me they nothing gain; and if I stay,
                              'Tis but the shortening of my Life one Day.
                              In thee thy Mother dies our Houshold's Name
                              My Death's Revenge, thy Youth and England's Fame:
                              All these and more, we hazard by thy Stay:
                              All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
                           
                           
                              

to her, and begged her Assistance in conveying one to him: this she readily promised, and as faithfully performed.
               My Letter being calculated to give him Hope, rather than Despair, my Lover omitted nothing that might contribute towards settling me in a firm Opinion of his Passion; every Day brought me a Letter, or some passionate Verses; every Evening a Serenade under my Chamber Window. A whole Year rolled away in this Manner: at length being firmly per-suaded of the Truth and Ardency of his Af-fection, I resolved to make myself by Promise hi
                     •
                  , when (oh! my adverse Fortune!) the Fa-ther of Don Felix, having received some Intima-tion of his Son's Passion for me, to prevent his marrying me, as he apprehended, sent him a-way immediately to the Court of the Great Princess Augusta Caesarina, telling him, it was not fit a young Gentleman of his noble Ex-traction, should spend his Youth at Home, where Idleness, and the Force of bad Exam-ples might draw him into dangerous Vices.
               Don Felix could not resolve to acquaint me with this cruel News, apprehensive that my extream Grief upon bearing it, would affect him too deeply, he departed without tak-ing leave.
               Ah, chaste and lovely Nymphs! how shall I give you an Idea of the Pangs I suffered in his Absence! Strangers as ye are to the sort Tyranny of Love, how shall I make you

                              JOHN.
                              The Sword of Orleans hath not made me smart,
                              These Words of yours draw Life-blood from my Heart.
                              Out on that Vantage bought with such a shame,
                              To save a paltry Life, and slay bright Fame!
                              Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
                              The coward Horse that bears me fall and die!
                              And like me to the Peasant Boys of France,
                              
                              To be Shame, Scorn, and Subject of Mischance.
                              Surely by all the Glory you have won,
                              An if I fly I am not Talbot's Son:
                              Then talk no more of Flight, it is no Boot;
                              If Son to Talbot, die at Talbot's Foot.
                           
                           
                              Alarm, Excursions, Enter old Talbot led.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Where is my other Life? mine own is gone;
                              O where is young Talbot? where is valiant John?
                              
                              Triumphant Death, smear'd with captivity,
                              Young Talbot's Valour makes me smile at thee.
                              When he perceived me shrink, and on my Knee,
                              His bloody Sword he brandish'd over me:
                              And, like a hungry Lion, did commence
                              Rough Deeds of rage, and stern Impatience:
                              But when my angry Guardant stood alone
                              Tendring my ruin, and assailed of none,
                              Dizzy-ey'd Fury, and great rage of Heart,
                              Suddenly made him from my side to start
                              Into the clustering Battle of the French:
                              
                                 
And in that Sea of Blood, my Boy did drench
                              His over mounting Spirit, and there dy'd
                              My Icarus, my Blossom! in his Pride.
                           
                           
                              Enter John Talbot, borne.
                           
                           
                              SERVANT.
                              O my dear Lord, lo! where your Son is borne.
                           
                           
                              TALBOT.
                              Thou antic Death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
                              Anon, from thy insulting Tyranny
                              Coupled in Bonds of Perpetuity,
                              Two Talbots winged through the lither Sky
                              In thy despight shall 'scape Mortality.
                              O thou, whose Wounds become hard favour'd Death!
                              Speak to thy Father ere thou yield thy Breath.
                              Brave Death by speaking, whether he will or no,
                              Imagine him a Frenchman and thy Foe.
                              Poor Boy! he smiles methinks, as who should say.
                              "Had Death been French, then Death had "died to-day."
                              Come, come, and lay him in his Father's Arms,
                              My Spirit can no longer bear these harms.
                              Soldiers adieu! I have what I would have
                              Now my old Arms are young John Talbot's Grave. Dies.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               

               THE SECOND PART OF King Henry the Sixth.
               THE Contention between the two Houses of York and Lancaster furnishes the Incidents which compose this Play. The Action begins with King Henry's Mar-riage, which was in the twenty third Year of his Reign, and closes with the first Battle fought at St. Albans and won by the York Faction, in the thirty third Year of his Reign; so that it takes in the History and Transactions of ten Years.
               
                  Shakespear has copied Holingshed pretty close-ly throughout this whole Play, except in his Relation of the Duke of Suffolk's Death.

The Chronicle tells us, that King Henry, to satisfy the Nobility and People, who hated this Favourite, condemned him to Banishment during the Space of five Years. In his Passage to France he was taken by a Ship of War belong-ing to the Duke of Exeter, Constable of the Tower; the Captain of which Ship carried him into Dover Road, and there struck off his Head on the Side of a Cock-boat.
               In Shakespear, he is taken by English Pyrates on the Coast of Kent, who, notwithstanding the large Ransom he offers them, resolve to murder him: One of them, in the Course of his Conversation with the Duke, tells him, that his Name is Walter Whitmore; and observ-ing him start, asks him, if he is frighted at Death, to which Suffolk replied.
               
                  Thy Name affrights me, in whose Sound is Death,
                  A cunning Man did calculate my Birth,
                  And told me that by Walter I should die.
               
               This Circumstance is not to be found, either in Hall or Holingshed; and as it has greatly the Air of Fiction, Shakespear probably bor-rowed it from the same Tale that furnished him with the Loves of Suffolk and the Queen, on which several passionate Scenes in this Play, as well as the former, are Built.
            
            
               

               THE THIRD PART OF King Henry the Sixth.
               THE Scene of this Play opens just after the Battle of St. Albans, wherein the York Faction was Victorious, and closes with the Murder of King Henry the sixth and the Birth of Prince Edward, afterwards King Edward the fifth; so that this History takes in the space of sixteen Years. The Facts are all extracted from Holingshed, and most of the Incidents very closely copied. The strug-gle between the two Houses of York and Lan-caster for the Crown being the Subject pursued in this Drama, every Scene almost presents us with a new Battle, a flying Army, or the Carnage of a bloody Field; where the inhu-man

Conquerors unsated with the Slaughters of the Fight, sacrifice their defenceless Enemies to the Fury of their Revenge, and exult over them, when dying, with a Cruelty truly di-abolical.
               
                  Shakespear has given the same inconsistent and improper Manners to all the chief Persons in this Play; the brave old Duke of York, the gallant Edward his Son, afterwards King, the heroic Warwick, whom the Poet so often styles the Maker and Subduer of Kings, are all Murderers; at once the Heroes and the Villains of the Scene, equally exciting our Praise and Detestation. The Poet, in order to display this predominant Passion, Cruelty, in Charac-ters where it is lest expected to be found, the Heroe and the Prince, has not scrupled to vi-olate sometimes the Truth of History.
               The Chronicles say, that the Duke of York, who pretended to the Crown, was killed in the Battle of Wakefield, and being found dead in the Field by the Lord Clifford, he cut off his Head and presented it to the Queen of Henry the sixth, who was in Person at this Battle. Shakespear makes him to be taken Prisoner by the Earls of Northumberland and Clifford, who bring him to the Queen and ask what she would have done to him: To which she replies,
               
                  
                     QUEEN.
                     Brave Warriors, Clifford and Northumberland
                     
                     
                        
Come, make him stand upon this Mole-hill here,
                     That raught at Mountains with out-streched Arms,
                     Yet parted but the Shadow with his Hand:
                     What, was it you, that would be England's King?
                     Was't you, that revell'd in our Parliament,
                     And made a Preachment of your high Descent?
                     Where are your Mess of Sons to back you now,
                     The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
                     
                     And wher's that valiant crook-back'd Prodigy?
                     
                        Dicky your Boy, that with his grumbling Voice
                     Was wont to cheer his Dad in Mutinies?
                     Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
                     
                     Look, York, I stain'd this Napkin with the Blood
                     That valiant Clifford, with his Rapier's Point,
                     Made issue from the Bosom of the Boy:
                     And if thine Eyes can water for his Death
                     I give thee this to dry thy Cheeks withal.
                     Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly
                     I should lament thy miserable State.
                     I prythee grieve to make me merry York.
                     
                     What, hath thy fiery Heart so parcht thine En-trails
                     That not a Tear can fall for Rutland's Death?
                     Why art thou patient Man? thou shouldst, be mad,
                     And I to make thee mad, do mock thee thus:
                     Stamp, rave and fret, that I may sing and dance.
                     Thou would'st be fee'd, I see, to make me Sport;
                     
                        

                        York cannot speak unless he wear a Crown.
                     A Crown for York—And, Lords, bow low to him;
                     Hold you his Hands, while I do set it on.
                     putting a Paper Crown on his Head.
                     Ay, marry Sir, now looks he like a King:
                     Ay, this is he, that took King Henry's Chair;
                     And this is he, was his adopted Heir.
                     But how is it that great Plantaganet
                     
                     Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn Oath
                     As I bethink me, you should not be King
                     Till our King Henry had shook Hands with Death.
                     And will you pale your Head in Henry's Glory
                     And rob his Temples of the Diadem,
                     Now in his Life, against your holy Oath?
                     Oh, 'tis a Fault too too unpardonable.
                     Off with the Crown, and with the Crown his Head;
                     And whilst we breathe, take Time to do him dead,
                  
               
               With this more than fiendlike Cruelty, has Shakespear represented a Queen, whose Motives for taking Arms were far from being unjust; the recovery of her Husband's Liberty and Crown, and the restoring her Son to the Rights and Privileges of his Birth. And for the Sake of this shocking Absurdity in the Manners of a Female Character, in so high a Rank, he contradicts a known Fact in History, and makes one of the greatest Captains of the Age die by the cowardly Stabs of a Woman, and a Ruffian, who, according to the Chro-nicles fell in the Field of Battle, covered with Wounds and Glory.
               
                  
In the next Act, Clifford is shewn in the pangs of Death; with the great Warwick, King Edward and his Brothers exulting over him and embittering his last Moments with the most unmanly Railings.
               
                  
                     EDWARD.
                     Bring forth that fatal Screech-owl to our House
                     That nothing sung but Death to us and ours:
                     Now Death shall stop his dismal threatening Sound
                     And his ill-boading Tongue, no more shall speak.
                  
                  
                     WARWICK.
                     I think, his understanding is bereft;
                     Speak Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
                     Dark cloudy Death o'er-shades his beams of Life
                     And he nor sees, nor hears us what we say.
                  
                  
                     RICHARD.
                     O would he did! and so, perhaps, he doth.
                     'Tis but his Policy to counterfeit;
                     Because he would avoid such bitter Taunts
                     As in the Time of Death he gave our Father.
                  
                  
                     CLARENCE.
                     If so thou think'st, vex him with eager Words.
                  
                  
                     RICHARD.
                     
                        Clifford, ask Mercy, and obtain no Grace.
                  
                  
                     

                     EDWARD.
                     
                        Clifford, repent in bootless Penitence.
                  
                  
                     WARWICK.
                     
                        Clifford, devise Excuses for thy Faults.
                  
                  
                     CLARENCE.
                     While we devise fell tortures for thy Faults.
                  
                  
                     RICHARD.
                     Thou did'st love York, and I am Son to York.
                     
                  
                  
                     EDWARD.
                     Thou pitied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.
                  
                  
                     CLARENCE
                     Where's Captain Margaret to fence you now.
                  
                  
                     WARWICK.
                     They mock thee Clifford, swear as thou wast wont.
                  
                  
                     RICHARD.
                     What not an Oath, nay then the World goes hard,
                     When Clifford cannot spare his Friends an Oath.
                     I know by that he's dead; and by my Soul
                     If this right Hand would buy but two Hour's Life,
                     That I in all dispight might rail at him,
                     This Hand should chop it off, and with the is-suing Blood
                     Stifle the Villain, whose unstanched thirst,
                     
                        York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
                  
               
               
                  

comprehend the Torments divided Lovers feel? I found them so insupportable, that for-getting what I owed my Sex, my Rank, and Fame, I quitted my Grandmother's House, and in the Disguise of a Page, travelled to that Court, where the dear Object of all my Wishes was.
               I was twenty Days in performing this journey, during which time my Disguise ex-posed me to great Inconveniences; but my eager Desire to see Don Felix, made me de-spise them all. At my Arrival I hired a Lodg-ing in a Street less frequented than any other with Company. My anxious Impatience to see Don Felix, left me not room for any other Thoughts, but how to gratify this Wish; yet I durst not enquire for him of my Host, lest my Flight being noised abroad, my Sex and Condition might have been suspected; nor did I think it prudent to venture out to seek him, for fear I should be observed.
               All Day I passed in this Perplexity; at length the Night approached, and brought with it an Increase of my Affliction, notwith-standing the Fatigue both of Body and Mind which I had endured, yet I could take no Re-pose; I tossed and tumbled on my uneasy Bed 'till Midnight, when my Host knocking at my Chamber Door, told me, if I had any Inclina-tion to hear some fine Music, I had nothing to do but to rise and open the Window that lo
                     •••
                  d towards t
                     •
                  e Street. Ah me! in the distracted State my Mind was then in, I was
For many of the Murders which the Follow-ers of each Party commit oh those of the other in this Play, Shakespear had no Foundation in the History; but that of the young Earl of Rutland by Clifford, is copied with all its Cir-cumstances from Holingshed. The Character of King Henry the Sixth, whose unfortunate Reign makes the Subject of these three Plays, is drawn by Shakespear exactly conformable to that given him by the Historians. As to the Manner of his Death, several different Opi-nions prevailed; but the Poet, by making the Duke of Gloucester murder him in the Tower, has followed that which was most probable and most generally believed
            
            
               

               THE LIFE and DEATH OF King Richard the Third.
               THIS Tragedy, tho' it is called the Life and Death of Richard the third, takes in, at most, but the last eight Years of his Time. The Scene opens with the Im-prisonment of George Duke of Clarence in the Tower, which happened in the beginning of the Year 1477, and closes with the Death of Richard at Bosworth Field; which Battle was fought on the 22d of August, in the Year 1485.
               The historical Facts are all taken from Hol-ingshed, and the Characters all closely copied from that Author; that of Richard the third

has been censured as monstrous, the Picture of a Fiend and not a Man; and too exquisitely wicked to be represented on the Stage. 'Tis certain however, that Shakespear has not ag-gravated the Vices and Cruelty of this Prince; he paints him such as History has transmitted him to us; and if his Character shocks us more in the Scene than the Story, 'tis because the Colours of the Poet are more lively, his Expression stronger, and the Lights he shews him in more diversified; but the Subject in both is the same. The qualities of his Mind and Person are thus summed up by Holingshed.
               
               "As he was small and little of Stature, so was he of Body greatly deformed, the one Shoul-der higher than the other, his Face was small, but his Countenance cruel, and such that the first Aspect a Man would judge it to smell and favour of Malice, Fraud and Deceit; when he stood musing, he would bite and chaw his nether Lip; as who said, that his fierce Nature always chafed, stirred and was ever unquiet: beside, that the Dagger which he wore, he would (when he studied) with his Hand pluck up and down in the Sheath to the midst, never drawing it fullie out. He was of a ready, preg-nant and quick Wit, wielie to feire, and apt to dissemble: He had a proud Mind, and an arrogant Stomach, the which accompanied him even to his Death, rather choosing to suf-fer the same by dint of Sword, than, being forsaken and left helpless of his unfaithful Com-panions, to preserve by cowardlie Flight, such a frail and uncertain Life, which by Malice,

Sickness, or condigne Punishment, was like shortly to come to confusion."
               This Character is the very same with that drawn of him by Shakespear; but the latter is made more striking by the wonderful Propriety of the Manners and Sentiments he every where, throughout the Play, attributes to him. If Shakespear is in any Instance to be blamed for keeping too close to the Historian, it is for dignifying the last Moments of this bloody Tyrant with such shining Proofs of Fortitude and Valour, as, notwithstanding the Detesta-tion we conceived at his cruelties, must force from us an involuntary Applause. The History tells us he fought bravely in that Battle which decided his Fate, and, overpowered as he was by Numbers, disdained to save his Life by Flight.
               
                  Shakespear improves this into the following noble Description, which has indeed this im-proper Effect, that our hatred of the Tyrant is wholly lost in our Admiration of the Heroe.
               
                  
                     Alarm. Excursions. Enter Catesby.
                  
                     CATESBY.
                     Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue:
                     The King enacts more wonders than a Man,
                     Daring an Opposite to every Danger!
                     His Horse is slain and all on Foot he fights
                     Seeking for Richmond in the Throat of Death.
                  
                  
                     

                     Alarm. Enter King Richard.
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     A Horse! a Horse! my Kingdom for a Horse!
                  
                  
                     CATBSBY.
                     Withdraw, my Lord, I'll help you to a Horse.
                  
                  
                     K. RICHARD.
                     Slave, I have set my Life upon a Cast,
                     And I will stand the Hazard of the Dye.
                  
               
               There are several of Shakespears historical Plays which take in a greater Compass of Time than this, but none in which the absurdity of crowding the Events of many Years into a Representation of three Hours, is made so glaring. This, no doubt, is occasioned by the very unartful Disposition of the Incidents which, though made up of distant Events, follow one another without the least Preparation, without the Intervention of an Act, or Change of Scene, to give the Spectator's Imagination room to cheat itself agreeably, by supplying that Distance of Time necessary for the giv-ing any Probability to the Story. To be con-vinced of this one need only consider the Con-duct of the first Part of the fourth Act, where Richard, for the first Time, enters as King, his Nephew Prince Edward, and the Duke of York being still alive: He declares his Appre-hensions of them to the Duke of Buckingham, by whose Assistance he had usurped the Crown,

and presses him to give Consent to their Mur-der.
               The Duke demands a Minute's Leisure to consider of his Proposal, and goes out; Ri-chard immediately asks his Page, if he can re-commend any Person to him that will under-take a Murder for Reward; the Page names Tyrrel, and goes to fetch him; King Richard then addressing himself to one of his Confi-dents, says:

                     Come hither, Catesby, rumour it abroad,
                     That Anne my Wife is sick, and like to die.
                     I will take Order for her keeping close.
                     Inquire me out some mean-born Gentleman,
                     Whom I will marry strait to Clarence' Daugh-ter,
                     (The Boy is foolish, and I fear him not)
                     Look how thou dream'st.—I say again, give out
                     That Anne my Wife is sick, and like to die.
                     About it, for it stands me much upon
                     To stop all Hopes, whose Growth may da-mage me:
                     I must be married to my Brother's Daughter,
                     Or else my Kingdom stands on brittle Glass;
                     Murder her Brothers, and then marry her,
                     Uncertain Way of Gain! But I am in
                     So far in Blood, that Sin will pluck on Sin.
                     Tear-falling Pity dwells not in this Eye!
                  
               
               This Soliloquy is interrupted by Tyrrel, whom Richard dispatches to the Tower, with Orders to kill the young Princes imprisoned

there. Buckingham then re-enters, and is be-ginning to acquaint Richard with his Resolu-tion concerning the Princes, but is stopped by the Tyrant, who changes the Discourse; Buckingham thereupon demands the Earldom of Hereford, which the King had promised him; the King makes evasive Answers, till being hard pressed by the Duke, he retires, and Buckingham declaring he will fly to Breck-nock, goes off.
               
                  Tyrrel then enters, and informs the Audi-ence that the two Princes are murdered by Dighton and Forrest, whom he had suborned to commit this cruel Action; the King coming in, he tells him his Commands had been per-formed; Richard dismisses him, with a Pro-mise of Preferment, and then proceeds to give the Audience an Account of what he had done during his Absence of two Minutes.
               
                  
                     King RICHARD.
                     The Son of Clarence have I pent up close;
                     His Daughter meanly have I match'd in Mar-riage;
                     And Anne my Wife hath bid this World good Night.
                  
               
               Two or three Speeches backwards we find him dispatching Catesby to spread a Report, That his Queen Anne, was Sick and like to die. And also to enquire for some mean Born Gentleman to whom he might marry Clarence's Daughter; and scarce two Minutes are elapsed till we are informed all this is done:

                  Buckingham this Moment tells us, that he will fly to Brecknock to save his Head, and scarce has he quitted the Scene when Catesby comes in and tells us that,

                     
                        Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
                     
                     Is in the Field, and still his Power increaseth,
                  
Absurdities like these are such a gross Abuse of the Understanding, that all the Beauties we find scattered throughout this Play, can hardly at-tone for them.
            
            
               

               THE LIFE OF King Henry the Eighth.
               THIS Play, tho' called, The Life of King Henry the eighth, takes in only the Transactions of twelve Years of his Reign. The Action of it begins with the arresting the Duke of Buckingham for high Treason; which happened in the thirteenth Year of this King's Reign, and closes with the Birth of the Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Queen of England, which was on the twenty-fifth.
               The historical Facts upon which this Play is founded, are all extracted from Holingshed; the Characters generally drawn closely after this Historian, and many of the Speeches copied almost literally from him.
               
                  
The Accusation, Tryal, and Death of the Duke of Buckingham, makes a very affecting Incident in this Play.
               
                  Shakespear has been exactly just to historical Truth, in making Cardinal Wolsey the sole Con-triver of this Nobleman's Fall; whose Character as it is thus summed up by King Henry, is perfectly agreeable to that given him by Holing-shed.
               
               
                  
                     KING
                     The Gentleman is learn'd, a most rare Speaker,
                     So Nature none more bound, his Training such,
                     That he may furnish and instruct great Teach-ers,
                     And never seek for Aid out of himself.
                  
               
               The Accusations the Duke's Surveyor brings against him, in the first Act, before the King and Council, are an Abridgment of all the Articles upon which his Indictment of high Treason was founded, as they are set down at length by Holingshed: King Henry in the Play, after hearing these Articles, consigns him over to the Law, in much the same Words with the Historian,

                     Call, him to present Tryal, if he may
                     Find Mercy in the Law, 'tis his, if none,
                     Let him not seek't of us,
                  
               
               The King, hearing the Accusation enforced to the uttermost by the Cardinal, made this

little capable of relishing Music, however charming it might be; yet did I rise without thinking on what I was doing, and opening the Window, my Attention was immediately engaged by the Sound of a Voice that seemed familiar to my Ears; and listening eagerly, I perceived it was Fabius, a Page belonging to Don Felix, who calling to some Persons at a little Distance, said, now, my Masters, it is time to begin, for the Lady is come into the Gal-lery this Moment.
               Then immediately they began to play upon several Instruments, which, had I not been racked with a thousand various Thoughts, might with the celestial Harmony they made, have charmed me into an Extasy.
               The Music no sooner ceased, than a Voice, which, by its ravishing Sweetness, I knew to be Don Felix's, sung some tender and passionate Verses, in which he complained of the extream Rigour of a Lady to whom he had devoted his Affections.
               That well known Voice lulled me into such a sweet Delirium of Joy, that forgetting those fatal Verses were addressed to another, the Image of our past Loves rose fresh to my Remembrance, and my deceitful Imagination represented my Lover as formerly, breathing out those melting Sounds to me: but this pleasing Delusion lasted not long; I soon recovered to a Sense, a bitter Sense of my deplorable Condi-tion, and turning to my Host, I asked him

Answer: "If the Duke have deserved to be punished, let him have according to his Deserts." The Account Shakespear gives of his Behaviour at his Tryal, agrees exactly with that of Hol-ingshed, from whom he copies it closely.
               
                  
                     FIRST GENT.
                     The great Duke
                     Came to the Bar; where, to his Accusations
                     He pleaded still not guilty; and alledg'd
                     Many sharp Reasons to defeat the Law.
                     The King's Attorney, on the contrary
                     Urg'd on Examinations, Proofs, Confessions
                     Of divers Witnesses, which the Duke desir'd
                     To have brought viva voce to his Face;
                     At which appear'd against him his Surveyor,
                     Sir Gilbert Pack his Chancellor, and John Court
                     
                     Confessor to him, with that Devil-monk
                     
                        Hopkins, that made this mischief.
                  
                  
                     SECOND GENT.
                     That was he,
                     That fed him with his Prophecies.
                  
                  
                     FIRST GENT.
                     The same.
                     All these accused him strongly, which he fain
                     Would have flung from him; but indeed, he could not:
                     And so his Peers upon this Evidence
                     Have found him guilty of high Treason. Much
                     He spoke; and learnedly for Life, but all
                     Was either pitied in him, or forgotten.
                  
                  
                     

                     SECOND GENT.
                     After all this, how did he clear himself.
                  
                  
                     FIRST GENT.
                     When he was brought again to the Bar, to hear
                     His Knell rung out, his Judgment, he was stirr'd
                     With such an Agony, he sweat extreamly!
                     And something spoke in Choler, ill and hasty:
                     But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
                     In all the rest shew'd a most noble Patience.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Holingshed, Page 865."When the Lords had taken their Place, the Duke was brought to the Bar, and upon his Arraignment, pleaded not guilty, and put himself upon his Peers. Then was his Indite-ment read, which the Duke denied to be true, arid (as he was an eloquent Man) alledged Reasons to falsify the Inditement, pleading the Matter for his own Justification very pi-thily and earnestly. The King's Attorney against the Duke's Reasons alledged the Ex-aminations, Confessions, and Proofs of Wit-nesses.
               The Duke desired that the Witnesses might be brought forth. And then came before him Charles Knevet, Perk, de la Court, and Hop-kins the Monk of the Priory of the Charter-house beside Bath, which, like a false Hypocrite, had induced the Duke to the Treason with his false 
                     •
                  orged Prophesies. Divers Presumptions

and Accusations were laid unto him, by Charles Knevet, which he would fain have covered. The Depositions were read, and the Deponents delivered as Prisoners to the Officers of the Tower. Then spake the Duke of Norfolk and said, my Lord, the King our Sovereign Lord hath commanded that you shall have his Law ministred with Favour and Right to you, wherefore if you have any other Thing to say for yourself, you shall be heard. Then he was ordered to withdraw him, and so was led into Paradice, a House so named. The Lords went to Councel a great While and after took their Places.
               Then said the Duke of Norfolk to the Duke of Suffolk, what say you of Sir Edward Duke of Buckingham touching the high Treason: The Duke of Suffolk answered, He is guilty, and so said the Marquis and all the other Earls and Lords. Thus was this Prince Duke of Buckin-gham found guilty of high Treason, by a Duke and a Marquis, seven Earls and twelve Bar-rons. The Duke was brought to the Barr sore chafing, and sweat marvelously, and after he had made his Reverence, he paused a While. The Duke of Norfolk as Judge said, Sir Edward you have heard how you be indited of high Treason, you pleaded thereto not guilty, put-ting yourself to the Peers of the Realm, who have found you guilty. Then the Duke of Norfolk weept and said. you shall be led to the King's Prison, and there laid on a Hurdle and so drawn to the Place of Execution, and there hanged, cut down alive, your Members cut off

and cast into the Fire, your Bowels burnt before you, your Head smitten off, and your Body quartered and devided at the King's Will, and God have mercy on your Soul.
               The Duke of Buckingham, said, my Lord of Norfolk you have said as a Traitor should be said unto, but I was never anie: But my Lords I nothing malign for that you have done to me, but the eternal God forgive you my Death, and I do, I shall never sue to the King for Life, howbeit he is a gracious Prince, and more Grace may come from him than I desire, I desire you my Lords and all my Fellows to pray for me. Then was the Edge of the Ax turned towards him, and he led into a Barge, Sir Thomas Lovel desired him to sit upon the Cushins and Carpet ordained for him: He said nay; for when I went to Westminster I was Duke of Buckingham, now I am but Edward Bohune the most caitife of the World. Thus they landed at the Temple, where Sir Nicholas Hawse and Sir William Sands received him and led him through the City, who desired the People to pray for him, of whom some weept and la-mented, and said this is the End of evil Life: God forgive him he was a proud Prince, it is Pity he behaved him so against the King and Liege Lord, whom God preserve. Thus about four of the Clock he was brought as a cast Man to the Tower.
               
               The Friday the 17th May eleven of the Clock, this Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Hereford, Stafford and Northampton, with a

great Power was delivered to John Reim and John Skevington Sheriffes, who led him to the Scaffold on Tower-hill, where he said he had offended the King's Grace and desired all Noblemen to beware by him, and all Men to pray for him, and that he trusted to die the King's true Man.
               The Substance of what the Duke here says at his Execution, Shakespear has interwoven into the following Speeches; which, from the pathetic Eloquence they contain, and peculiar Propriety with which they are adopted to the Character and Circumstances of the Speeches, derive an inexpressible Grace and Beauty.
               
                  
                     Enter Buckingham from his Arraignment (Tipstaves before him, the Axe with the Edge towards him, Halberts on each side) accompanied by Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir Nicholas Vaux, Sir William Sands, and common People.
                  
                  
                     BUCKINGHAM.
                     All good People,
                     You that thus far have come to pity me,
                     Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me:
                     I have this Day received a Traitor's Judgment,
                     And by that Name must die, yet Heav'n bear Witness,
                     And if I have a Conscience, let it sink me
                     Even as the Axe falls, if I be not faithful.
                     To the Law I bear no Malice for my Death;
                     'T has done, upon the Premises but Justice:
                     
                        
But those that sought it, I could wish more Christians;
                     Be what they will, I heartily forgive them;
                     Yet let 'em look, they glory not in mischief;
                     Nor build their evils the Graves of great Men,
                     For then my guiltless Blood must cry against' em
                     For further Life in this World I ne'er hope
                     Nor will I sue, altho' the King have Mercies
                     More than I dare make Faults. You few that lov'd me,
                     And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham
                     
                     His noble Friends and Fellows, whom to leave
                     Is only bitter to him, only dying;
                     Go with me, like good Angels to my End:
                     And as the long Divorce of Steel falls on me,
                     Make of your Prayers one sweet Sacrifice.
                     And lift my Soul to Heaven. Lead on, o'God's Name.
                  
                  
                     LOVELL.
                     I do beseech your Grace for Charity,
                     If ever any Malice in your Heart
                     Were hid against me. now forgive me frankly,
                  
                  
                     BUCKINGHAM.
                     Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you,
                     As I would be forgiven: I forgive all,
                     There cannot be these numberless Offences
                     'Gainst me, I can't take peace, with: No black Envy
                     Shall make my Grave—Commend me to his Grace;
                     And if he speak of Buckingham; pray tell him,
                     You met him half in Heaven: My Vows and Prayr's
                     
                        
Yet are the King's, and, till my Soul forsake me
                     Shall cry for Blessings on him. May he live
                     Longer than I have Time to tell his Years,
                     Ever beloved and loving, may his Rule be,
                     And when old Time shall lead him to his End
                     Goodness and he fill up one Monument.
                  
                  
                     LOVELL.
                     To th' Water side I must conduct your Grace,
                     Then give my Charge to Sir Nicholas Vaux
                     
                     Who undertakes you to your End.
                  
                  
                     VAUX.
                     Prepare there,
                     The Duke is coming: See the Barge be ready
                     And fit it with such Furniture as suits
                     The greatness of his Person,
                  
                  
                     BUCKINGHAM.
                     Nay, Sir Nicholas
                     
                     Let it alone; my State now will but mock me.
                     When I came hither, I was Lord high Con-stable
                     And Duke of Backingham, now poor Edward Bohone.
                     
                     Yet I am richer than my base Accusers,
                     That never knew what Truth meant: I now seal it;
                     And with that Blood will make them one Day groan for't.
                     My noble Father, Henry of Buckingham,
                     
                     Who first rais'd head against usurping Richard,
                     
                     Flying for Succour to his Servant Banister,
                     
                     Being distress'd, was by that Wretch betray'd,
                     
                        
And without Tryal fell: God's Peace be with him!
                     
                        Henry the Sev'nth succeeding, truly pitying
                     My Father's Loss, like a most royal Prince
                     Restor'd to me my Honours; and from Ruins,
                     Made my Name once more noble. Now his Son,
                     
                        Henry the Eighth, Life, Honour, Name, and all
                     That made me happy, at one Stroke has taken
                     For ever from the World. I had my Tryal,
                     And must needs say, a noble one; which makes me
                     A little happier than my wretched Father:
                     Yet thus far we are one in Fortune, both
                     Fell by our Servants, by those Men we lov'd:
                     A most unnatural and faithless Service!
                     Heav'n has an End in all: Yet, you that hear me,
                     This from a dying Man receive as certain:
                     Where you are lib'ral of your Loves and Coun-sels,
                     Be sure, you be not loose; those you make Friends,
                     And give your Hearts to, when they once per-ceive
                     The least Rub in your Fortunes, fall away
                     Like Water from ye, never found again
                     But where they mean to sink ye. All good People
                     Pray for me! I must leave ye, the last Hour
                     Of my long weary Life is come upon me;
                     Farewell! and when you would say some-thing sad,
                     
                        
Speak how I fell—I've done, and God for-give me.
                  
               
               The Divorce of Queen Catharine from King Henry the Eighth, makes one of the principal Incidents of this Play. Shakespear has here so closely copied Holingshed as well in the Facts as the Speeches of the chief Persons concerned in this Affair, that it will be necessary to tran-scribe the Passages both from the Historian and Poet, if we would judge of their Similarity.
               
                  
                     Holingshed, Page 906. "Ye have heard how the People talked a little before the Cardinal's going over into France the last Year, that the King was told by Dr. Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, and others, that his Marriage with Queen Kath-rine could not be good nor lawful. The Truth is, that whether this Doubt was first moved by the Cardinal, or by the said Longland, be-ing the King's Confessor, the King was not only brought in Doubts, whether it was a lawful Marriage or no; but also determined to have the Case examined, cleered, and adjudged, by Learning, Law, and sufficient Authority. The Cardinal verily was put in most Blame for this Scruple now cast into the King's Con-science, for the Hate he bore to the Emperor, because he would not grant to him the Arch-bishoprick of Toledo, for the which he was a Suiter; and therefore, he did not only pro-cure the King of England to join in Friendship with the French King, but also sought a Di-vorce betwixt the King and Queen, that the

King might have in Marriage the Dutchess of Alanson, Sister to the French King; and (as some have thought) he travelled in that Mat-ter with the French King at Amiens: But the Dutchess would not give Ear thereunto.
               But howsoever it came about, that the King was thus troubled in Conscience concerning his Marriage, this followed, that, like a wise and sage Prince, to have the Doubt clearly removed, he called together the best learned of the Realm, which were of several Opinions. Wherefore, he thought to know the Truth by indifferent Judges, lest, peradventure the Spa-niards, and other also in favour of the Queen, would say, that his own Subjects were not in-different Judges in this Behalf; and therefore, he wrote his Cause to Rome, and likewise sent to all the Universities in Italy and France, and to the great Clerks of all Christendome, to know their Opinions, and desired the Court of Rome to send into his Realm a Legate, which should be indifferent and of great and pro-found Judgment, to hear the Cause debated. At whose Request the whole Consistory of the College of Rome sent thither Laurence Cam-peius a Priest Cardinal, a Man of great Wit and Experience, which was sent hither before, in the tenth Year of this King, and with him was joined in Commission the Cardinal of York and Legate of England.
               
               This Cardinal came to London in October, and did intimate both to the King and Queen the Cause of his coming, which being known,

with a Sigh, that shook my whole Frame, if he knew the Lady for whose Sake that Music was performed.
               He answered, he did not, for there were so many fair and noble Ladies lived in that Street, that it was not easy to discover to which of them it was addressed.
               Finding he could not satisfy me in this particular, I lent my whole Attention again to the Voice of my unfaithful Lover, but ah! with different Sensations; for now my Soul was filled with the most gloomy Despair. The Morning dawn'd before this hateful Serenade was ended; I withdrew again to my Bed, and with a River of Tears bewailed my own Misfor-tune, and the Inconstancy of Don Felix.
               
               Great Part of the Day being wasted in this Manner, I rose, and putting on my Dis-guise, went out of my Lodging, wandering thro' the Streets, without any determined Design, yet anxiously wishing to see my perjured Lover.
               Chance brought me to the Gates of the Palace; I entered a broad paved Court that was before it, and beheld a great many La-dies, young, beautiful, and richly adorned, shewing themselves at the Windows to the young Noblemen, who were riding backwards and forwards below, and whose Eyes were differently directed, as the Objects of their Desires were placed.
               
                  

great Talk was had thereof. The Archbishop of Canterbury sent for the famous Doctors of both the Universities, to Lambeth; and there were every Day Disputations and Communings of this Matter. And because the King meant nothing but uprightly therein, and knew that the Queen was something wedded to her own Opinion, and wished that she should do no-thing without Counsel, he bad her choose the best Clerks of his Realme to be of her Coun-cel, and licenced them to do the best on her Part that they could, according to the Truth. Then she elected William Warham, Archbi-shop of Canterbury, and Nicholas West, Bishop of Elie, Doctors of the Laws; and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and Henry Standish, Bishop of St. Asaph, Doctors of Divinity; and many other Doctors and well-learned Men, which, for Surety, like Men of great Learn-ing, defended her Cause as far as Learning might maintain and hold it up.
               About this time was received into Favour Stephen Gardiner, whose Service he used in Matters of great Secrecy and Weight, admit-ting him in the room of Dr. Pace, the which being continually abroad in Ambassages, and the same oftentimes not much necessary, by the Cardinal's Appointment, at length he took such Grief therewith that he fell out of his right Wits.
               The Place where the Cardinals should sit to hear the Cause of Matrimony betwixt the King and Queen, was at the Black Friars in London;

where, in the great Hall was Preparation made of Seats, Tables, and other Furniture, according to such a solemn Session and royal Appearance. The Court was platted in Tables and Benches in manner of a Consistory, one Seat raised higher for the Judges to sit in; then, as it were in the midst of the said Judges, aloft above them three Degrees high, was a Cloth of State hanged, with a Chair royal un-der the same, wherein sat the King; and be-side him, some Distance from him, sat the Queen; and under the Judges Feet sat the Scribes and other Officers; the chief Scribe was Dr. Stevens, and the Caller of the Court was one Cooke of Winchester.
               
               Then, before the King and Judges, with-in the Court, sat the Archbishop of Canterbury, Warham, and all the other Bishops. Then stood at both Ends within, the Councellors learned in the spiritual Laws, as well the King's as the Queen's. The Doctors of Law for the King had their convenient Rooms: Thus was the Court furnished. The Judges commanded Silence whilst their Commission was read, both to the Court and to the People assembled; that done the Scribes commanded the Crier to call the King by the Name of, King Henry of England, come into the Court, &amp;c. with that the King answered and said, Here: Then called he the Queen, by the Name of, Kathrine Queen of England, come into the Court, &amp;c. who made no Answer, but rose out of her Chair.
               
                  
And because she could not come directly to the King for the Distance severed between them, she went about by the Court, and came to the King, kneeling down at his Feet; to whom she said in effect as followeth: Sir, I desire you to do me Justice and Right, and take some Pity on me, for I am a poor Wo-man, and Stranger born out of your Domi-nions, having here no indifferent Counccl, and less Assurance of Friendship. Alas, Sir, what have I offended you, or what Occasion of Displeasure have I shewed you, intending thus to put me from you after this Sort. I take God to my Judge, I have been to you a true and humble Wife, ever conformable to your Will, and Pleasure, that never contraried or gainsaid any thing thereof; and being al-ways contented with all things wherein you had any Delight, whether little or much, without Grudge or Displeasure; I loved, for your sake, all them whom you loved, whe-ther they were my Friends or Enemies. I have been your Wife these twenty Years and more, and you have had by me diverse Chil-dren; if there be any just Cause that you can allege against me, either of Dishonesty, or Matter lawful to put me from you, I am con-tent to depart, to my Shame and Rebuke; and if there be none, then I pray you to let me have Justice at your Hand. The King your Father was, in his time, of excellent Wit; and the King of Spain, Ferdinand my Father, was reckoned one of the wisest Princes that raigned in Spain many Years before; it is not

to be doubted, but that they had gathered as wise Councellors unto them of every Realme, as to their Wisdom they thought meet, who deemed the Marriage between you and me good and lawful: Wherefore, I humbly de-sire you to spare me, untill I may know what Councell my Friends in Spain will advertise me to take; and if you will not, then your Pleasure be fulfilled. With that she rose up, making a low Curtesie to the King, and de-parted from thence.
               The King being advertised that she was ready to go out of the House, commanded the Crier to call her again, who called her by these Words: Cathrine Queen of England come into the Court; with that (quoth Mr. Griffith) Madam you be called again. On on, quoth she, it maketh no Matter I will not tarry, go on your wayes, and thus she departed without any farther Answer at that Time, or any other, and never would appear after in any Court. The King, perceiving she was departed, said these Words in Effect: For as much, quoth he, as the Queen is gone, I will, in her Ab-sence declare to you all, that she hath been to me as true, as obedient, and as conformable a Wife, as I could Wish or Desire. She hath all the virtuous Qualities that ought to be in a Woman of her Dignity, or in any other of a baser Estate; she is also surely a noble Woman born, her Conditions will well declare the same.
               
                  
With that, quoth Wolsey the Cardinal, Sir I most humbly require your Highness, to de-clare, before all this Audience whether I have been the chief and first Mover of this Matter unto your Majesty or no, for I am greatly suspected herein. My Lord Cardinal, quoth the King, I can well excuse you in this Matter; Marrie, quoth he, you have rather been against me, in the tempting hereof than a Setter for-ward or Mover of the same. The special Cause that moved me unto this Matter, was a certain Scrupulosity that pricked my Con-science, upon ceriain Words spoken at a Time, when it was by the Bishop of Baion the French Ambassador, who had been hither sent upon the debating of a Marriage between our Daugh-ter the Lady Mary and the Duke of Orleance, second Son to the King of France. Upon the Resolution and Determination whereof, he desired Respite to advertise the King his Master thereof, whether our Daughter Mary, should legitimate in Respect of this my Marriage with this Woman, being sometime my Brother's Wife; which Words, once conceived within the secret Bottom of my Conscience, ingen-dered such a scrupulous Doubt, that my Con-science was incontinently accombred, vex-ed, disquieted; whereby I thought myself to be greatly in Danger of God's Indignation, which appeared to be (as to me seemed) the rather for that he fent us no issue Male, and all such Issues Male as my said Wife had by me, died incontinent after they came into the World, so I doubted the great Displeasure of God in

that behalf. Thus my Conscience being tossed in the Waves of a scrupulous Mind, and partly Despair to have any other Issue than I had al-ready by this Lady now my Wife, it behoved me further to consider the State of this Realm, and the Danger it stood in for lack of a Prince to succeed me: I thought it good, in Release of the weighty Burthen of my weak Conscience, and also the quiet Estate of this worthy Realm, to attempt the Law therein, whether I may lawfully take another Wife, by whom God may send me more Issue, in case this my first Copulation was not good, without any carnal Concupiscence, and not for any Displeasure or misliking of the Queen's Person and Age, with whom I would be as well contented to continue, if our Marriage may stand with the Laws of God, as with any alive. In this Point con-fisteth all this Doubt, that we go about now to trie, by the Learning, Wisdom and Judg-ment of you our Prelates and Pastors of all this our Realm and Dominions, now here assem-bled for that Purpose, to whose Conscience and Learning I have committed the Charge and Judgment, according to the which I will (God willing) be right well content to sub-mit myself, and, for my Part obey the same. Wherein after that I perceived my Conscience so doubtfull, I moved it in Confession to you my Lord of Lincoln then Ghostly Father, and for so much as then you yourself were in some Doubt, you moved me to ask the Councel of all these my Lords; whereupon I moved you my Lord of Canterbury first, to have your Li-cence, in as much as you were Metropolitan,

to put this Matter in Question, and so I did of all you my Lords, to which you granted under your Seals, here to be shewed. That is truth quoth the Archbishop of Canterbury. After that the King rose up; and the Court was adjourned untill another Day.
               Here is to be noted, that the Queen in Pre-sence of the whole Court, most greveously ac-cused the Cardinal of Untruth, Deceit, Wic-kedness and Malice, which had sowne Discen-tion betwixt her and the King her Husband; and therefore openly protested, that she did utterly abhore, refuse and forsake such a Judge, as was not only a most malicious Enemy to her, but also a manifest Adversarie to all Right and Justice, and therewith did she appeal unto the Pope, committing her whole Cause to be judg-ed by him. But notwithstanding this Appeal, the Legates sat weekly, and every Day were Argument on both Parts, and Proofes alleged for the understanding of the Case, and still they stayed if they could by any Means to pro-cure the Queen to call back her Appeal; which she utterly refused to do. The King would gladly have had an end in this Matter; but when the Legates drave Time, and determined upon no certain Point, he conceived a suspi-cion, that this was done of Purpose, that their doings might draw to none Effect or Conclu-sion."
               
                  

                  
                     
                        
                           SCENE, Black Fryars, &amp;c.
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Whilst our Commission from Rome is read
                              Let Silence be commanded.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              What's the need?
                              It hath already been read,
                              And all Sides th'Authority allow'd;
                              You may then spare that Time.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Be't so, proceed.
                           
                           
                              SCRIBE.
                              Say, Henry King of England come into the Court.
                           
                           
                              CRYER.
                              
                                 Henry King of England, &amp;c.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              Here.
                           
                           
                              SCRIBE.
                              Say, Cathrine Queen of England
                              
                              Come into the Court.
                           
                           
                              CRYER.
                              
                                 Cathrine Queen of England, &amp;c.
                           
                           The Queen wakes no Answer, rises out of her Chair, goes about the Court, comes to the King, kneels at his Feet, then speaks.
                           
                              

                              QUEEN.
                              Sir, I desire you do me Right and Justice;
                              And to bestow your Pity on me, for
                              I am a poor Woman, and a Stranger,
                              Born out of your Dominions, having here
                              No Judge indiff'rent, and no more Assurance
                              Of equal Friendship and Proceeding. Alas, Sir,
                              In what have I offended you? What Cause
                              Hath my Behaviour given to your Displeasure,
                              That you should thus proceed to put me off,
                              And take your good Grace from me? Heav'n witness
                              I've been to you a true and humble Wise,
                              At all times to you conformable:
                              Ever in fear to kindle your Dislike,
                              Yea subject to your Count'nance; glad or sorry
                              As I saw it inclin'd: When was the Hour
                              I ever contradicted your Desire,
                              Or made it not mine too? Which of your Friends
                              Have I not strove to love, although I knew
                              He were mine Enemy? What Friend of mine
                              That had to him deriv'd your Anger, did I
                              Continue in my Liking? Nay, gave Notice
                              He was from thence discharg'd. Sir, call to mind,
                              That I have been your Wife, in this Obedi-ence,
                              Upward of twenty Years; and have been blest
                              With many Children by you. If in the Course
                              And Process of this Time you can report
                              And prove it too, against mine Honour aught,
                              My Bond of Wedlock, or my Love and Duty,
                              Against your sacred Person; in God's Name
                              
                                 
Turn me away, and let the foul'st Contempt
                              Steek Door upon me, and so give me up
                              To the sharpest kind of Justice. Please you, Sir,
                              The King your Father, was reputed for
                              A Prince most prudent, of an excellent
                              And unmatch'd Wit and Judgment. Ferdinand
                              
                              My Father, King of Spain, was reckon'd one
                              The wisest Prince that there had reign'd, by many
                              A Year before. It is not to be question'd,
                              That they had gather'd a wise Council to them
                              Of ev'ry Realm, that did debate this Business,
                              Who deem'd our Marriage lawful. Wherefore humbly
                              Sir, I beseech you spare me, till I may
                              Be by my Friends in Spain advis'd, whose Counsel
                              I will implore. If not, i'th' Name of God,
                              Your Pleasure be fulfill'd.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              You have here, Lady,
                              (And of your Choice) these rev'rend Fathers, Men
                              Of singular Integrity and Learning:
                              Yea, the elect o' th' Land, who are assembled
                              To plead your Cause; it shall be therefore bootless
                              That longer you defer the Court, as well
                              For your own Quiet, as to rectify
                              What is unsettled in the King.
                           
                           
                              
While I continued standing near the Pa-lace-Gate in hopes of seeing Don Felix, whose new Mistress I did not doubt was amongst the Ladies there, I saw Fabius approach, and after speaking a few Words to the Porter that kept the second Entry, return, the same Way he came; my Heart beat with eager Expecta-tion; I imagined Don Felix was coming; I was not deceived, he came attended with se-veral Servants, all dressed in rich Liveries of yellow Velvet, with white and blue Feathers in their Hats; my Lover himself was drest with the utmost Exactness, and wore Feathers of the same Colours in his Hat.
               As soon as he arrived at the Palace-Gate, he dismounted, and went up the Stairs that led to the Chamber of Presence.
               The Extreams of Joy and Grief in which my Soul was tost at that transient View of him, whom I so passionately loved, and whose Falshood I so tenderly lamented, kept me a long Time motionless in the Place where I stood.
               At last recovering myself a little, I ob-served Fabius waiting his coming out with the rest of his Attendants, and stepping up to him, I drew him aside, and asked him who that Nobleman was that had just entered the Palace."
               Thou must beeds be a Stranger here, re-plied he, if thou knowest not Don Felix; why,

                              CAMPEIUS.
                              His Grace
                              Hath spoken well and justly; therefore, Ma-dam,
                              It's fit this Royal Session do proceed;
                              And that, without Delay, their Arguments
                              Be now produced, and heard.
                           
                           
                              QUEEN.
                              Lord Cardinal,
                              To you I speak.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Your Pleasure, Madam?
                           
                           
                              QUEEN.
                              Sir,
                              I am about to weep; but thinking that
                              We are a Queen, or long have dream'd so; certain
                              The Daughter of a King; my Drops of Tears
                              I'll turn to Sparks of Fire.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Be patient yet.—
                           
                           
                              QUEEN.
                              I will, when you are humble: Nay, before;
                              Or God will punish me. I do believe,
                              Induc'd by potent Circumstances, that
                              You are mine Enemy and make my Challenge;
                              You shall not be my Judge. For it is you
                              Have blown this Coal betwixt my Lord and me;
                              Which God's due quench! therefore, I say again,
                              
                                 
I utterly abhor, yea from my Soul
                              Refuse you for my Judge; whom yet once more
                              I hold my most malicious Foe, and think not
                              At all a Friend to truth.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              I do profess,
                              You speak not like yourself; who ever yet
                              Have stood to charity, and display'd the Effects
                              Of Disposition gentle, and of Wisdom
                              O'er topping Woman's Power. Madam you wrong me,
                              I have no Spleen against you, nor Injustice
                              For you, or any; how far I've proceeded,
                              Or how far further shall, is warranted
                              By a Commission from the Consistory.
                              Yea, the whole Consist'ry of Rome. You charge me
                              That I have blown this Coal; I do deny it.
                              The King is present: if't be known to him
                              That I gainsay my Deed, how may he wound
                              And worthily, my Falshood? Yea, as much
                              As you have done my Truth. But if he know
                              That I am free of your Report, he knows
                              I am not of your Wrong. Therefore in him
                              It lyes to cure me, and the Cure is to
                              Remove these Thoughts from you. The which before
                              His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
                              You, gracious Madam, to unthink your speaking
                              And to say no more.
                           
                           
                              

                              QUEEN.
                              My Lord, my Lord,
                              I am a simple Woman, much too weak
                              T' oppose your cunning. You are meek and humble mouth'd,
                              You sign your Place, and Calling, in full seeming
                              With meekness and humility; but your Heart
                              Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen and pride.
                              You have by Fortune, and his Highness' Fa-vour
                              Gone slightly o'er low Steps; and now are mounted
                              Where Power's are your Retainers, and your Words
                              Domesticks to you, serve your Will, as't please
                              Your self pronounce their Office. I must tell you
                              You tender more your Person's Honour, than
                              Your high Profession Spiritual: That again
                              I do refuse you for my Judge: And here,
                              Before you all appeal unto the Pope,
                              To bring my whole Cause 'fore his Holiness,
                              And to be judg'd by him.
                           
                           She curtisies to the King and offers to depart.
                           
                              CAMPEIUS.
                              The Queen is obstinate,
                              Stubborn to Justice, apt t'accuse it, and
                              Disdainful to be try'd by't; 'tis not well.
                              She's going away.
                           
                           
                              

                              KING.
                              Call her again.
                           
                           
                              CRIER.
                              
                                 Cathrine, Queen of England, come into the Court.
                           
                           
                              USHER.
                              Madam, you are call'd back.
                           
                           
                              QUEEN.
                              What, need you note it, pray you keep your Way,
                              When you are call'd return. Now the Lord help,
                              They vex me past my Patience— Pray you pass on
                              I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
                              Upon this Business my Appearance make
                              In any of their Courts.
                           
                           
                              Exeunt Queen and her Attendants.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              Go thy ways, Kate;
                              That Man i'th'World who shall report he has
                              A better Wife, let him in nought be trusted
                              For speaking false in that. Thou art alone
                              (If thy rare Qualities, sweet Gentleness,
                              Thy Meekness, Saint-like, Wife-like Go-vernment,
                              Obeying in commanding, and thy Parts
                              Sovereign, and pious else, could speak thee out)
                              The Queen of earthly Queens, she's nobly born,
                              
                                 
And like her true Nobility, she has
                              Carried herself towards me.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Most gracious Sir,
                              In humblest Manner I require your Highness,
                              That it shall please you to declare, in hearing
                              Of all these Ears (for where I'm robb'd and bound
                              There must I be unloos'd; altho' not there
                              At once, and fully satisfied) if I
                              Did broach this Business to your Highness, or
                              Laid any Scruple in your Way, which might
                              Induce you to the Question on't: or ever
                              Have to you, but with Thanks to God for such
                              A Royal Lady, speak one the least Word
                              That might be Prejudice of her present State,
                              Or Touch of her good Person?
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              My Lord Cardinal
                              I do excuse you; yea, upon mine Honour
                              I free you from't: You are not to be taught
                              That you have many Enemies, that know not
                              Why they are so; but like the Village Curs
                              Bark when their Fellows do. By some of these
                              The Queen is put in Anger, y'are excus'd:
                              But will you be more justified? You ever
                              Have wish'd the sleeping of this Business, never
                              Desir'd it to be stirr'd; but oft have hindred
                              The Passages made tow'rds it:—On my Ho-nour
                              I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this Point;
                              
                                 
And thus far clear him. Now what mov'd me to't
                              I will be bold with Time and your Attention:
                              Then mark th'Inducement. Thus it came; give heed to't.
                              My Conscience first receiv'd a Tenderness,
                              Scruple, and Prick, on certain Speeches utter'd
                              By the Bishop of Bayon, then French Ambassa-dor,
                              Who had been hither sent on the debating
                              A Marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and
                              Our Daughter Mary: I' th' Progress of this Business,
                              Ere a determinate Resolution, he
                              (I mean the Bishop) did require a Respite;
                              Wherein he might the King his Lord advertise
                              Whether our Daughter were legitimate
                              Respecting this our Marriage with the Dowager
                              Some time our Brother's Wife. This Respite shook
                              The Bottom of my Conscience, enter'd me,
                              Yea, with a splitting Power; and made to tremble
                              The Region of my Breast; which forc'd such way,
                              That many maz'd Considerings did throng
                              And press'd in with this Caution. First, me-thought
                              I stood not in the Smile of Heav'n, which had
                              Commanded Nature, that my Lady's Womb
                              (If it conceiv'd a Male Child by me) should
                              Do no more Offices of Life to't, than
                              The Grave does to the Dead; for her Male Issue
                              Or died where they were made, or shortly after
                              
                                 
This World had air'd them. Hence I took a Thought
                              This was a Judgment on me, that my King-dom
                              (Well worthy the best Heir o'th'World) should not
                              Be gladded in't by me. Then follows, that
                              I weigh'd the Danger which my Realms stood in
                              By this my Issue's Fail; and that gave to me
                              Many a groaning Throe: Thus hulling in
                              The wild Sea of my Conscience, I did steer
                              Towards this Remedy, whereupon we are
                              Now present here together, that's to say,
                              I mean to rectify my Conscience (which
                              I then did feel full sick, and yet not well;)
                              By all the rev'rend Fathers of the Land
                              And Doctors learn'd. First, I began in private
                              With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remem-ber,
                              How under my Oppression I did reek.
                              When I first mov'd you.
                           
                           
                              LINCOLN.
                              Very well, my Liege.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              I have spoke long; be pleas'd yourself to say
                              How far you satisfied me.
                           
                           
                              LINCOLN.
                              Please your Highness,
                              The Question did at first so stagger me,
                              Bearing a Stake of mighty Moment in't,
                              And Consequence of Dread, that I committed
                              The daring'st Counsel, which I had, to doubt,
                              
                                 
And did intreat your Highness to this Course
                              Which you are running here.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              I then mov'd you
                              My Lord of Canterbury, and got your Leave
                              To make this present Summons: Unsollicited
                              I left no rev'rend Person in this Court,
                              But, by particular Consent, proceeded
                              Under your Hands and Seals. Therefore go on;
                              For no Dislike i' th' World against the Person
                              Of our good Queen, but the sharp thorny Points
                              Of my alledged Reasons drive this forward.
                              Prove but our Marriage lawful, by my Life
                              And kingly Dignity, we are contented
                              To wear our mortal State to come, with her
                              
                                 (Cath'rine our Queen) before the primest Crea-ture
                              That's paragon'd i'th'World.
                           
                           
                              CAMPEIUS.
                              So please your Highness,
                              The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful Fitness
                              That we adjourn this Court to further Day;
                              Mean while must be an earnest Motion
                              Made to the Queen, to call back her Appeal
                              She intends to his Holiness.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              I may perceive
                              These Cardinals trifle with me, I abhor
                              This dilatory Sloth, and Tricks of Rome.
                              
                              My learn'd and well-beloved Servant Cranmer,
                              
                              Pr'ythee return, with thy Approach I know
                              
                                 
My Comfort comes along. Break up the Court
                              I say, set on. Exeunt.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               The Visit which the Popes Legate, Cardinal Campeius, and Cardinal Wolsey make to the Queen, her Reception of them, and the Dis-course that past amongst them, is not less closely copied.
               
                  Page 908. "The next Court Day, the Cardinals sat again, at which Time the Councel on both sides, were there ready to answer. The King's Councel alledged the Matrimony not to be lawful at the Beginning, because of the carnal Copulation had between Prince Arthur and the Queen. This Matter was very vehe-mently touched on that Side; and, to prove it, they alledged many Reasons and Similitudes of Truth; and being answered negatively again on the other Side, it seemed that all their former Allegations were doubtful to be tried, and that no Man knew the Truth, and thus this Court passed from Sessions to Sessions, and Day to Day, till at certain of their Sessions the King sent the two Cardinals to the Queen (who was then in Bridwell) to persuade with her by their Wisdoms, and to advise her to surrender the whole Matter into the King's Hands, by her own Consent and Will, which should be much better to her Honour, than to stand to the Tryal of Law, and thereby to be con-demned, which should seem much to her Dishonour.
               
                  
The Cardinal being in the Queen's Chamber of Presence, the Gentleman Usher advertised the Queen that the Cardinals were come to speak with her, with that she rose up, and with a Skeine of white Thread about her Neck, came into her Chamber of Presence, where the Cardinals were attending. At whose coming, quoth she, what is your Pleasure with me? If it please your Grace, quoth Cardinal Wolsey, to go into your Privy Chamber we will shew the Cause of our coming. My Lord, quoth she, if ye have any Thing to say, speak it openly before all these Folk, for I fear nothing you can say against me, but that I would have all the World should hear and see it, and therefore speak your Mind. Then began the Cardinal to speak to her in Latine. Nay, good my Lord, quoth she, speak to me in English.
               
               Forsooth (quoth the Cardinal) good Ma-dam, if it please you, we come both to know your Mind, how you are disposed to do in this Matter between the King and you, and also to declare secretely our Opinions and Councels unto you, which we do only for very Zeal and Obedience we bear unto your Grace. My Lord, quoth she, I thank you for your good Will, but to make you Answer in your Request I cannot so suddenly; for I was set among my Maids at Work, thinking full little of any such Matter, wherein there needeth a longer Deliberation, and a better Head than mine to make Answer, for I need Councell in this Call which touches me so near, and for any Coun-cell

            CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
            
               
                  THE Fable of the Two Gentlemen of Verona. Page 1
               
                  The Story of Troilus and Cressida, from Chaucer. Page 55
               
                  The Fable of Troilus and Cressida. Page 89
               
                  The Plan of K. Richard the Second. Page 101
               
                  The Plan of the First Part of Henry the Fourth. Page 123
               
                  The Life of King Henry the Fifth. Page 127
               
                  The First Part of King Henry the Sixth. Page 143
               
                  The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth. Page 153
               
                  The Third Part of King Henry the Sixth. Page 155
               
                  The Life and Death of King Richard the Third. Page 163
               
                  The Life and Death of King Henry the Eighth. Page 171
               
                  

Youth, I tell thee, there is not any Nobleman in the Court better known than Don Felix.
               
               It may be so, said I, but I am a Stranger, and would be glad to be informed if he has any particular Reason for giving Liveries of these Colours.
               If it were not so well known, replied he, I would conceal it, but since any other Person can acquaint thee with it as well as myself, I'll tell thee the Reason; he loves a Lady of this City, named Celia, and 'tis her Colours that he wears.
               My wounded Heart bled afresh at this Confirmation of my Unhappiness, yet I dis-sembled my Emotion, and continued talking to the Page about his Master's Passion, from whom I gathered that the Lady did not receive it with any Marks of Kindness.
               This Assurance animated my drooping Spirits, I pursued the Conversation, and Fa-bius following the Custom of Pages, very freely acquainted me with all his Master's Affairs, from which making a quick Transi-tion to mine, he asked me my Name, Coun-try and Condition.
               I told him my Name was Valerius, my Country, Vandalia, and that as yet I had served no Person.
               
                  Fabius being desirous, as I was his Countryman, to have me for a Fellow-servant,

or Friendship that I can find in England, they are not for my Profit, what think you my Lords, will any Englishman Councell me, or be Friend to me against the King's Pleasure, that is his Subject? Nay forsooth, and as for Councell, in whom I will put my trust, they be not here, they be in Spain, in my own Country. And my Lords, I am a poor Wo-man lacking Wit, to answer to any such Noble Persons of Wisdom as you be, in so weighty a Matter, therefore I pray you be good to me poor Woman, destitute of Friends, here in a foreign Region, and your Councell also I will be glad to hear. And therewith she took the Cardinal by the Hand, and led him into her privy Chamber with the other Cardinal, where they tarried a Season talking with the Queen, which Communication ended, they departed to the King, making to him Rela-tion of her Talk. Thus this Case went for-ward from Court to Court, till it came to Judgment, so that every one expected that Judgment would be given the next Day. At which Day the King came thither, and set him. down in a Chair, within a Door in the End of the Gallery (which opened directly against the Judgment Seat, to hear the Judgment given, at which Time all their Proceedings were read in Latine.
               
               That done the King's Councell at the Bar called for Judgment (with that quoth Cardinal Campeius) I will not give Judgment till I have made Relation to the Pope of all our Proceed-ings, whose Councell and Commandment in

this Case I will observe. The Case is very doubtful, and also the Party Defendant will make no Answer here but doth rather Appeal from us, supposing that we be not indifferent, wherefore I will adjourn this Court for this Time, according to the Order of the Court of Rome. And with that the Court was dissolved and no more done. This potracting of the Conclusion of the Matter, King Henry took very displeasantly. Then Cardinal Campeius took his Leave of the King and Nobility and returned to Rome."
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ACT III.
                           
                              
                                 SCENE, the Queen's Apartment. The Queen and her Women as at Work.
                              Enter a Gentleman.
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 How now?
                              
                              
                                 GENT.
                                 An't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
                                 Wait in the Presence.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Would they speak with me?
                              
                              
                                 GENT.
                                 They will'd me say so, Madam.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Pray their Graces
                                 To come near; what can be their Business
                                 
                                    
With me, a poor weak Woman fall'n from Favour?
                                 I do not like their coming. Now I think on't,
                                 They should be good Men, their Affairs as righteous,
                                 But all Hoods make not Monks.
                              
                              
                                 Enter the Cardinals, Wolsey and Campeius,
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Peace to your Highness.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Your Graces find me here Part of a House-wife,
                                 (I would be all) against the worst may happen.
                                 What are your Pleasures with me rev'rend Lords.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 May'st please you, noble Madam, to withdraw
                                 Into your private Chamber; we shall give you
                                 The full Cause of our coming.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Speak it here,
                                 There's nothing I have done yet, o'my Con-science
                                 Deserves a Corner; would all other Women
                                 Could speak this with as free a Soul as I do:
                                 My Lords I care not (so much I am happy
                                 Above a Number) if my Actions
                                 Were try'd by ev'ry Tongue, ev'ry Eye saw 'em
                                 Envy and base Opinion set against 'em;
                                 I know my Life so even. If your Business
                                 
                                    
Do seek me out; and that way I am wise in,
                                 Out with it boldly, truth loves open dealing.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 
                                    Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, Regina Se-renissima.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 O my good Lord, no Latin;
                                 I am not such a Truant, since my coming
                                 As not to know the Language I have liv'd in,
                                 A strange Tongue makes my Cause more strange, suspicious:
                                 Pray speak in English, here are some will thank you
                                 If you speak truth, for their poor Mistress' sake:
                                 Believe me, she has had much wrong, Lord Cardinal,
                                 The willing'st Sin I ever yet committed
                                 May be absolv'd in English.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Noble Lady,
                                 I'm sorry my Integrity should breed
                                 (And service to his Majesty and you)
                                 So deep Suspicion, where all Faith was meant.
                                 We come not by the way of Accusation
                                 To taint that Honour, every good Tongue blesses;
                                 Nor to betray you any way to Sorrow;
                                 You have too much, good Lady: But to know
                                 How you stand minded in the weighty Dif-ference
                                 Between the King and you, and to deliver
                                 
                                    
Like free and honest Men, our just Opinions
                                 And comforts to your Cause.
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 Most honour'd Madam,
                                 My Lord of York out of his noble Nature
                                 Zeal and Obedience he still bore your Grace,
                                 Forgetting, like a good Man, your late Censure
                                 Both of his Truth and him (which was too far)
                                 Offers, as I do, in a Sign of Peace
                                 His Service and his Counsel.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 To betray me.
                                 My Lords, I thank you both for your Good-wills.
                                 Ye speak like honest Men; pray God ye prove so,
                                 But how to make you suddenly an Answer
                                 In such a Point of Weight, so near mine Ho-nour,
                                 (More near my Life, I fear) with my weak Wit
                                 And to such Men of Gravity and Learning,
                                 In Truth, I know not. I was set at work
                                 Among my Maids; full little, God knows, looking
                                 Either for such Men, or such Business,
                                 For her Sake that I have been (for I feel
                                 The last Fit of my Greatness) good your Graces,
                                 Let me have Time and Council for my Cause;
                                 Alas! I am a Woman, friendless, hopeless.
                              
                              
                                 

                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Madam, you wrong the King's Love with those Fears:
                                 Your Hopes and Friends are infinite.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 In England,
                                 
                                 But little for my Profit, can you think, Lords
                                 That any Englishman dare give me Counsel?
                                 Or be a known Friend 'gainst his Highness' Pleasure
                                 (Though he be grown so desp'rate to be honest)
                                 And live a Subject? Nay, forsooth, my Friends,
                                 They that must weigh out my Afflictions,
                                 They that my Trust must grow to, live not here;
                                 They are, as all my Comforts are, far hence
                                 In my own Country, Lords.
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 I would your Grace
                                 Would leave your Griefs, and take my Coun-sel.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 How Sir?
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 Put your main Cause into the King's Protection;
                                 He's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much
                                 Both for your Honour better, and your Cause;
                                 For if the Tryal of the Law o'ertake you,
                                 You'll part away disgrac'd.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 He tells you rightly.
                              
                              
                                 

                                 QUEEN.
                                 Ye tell me what ye wish for both, my Ruin:
                                 Is this your Christian Counsel? Out upon ye,
                                 Heav'n is above all yet; there sits a Judge,
                                 That no King can corrupt.
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 Your Rage mistakes us.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 The more shame for ye, holy Men I thought ye
                                 Upon my Soul, two rev'rend Cardinal Vertues;
                                 But Cardinal Sins, and hollow-Hearts, I fear ye:
                                 Mend 'em for Shame, my Lords, is this your Comfort?
                                 The Cordial that you bring a wretched Lady?
                                 A Woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?
                                 I will not wish you half my Miseries
                                 I have more Charity. But say I warn'd ye;
                                 Take heed, take heed, for Heaven's Sake, lest at once
                                 The Burthen of my Sorrows fall upon ye.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Madam this is a meer Distraction,
                                 You turn the Good we offer into Envy.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye
                                 And all such false Professors; would you have me
                                 (If you have any Justice, any Pity,
                                 If ye be any thing but Church Mens Habits)
                                 
                                    
Put my sick Cause into his Hands that hates me?
                                 Alas! h'as banish'd me his Bed already;
                                 His love, too long ago, I'm old my Lords;
                                 And all the Fellowship I hold now with him
                                 Is only my Obedience. What can happen
                                 To me, above this wretchedness? all your Studies
                                 Make me a curse, like this.
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 Your Fears are worse.—
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Have I liv'd thus long (let me speak myself
                                 Since virtue finds no Friends) a Wife, a true one?
                                 A Woman [I dare say without vain Glory]
                                 Never yet branded with Suspicion;
                                 Have I with all my full Affections
                                 Still met the King, lov'd him, next Heav'n obey'd him;
                                 Been, out of Fondness, superstitious to him,
                                 Almost forgot my Prayers to content him;
                                 And am I thus rewarded? 'tis not well, Lords.
                                 Bring me a constant Woman to her Husband,
                                 One, that ne'er dream'd a Joy beyond his Plea-sure;
                                 And to that Woman, when she has done most,
                                 Yet will I add an Honour, a great Patience.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
                              
                              
                                 

                                 QUEEN.
                                 My Lord, I dare not make myself so guilty,
                                 To give up willingly that noble Title
                                 Your Master wed me to, nothing but Death
                                 Shall e'er divorse my Dignities.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 Pray hear me.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Would I had never trod this English Earth,
                                 Or felt the Flatteries that grow upon it;
                                 Ye've Angels' Faces, but Heav'n knows your Hearts.
                                 What shall become of me now! wretched Lady!
                                 I am the most unhappy Woman living.
                                 Alas! poor Wenches, where are now your Fortunes?To her Women.
                                 
                                 Ship-wreck'd upon a Kingdom, where no Pity.
                                 No Friends, no Hope, no Kindred weep for me,
                                 Almost no Grave allow'd me! Like the Lilly,
                                 That once was Mistress of the Field and flou-rish'd,
                                 I'll hang my Head and perish.
                              
                              
                                 WOLSEY.
                                 If your Grace
                                 Could not be brought to know our Ends are honest,
                                 You'd feel more comfort, why should we, good Lady,
                                 Upon what Cause wrong you▪ alas! our Places
                                 
                                    
The Way of our Profession is against it:
                                 We are to ear such Sorrows, not to sow 'em,
                                 For Goodness' sake, consider what you do,
                                 How you may hurt yourself, nay, utterly
                                 Grow from the King's Acquaintance, by this Carriage.
                                 The Hearts of Princes kiss Obedience,
                                 So much they love; but to stubborn Spirits,
                                 They swell and grow as terrible as Storms.
                                 I know you have a gentle, noble Temper,
                                 A Soul as even as a Calm; pray think us
                                 Those we profess, Peace make us, Friends and Servants.
                              
                              
                                 CAMPEIUS.
                                 Madam, you'll find it so; you wrong your Virtues
                                 With these weak Women's Fears. A noble Spirit
                                 As yours was put into you, ever casts
                                 Such Doubts, as false Coin, from it; the King loves you,
                                 Beware you lose it not; for us, if you please
                                 To trust us in your Business, we are ready
                                 To use our utmost Studies in your Service.
                              
                              
                                 QUEEN.
                                 Do what you will, my Lords, and pray forgive me
                                 If I have us'd myself unmannerly.
                                 You know, I am a Woman lacking Wit
                                 To make a seemly Answer to such Persons.
                                 Pray do my Service to his Majesty.
                                 He has my Heart yet; and shall have my Prayers
                                 While I shall have my Life. Come, rev'rend Fathers,
                                 
                                    

told me, that his Lord had ordered him to enquire for a Page for him, and that he would recommend me, provided it was agreea-ble to my Inclination: this Proposal I imme-diately accepted, as it afforded me the Means of seeing my Don Felix every Day.
               
                  Fabius having mentioned me to him, he ordered my Attendance on him that Evening, and being pleased with my Appearance, hired me immediately. Alas, this Situation was productive of new Miseries, for now I was a Witness, a mournful Witness to the Mes-sages, Letters, and Presents that were daily sent my Rival.
               "After I had been a Month in his Ser-vice, Don Felix, who had conceived an ex-traordinary Liking for me, communicated to me the whole Story of his Passion for Celia, and gave me a Letter for her, which he charged me to deliver, if possible, into her own Hands. Judge, charming Nymphs, if this Commission was not painful, yet I undertook it, and pro-curing an Audience of the Lady, presented her the Letter: Celia looking fixedly upon me, re-ceived the Letter, as it should seem, without knowing what she did. She blushed, and grew pale alternately, and not able for several Mi-nutes to remove her Eyes from my Face, she gazed on me with such a visible Emotion, that I plainly perceived my Sight had caused some great Alteration in her Heart.
               
                  
Bestow your Counsels on me. She now begs
                                 That little Thought, when she set Footing here
                                 She should have bought her Dignities so dear.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Shakespear makes the King first see Anna Bullen at a Banquet given by Cardinal Wolsey. There seems to be some little Absurdity in this Incident; for Anna Bullen being, as the Lord Chamberlain afterwards tells the King, one of the Queen's Attendants, it can hardly be sup-posed that he never saw her before. This Ban-quet is at large described by Holingshed. Shake-spear follows him closely in several of the Cir-cumstances, as well as the Discourse that passed between the King and some of the Persons pre-sent.
               "On a time, says Holingshed, Page 921, the King came suddenly thither in a Mask, with a Dozen Maskers, all in Garments like Shepherds, made of fine Cloth of Gold, and Crimson Sattin paned, and Caps of the same, with Vizards of good Physnomie, their Hair and Beards either of fine Gold-wire, Silk, or Black Silk, having sixteen Torch-bearers, be-sides their Drums, and other Persons with their Vizards, all cloathed in Sattin of the same Co-lour, and before his entering into the Hall, he came by Water to the Water-gate without Noise, where were laid diverse Chambers and Guns charged with Shot, and at his Landing they were shot off, which made such a Rumble in the Air that it was like Thunder, it made all the Noblemen, Ladies, and Gentlemen to muse what it should mean, coming so sudden-ly, they sitting quiet at a solemn Banquet after

this Sort. First, you shall understand that the Tables were set in the Chamber of Presence, just covered, and the Lord Cardinal sitting un-der a Cloth of State, there having all his Ser-vice alone, and was there set a Lady with a Nobleman, or a Gentleman and a Gentlewo-man throughout all the Tables in the Chamber on the one Side, which were made and joined as it were but one Table, all which order and devise was done by the Lord Sanders, then Lord Chamberlain to the King, and by Sir Henry Guildford, Comptroller of the King's House. Then immediately after the Great Chamberlain, and the said Comptroller, sent to look what it should mean (as though they knew nothing of the Matter) who looking out of the Windows into the Thames, returned again and shewed him, that it seemed they were Noblemen and Strangers that arrived at his Bridge, coming as Ambassadors from some fo-reign Prince, With that, quoth the Cardinal, I desire you because you can speak French, to take the Pains to go into the Hall, there to receive them according to their Estates, and to conduct them into this Chamber, where they shall see us, and all these noble Personages, being merry at our Banquet desiring them to sit down with us, and to take part of our Fare. Then went down incontinently into the Hall, where they were received with twenty new Torches, and conveyed them up into the Chamber with such a noise of Drums and Flutes, as seldom had been heard the like. At their entring into the Chamber two and two together, they went directly towards the Car-dinal,

where he sat, and saluted him reve-rently. To whom the Lord Chamberlain for them said; Sir, for as much as they be Stran-gers, and can not speak English, they have de-sired me to declare unto you, that having un-derstanding of this triumphant Banquet, where was assembled such a Number of excellent Dames, they could do no less under support of your Grace, but to repair hither, to view as well their incomparable Beauty, as for to ac-company them at Mum-chance, and then to Dance with them; and, Sir, they require of your Grace, Licence to accomplish the said Cause of their coming. To whom the Car-dinal said, he was very well content they should do so. Then went the Maskers, and first saluted all the Dames, and returned to the most worthy, and there opened their great Cup of Gold filled with Crowns and other Pieces of Gold, to whom they set certain Pieces of Gold to cast at. Thus perusing all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, to some they lost, and of some they won; and marking after this Man-ner all the Ladies, they returned to the Cardi-nal with great Reverence, powring down all the Gold so left in their Cup, which was a-bout two Hundred Crowns. At all quoth the Cardinal, and so cast the Dice and wone them, whereat was made a great Noise and Joy. Then, quoth the Cardinal to the Lord Chamberlain. I pray you, that you would shew them, that me seemeth there should be a Nobleman amongst them, who is more meet to occupy this Seat and Place than I am, to

whom I would most gladly surrender the same according to my Duty, if I knew him.
               Then spake the Lord Chamberlain to them in French, and they rounding him in the Ear, the Chamberlain said unto my Lord Cardinal, Sir quoth he, they confess, that among them there is such a noble Personage, whom if your Grace can point him out from the rest, he is content to disclose himself, and accept your Place. With that the Cardinal taking good Advisement among them, at the last quoth he, me seemeth the Gentleman with the black Beard, should be he, and with that rose out of his Chair, and offered the same to the Gentle-man in the black Beard with his Cap in his Hand. The Person to whom he offered the Chair was Sir Edward Nevill, a comely Knight, that much more resembled the King's Person in that Mask than any other. The King per-ceiving the Cardinal so deceived, could not forbear laughing, but pulling down his Visar and Mr. Nevill's also, and dashed out such a pleasant Countenance and Cheere, that all the noble Estates there assembled perceiving the King to be there among them, rejoiced very much."
               
                  

                  
                     
                        
                           SCENE York House.
                           
                              Hautboys. A small Table under a State for the Cardinal, a long Table for the Guests. Then enter Anne Bullen, and divers other Ladies and Gentlewomen, as Guests, at one Door; at another Door enter Sir Henry Guildford.
                           
                              GUILDFORD,
                              Ladies, a general Welcome for his Grace
                              Salutes ye all: This Night he dedicates
                              To fair Content and you: None here, he hopes,
                              In all this noble Bevy, has brought with her
                              One Care abroad; he would have all as merry
                              As, first good Company, good Wine, could welcome,
                              Can make good People.
                              
                                 Enter Lord Chamberlain, Lord Sands and Lovell.
                              O my Lord, y'are tardy;
                              The very Thoughts of this fair Company,
                              Clap'd Wings to me.
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              You're young, Sir Harry Guildford.
                              
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
                              But half my lay-Thoughts in him, some of these
                              Should find a running Banquet, ere they rested:
                              
                                 
I think, would better please 'em: by my Life,
                              They are a sweet Society of fair Ones.
                           
                           
                              LOVELL.
                              O, that your Lordship were but now Con-fessor
                              To one or two of these.
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              I would, I were;
                              They should find easy Penance,
                           
                           
                              LOVELL.
                              'Faith, how easy?
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              As easy as a down Bed would afford it.
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Sweet Ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry
                              
                              Place you that side, I'll take the Charge of this:
                              His Grace is ent'ring; nay, you must not freeze;
                              Two Women, plac'd together, make cold Weather.
                              My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking,
                              Pray, sit between these Ladies.
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              By my faith,
                              And thank your Lordship. By your leave, sweet Ladies,
                              If I chance to talk a little Wild, forgive me:
                              I had it from my Father.
                           
                           
                              

                              ANNE.
                              Was he mad, Sir?
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              O, very mad, exceeding mad, in Love too.
                              But he would bite none; just as I do now
                              He'd Kiss you twenty with a Breath.
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Well said, my Lord:
                              So now y'are fairly seated: Gentlemen,
                              The Penance lyes on you, if these fair Ladies
                              Pass away frowning.
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              For my little Cure
                              Let me alone,
                           
                           
                              Hautboys, Enter Cardinal Wolsey and takes his State.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Y'are welcome, my fair Guests: that noble Lady
                              Or Gentleman that is not freely merry
                              Is not my Friend. This, to confirm my wel-come:
                              And to you all good Health. Drinks.
                              
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              Your Grace is noble;
                              Let me have such a Bowl may hold my thanks
                              And save me so much talking.
                           
                           
                              

                              WOLSEY.
                              My Lord Sands,
                              
                              I am beholden to you, cheer your Neighbour;
                              Ladies, you are not merry; Gentlemen,
                              Whose Fault is this?
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              The red Wine first must rise
                              In their fair Cheeks, my Lord, then we shall have 'em
                              Talk us to silence.
                           
                           
                              ANNE.
                              You're a merry Gamester,
                              My Lord Sands.
                              
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              Yes, and if I make my Play:
                              Here's to your Ladyship, and pledge it, Madam:
                              For 'tis to such a Thing.—
                           
                           
                              ANNE.
                              You cannot shew me.
                           
                           
                              SANDS.
                              I told your Grace that they would talk anon.
                           
                           Drums and Trumpets, Chambers discharg'd.
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              What's that?
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Look out there some of ye,
                           
                           
                              

                              WOLSEY.
                              What warlike Voice,
                              And to what end is this? nay, Ladies, fear not;
                              By all the Laws of War y'are privileged.
                           
                           Enter a Servant.
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              How now, what is't?
                           
                           
                              SERVANT.
                              A noble Troop of Strangers,
                              For so they seem, have left their Barge and landed;
                              And hither make, as great Ambassadors
                              From foreign Princes.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Good Lord Chamberlain,
                              Go, give 'em welcome, you can speak the French Tongue.
                              And, pray receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em
                              Into our Presence, where this Heav'n of Beauty
                              Shall shine at full upon them, some attend.
                              All rise, and Tables removed.
                              You've now a broken Banquet, but we'll mend it.
                              A good Digestion to you all, and once more
                              I showre a Welcome on ye, welcome all.
                              Enter King and others, as Maskers, habited like Shepherds usher'd by the Lord Cham-berlain. They pass directly before the Lord Cardinal, and gracefully Salute him.
                              
                                 
A noble Company! what are their Pleasures?
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd
                              To tell your Grace, that having heard by Fame
                              Of this so noble and so fair Assembly,
                              This Night to meet here, they could do no less
                              Out of the great Respect they bear to beauty,
                              But leave their Flocks, and under your fair Conduct
                              Crave leave to view these Ladies, and intreat
                              An Hour of Revels with 'em.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Say, Lord Chamberlain,
                              They've done my poor House Grace: for which I pay 'em
                              A thousand Thanks, and pray 'em, take their Pleasures.
                           
                           
                              Chuse Ladies, King and Anne Bullen.
                           
                              KING.
                              The fairest Hand I ever touch'd! O Beauty
                              Till now I never knew thee. Musick. Dance.
                              
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              My Lord.—
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Your Grace.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Pray tell 'em thus much from me.
                              There should be one amongst 'em by his Person
                              
                                 
Recovering herself, at length she opened the Letter, and hastily glancing it over, threw it aside, and again directed her Looks to me."
               Fortune, said she, after a little Pause, has been very favourable to Don Felix, in bring-ing thee to this Court to be his Page."
               And to me also, Madam, said I, by giv-ing me an Opportunity of seeing a Lady, whose Beauty has, in my Opinion, no equal in the World."
               
                  Celia smiling, told me, I had learned of my Master to flatter; yet she did not seem displeased with my Discourse, but protracted my Stay by asking me a great many Questi-ons concerning Felismena, to whom she had heard Don Felix had formerly paid his Ad-dresses.
               I sighed and blushed when she mentioned my Name, but my Emotion escaped her Ob-servation, and having satisfied her Curiosity about Felismena, whose Beauty, Wit, and Love for Don Felix, were the Subjects of her Interrogatories, I entreated her to send some kind Message to my Master."
               Tell him, said she, that I have read his Letter, and am willing to believe the Truth of his Professions; but, Valerius, added she, in a lower Voice, this Favour your Master owes to you, I perceive you love him, and, and to
More worthy this Place than myself, to whom
                              If I but knew him, with my Love and Duty
                              I would surrender it. Whisper,
                              
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              I will, my Lord.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              What say they?
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              Such a one, they all confess,
                              There is, indeed; which they would have your Grace
                              Find out, and he will take it.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Let me see then:
                              By all your good leaves, Gentlemen, here I'll make
                              My Royal Choice,
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              You've found him, Cardinal:
                              You held a fair Assembly: You do well, Lord.
                              You are a Church Man, or I'll tell you Car-dinal,
                              I should now judge unhappily.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              I'm glad,
                              Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
                           
                           
                              

                              KING.
                              My Lord Chamberlain.
                              Pr'ythee come hither, what fair Lady's that?
                           
                           
                              CHAMBERLAIN.
                              An't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's Daughter,
                              (The Viscount Rochford) one of her Highness' Women.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              By Heaven, she's a Dainty one: Sweet Heart
                              I were unmannerly to take you out,
                              And not to Kiss you. A Health, Gentlemen,
                              Let it go round.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Sir Thomas Lovell, is the Banquet ready
                              I'th' Privy Chamber.
                           
                           
                              LOVELL.
                              Yes my Lord.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              Your Grace,
                              I fear, with Dancing is a little heated.
                           
                           
                              KING.
                              I fear too much.
                           
                           
                              WOLSEY.
                              There's fresher Air, my Lord,
                              In the next Chamber.
                           
                           
                              

                              KING.
                              Lead in your Ladies every one: Sweet Partner,
                              I must not yet forsake you; let's be merry.
                              Good my Lord Cardinal, I have half a dozen Healths
                              To drink to these fair Ladies, and a Measure
                              To lead them once again, and then let's dream
                              Who's best in Favour, let the Music knock it.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Play, as the learned Mr. Upton ob-serves in his critical Observations on Shake-spear, might be properly called the Fall of Car-dinal Wolsey, if the Action had closed with the Marriage of the King to Anna Bullen.
               
               This haughty Churchman is indeed shewn in the Heighth of his Power and Favour with the King, from whence he falls by a Concur-rence of unhappy Circumstances, which bring on his total Disgrace, and at last his Death: But even in this Case, the Action could not be considered as one and entire, while Queen Ca-tharine's Sufferings make so large a Part of it, and which, from the Dignity of her Character, and the great and sudden Reverse of her For-tune, cannot, with any Propriety, form only a subordinate Incident in a Play, whose Sub-ject is the Fall of a much less considerable Per-son than herself.
               Queen Catharine has a higher Claim to give a Title to the Tragedy than Wolsey, since her Quality and Misfortunes are both superior to his. She, like him, is shewn in the Sunshine

of her Fortune, a Queen, and happy in the Affections of her Sovereign and Husbund, as may be concluded from King Henry's Speech to her at her Entrance into the Council-Cham-ber.
               
                  
                     KING.
                     Arise and take your Place by us, half your Suit
                     Never name to us; you have half our Power;
                     The other Moity, ere you ask is given;
                     Repeat your Will, and take it.
                  
               
               After this, we see her despised, neglected, banished from his Bed, the Name and Cha-racter of Wife taken from her, divorced, un-queen'd, and shutting up all her Sorrows in Death. The Fate of this Queen, or that of Cardinal Wolsey, each singly afforded a Subject for Tragedy. Shakespear, by blending them in the same Piece, has destroyed the Unity of his Fable, divided our Attention between them; and, by adding many other inconnected Incidents, all foreign to his Design, has given us an irregular historical Drama, instead of a finished Tragedy.
               In all that related to Cardinal Wolsey he has exactly followed historical Truth; and his Character, as drawn by the Queen and Grif-fith, with all its Lights and Shades, is, as the Reader may perceive, closely copied from that Historian.
               Queen Catharine, in the Play, being told by Griffith, her Gentleman Usher, that the Cardinal is dead, replies,

                     

                     So may he rest, his Faults lie gently on him!
                     Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
                     And yet with Charity; he was a Man
                     Of an unbounded Stomach, ever ranking
                     Himself with Princes: One that by Suggestion
                     Ty'd all the Kingdom; Simony was fair Play:
                     His own Opinion was his Law. I'th'Presence
                     He would say Untruths, and be ever double
                     Both in his Words and Meaning. He was never,
                     But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
                     His Promises were, as he then was, mighty;
                     But his Performance, as he now is, nothing.
                     Of his own Body he was ill, and gave
                     The Clergy ill Example
                  
               
               "This Cardinal was of a great Stomach, for he counted himself equal with Princes; and by crafty Suggestion got into his Hands innu-merable Treasure; he forced little on Simony, and was not pitiful
                     •
                  ; and stood affectionate in his own Opinion. In open Presence he would lie and say Untruths, and was double both in Speech and Meaning; he would promise much and perform little; he was vicious of his Body, and gave the Clergy evil Example."
               
                  
                     GRIFFITH.
                     Noble Madam,
                     Men's evil Manners live in Brass, their Vir-tues
                     We write in Water. May it please your Highness
                     
                        
To hear me speak his Good now?
                  
                  
                     CATHARINE.
                     Yes, good Griffith,
                     
                     I were malicious else.
                  
                  
                     GRIFFITH.
                     This Cardinal,
                     Though from an humble Stock, undoubtedly
                     Was fashion'd to much Honour, from his Cradle;
                     He was a Scholar, and a ripe and good One;
                     Exceeding wife, fair spoken, and persuading;
                     Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not;
                     But to those Men, that sought him, sweet as Summer.
                     And though he were unsatisfy'd in getting,
                     (Which was a sin) yet in bestowing, Madam,
                     He was most princely: Ever witness for him
                     Those Twins of Learning that he rais'd in you,
                     
                        Ipswich and Oxford, one of which fell with him,
                     Unwilling to out-live the Good he did it;
                     The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
                     So excellent in Art, and still so rising,
                     That Christendom shall ever speak his Virtue,
                     His Overthrow heap'd Happiness upon him;
                     For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
                     And found the Blessedness of being little:
                     And to add greater Honours to his Age,
                     Than Man could give him, he dy'd, fearing God.
                  
               
               "This Cardinal, was a Man undoubtedly born to honour; I think some Princes Bastard, no Butcher's Son; exceeding wise, fair spoken, high minded, full of Revenge, vitious of his Body, lofty to his Enemies, were they never so

big; to those that accepted and sought his Friendship, wonderful courteous; a ripe School-man, thrall to affections, brought to Bed with flattery, insatiable to get, and more princely in bestowing; as appeareth by his two Colleges of Ipswich and Oxford, the one overthrown with his Fall; the other unfinished; and, yet, as it lieth, for a House of Students, con-sidering all the Appurtances, incomparable through Christendome, whereof Henry the Eighth is now called Founder, because he let it stand. He held and enjoyed at once the Bishopricks of York, Durham, and Winchester, the Dignity of Lord Cardinal, Legate and Chancelor, the Abbey of St. Albans, divers Pri-ories, sundry fat Benifices in commendam; a great Preferrer of his Servants, an Advancer of Learning, stout in every Quarrel, never hap-py till this his Overthrow, wherein he shewed such Moderation and ended so perfectly, that the Hour of his Death did him more Honour than all the Pomp of his Life."
               Tho' the Character of King Henry is drawn after this Historian, yet Shakespear has placed it in the most advantagious Light; In this Play he represents him as greatly displeased with the Grievances of his Subjects and ordering them to be relieved, tender and obliging to his Queen, grateful to the Cardinal, and in the Case of Cranmer, capable of distinguishing and rewarding true Merit. If, in the latter Part of the Play, he endeavours to cast the dis-agreeable Parts of this Prince's Character as much into Shade as possible, it is not to be

wondered at. Shakespear wrote in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, a Princess who inherited more of the Ambition of her Father Henry, than of the Tenderness and Delicacy of her Mother Anne Bullen: And however sensible she might be of the Injuries her Mother endur'd, would not have suffered her Father's Character to have been drawn in the worst Colours, either by an Historian or a Poet. Shakespear has exerted an equal degree of Complaisance to-wards Queen Elizabeth by the amiable Lights he shews her Mother in, in this Play,
               
                  Anne Bullen is represented as affected with the most tender Concern for the Sufferings of her Mistress, Queen Catharine; receiving the Honour the King confers on her, by making her Marchioness of Pembroke, with a graceful Humility; and more anxious to conceal her Advancement from the Queen, lest it should aggravate her Sorrows, than solicitous to penetrate into the Meaning of so extraordinary a Favour, or of indulging herself in the flatter-ing Prospect of future Royalty.
            
            
               

               
                  THE TALE of Geneura: From the Italian of Lodovico Ariosto, in the Fifth Book of his Orlando Furioso.
               
               THE noble Rilando sailing to England, whither he was sent on an Embassy by the Emperor Charlemaine, a violent Storm arose, which continuing two Days and Nights, drove him, at last, on the Coast of Scotland: His Fleet arriving safe, he ordered his Retinue to meet him at Berwick, himself, without any Attendants, struck into the fa-mous Forest of Caledonia, not without a Hope of meeting with some Adventure worthy his Courage and Virtue.
               While he was pleasing himself with this Ex-pectation, sometimes riding, and sometimes walking a slow Pace leading his Horse, Night drew on, and he now began to think it neces-sary to go in quest of a Lodging. Perceiving an Abbey at some Distance, he remounted his

Horse and rode up to it. The Abbot and his Monks, seeing a Stranger of a noble Appear-ance at their Gate, came out, and with great Civility invited him to pass the Night there.
               
                  Rinaldo gratefully accepted their Offer; and being conducted to a Chamber, and an elegant Repast served to the Table, as soon as he had satisfied the Cravings of an Ap-petite made eager by Travel and long Fasting, he enquired of the good Fathers what noble Exploits in Arms had been lately performed in their Neighbourhood, and whether a Warrior might hope to find any Occasions there of sig-nalizing his Valour?
               'Tis certain, replied the Abbot, that many great and wonderful Adventures have been at-chieved in this Forest, but as the Place, so are the Actions, obscure, and buried in Oblivion: Hovever, if Honour be your Pursuit, the pre-sent time affords you a fit Opportunity to ac-quire it; the Danger, indeed, is great, but if you succeed eternal Fame will be your Re-ward. The young and beautiful Geneura, the Daughter of our King, is accused by a Knight named Lurcanio, of having violated her Chastity; and it being provided by our Scottish Laws, that all Damsels, of what Rank soever, who are publickly charged with In-continence, shall suffer the Punishment of Fire, unless a Champion be found who will under-take their Defence, and fight with the Ac-cuser.
               
                  

oblige you I condescend to give him this Sa-tisfaction."
               She accompanied these Words with a Look so extreamly expressive, that I had not the least Room to doubt the secret Purport of them. I bowed respectfully, and retired, full of Surprize at this unexpected Incident, yet not without a Hope it might produce some-thing favourable to my Love.
               Don Felix finding the never received any An-swer from Celia, unless I was the Bearer of his Letter, took Care always to assign me this Employ-ment. Celia, by these Means, seeing me every Day, conceived a very violent Affection for me, which, however, she only discovered by her Sighs and Looks; but her Indifference towards Don Felix was far from producing the Effects I hoped and expected: his Passion seemed to increase in Proportion as she neglected him; and so great was his Despair, that apprehend-ing it might endanger his Life, I, whom it might well be imagined, was the last Person in the World, who would sollicit her Com-passion for him, I, fair Nymphs, threw my-self at her Feet, and with Tears besought her to have some Regard to the sad Condition to which her Rigour had reduced my Master.
               
                  Celia, who had flattered herself with the Hopes of having made some Impression on my Heart; imagined by my suppliant Posture, and the first Words I uttered, that I was going to plead for myself; but no sooner did she hear the

                  Geneura, in Consequence of this Law, has been adjudged to die, and only a Month's Space allowed her to procure a Defender of her Life and Honour. The King, anxious for his Daughter's Safety, but more for her Reputation, has caused it to be proclaimed throughout his Dominions, that by whatever Person (provided his Birth he not absolutely base) his Daughter shall be delivered from the Danger that threatens her, to him shall the Princess be given in Marriage, with a Portion suitable to her high Rank and Quality.
               This Enterprize, noble Stranger, is worthy your Youth, your Courage, and Generosity: The Law of Arms requires all true Knights to undertake the Defence of injured and oppressed Ladies; and, surely, a fairer than Geneura is not to be found from one Extremity of the Globe to the other; nor, if common Opinion may be relied on, a chaster.
               And is it possible, said Rinaldo after a little Pause, that this fair Princess is condemned to die for having generously rewarded the Passion of a faithful Lover? Cursed be the Makers of so hard a Law; more cursed they that are in-fluenced by it. For me it matters not whether Geneura be justly or unjustly accused; what has been imputed to her as a Crime, were I her Judge, she should be applauded for, had she taken care to have avoided Discovery; and, as it is, I am resolved to defy her Accuser to Combat, and, I trust, shall be able to deliver

her from the unjust and cruel Punishment she has been doomed to.
               The Abbot and Monks, overjoyed that they had procured a Champion for their Princess, lavished a thousand Praises on Rinaldo for his generous Design; and he, full of Impatience to begin the glorious Enterprize, being furnish-ed by his Hosts with a Guide, set out early the next Morning for the Scottish Court, leaving the good Fathers charmed with his Courage and Gallantry, and offering up repeated Pray-ers to Heaven for his Success.
               As they were pursuing their Journey through Bye-roads, for the greater Expedition, a Cry, as of some Person in Distress, rouzed all their Attention. Instantly Rinaldo clapped Spurs to his Horse, and bending his Course towards the Place from whence the Noise proceeded, he came to a deep Valley, surrounded with Trees, through the Branches of which he perceived a young Maid struggling to free herself from the Hands of two Ruffians, who were attempting to murder her. Transported with Rage at this Sight, the generous Rinaldo flew to the Relief of the distressed Damsel; his Appearance so terrified the intended Murderers, that they left their Prey, and fled with the utmost Precipita-tion.
               Mean time the Maid recovered from her Fright, thanked her Deliverer with a Trans-port of Joy and Gratitude, and was beginning to acquaint him with the Story of her Misfor-tunes,

when he, who had not alighted, being eager to pursue his Journey, commanded his Guide to take her up behind him; and as they travelled, having at leisure observed her Coun-tenance and Behaviour, he was so much struck with the Beauty of the one, and the soft and gentle Modesty of the other, that his Curiosity was awakened, and he became solicitous to know by what means she had been brought in-to so cruel a Situation.
               His Request being inforced with kind As-surances of future Protection, the Damsel, with a low Voice, and Eyes cast down in a graceful Confusion, began in this manner:
               Since you, my generous Deliverer, have commanded me to relate my Misfortunes, pre-pare to hear a Tale more full of Horror, an Act of greater Villainy and Baseness than A-thens, Thebes, or Argos ever knew. Ah! 'tis no Wonder that our barren Clime is curst with a long Winter's ceaseless Rage, Phoebus dis-dains to shine upon a Land where such inhu-man Crimes are perpetrated; Deeds black as Darkness, and fit to be covered with everlast-ing Night; unhappy as I am, I bore but too great a Share in those I am going to relate.
               From my earliest Youth I was brought up in the Palace with the Daughter of our King, honoured with a near Attendance on her Per-son, and happy in the Possession of her Af-fection and Esteem. Long might I have en-joyed this delightful Situation; but Love (ah!

that ever so sweet a Passion should prove the Source of so much Misery) Love interrupted my Tranquillity, subjected my whole Soul, and gave me up to Guilt, to Shame, and un-availing Penitence.
               The Duke of Alban was the Subject of my Virgin Wishes, my Youth and Person pleased him; skilled as he was in every deluding Art by which the false and the designing Part of his Sex betray the unexperienced of ours, is it any Wonder that I was deceived? Fond of believing what I wished, and judging of his Passion by my own, I yielded to his Desires, and vainly hoped this Sacrifice of my Honour would secure to me for ever, the Possession of his Heart.
               Our guilty Commerce lasted some Months, during which time I always received his Visits in a Summer Apartment belonging to the Prin-cess my Mistress, into which, as it was now the most rigid Season of the Year, she never entered; and being also in a Part of the Palace little frequented, and the Windows opposite to some ruined Houses, my Lover could come thither unobserved, and by the Help of a silken Cord which I let down to him, easily ascend the Chamber.
               All Sense of Virtue being now subdued, and my whole Soul sunk in a dear lethargick Dream of Pleasure, I never once suspected, that as my Passion increased, that of my Lover was decreasing: Ah! my too violent Love favour-ed

his Deceit, or soon I might have perceived that he feigned much, and loved but little.
               At length, notwithstanding my Preposses-sion, his Coldness became visible; I sigh'd, I wept, I reproach'd, alas! how unavailing are all Endeavours to revive a decaying Passion, satiated by Possession, and constant only to In-constancy.
               
                  Polynesso, so was my faithless Lover named, languished in secret for the bright Geneura, my royal Mistress, I know not if this Passion com-menced before my Ruin was compleated, or whether her more powerful Charms was the Cause of his Infidelity; but certain it is, that relying on the fervent Love I bore him, he made no Scruple to confess his Flame, even to me, urging me by all the Arguments his wick-ed Mind could suggest, to move the Heart of Geneura in his Favour.
               Ah! my Lord judge, if this cruel Man was dear to me, ever solicitous to procure his Hap-piness, and soothed by his Assurances that Am-bition was the prevailing Motive of his Address to the Princess, in which, if he succeeded, he vowed to keep me still his, and that I should Share with her his Person and his Heart, I consented to all he proposed; and following his Instructions, took all Opportunities of praising him to my Mistress.
               The Duke of Alban was the constant Subject of my Discourse; I extolled his Valour his Generosity, his illustrious Birth, the manly

Graces of his Person, the mingled Sweetness and Dignity of his Manners; the charming Theme transported me out of myself; with eager Pleasure I ran over all his Virtues, dwelt with Delight on every imputed Charm; scarce could my Tongue keep Pace with the over-flowings of my lovesick Fancy, fond of the dear Indulgence of talking in a personated Character of him I loved.
               But when, in Compliance with his Injunc-tions, I ventured to insinuate his Passion for her, then only did I speak with Coldness and Restraint; slowly the unwilling Words found way, checked by my rising Sighs, and prefaced by my Blushes. My Emotions could not have been hid from an interested Observa-tion; but the Princess was not only wholly indifferent to Polynesso, but indulged a secret Passion for the all-accomplished Ariodant.
               
               This young Knight, an Italian by Birth, came with his Brother to the Court of Scotland, either in pursuit of Glory, or to transact some se-cret Business with the King. To the Graces of his Form, than which Nature never made one more lovely, is added a Mind fraught with whatever is most great and excellent in Man-kind; his Valour never yet found an equal in our Land; his is the Prize at every Tourne-ment, his the foremost Honours of the Field: in Peace the Ornament of our Court, in War the Defender of our Country.
               The King, to whom he had indeared him-self by a thousand Services, loaded him with

Riches and Honours, and gave him the first Employments in the Kingdom; the Hill of Sicily burns not with fiercer Fires, nor glows Vesuvius with more ardent Flames, than those which the bright Eyes of our Princess kindled in the Heart of Ariodant.
               
               I soon discovered that Geneura approved, encouraged and returned his Passion; and being, as you may easily imagine, not greatly con-cerned at this Obstacle to the Desires of my faithless Duke, I acquainted him with all I knew, and from the apparent Impossibility of his ever succeeding in his Attempt, drew Arguments to induce him to give it over.
               
                  Polynesso, naturally haughty and vindictive, could not bear with Patience, the Thoughts of being rejected for a Stranger. Every way, as he conceived, his Inferior; Disdain, Shame, Rage, by turns, engrossed his Soul, and ba-nished thence every softer Passion; his Love for Geneura was now converted to the most obstinate Hatred, and he resolved to accomplish her ruin by the blackest Treason that ever was conceived in the Heart of Man.
               His Scheme of Revenge concerted, in which I, alas! tho' ignorantly, was to act the chiefest Part, he one Day accosted me with an Air more tender and affectionate than usual.
               My dear Dalinda, said he, generous and kind as you have been to me, well may you think yourself injured by my Inconstancy,

but as Trees, you know, when cropt by the Pruner's Hand, shoot out into fresh luxuriant Branches, so on the Root of my Passion for Geneura, young Buds of Fondness rise and all the ripening Fruit is yours.
               Nor do I languish so much for the Possession of Geneura's Beauties, as I Disdain to be thus rejected and contemned; and, lest this Grief should prey too forcibly on my Heart, do thou, my Fair, indulge my sick Fancy with a kind Deceit, and in the Dress of that too haughty Charmer, receive me to thy Arms.
               When the Princess is retired to Bed, put on her Robes, adorn thee with her richest Jewels, with her Girdle bind thy swelling Bosom, let her Coronet glitter on thy beauteous Brow, and beneath it let thy Hair descend in graceful Curls like hers; then, in her borrowed Form, attend my coming at the well-known Win-dow; thus shall my Pride be gratified, and my capricious Fancy pleased.
               Without reflecting on the insidious Purport of this Request, I promised to comply with it; and, for many successive Nights, received him in the Habit he prescribed. Having thus wrought me to his Wish, his wicked Arts were next played off on Ariodant.
               
               Before the Duke had any Knowledge of his Passion for the Princess, he had lived in strict Friendship with this young Knight, and thence
took Occasion to reproach him with the Breach of it, by presuming to address the Princess.
               In you, said he, I little expected a Rival as well on Account of your Attachment to me, as the Improbability of your succeeding in your Attempt; for you are not now to be told of the mutual Passion that has long joined Geneura's Heart and mine, nor that I intend soon to ask the King's Consent to espouse her; why then do you fondly thrust yourself between me and my almost certain Happiness? how dif-ferently should I act were I in your Place?
               Why this to me, my Lord? replied Ariodant hastily, 'tis you who have betrayed our Friendship, you have commenced my Rival, not I yours; I claim a prior Right in fair Geneura, as have-ing loved her first, and have been happy enough to inspire her with an equal Flame; this you might have perceived, had you not been blind-ed by Obstinacy; since then the Laws of Friendship demand one of us to yield, be yours the Task as having less Right to persist, and less Hope of succeeding than myself. In Riches indeed you are my Superior; but the King's Favour is equally shared betwixt us, and in the Heart of Geneura the Advantage is wholly mine.
               What Errors does not Love Occasion? repli-ed the Duke; each thinks himself the happy Object of her Wishes, and yet 'tis certain that only one is loved: Thus then let us decide the Contest; he who can give the most certain

Proofs of her Affection shall be left by the other in the free and undisturbed Possession of it; but, first, let us bind ourselves by the most solemn Oaths not to disclose each others Secret.
               To this Ariodant, with trembling Impatience agreed, and the artful Duke went on in this Manner:
               'Tis now almost five Months since the beautious Geneura, rewarded my ardent Love with the Possession of her Person; oft has the conscious Queen of Night lent me her shades to guide me to my Charmer and seen me hap-py in her Arms.
               'Tis false, by Heaven, interrupted Ariodant, transported with Rage; not that cold Queen, whose Name thou hast profaned, is chaster than my Geneura: Traitor, with my good Sword I'll prove thou lyest, take Notice I defy thee to mortal Combat, and will with thy dearest Blood, wash away the Slanders thou hast thrown upon my Princess.
               Moderate your Rage, said the calm Villain, I mean to give you Proofs, convincing Proofs, of what I have said, your own Eyes shall be Witnesses of the Favours I enjoy.
               The unhappy Ariodant, pale, trembling, and lost in speechless Grief and Horror at those fatal Words, stood for some Moments fixed in racking Thought, like the sad Statue of Despair; then raising his Eyes, overflowing

Name of Don Felix, than, losing in an In-stant all her former Complacency, her Cheeks glowed with indignant Blushes, her Eyes flashed a look of Rage and Disappointment, and rising from her Chair with trembling Emotion; 'Be gone, ungrateful, said she to me, is it for thy Master then thou pleadest, when thou hast long known my Soul was de-voted to thee? have I lived to be despised by such a one as thou art? oh! cursed Fortune, oh, more cursed Love! but I will be revenged, if not on thee, I will on myself. My Death shall free me at once from thy scorn, and the Upbraidings of my own conscious Mind."
               Saying this, she flew into an adjoining Apartment, making fast the Door after her, which left me not the Possibility of pursuing her, if I had had an Inclination to it.
               Grief and Amazement kept me for some Moments immoveable as a Statue; at length I departed, but my Thoughts were in such Confusion at the strange Accident which had happened, that I came into the Presence of Don Felix without being prepared with any Answer from Celia.
               
               His eager Interrogatories rousing me from the deep Reverie into which I was plunged, I replied at Random that Celia was engaged with Company, and that I could not procure an Opportunity of speaking to her.
               Don Felix sighing profoundly, told me, I must go then the next Day. I did, but oh!

with Tears, to Heaven, and passionately strik-ing his groaning Breast, and can it be, he cried, that my Geneura, that Princess whom I loved, whom I adored, with such pure Re-verence as mortals pay to Deities, should be-come the Prey of loose Desires, and give her faithful Ariodant to Death? Oh! 'tis impos-sible, though a God spoke it, I should say t'were false.
               Incredulous Man, said Polynesso, have I not offered to give thee Proofs that cannot be de-nied? thy Eyes shall see the Favours she bestows on me.
               I take you at your Word, resumed Ariodant impatiently, give me to behold her Guilt and I am satisfyed.
               To morrow Night, said the Duke, I have an Appointment with her; I will conduct you to a Place from whence, unperceived, you yourself shall behold me ascend her Chamber Window, and judge by the Reception she gives me, if I am happy in her Favour.
               To this the almost distracted Ariodant con-sented; and, at the appointed Time, followed the Duke to those ruined Houses I mentioned before, and there stood concealed from View: Being doubtful of Polynesso's Intentions he had ordered his Brother Lurcanio to arm and go with him, directing him to stay at a convenient Distance so as to be within call if any Treach-ery was offered him, but not in Sight of Gene-ura's

Window: for he would have no Witness of her Guilt but himself.
               The Duke, having placed Ariodant most conveniently for his Purpose, advanced and gave the usual Sign; unhappy as I am I heard, and eagerly obeyed the welcome Summons, adorned in Geneura's richest Robes, and cover-ed with the Veil that Princesses only wear, I appeared at the Window and threw the Silken Ladder over to my Lover.
               
                  Lurcanio either fearing for his Brother's Safety, or desirous of prying into his Secrets, quitted his appointed Station and unperceived by him, walked softly forward till he came within ten Paces of Ariodant, and now my faithless Duke was seen by both the Brothers (though known only to Ariodant) to ascend the Ladder and gain the Chamber Window, at which I met him with a tender Embrace, wandering over his Lips and Eyes with eager Kisses.
               This Sight so enflamed the Soul of Ari-odant with Rage and Grief, that draw-ing out his Sword, and fixing the Pummel of it in the Ground, he was going to rush with all his Force upon the Point, had he not been prevented by Lurcanio, who perceiving his rash Design sprang to him in an Instant, and having thrown aside the fatal Instrument of Death, received his sinking Brother in his Arms.
               
                  
Ah miserable Brother! said Lurcanio, by what wild Fury art thou possest to fall thus meanly for a Woman? Now cursed, forever cursed be all the Kind, may they all perish, in one wide Ruin, blown as they are, like Clouds, with every blast of Wind; and this fair Mischief that has betrayed thee, let us devise some glo-rious Vengeance for her: Let not thy noble Life be sacrificed to her Falshood; her's is the Crime, be her's the Punishment; proclaim her Guilt aloud, accuse her to the King, my Eyes as well as thine have seen her Infamy, and, with my Sword I'll make good thy Assertion.
               
                  Ariodant, whose Soul was torn with various and conflicting Passions, smiled gloomily at the Mention of Revenge; a while he seemed to bury every Thought of Grief and of Despair in that one Hope of sacrificing the guilty Lover to his Wrongs: But alas! the cureless Wound remained behind; Geneura, base as she appear-ed, he loved with such unceasing Fondness, that wholly unable to endure her Loss, and dreading no Hell like that within his Bosom, once more he resolved to die.
               To Lurcanio, however he dissembled his De-sign, and went Home with him at his Request; but early the next Morning he departed, leav-ing no Traces behind him from whence it might be gathered to what Place he was gone.
               
                  Lurcanio, dreading the fatal Effects of his Despair, was pierced to his inmost Soul at the

News of his Flight; the King and the whole Court took Part in his Affliction; no Methods were left untried to discover where he was; Messengers were sent in search of him to the utmost Extremities of the Kingdom: But all returned without any Success.
               At length a Peasant came to Court, and at his Request was introduced to the Princess, who informed her, that as he was travelling to the City he met Ariodant; that this unhappy Knight obliged him to follow him and be Wit-ness of an Act he was going to perform; that obeying his Orders they journeyed on together till they came to a steep Rock, that hung pendant over the Sea, fronting the Irish Island.
               
                  Ariodant, said the Peasant, ascending this Rock commanded me to observe well what he did, to give you an Account of it, and tell you his last Words; which were, that he had seen too much: Then springing furiously from the top of the Rock, he precipitated himself into the Sea. Terrified at the dreadful Sight, I hastily turned back, and travelled hither to bring you the fatal News.
               
                  Geneura, overwhelmed with Grief and Amazement for the Death of her Lover, and the strange Message he had sent her, abandon-ed herself to the most violent Excesses of De-spair; she beat her beautious Bosom, tore her Hair, and in the wildness of her Woe, a thou-sand Times invoked the dear loved Name of

                  Ariodant; repeated the mysterious Words he uttered, and as often called on Death to end her.
               The News of his Death, with the sad Manner of it, spread Grief and Consternation through the whole City; even the remotest Parts of Scotland felt and lamented the loss of their valiant Defender; the King and the whole Court bewailed his loss with the sincerest Sor-row: but Lurcanio, superior in Grief, as more nearly interested in the dear deceased, mourn-ed his unhappy Brother with all the tenderness of fraternal Love, and all the warmth of Friendship.
               Revolving in his Mind the fatal Ad-venture of the Window, which had been the Cause of his Brother's Distraction; the Desire and Hope of Revenge afforded some Relief to the poignancy of his Woe, and ob-stinately bent to sacrifice the Princess to the Manes of his Ariodant, he presented himself be-fore the King and Council, and accused her of Incontinence, relating all that Ariodant and he had seen, and the fatal Effects it had upon him; he then reminded the King of the Scottish Laws against unchastity, and loudly demanded Justice on the Princess.
               Horror and Amazement seized the Soul of the unhappy Father; Geneura tho' dearer to him than Life, tho' innocent in his Opinion, he has not Power to screen from the Danger that threatens her; the Laws indeed permit

the accused to have a Champion to fight in her Defence; by whom, if the Prosecuter (who is obliged to maintain by Force of Arms the Truth of his Assertion) is worsted, she is declared guiltless of the Crimes laid to her Charge.
               To this only Remedy the King has Recourse, and causes it to be proclaimed throughout his Dominions, that if any Knight of noble Birth will undertake the Defence of his Daughter, and by Force of Arms shall vanquish her Ac-cuser, on him he will bestow the Princess, with a Dower suitable to her Quality.
               Notwithstanding this Proclamation no Knight has yet offered himself for the Enterprize, deterred therefrom by the known Valour of Lurcanio; the King, no less anxious for Gene-ura's Reputation than her Life, caused all her Maids to be brought to a Tryal, who with one Voice declared they never were privy to any Intrigue of their royal Mistress.
               Alarmed at these Proceedings, and dreading the Consequence of a further Scrutiny, I urged the Duke to take some Measures for our com-mon Security, he, with dissembled Kindness, praised my Secrecy and Affection, and sent two Men to conduct me to a Castle of his at a great Distance from the Court.
               Wholly relying on his Faith, I put myself un-der the Protection of those two Villains, whom the Duke, desirous of removing for ever the only Person who could discover his Guilt,

ordered when they came to a convenient Place to murder me; happily for me Chance conduct-ed you that Way; you delivered me from my impending Fate, and while it shall please Heaven to preserve my unhappy Life, it shall be spent in grateful Acknowledgments to my Protector.
               This Account of Geneura's Innocence was extreamly welcome to Rinaldo; for tho' con-fiding in his own Courage he was not without Hopes of delivering her, guilty as she appeared; yet the certainty that he was going to fight in a just Cause, animated him with double Fires, and gave him almost a Confirmation of Victory.
               Now clapping Spurs to his Horse he rode on with such eager Haste, that the noble Town of St. Andrews soon appeared in View. There the Combat was to be performed, the Guards had already surrounded the Lists, the Chal-lengers Trumpet had sounded, and the unhap-py King, pale, trembling, and full of eager Anxiety, listened with a beating Heart, and fear-checked Wishes for an accepting Answer.
               Mean time Rinaldo, having left the fright-ed Dalinda at an Inn, with repeated Assu-rances of gaining her Pardon, in case he van-quished the Princess's Accuser, advanced to-wards the City-gate: Here he was met by a young Page, who informed him that an un-known Knight, clad all in sable Armour, was arrived; that he had demanded the Combat with Lurcanio, and declared he would die, or

free the Princess from her ignominious Sen-tence.
               
                  Rinaldo, impatient to unfold the Mystery, thundered at the City-gates, which being open-ed, he rode eagerly to the Lists; there behold-ing the Combatants engaged, he forced his Way through the Press, and crying aloud that they should cease the Fight, demanded an in-stant Audience of the King.
               The Marshals of the Field thereupon parted the two Champions, and Rinaldo was imme-diately conducted to the King; to whom he related the whole Story of Polynesso's Treache-ry, as he had received it from Dalinda; adding that he would prove the Truth of it by Force of Arms, and begged he might be allowed to defy the Traitor Duke to single Combat.
               The noble Form of Rinaldo, but chiefly the pleasing Purport of his Speech, gained him absolute Credit with the King. Scarce could the raptur'd Parent restrain the wild Exultings of his Joy at this Confirmation of his Geneu-ra's Innocence; dearer than Life or Empire was she loved by him, and freely would he have sacrificed both to save her Honour: He hesitated therefore not a Moment in permitting the requested Combat, but ordered Duke Poly-nesso to be called.
               He, by his Office of High Constable, have-ing the ordering of the Combat, was riding proudly about the Field, exulting in his suc-cessful

Treason, and anticipating, in his own Mind, the Ruin of the fair and injured Geneura, ignorant though he was of the Design of this Summons, yet coward Guilt suggesting the worst he had to fear, with a disordered Air, and Eyes expressive of the various Apprehen-sions that struck his conscious Soul, he met the reproachful Look of his King, and the fierce Glances of Rinaldo.
               
               That noble Warrior repeating in a few Words the Treasons he had been guilty of, challenged him to the Field: Polynesso denied the Accusation, but accepting the proferred Combat, because he could not avoid it, retired to arm himself, while Rinaldo, fraught with the pious Prayers and Blessings of the King, entered the Lists, and ordered his Trumpet to sound.
               At the third Blast the Duke appeared, pale Terror and Dismay were pictured in his Face, his fainting Heart throbbed with the conscious Pangs of Guilt, and Horrors of impending Fate; confused, distracted, not knowing what he did, he darted forwards at the Signal given to begin the Fight; but his weak Lance, ill-guided by his trembling hand, fell harmless to the Ground.
               Not so the great Rinaldo; he, with calm Courage, and Brave, yet unassuming Con-fidence, meditated the Wound, and rising all collected to the Blow, threw his famed Lance with such unerring Skill and Force, that it

pierced quite through the Armour of Polynesso and hid its fatal Point within his Side.
               The Traitor fell, Rinaldo eagerly dismount-ed and approaching him unlaced his Helmet. With faint low Voice he called for Mercy, and thinking to deserve it, confessed unasked the Wrong he had been guilty of to Geneura; then as if Life had been only lent him till he had cleared her Innocence, scarce had he ut-tered another Prayer for Mercy, but Death supprest the coward Supplication, and he lay a breathless Coarse at the Feet of Rinaldo.
               
               The People transported with Joy that their Princess was not only delivered from Death, but restored to her former sanctity of Charac-ter, made the Air resound with their Accla-mations.
               
                  Rinaldo being conducted to the King, untied the Beaver of his Helmet, and was immediately known to be that famous Knight of Italy, whose noble Exploits were noised over all the habitable World.
               The King embraced him in a rapture of Joy and Gratitude; the Nobles crouded round the Deliverer of their Princess, loaded him with Blessings, and strove to exceed each other in Praises of his invincible Valour.
               These Congratulations over, all Eyes were turned upon the unknown Knight in black Armour, who had so generously undertaken

fair Nymphs of the chaste Goddess, what was my Astonishment and Grief, when I was in-formed by Celia's chief Attendant that she was dead, having expired some Hours after I left her, in a fainting Fit.
               Had my Soul been less susceptible of Ten-derness and Gratitude than it was, the Death of a Rival had not disturbed it so much, but knowing myself to be the unhappy, though innocent Cause of her Death, I could not hear of it without feeling the deepest Afflic-tion, which, the Apprehension of Don Felix's Sorrow, increased to such a Degree, that I was almost distracted.
               At my Return Home I found him lost in the wildest Agonies of Despair; the News had already reached him; none of his Servants durst approach him; he even commanded me, who was his Favourite, out of his Presence: Heaven knows with what Reluctance I obeyed. —From that fatal Day I saw him no more, he departed without acquainting any of his Friends or Servants with the Place to which he designed to go.
               No Words can paint the Torments I en-dured at this new Misfortune; deprived of his Presence for whom I only wished to live, I loathed the Sight of Day, I cursed my Fate, my hapless Love, and all Things, but my Fe-lix.
               
               These Agonies were too violent to con-tinue long; Nature was too weak to support

the Defence of Geneura against her Accuser Lurcanio; pensive he stood during the Fight between Polynesso and Rinaldo, his Eyes fixed upon the Combatants, with eager Attention he had listened to the dying Words of the treacherous Duke, and while the Multitude in loud shouts expressed their Joy, and the King and Court were paying Honours to the glorious Victor, he stood apart from the Throng, absorbed in Thought, and wholly insensible of the Tumult around him.
               The King caused him to be conducted to his Presence, and acknowledging himself greatly obliged to his generous Intention, pressed him to let him know in what manner he could re-pay the Obligation.
               The Knight made no Answer, but bowing low, and throwing off his Helmet, the King and Court, with the utmost Astonishment, be-held the lovely Face of Ariodant; Wonder and Joy kept them all silent for a while; at length the King, recovering from his Surprize, clasp'd the young Warrior to his Breast with a tender Embrace:
               Is it possible, said he, in a Tone of Voice expressive of the strongest Transport, that I behold again my Ariodant, the gallant Defend-er of my Dominions, and the brave Champion for my Daughter's Honour? him whom I la-mented as dead, whom my whole Kingdom mourned for, tell me by what strange yet hap-py Chance I now behold thee living, whose

Death was so confidently affirmed, and so uni-versally believed.
               
                  Ariodant knowing the King was acquainted with the whole Story of his Love, replied without Reserve:
               The Peasant, my Lord, whom I detained to be a Witness of the sad Effects of my Despair, and to bring the News of it to the Princess, in-formed her truly that I cast myself from the Rock into the Sea, but that natural Repug-nance we have all to Death, when near, how-ever we may despise its Terrors at a Distance, impelled me, involuntarily, to use Measures to preserve a Life which a Moment before I had been so desirous of losing.
               As soon as I rose again upon the Surface of the Waves, I applied myself to swimming, at which I was very expert, and soon reached the neighbouring Shore, faint, weary, and almost breathless I threw myself down amidst the Rushes, and was found in this Condition by an ancient Hermit, whose Cell was at a small Distance.
               Thither he conducted me, and in a few Days his charitable Cares restored me to my Strength; but alas! my Mind was tortur'd still with va-rious Passions; Love, Hate, Despair, and ea-ger Thirst of Vengeance, by Turns possessed me; in vain I sought to banish the Idea of Ge-neura from my Soul, it still returned with double Force; nor could her Infidelity, of

which, mistaken Wretch that I was, I thought I had such convincing Proofs, weaken the Power of her resistless Charms.
               Thus languishing, with a cureless Wound, I heard the News of her Accusation by my Brother, and the Danger to which her Life and Honour were exposed: At that Moment, forgetting the Injuries I had suffered, insensible to all the Tyes of Consanguinity and Friend-ship, and only solicitous for her Safety, I de-termined to fight with my Brother in her De-fence, pleasing myself with the Thought, that if I did not free her, I should at lest have the Satisfaction of dying in her Cause, and there-by proving how much Superior to Polynesso was my Love, who though favoured as he was by her he wanted Courage to defend her.
               Having provided myself with Armour that might effectually conceal me, I came hither full of Fury against my Brother, whom I could not but consider as my worst Enemy, since he was the Accuser of the still adored Geneura,
               
               The Arrival of the brave Rinaldo happily prevented the Continuance of a Combat, which must have ended in the Death of one Brother, and eternal Remorse to the other.
               With Joy I behold the Princess delivered from the ignominious Death with which she was threatened; but oh! with far more Rapture do I congratulate your Majesty on this Dis-covery of her Innocence: Happy Rinaldo, to

be at once the Defender of her Life, and Re-storer of her Honour: As for me I sought only to preserve her from Death; and if that was denied me, to have the Satisfaction, at least, of dying in her Defence, by the Hand of a Friend and Brother.
               The King who loved him before for his Virtues, was so charmed with this generous Proof of his Passion for his Daughter, that he easily yielded to the Solicitations of Rinaldo and the Noblemen of his Court, to bestow the Princess on so faithful a Lover; and endowing her with the Dutchy of Albania, which, on Polynesso's Decease, reverted to the Crown, he gave her Hand to Ariodant in the Presence of the whole Court, and the Nuptials were soon after celebrated with the utmost Magnificence.
               
                  Rinaldo having obtained Dalinda's Pardon, who retired into a Monastery, took leave of the King and happy Lovers, and pursued his Voyage to England.
               
            
            
               

               PLAN OF Much ado about nothing.
               
               DON Pedro, Prince of Arragon, re-turning from a successful Battle, and attended by his Bastard Brother Don John, and two young Noblemen, stop at Messina in Sicily, the Governor of which Place is his Friend: Here they are invited to stay a Month. Claudio one of the young Noblemen falls in Love with Hero Daughter to the Governor, and acquainting the Prince, whose favourite he is, with his Passion, Don Pedro promises his Assistance; and assuming the Name and Character of Claudio, in a Mas-querade given that Night by the Governor, courts Hero, and obtains her Father's Consent to the Match.
               Don John hating Claudio, on Account of the Friendship subsisting between his Brother

and him, and being likewise of a Disposition prone to every kind of Mischief, engages ea-gerly in a Scheme proposed by his wicked Con-fident Borachio, to break off the intended Marriage.
               
                  Borachio tells him that a Year since, when they were last at Messina, he had gained the Favour of Margaret one of Hero's waiting Women; that it would be therefore easy for him to persuade Margaret to personate her Mistress Hero, and talk to him from her Chamber Window. Do you, says he to Don John, tell the Prince and Claudio that the Daughter of Leonato is a base Wanton, that she is engaged in a criminal Intrigue with one of your Servants, and to prove that this Accu-sation is not meer Calumny, bring them to a convenient Place where they may hear all our Conversation, which shall be wholly calculated to ruin the Reputation of Hero; the Plot thus laid, Don John departs, to learn as he says, the Day of Marriage.
               In the mean Time the Governor, Don Pedro, Claudio and Hero, form an innocent Stratagem to make Benedict and Beatrice Leonato's Niece in Love with each other, which succeeds. Don John tells his Brother and Claudio that Hero is a Strumpet, which they not immediately crediting, he offers to conduct them to a Place where they shall be Witnesses of an Assignation between her and his Servant Borachio; Claudio hereupon declares that if he

finds her dishonoured, he will disgrace her the next Day in Church by refusing to marry her, and publicly assigning the Cause of his Refusal.
               The next Mo
                     •
                  ning they meet at Church; the Priest is going to begin the Ceremony when Claudio, who had been effectually im-posed upon by Margnret's personating her Mistress, taxes Hero with incontinence, and refuses to give his Hand to (as he calls) her "an approved Wanton." The Prince adds that himself, his Brother and Count Claudio, had heard her the last Night hold shameful Con-verse with a loose Ruffian, from her Chamber Window.
               The unhappy Father, overwhelmed with Grief and Shame, reproaches his Daughter with her Guilt; she faints; the Prince, Claudio, and the Bastard Don John, go out; the Friar having observed Hero's Looks and Behaviour with great Attention, declares it to be his O-pinion that she is Innocent, advises Leonato to give it out that she is dead, and patiently expect the Issue.
               Don Pedro and Claudio afterwards passing through the Street meet Borachio and Conrade in the Custody of some Constables; Don Pedro asks for what Cause his Brother's Servants were thus guarded? Borachio confesses the Treasons he had practiced against Hero for the Sake of a Bribe given him by Don John, which having told in Confidence to his Friend had

been overheard by the Watch, and occasioned their being taken into Custody.
               
                  Claudio now passionately laments the Death of the injured Hero; Leonato to whom the whole Plot had been related by the Sexton, enters and reproaches Claudio with his easy Credulity. Claudio professes his Sorrow for what is past, and offers to satisfy him for the Part he had in the Death of his Daughter, by suffering any Penance he shall impose upon him.
               
                  Leonato then desires him to visit his Daugh-ter's Tomb, hang an Epitaph of his own com-posing upon it, sing it to her Bones that Night, and the next Morning marry his Brother An-tonio's Daughter, who, Herö being dead, was Heiress to the Possessions of them both.
               
                  Claudio readily agrees to all, and after per-forming the Ceremony of singing his own Verses at the Tomb of Hero, repairs to Leo-nato's House; there Hero is presented to him in a Masque as the Daughter of Antonio; and being asked if he persisted in his Resolution of marrying, to which he answers in the Affirm-ative, she unmasques and discovers herself to be Hero.
               
               
                  Benedick then humourously claiming Beatrice, both Marriages are agreed upon, and Don John who had fled upon News that his Treachery had been discovered, is taken and brought back to Messina to receive his Punishment.
               
                  
This Fable, absurd and ridiculous as it is, was drawn from the foregoing Story of Geneu-ra, in Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, a Fiction, which as it is managed by the Epic Poet, is neither improbable nor unnatural; but by Shakespear mangled and defaced, full of Incon-sistencies, Contradictions, and Blunders. The defaming a Lady, by means of her Servant per-sonating her at her Chamber-window, is the Subject pursued by both.
               
                  Shakespear, by changing the Persons, alter-ing some of the Circumstances, and inventing others, has made the whole an improbable Con-trivance, borrowed just enough to shew his Po-verty of Invention, and added enough to prove his want of Judgment.
               The Scheme for ruining the Lady in the O-riginal, is formed and executed by a rejected Lover, who sees a Rival, his inferior in Rank and Fortune, preferred before him, and loses at once the Object of his Wishes, and the Pro-spect of increased Honours, by that Preference. Ambition, and the Desire of Revenge, are Passions strong enough in a Mind not very virtuous, to produce Acts of Baseness and Villainy. Polynesso, urged by those powerful Incentives, contrives to blacken Geneura's Fame, which produces a Separation between her and her Lover, and prevents a Stranger from marrying this Princess, and consequently enjoying those Honours, he so ardently desired himself.
               
                  
Don John, in the Play, is a Villain merely through the Love of Villainy, and having en-tertained a capricious Dislike to Claudio, closes eagerly with his Confident's horrid Scheme for breaking off his Marriage with Hero.
               
               To prevent the multiplying such outrageously wicked, and therefore unnatural Characters, Don John himself might have been the Pro-poser of that black Contrivance against the in-nocent Hero, and Borachio, for the sake of the thousand Ducats that was afterwards given him by Don John, be induced to execute it: But here we have two Villains equally bad, both governed by the same detestable Principles, acting upon the same Motives, and such a per-fect Parity in their Manners, that they are only distinguished from each other by their Names.
               When Borachio tells Don John to go to his Brother, and maintain confidently that Hero is a loose Wanton, Don John asks what Proof he shall make of that? "Proof enough, says the other, to misuse the Prince, vex Claudio, undo Hero, and kill Leonato, look you for any other Issue?"
               
                  Claudio only is the Object of Don John's Hatred, yet the chief Force of rhe intended Injury is to fall on Hero and Leonato her Father, towards whom he has no Malice; and he is made to engage in this wicked Enterprize, to procure the Ruin and Death of two Persons he

them; their Rage at Length subsided; a calm of Grief ensued, and Hope, the false intoxicat-ing Friend, of Love, represented it still possi-ble for me to be happy if I could find my Fe-lix.
               
               Roused by this flattering Thought, I re-solved to seek him through the World, and have already wasted two Years in my Pursuit of him.
               Chance brought me to these Plains, where being struck with the peaceful Simplicity of a pastoral Life, and absolutely despairing ever to see Don Felix more, I threw off the Habit of a Man, and in the Weeds of a Shepherdess, wandered through these Woods, still nourish-ing with Solitude and Tears the fatal Passion that consumes me.
               Heaven, by affording me an Opportuni-ty of delivering you, fair Nymphs, from the Danger with which you were threatened, seems to be preparing a Reverse of Fate for me; the first Ray of Joy that ever dawned upon my Soul since the Absence of my beloved Don Felix, was occasioned by being made the In-strument of your Deliverance; oh! may it be a happy Omen of Fortune's future Favours; let me hail it as the Beginning of that Happi-ness which the Sight of my Don Felix will raise me to."
               The beautiful Felismena ended here, and the fair Votaries of Diana confirmed her in that

hates not, to give a little Vexation to one he does. These Absurdities have their Rise from the injudicious Change of the Characters. The Contrivance to slander Hero is not less ridicu-lous; and this also is occasioned by the Poet's having deviated from the Original to introduce his own wild Conceits.
               
                  Borachio tells Don John, that he is highly fa-voured by Margaret, Hero's waiting Woman; that he will persuade her to dress in her Lady's Cloaths, assume her Name, and talk to him out of her Chamber-window, all which Don Pedro and Claudio being Witnesses of, would effectually convince them that Hero was disho-noured.
               But Borachio does not acquaint Don John, and through him the Audience, what Colour he will give to this strange Request, in order to induce Margaret to grant it: Margaret is all along represented as faithful to her Mistress; it was not likely she would engage in a Plot that seemed to have a Tendency to ruin Hero's Reputation, unless she had been imposed on by some very plausible Pretences, what those Pre-tences were we are left to guess, which is in-deed so difficult to do, that we must reasonably suppose the Poet himself was as much at a Loss here as his Readers, and equally incapable of solving the difficulty he had raised.
               That Borachio should be the suspected Gal-lant of Hero, is a Circumstance also highly improbable. Borachio, a mean Dependant on

a Man whose Vices had made him the Object of universal Hatred and Contempt, a Stranger almost in Messina, and, as well on Account of the Meanness of his Situation, as the Profli-gacy of his Manners, excluded from any Ac-quaintanee with a Lady of Hero's Quality.
               Yet how easily does Don Pedro the Friend, and Claudio the Lover of the Lady, swallow this gross Scandal, that must even derive Im-probability from the Person who utters it; for he is neither an honest Man nor a Friend of Claudio, who is thus solicitous to prevent his dishonouring himself by marrying a bad Wo-man, but a Wretch noted for his Propensity to all Kinds of Mischief and Villainy, an invete-rate Hater of Claudio, and but a little while be-fore at open Enmity with Don Pedro his Bro-ther.
               Surely these Circumstances were sufficient to make the Prince and Claudio doubt the Truth of this Story, which the Character of the Tel-ler considered, as well as the Improbability of the Facts, seemed much more likely to be con-trived to produce Mischief than prevent it.
               The Proof Don John offers them in support of his Assertion, could have no Weight with Minds less stupidly credulous than theirs; they are to be shewn Hero talking to her Gallant Borachio out of her Chamber window, very unlikely that Hero should be so imprudent, as the Night before her intended Marriage, to have an Assignation with a Gallant in so

publick a Place; but their own Eyes and Ears are to be Witnesses of this Conference; strong Evidence indeed if it be realy Hero that they see and hear; but if it be only Margaret drest in her Ladies Cloaths, with such powerful Reasons as they had before to believe the whole a Fiction, how could this gross Fallacy impose upon them.
               We are not told that Margaret was so very like her Lady, that in the same Cloaths they could not be distinguished from each other; their Eyes are to be deceived by her Dress, but how if her Face happens, as certainly was the Case, not to be exactly like Hero's, it cannot be pretended that it was so dark that they could not distinguish her Features. The same Degree of Light that shewed her Cloaths to be Hero's would discover the Face to be Margaret's.
               Let it be granted, however, that their Sight was deceived (though, all Things considered, it is not possible to conceive how) yet as they heard plainly all the Discourse that passed be-tween the Counterfeit Hero and her Lover, why did not the Voice of Margaret discover the Cheat? Strange Absurdity! Let us see how the Original has provided against all these Ob-jections.
               The Duke of Alban, who is secretly in love with the Princess Geneura, having seduced a young Maid that attended on her Person, pre-vailed upon her, by extravagant Promises, that were contrived to please at once her Ambition,

and weaken the Force of her Jealousy, to as-sist him in his Design of gaining her royal Mis-tress for his Wife, discovering, by her Means, that the Princess had not only a Dislike to him, but had bestowed her Heart upon Ariodant: Rage and Despair suggest to him a Scheme for interrupting the Happiness of the two Lovers, and gratifying his Revenge, which was now his predominant Passion, he tells Dalinda, that if she wishes to see him cured of his hopeless Love for the Princess, she must assume as much of her Appearance as the wearing her Apparel and rich Ornaments could give her, and thus disguised, receive him to her Arms.
               
                  Dalinda willing to revive her Lover's decay-ing Passion by an Artifice that flattered her own Vanity, fondly agrees to his Proposal, and for many successive Nights, meets him at the usual Place of Assignation; which, was in the Prin-cesses Summer Apartment drest in her Cloaths.
               
                  Polynesso having succeeded thus far, re-proaches Ariodant with his breach of Friend-ship in addressing Geneura, of whose Affections he was in absolute Possession; Ariodant insists that himself is the favoured Lover, the Duke to convince him of the contrary, conducts him to a Place from whence he could see him as-cend the Princesses Chamber.
               
                  Dalinda in Shape and Statue not much dif-fering from her Mistress, her Face shaded by the royal Veil, that Geneura, and only Geneura was accustomed to wear, standing as usual at

the Chamber Window, lets down the silken Cord to her Lover, and receives him with a tender Embrace, Ariodant maddening at this Sight, believes his Mistress false; and Polynes-so's Treachery produces all the Effects he could have wished.
               Here the Contrivance is plausible enough, the Characters are properly distinguished, each acts upon Motives probable and natural, and the Incidents that follow are the necessary Re-sult of those Actions. Why Shakespear re-jected these Circumstances for others, wholly inconsistent and ridiculous, is not easy to guess; we shall find him altering the succeeding Part of the Plot with the same utter disregard to probability and contempt of Decorum.
               
                  Margaret having done her Part towards de-faming her Mistress, without knowing any Thing of the Matter, though her Discourse with Borachio was calculated to raise the most in-jurious Suspicions; assists her next Morning to dress for her Wedding, attends her to the Church, hears the designed Bridegroom refuse her Hand, proclaim her a Wanton, and urge her last Night's loose Discourse with Borachio from her Chamber Window as a Proof: Yet all the while she appears wholly insensible of what had happened, neither concerned for her Mistress, whom she had ruined without Design, nor anxious for her own Safety, that seemed to depend upon a candid Confession; for it was not likely her Treachery could be long con-cealed. Thus supernaturally (if what is out

of Nature may be called above it) is the Plot brought to perfection, nor is the unravelling of it less happily imagined.
               
                  Borachio having received his promised Ducats from Don John, the Moment after his Con-ference with Margaret was ended, meets an Acquaintance of his, named Conrade, in the Street, to whom he is impatient to communi-cate his good Luck.
               'Tis true the Secret is of Importance, and if known, endangers his Life; the Place also is very improper for such a Conversation, being the Street, and near Leonato's House, where the Scene of his Treachery had been acted; add to this that the Rain obliges them to stand close up to the Door, which exposes them to the In-convenience of having even their Whispers overheard, if any one was near it: Yet such is Borachio's extream eagerness to tell his wicked Exploit, that he never thinks of carrying his Friend to his own Lodgings, where he may boast in Safety, but in a rainy Night stands in the Street, close to the Door of the Man whose Daughter he had injured, and there at his lei-sure relates the whole treacherous Contrivance.
               However, all this happens exactly right, be-cause the Watch who is posted about Leonato's House, hear every Syllable, that is spoken, and understanding that one of these Villains had de-famed the Lady Hero, and made her intended Bridegroom resolve to disgrace her the nex
                     •
                   Morning in Church, by publicly refusing to

marry her on account of her being dishonour-ed, they sieze the two Wretches with an In-tent to bring them before Leonato, not that same Night to prevent the Lady's Disgrace, but the next Morning, when all was over, to discover her Innocence.
               Two or three absolute Ideots, are here very artfully introduced for Constable and Watch-men, for had they the lest Ray of Reason to direct them, they must have conceived that it was absolutely necessary to acquaint Leonato immediately with the Treason, that had been practised against his Daughter, in order to pre-vent the ignominious Treatment she was to suffer in Consequence of it the next Morning.
               This Method of protracting the Discovery, is not indeed very ingenious, but the Poet's Occasions are answered by it, and that is suf-ficient. Claudio's designed Vengeance suffer-ed no Interruption, the Lady is shamefully refused, hence arise two or three new Contriv-ances, she is believed to be dead, Claudio en-gages to marry another in a Masque, and when he has given his Hand to this unknown Lady, is surprized with the Sight of his living Hero; whose Death after he had been convinced of her Innocence he had passionately lamented. These Incidents, were they ever so natural, cannot affect the Readers either with Pity or Surprize, since they are let into the Secret beforehand: and can anticipate the Catastrophe.
               
                  

                  Shakespear has deviated from the Original, as much in the drawing his Characters, as the Disposition of his Plan. Nothing can be more different than the Sentiments and Behaviour of Ariodant and Claudio, in Circumstances nearly alike. Both are representedas passionate Lovers, happy in the Possession of their Mistresses Af-fections, yet prevailed upon to think them false through the Treachery of a Villain; but Ario-dant yields only to the strongest Conviction, Claudio to the grossest Artifice.
               
                  Ariodant's Grief, Rage and Jealousy, ter-minate in a fixed Despair; which prompts him to lay violent Hands on his own Life. Claudio is actuated by a Desire of Revenge, and that of the meanest Sort, for he suffers the supposed Gallant to escape, and only meditates the Ruin of the Lady.
               
                  Ariodant fights with his own Brother, to preserve the Life of her who had injured him: Claudio without any necessity, exposes his Mistress publickly in Church, brings Ruin and Contempt on her, and everlasting Shame and Affliction on her poor Father, to whom he had been obliged, for an hospitable Reception, and an intended Benefit.
               
                  Claudio is mean, selfish, ungenerous and cruel: Qualities, that are seldom found in the Heroe and Lover, and he is represented as both.
               
                  

                  Ariodant is always consistent with his Character, too brave, to be actuated by a mean Desire of Revenge, too much in love, to be guided by Reason; hence arises the several Extravagancies he is guilty of, but in all, the Manners of the Soldier and Lover are invio-lably preserved.
               There is a great Deal of true Wit and Hu-mour in the Comic Scenes of this Play; the Characters of Benedict and Beatrice are pro-perly marked, and beautifully distinguished.
            
            
               

               THE HISTORY OF LEIR, King of the BRITAINS, From Holingshed's Chronicle.
               
                  "LEIR the Son of Baldub, was admit-ted Ruler over the Britains, in the Year of the World 3105. At what Time Joas reigned as yet in Juda. This Leir was a Prince of noble Demeanor, governing his Land and Subjects in great Wealth. He made the Town of Cairleir now called Leicester, which standeth upon the River of Dore. It is

agreeable Hope, with Reasons founded on the true Delicacy, and noble Perseverance of her Passion; and all joining to intreat she would consent to reside with them in the Palace of the sage Felicia, 'till Fortune had made some Change in her Affairs, she readily embraced their Offer, and set out with them for the Temple of Diana.
               
               The Reader, by comparing the Incidents that compose the Fable of The Two Gentle-men of Verona, with those in the foregoing Sto-ry, will easily perceive that Protheus and Julia in the Play are the same with Felix and Felis-mena in the Novel.
               The Story, indeed, is highly romantic and improbable, and Shakespear's Judgment in re-jecting many of the Circumstances might be praised, if those he has invented were not e-qually absurd: 'tis generally allowed, that the Plot, Conduct, Manners, and Sentiments of this Play are extreamly deficient.
               The Court and Palace of the Duke of Mi-lan, to which first Sir Valentine, and then Sir Protheus, are sent to improve their Politeness in, has less Dignity and Decorum in it, than the House of a private Gentleman. Silvia, the Duke's Daughter, notwithstanding we are told with wonderful Simplicity, in different Passages of the Play, that she is a virtuous civil Gentlewoman, yet behaves with all the rustic Smartness, and awkward Gaiety of a Village Coquet.
               
                  

writ that he had by his Wife three Daughters, without other Issue, whose Names were, Go-norilla, Regan and Cordilla, which Daughters he greatly loved, but especially the youngest, Cordilla, far above the two Elder.
               When this Leir was come to great Years, and began to wear unweildy through Age, he thought to understand the Affections of his Daughters towards him, and prefer her whom he best loved, to the Succession of the King-dom: Therefore, he first asked Gonorilla the eldest, how well she loved him: the which calling her Gods to record, protested that she loved him more than her own Life, which by Right and Reason should be most dear unto her, with which Answer the Father being well pleased, turned to the second and demand-ed of her, how well she loved him? which answered (confirming her Sayings with great Oaths) that she loved him more than Tongue can express, and far above all other Creatures in the World.
               Then called he his youngest Daughter Cordilla before him, and asked of her what ac-compt she made of him: Unto whom she made this Answer as followeth: Knowing the great Love, and fatherly Zeal you have always borne towards me (for the which, that I may not answer you otherwise than I think, and as my Conscience leadeth me) I protest to you, that I have always loved you, and shall continually while I live, love you as my natural Father, and if you would more understand of the Love

that I bear you, assertayn yourself, that so much as you have, so much you are worth, and so much I love you, and no more.
               The Father being nothing content with this Answer, married the two eldest Daughters, the one unto the Duke of Cornwall named Henninus, and the other unto the Duke of Albania called Maglanus, and betwixt them after his Death, he willed and ordained his Land should be divided, and the one half thereof should be immediately assigned unto them in Hand; but for the third Daughter Cordilla, he reserved nothing.
               Yet it fortuned that one of the Princes of Gallia (which now is called France) whose Name was Aganippus, hearing of the Beauty, Womanhood and good Conditions of the sayd Cordilla, desired to have her in Marriage, and sent over to her Father, requiring that he might have her to Wife, to whom Answer was made that he might have his Daughter; but for any Dowry he could have none, for all was promised and assured to her other Sisters already.
               
                  Aganippus, notwithstanding this Answer of Denyall to receive any Thing by way of Dower with Cordilla, took her to Wife, only moved thereto (I say) for respect of her Person and amiable Virtues. This Aganippus was one of the twelve Kings that ruled Gallia in those Days, as in the British History it is recorded. But to proceed, after that Leir was fallen into Age, the two Dukes, that had married his two

eldest Daughters, thinking it long ere the Government of the Land did come to their Hands, arose against him in Armour, and rest from him the Governance of the Land, upon Conditions to be continued for tearme of Life: By the which he was put to his Portion, that is, to live after a Rate assigned to him for the Maintenance of his Estate, which in process of Time was diminished as well by Maglianus, as by Henninius.
               
               But the greatest Grief that Leir took, was to see the Unkindness of his Daughters, who seemed to think that all was too much which their Father had. The same being never so little, in so much that going from the one to the other, he was brought to that Misery, that they would allow him only one Servant to wait upon him. In the End such was the un-kindness, or as I may say, the unnaturalness which he found in his two Daughters, notwith-standing their fair and pleasant Words uttered in Time past, that being constrained of Neces-sity, he fled the Land and sailed into Gallia, there to seek some Comfort of his youngest Daughter Cordeilla, whom before he hated.
               The Lady Cordeilla hearing he was arrived in poor Estate, she first sent to him privately a Sum of Money to apparel himself withall, and to retain a certain Number of Servants, that might attend upon him in honorable Wise, as apperteyned to the Estate which he had borne. And then so accompanyed, she appointed him to come to the Court, which he did, and was

so joyfully, honorably and lovingly received, both by his Son in Law Aganippus, and also by his Daughter Cordeilla, that his Heart was greatly comforted: For he was no less honour-ed, than if he had been King of the whole Country himself. Also after that, he had in-formed his Son in Law, and his Daughter, in what sort he had been used by his other Daugh-ters. Aganippus caused a mighty Army to be put in readiness, and likewise a great Navy of Ships to be rigged to pass over into Britain, with Leir his Father in Law, to see him again restored to his Kingdom.
               It was accorded that Cordeilla should also go' with him to take Possession of the Land, the which he promised to leave unto her, as his rightful Inheritour after his Decease, notwith-standing any former Grants made unto her Sisters, or unto their Husbands, in any Manner of wise, hereupon when this Army and Navy of Ships were ready, Leir and his Daughter Cordeilla with her Husband took the Sea, and arriving in Britain, fought with their Enemies, and discomfitted them in Battle, in the which Maglanus and Henninus were slain, and then was Leir restored to his Kingdom, which he ruled after this by the Space of two Years, and then died, forty Years after he first began to reign: His Body was buried at Leicester, in a Vault under the Channel of the River Dore, beneath the Town."
            
            
               

               FABLE Of the TRAGEDY of King LEAR.
               
               
                  LEAR King of Britain, being old and weary of the Toils of Government, de-termines to resign his Crown, and divide his Dominions amongst his three Daughters, two of whom were married to the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany, and the third addressed to by the King of France and Duke of Burgundy.
               
               The Princessess being commanded by their Father, to declare with what Degree of Af-fection each loves him, that he may know which of them is intitled to the greatest Share of his Bounty: Gonerill the eldest, begins with assur-ing him that she loves him beyond every Thing that is most dear and precious in the World: Regan the second Daughter, professes herself an Enemy to all other Joys, but that of loving and being beloved by him: To each of these

Ladies the old King assigns one third of his Kingdom.
               Then addressing himself in a particularly tender Manner to Cordelia, his youngest Daughter, he asks her what she has to say, to draw a Dowry more opulent than her Sisters. Cordelia tells him, Nothing; the King surpri-sed bids her speak again, she with a modest plainness replies: That she loves him as a du-tiful Child ought to love an indulgent Father, neither more nor less.
               The King enraged at this Speech, bids her avoid his Presence, declares that he will banish her for ever from his Heart, and divides that Portion of his Kingdom, which he had design'd for her, between her two Sisters. Then giv-ing his Crown to Cornwall and Albany, he re-quires of them in return, only Maintenance for himself and an hundred Knights.
               The Earl of Kent, for opposing this frantick Resignation, and offering to Plead in favour of Cordelia, is banished for ever by the old King. The King of France marries Cordelia without a Portion, and takes her away with him.
               
                  Goneril and Regan soon grow weary of their old Father, and agree to treat him with Con-tempt. He is first affronted by Goneril's At-tendants, and she treating his Complaints of their rude Behaviour with Lightness, and ob-jecting to the number of his Followers, which she wants to have reduced to Fifty, the King

leaves her in a Rage, and repairs to the Court of his Daughter Regan, who having received an Account of what had pass'd from her Sister, comes to the Earl of Gloster's Castle in order to avoid him.
               
                  Lear in his way stopping at Gloster's Castle, meets his two Daughters there; they both join to treat him with the utmost Cruelty, and absolutely refuse to give him Entertainment in either of their Palaces, unless he disbands all his Knights, and submits to be attended by their Servants.
               The old King, in an agony of Grief and Rage at this barbarous and unnatural Treat-ment from his two Daughters, to whom he had given all, rushes out of the Castle, declar-ing he will not stay under the same Roof with them. They, who desire nothing so much as his Absence, command the Earl of Gloster to shut his Gates, and suffer him to go whi-ther he pleases. The Earl represents to them, that the King must inevitably Perish in the Storm, which then raged with the utmost Vi-olence, there being no House nor Shed within several Miles to Shelter him, and humbly in-treats that he may be allowed to follow his old Master, and invite him in. The wicked Princesses peremptorily forbid him to afford their Father any Relief, and threaten'd him with Death if he Disobeys.
               Notwithstanding this, the Earl secretly seeks for the King, whose Griefs had now turned

his Brain, and conveys him to a Farm-house, Afterwards being informed that there was a Plot laid to take away his Life, he enjoins his Attendants to carry him to Dover, and fur-nishes them with Necessaries for that Purpose.
               
                  Edmund, the Bastard Son of Gloster, having by his wicked Arts prevailed upon his Father to Disinherit his lawful Son Edgar, and to re-solve his Death, now betrays his Father him-self, and Discovers, to the two enraged Prin-cesses, what he had done for the old King.
               
                  Gloster is seiz'd, bound, and his Eyes trod out by the Duke of Cornwal; and in this mi-serable Condition thrust out of his own Castle, and contemptuously bid to smell his way to Dover.
               
               The injured Edgar, who had assum'd the Appearance of a mad Man, to elude an unde-served Punishment from his Father, meets him in this miserable Condition, and still keeping himself unknown, offers to be his Guide, and lead him to whatever Place he has a mind to go. Gloster overwhelmed with Despair, de-sires to be conducted to a Hill near Dover, from whence he means to cast himself into the Sea.
               
                  Edgar still counterfeiting the mad Man, leads his Father to Dover, and thinking to cure his Despair by seeming to give way to it, yet preventing its Effects, tells him, that they have gain'd the Summit of the Hill. Gloster
                  

bids him lead him to the Verge of it; then taking leave of the supposed mad Man, springs Forwards with an Intention to precipitate him-self to the Bottom, but falls flat on the level Plain.
               
                  Edgar approaches him, and changing his Voice, expresses the extreamest Amazement at his having fallen from such an enormous Height without being bruis'd to Peices. Gloster sup-posing himself miraculously preserved, declares that he will no more attempt to put an End to his miserable Life, but wait patiently for his Dissolution.
               
                  Edgar confirms him in those Thoughts, and offers to conduct hlm to some Retreat. As they are going, the Princess Regan's Steward, who had been sent with Letters from her and her Sister to the Bastard Edmund, meets them, and seeing Gloster, on whose Head a Price had been set, offers to murder him.
               
                  Edgar defends his Father, and kills the Steward, and searching his Pockets, finds a Letter from the Princess Goneril to his Brother, in which she desires him to Assassinate her Husband the Duke of Albany, and promises to Reward him for that Action with her Hand.
               
                  Edgar reserves this Letter for a Proof of his Brother's wickedness; and having placed his Father in Safety, joins the French Army, that with their Queen Cordelia at their Head, had

come into England to revenge the Injuries of-fered to Lear, and to restore him to his Crown.
               The Duke of Albany, though he detested the cruel Usage that Lear had received, raises an Army to oppose Cordelia.
               
               The Princess Regan. whose Husband had been killed by one of his Servants, as he was stamping on Gloster's Eyes, gives the Command of her Forces to the Bastard Edmund, with whom she, as well as her Sister, is in love; and joins her Brother-in-law.
               Before the Armies engage, Edgar, disguised, gives the Duke of Albany his Wife's Letter which he had taken from the Steward; bids him read it; and if Victory declares on his Side, a Champion will appear at the first Sound of the Trumpet to prove the Truth of what is con-tained therein.
               After this the Battle is fought; the English are victorious; Lear and Cordelia are taken Prisoners; and Edmund gives secret Orders to the Officer who guards them to put them to death.
               The Duke of Albany having read the Letter, by which he discovered his Wife's Adultery, and Edmund's Crimes, arrests him for high Treason, and declares, if at the Sound of the Trumpet, no Champion appears to prove it by Force of Arms, himself will undertake the Combat, and maintain the Charge.
               
                  
She is introduced flirting from Room to Room, followed by two of her Lovers, and laughing equally at the Man she favours, and him she rejects, slyly inciting them to quarrel, and when she has set them together by the Ears, enjoys the Jest, 'till the good Prince, her Father, comes in to part them.
               Sir Valentine's Courtship of this Princess, it must be confessed, is extreamly singular, and the Appearance of his dirty Footman, Speed, in the Presence-Chamber, breaking Jests upon his Master and her Highness, while they are discoursing, has something in it very new and uncommon. The following Scene will give the Reader a Specimen of Sir Valentine's Gal-lantry, the Wit of his Servant, and the prince-ly Breeding of Silvia, the Duke's Daughter.
               
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     Madam and Mistress, a Thousand good Morrows.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Oh! give ye good Ev'n; here's a Million of Manners.
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     Sir Valentine and Servant, to you two Thou-sand.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     He should give her Interest; and she gives it him.
                  
                  
                     
The Trumpet sounds, Edgar appears in Arms, and after summing up his Brother's Crimes, challenges him to the Combat; they fight; Edmund is mortally wounded; Edgar then discovers himself, relates the Hardships he had suffered; the Condition in which he found his miserable Father; what he had done for him, and how upon his discovering himself to him, the strong Surprise, Grief, and mingled Rapture, siezed with such Force upon his Heart (already almost broken with his Mi-series) that he expired in the Arms of the ba-nished Earl of Kent, who, in the Disguise of a menial Servant, had contrnually followed the distressed King.
               
                  Edmund, struck with Remorse at this me-lancholy Tale, confesses all his Crimes; asks Pardon of his Brother, and willing to do some Good before he dies, owns the secret Orders he had given to put Lear and Cordelia to death, and urges them to send and prevent the Exe-cution of them.
               The Messenger arrives too late; Cordelia had been just strangled by a Soldier, whom the old King had afterwards killed; Lear brings Cordelia in dead in his Arms, and while he is lamenting over her, dies.
               The good Earl of Kent expires immediately after with Grief. Goneril and Regan, poisoned by each other through Jealousy, die in Tor-ments; and Edmund also dies by the Wound

he had received from his Brother, who is by the Duke of Albany restored to his Estates and Honours.
               This Fable, although drawn from the fore-going History of King Lear, is so altered by Shakespear, in several Circumstances, as to render it much more improbable than the Ori-ginal: There we are sufficiently disgusted with the Folly of a Man, who gives away one Half of his Kingdom to two of his Daughters, be-cause they flatter him with Professions of the most extravagant Love; and deprives his youngest Child of her Portion for no other Crime but confining her Expressions of Ten-derness within the Bounds of plain and simple Truth.
               But Shakespear has carried this Extrava-gance much farther; he shews us a King re-signing his Kingdom, his Crown and Dignity to his two Daughters; reserving nothing to himself, not even a decent Maintenance; but submitting to a mean Dependance on the Bounty of his Children; whom, by promising Rewards proportionable to the Degree of Flat-tery they lavish on him, he has stimulated to outvie each other in artful Flourishes on their Duty and Affection toward him.
               
                  Tell me, Daughters,
                  (Since now we will divest us, both of Rule,
                  Int'rest of Territory, Cares of State)
                  Which of you, shall we say, doth love us most?
                  That we our largest Bounty may extend
                  
                     
Where Nature doth with Merit challenge. Goneril,
                  
                  Our eldest born, speak first.
               
               What Wonder, when thus bribed Goneril should answer,

                     I love you, Sir,
                     Dearer than Eye-sight, Space and Liberty.
                  
               
               
                  Lear does not run mad till the third Act; yet his Behaviour towards Cordelia in this first Scene has all the Appearance of a Judgment totally depraved: he asks Cordelia what she has to say to draw a Dowry more opulent than her Sisters.
               Thus he suggested to her a Motive for ex-ceeding them in Expressions of Love: the no-ble Disinterestedness of her Answer afforded the strongest Conviction of her Sincerity, and that she possessed the highest Degree of filial Affection for him, who hazarded the Loss of all her Fortune to confine herself to simple Truth in her Professions of it: yet, for this, Lear banishes her his Sight, consigns her over to Want, and loads her with the deepest Im-precations. What less than Phrenzy can in-spire a Rage so groundless, and a Conduct so absurd! Lear, while in his Senses, acts like a mad Man, and from his first Appearance to his last seems to be wholly deprived of his Reason.
               In the History Lear Disinherits Cordelia, but we read of no other kind of Severity exerted to-wards her. The King of France, as well in

the History as the Play, charm'd with the Vir-tue and Beauty of the injured Cordelia, mar-ries her without a Portion.
               
                  Shakespear does not introduce this Prince till after the absurd Trial Lear made of his Daughters Affection is over. The Lover who is made to Marry the disinherited Cordelia on account of her Virtue, is very injudiciously contrived to be Absent when she gave so glori-ous a Testimony of it, and is touch'd by a cold Justification of her Fame, and that from herself, when he might have been charm'd with a shining Instance of her Greatness of Soul, and inviolable Regard to Truth.
               So unartfully has the Poet managed this In-cident, that Cordelia's noble Disinterestedness is apparent to all but him who was to be the most influenced by it. In the Eyes of her Lo-ver she is debased, not exalted; reduced to the abject Necessity of defending her own Charac-ter, and seeking rather to free herself from the Suspicion of Guilt, than modestly enjoying the conscious Sense of superior Virtue.
               
                  Lear's Invective against her to the King of France is conceived in the most shocking Terms.
               
                  I would not from your Love make such a stray,
                  To Match you where I Hate; therefore be-seech you,
                  T'avert your Liking a more worthy Way,
                  
                     
Than on a Wretch, whom Nature is asham'd
                  Almost t'acknowledge her's.
               
               Well might the King of France be startled at such Expressions as these from a Parent of his Child; had he been present to have heard the Offence she gave him to occasion them, how must her exalted Merit have been endeared to him by the extream Injustice she suffered; but as it is, a bare Acquittal of any monsterous Crime, is all the Satisfaction she can procure for herself; and all the Foundation her Lover has for the Eulogium he afterwards makes on her.
               
                  
                     CORDELIA.
                     I yet beseech your Majesty,
                     (If, for I want that glib and oily Art,
                     To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
                     I'll do't before I Speak) that you make known
                     It is no vicious Blot, Murther, or Foulness,
                     No unchast Action, or dishonour'd Step,
                     That hath depriv'd me of your Grace and Fa-vour.
                     But ev'n for want of that, for which I'm rich-er,
                     A still soliciting Eye, and such a Tongue,
                     That I am glad I've not; though not to have it
                     Hath lost me in your Liking.
                  
                  
                     LEAR.
                     Better thou
                     Hadst not been Born, than not to have pleased me better.
                  
               
               From this Speech of Cordelia's, and Lear's Answer, France collects Matter for extenuating

a supposed Error in his Mistress, not for Ad-miration of her Worth.
               
                  
                     FRANCE.
                     Is it but this? a Tardiness in Nature,
                     Which often leaves the History unspoke,
                     That it intends to do.
                  
               
               Yet a Moment after, without knowing any more of the Matter, he lavishes the warmest Praises on her Virtues, and offers to make her (loaded as she is with her Father's Curses, and deprived of the Dower he expected with her) Queen of France. This Conduct would be just and natural, had he been a Witness of her noble Behaviour; but doubtful as it must have appeared to him in such perplexing Circum-stances, 'tis extravagant and absurd.
               
                  Shakespear has deviated widely from History in the Catastrophe of his Play; the Chronicle tells us, that King Lear having been disposses-sed by his rebellious Sons in Law of that Half of the Kingdom which he had reserved for himself, and forced, by repeated Indignities from his Daughters, to take Refuge in France, was received with great Tenderness by Cordelia, who prevailed upon her Husband to attempt his Restoration; accordingly an Army of Frenchmen pass'd over into Britain, by which, the Dukes of Cornwal and Albany being defeat-ed, King Lear was restored to his Crown, died in Peace two Years after, and left his King-dom to Cordelia. In Shakespear the Forces of the two wicked Sisters are victorious, Lear and the pious Cordelia are taken Prisoners, she is hanged in Prison, and the old King dies with Grief. Had Shakespear followed the His-torian,

he would not have violated the Rules of poetical Justice; he represents Vice punish-ed, and Virtue rewarded; in the Play one Fate overwhelms alike the Innocent and the Guilty, and the Facts in the History are wholly changed to produce Events, neither probable, necessary, nor just.
               Several Incidents in this Play, are borrowed from the History of the old Prince of Paphlago-nia, in Sidney's Arcadia, which I shall here Transcribe.
               "IT was in the Kingdom of Galacia, the Season being (as in the Depth of Winter) very cold, and as then sodainly Grown to so extream and foul a Storm, that never any Winter, I think, brought forth a fowler Child; so that the Princes were even compelled by the Hail, that the Pride of the Wind blew in their Faces, to seek some shrowding Place, which a certain hollow Rock offering unto them, they made it their Shield against the Tempest's Fu-ry: And so staying there till the Violence thereof was passed, they heard the Speech of a Couple, who not perceiving them, being hid within the rude Canupie, held a strange and pitiful Disputation, which made them Step out, yet in such Sort, as they might see unseen.
               There they perceived an aged Man, and a young, scarcely come to the Age of a Man; both poorly arrayed, extreamly Weather-beat-en; the old Man blind, the young Man lead-ing him; and yet through all these Miseries, in both there seemed to appear a Kind of No-bleness, not suitable to that Affliction: But the

first Words they heard were these of the old Man.
               Well Leonatus, said he, since I cannot per-suade thee to lead me to that which should end my Grief, and thy Trouble, let me now in-treat thee to leave me: Fear not, my Misery cannot be greater than it is, and nothing doth become me but Misery. Fear not the Danger of my blind Steps, I cannot Fall worse than I am, and do not, I pray thee, do not obsti-nately continue to infect thee with my Wretch-edness, but fly, fly from this Region, only worthy of me.
               Dear Father, answered he, do not take a-way from me the only Remnant of my Happi-ness, while I have Power to do you Service, I am not wholly miserable.
               Ah my Son, said he, and with that he groan-ed, as if Sorrow strove to break his Heart, how evil fits it me to have such a Son, and how much doth thy Kindness upbraid my Wickedness.
               These doleful Speaches, and some others to like Purpose (well shewing they had not been born to the Fortune they were in) moved the Princes to go out unto them, and ask the younger, who they were?
               Sirs, answered he with a good Grace, and made the more agreeable by a certain noble Kind of Piteousness, I see well you are Stran-gers, that know not our Misery, so well here known, that no Man dare know but that we must be miserable; indeed our State is such, as though nothing is so needful unto us as Pity, yet nothing is more dangerous unto us, than to make ourselves so known as may stir Pity;

but your Presence promiseth, that Cruelty shall not over-run Hate, and if it did, in Truth our State is sunk below the Degree of Fear. This old Man whom I lead, was lately rightful Prince of this Country of Paphlagonia; by the hard-hearted Ungratefulness of a Son of his, de-prived not only of his Kingdom, whereof no foreign Forces were even able to spoile him, but of his Sight, the Riches which Nature grants to the poorest Creatures; whereby, and by other his unnatural Dealings, he hath been driven to such Grief, as even now he would have had me to have led him to the Top of this Rock, thence to cast himself head-long to Death, and so would have made me, who received my Life of him, to be the Worker of his Destruction. But noble Gen-tlemen, said he, if either of you have a Fa-ther, and feel what dutiful Affection is in-grafted in a Son's Heart, let me entreat you to convey this afflicted Prince to some Place of Rest and Security; amongst your worthy Acts it shall be none of the least, that a King of of such Might and Fame, and so unjustly op-pressed, is in any Sort by you relieved.
               But before they could make him Answer, his Father began to Speak: Ah my Son, said he, how evil an Historian are you, that leave out the chief Knot of all the Discourse? My Wickedness, my Wickedness; and if thou doest it to spare my Eares, the only Sense now left me proper for Knowledge, assure yourself thou doest mistake me: And I take Witness of that Sun which you see, with that he cast up his blind Eyes, as if he would Hunt for Light,

and wish myself in worse Case than I do wish myself, which is as Evill as may be, if I Speak untruly, that nothing is so welcome to my Thoughts, as the publishing of my Shame. Therefore know you Gentlemen (to whom from my Heart I wish that it may not prove some o-minous Foretoken of Misfortune to have met with such a Miser as I am) that whatsoever my Son (o God that Truth binds me to Reproach him with the Name of my Son) hath said is true. But besides those Truthes, this also is true, that having had in lawful Marriage, of a Mo-ther fit to bear Royal Children, this Son (such a one as partly you see, and better shall know by my short Declaration) and so enjoyed the Expectations in the World of him till he was grown to justilfy their Expectations, so as I needed envy no Father for the chief Comfort of Mortality, to leave another ones-self after me. I was carried by a Bastard Son of mine, if at least I be bound to believe the Words of that base Woman my Concubine, his Mother, first to mislike, then to hate, lastly to destroy, or to do my best to destroy this Son, I think, you think undeserving Destruction; what Ways he used to bring me to it, if I should tell you, I should tediously trouble you with as much poisonous Hypocrisy, desperate Fraud, smooth Malice, hidden Ambition, and smiling Envy, as in any living Person could be har-bour'd: But I list it not, no Remembrance of Naughtiness delights me but mine own, and methinks the accusing his Traps, might in some Manner excuse my Fault, which certainly I loth to do. But the Conclusion is, that I

                     VALENTINE.
                     As you enjoin'd me, I have wrote your Letter
                     Unto the secret, nameless Friend of yours;
                     Which I was much unwilling to proceed in,
                     But for my Duty to your Ladyship.
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     I thank you, gentle Servant; 'tis very clerkly done.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     Now trust me, Madam, it came hardly off;
                     For being ignorant to whom it goes,
                     I writ at Random, very doubtfully.
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     Perchance, you think too much of so much Pains.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     No, Madam, so it steed you, I will write,
                     Please you command a Thousand Times as much,
                     And yet—
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     A pretty Period; well, I guess the Sequel;
                     And yet I will not name it; and yet I care not;
                     And yet take this again, and yet I thank you;
                     Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     And yet you will; and yet, another yet.
                  
                  Aside.
                  
                     

gave Orders to some Servants of mine, whom I thought as apt for such Charities as myself, to lead him out into a Forrest, and there to kill him: But those Thieves, better natured to my Son than myself, spared his Life, letting him go to learn to live poorly, which he did, giving himself to be a private Soldier in a Country here by; but as he was ready to be greatly advanced for some noble Pieces of Ser-vice which he did, he heard News of me, who (Drunk in my Affection to that unlawful and unnatural Son of mine) suffered myself to be governed by him, that all Favours and Punish-ments passed by him, all Offices and Places of Importance distributed to his Favourites; so that ere I was aware, I had left myself no-thing but the Name of King, which he shortly weary of too, with many Indignities (if any Thing may be called an Indignity which was laid upon me) threw me out of my Seat, and put out my Eyes; and then proud in his Ty-ranny let me go, neither imprisoning, nor killing me, but rather delighting to make me feel my Misery; Misery indeed, if ever there were any, full of Wretchedness, full of Dis-grace, and fullest of Guiltiness. And as he came to the Crown by so unjust Means, as un-justly he kept it, by Force of Stranger Soldiers in Cittadels, the Nests of Tyranny, and Mur-derers of Liberty; disarming all his own Coun-trymen, that no Man durst shew himself a well willer of mine, to say the Truth, I think few of them being so, considering my cruel Folly to my good Son, and foolish Kindness to my unkind Bastard; but if there were any

who felt a Pity for so great a Fall, and had yet any Sparks of unstaine Duty left in them to-wards me; yet durst they not shew it, scarcely with giving me Alms at their Doors, which yet was the only Sustenance of my distressed Life, nobody daring to shew so much Charity as to lend me a Hand to guide my dark Steps; till this Son of mine, God knows, worthy of a more virtuous, and more fortunate Father, forgetting my abominable Wrongs, not reck-ing Danger, and neglecting the present good Way he was in of doing himself good, came hither to do this kind Office you see him per-form towards me, to my unspeakable Grief; not only because his Kindness is a Glass even to my blind Eyes of my Naughtiness; but that above all Griefs, it grieves me he should despe-rately adventure the loss of his well deserving Life for mine, that yet owe more to Fortune for my Deserts, as if he would carry Mudde in a Chest of Chrystal; for well I know, he that now reign-eth, how much soever (and with good Reason) he despiseth me, of all Men despised; yet he will not let slip any Advantage to make away him whose just Title, enobled by Courage and Goodness, may one Day shake the Seat of a never secure Tyranny; and for this Cause I craved of him to lead me to the Top of this Rock, indeed, I must confess, with meaning to free him from so Serpentine a Companion as I am; but he finding what I purposed, only therein, since he was born, shewed himself dis-obedient to me: And now, Gentlemen, you have the true Story, which, I pray you, publish to the World, that my mischievious Proceedings may be the Glory of his filial Piety, the only Re-ward

now left for so great a Merit; and if it may be, let me obtain that of you which my Son denies me, for never was there more Pity in saving any than in ending me; both because therein my Agony shall end, and so you shall preserve this excellent young Man, who else wilfully follows his own Ruin.
               The Matter, in itself lamentable, lament-ably expressed by the old Prince, which needed not take to himself the Gestures of Pity, since his Face could not put off the Marks thereof, greatly moved the two Princes to Compassion, which could not stay in such Hearts as theirs without seeking Remedy: But, by and by, the Occasion was presented; for Plexirtus (so was the Bastard called) came thither with forty Horse, only of purpose to murder this Bro-ther, of whose coming he had soon Advertise-ment; and thought no Eyes of sufficient Cre-dit in such a Matter but his own, and therefore come himself to be Actor and Spectator: and, as soon as he came, not regarding the weak (as he thought) Guard of but two Men, com-manded some of his Followers to set their Hands to his in the killing of Leonatus; but the young Prince (though not otherwise armed but with a Sword) how falsely soever he was dealt with by others, would not betray him-self; but bravely drawing it our, made the Death of the first that assailed him, warn his Followers to come more warily after him. But then Pyrocles and Musidorus were quickly be-come Parties (so just a Defence deserving as much as old Friendship) and so did behave them among that Company (more injurious than

valiant) that many of them lost their Lives for their wicked Master.
               Yet, perhaps, had the Number of them at last prevailed, if the King of Pontus (lately by them made so) had not come unlooked for to their Succour; who (having had a Dream, which had fixed his Imagination vehemently upon some great Danger, presently to follow those two Princes whom he most dearly loved was come in all Haste, following, as well as he could, their Track, with an Hundred Horses, in that Country, which he thought (considering who then reigned) a fit Place enough to make the Stage of any Tragedy.
               But then the Match had been so ill made for Plexertus, that his ill-led Life, and worse-got-ten Honour, should have tumbled together to Destruction, had there not come in Tydeus and Telenor, with forty or fifty in their Suit, to the Defence of Plexirtus. These two were Bro-thers, of the noblest House of that Country, brought up from their Infancy with Plexirtus; Men of such Prowess as not to know Fear in themselves, and yet to teach it in others that should deal with them: for they had often made their Lives triumph over most terrible Dan-gers; never dismayed, and ever fortunate; and, truly, no more settled in Valour than dis-posed to Goodness and Justice; if either they had lighted on a better Friend, or could have learned to make Friendship a Child, and not a Father of Virtue: But bringing up (rather the Choice) having first knit their Minds unto him (indeed crafty enough, either to hide his Faults or never to shew them, but when they

might pay home) they willingly held out the Course, rather to satisfy him than all the World; and rather to be good Friends than good Men; so as though they did not like the Evil he did, yet they liked him that did the Evil; and though not Counsellors of the Of-fence, yet Protectors of the Offender.
               Now they having heard of this sudden going out with so small a Company in a Country full of evil-wishing Minds toward him (though they knew not the Cause) followed him, till they found him in such Case as they were to venture their Lives, or else he to lose his, which they did with such Force of Mind and Body, that, truly, I may justly say, Pyrocles and Musidorus had never till then found any that could make them so well repeat their hardest Lesson in the Feats of Arms: And, briefly, so they did, that if they overcame not, were they not overcome; but carried away that ungrateful Master of theirs to a Place of Security: howsoever, the Princes laboured to the contrary.
               But this Matter being thus far begun, it be-came not the Constancy of the Princes so to leave it, but in all Haste making Forces both in Pontus and Phrygia, they had in few Days left him but only that one strong Place where he was; for Fear having been the only Knot that had fastened his People unto him, that once untied by a greater Force, they all scattered from him like so many Birds whose Cage had been broken.
               In which Season the blind King, having, in the chief City of his Realm, set the Crown upon his Son Leonatus's Head, with many

Tears, both of Joy and Sorrow, setting forth to the whole People his own Fault and his Son's Virtue, after he had kissed him, and forced his Son to accept Honour of him, as of his new become Subject, even in a Moment died; as it should seem, his Heart, broken with Unkindness and Affliction, stretched so far beyond his Limits with this Excess of Comfort, as it was no longer able to keep safe his vital Spirits.
               But the new King, having no less lovingly performed all Duties to him dead, than alive, pursued on the Siege of his unnatural Brother, as much for the Revenge of his Father, as for the establishing his own Quiet."
               The under plot of Gloster and his two Sons, in the Tragedy of King Lear, is borrowed from this foregoing short History of Leonatus; several of the Circumstances closely copied; and the Characters of the Brothers nearly the same.
               The Adventure of the Rock is heightened by Shakespear; perhaps with too little Atten-tion to Probability. Gloster, though deprived of Sight, might easily be sensible of the Differ-ence between walking on a level Plain, and ascending a sleep and craggy Rock; nor could he possibly suppose, when he fell gently on that Plain, that he had precipitated himself from an immense Height to the Margin of the Sea.
               
                  Shakespear, in the pathetic Description he makes Edgar give of his Father's Death, had certainly the following Passage of the Arcadia in his Eye. "The blind King having in the chief City of his Realm set the Crown upon his Son Leonatus's Head, with many Tears,

both of Joy and Sorrow, setting forth to the People his own Fault, and his Son's Virtue; after he had kissed him, and forced his Son to accept Honour of him, as of his new become Subject, even in a Moment died, as it should seem, his Heart broken with Unkindness and Affliction, stretched so far beyond his Limits with this Excess of Comfort, as it was able no longer to keep safe his vital Spirits." Sidney.
               
               
                  
                     EDGAR.
                     I met my Father with his bleeding Rings,
                     Their precious Gems new lost; became his Guide;
                     Led him, begg'd for him, sav'd him from Despair;
                     Never (O Fault!) reveal'd myself unto him,
                     Until some half Hour past, when I was arm'd.
                     Not sure, though hoping, of this good Success,
                     I asked his Blessing, and from first to last
                     Told him my Pilgrimage: but his flaw'd Heart,
                     Alack, too weak the Conflict to support,
                     'Twixt two Extremes of Passion, Joy and Grief,
                     Burst smilingly.
                  
               
               The Chronicle of Holingshed, and Sidney's Arcadia are not the only Resources Shakespear had for his Tragedy of Lear, if we may be-lieve the Editor of a Collection of old Ballads, published in the Year 1726: in his Introduction to an old Ballad called, A Lamentable Song of the Death of King Lear and his three Daughters, he has these Words.
               "I cannot be certain directly as to the Time when this Ballad was written; but that it was some Years before the Play of Shakespear
                  

appears from several Circumstances, which to mention would swell my Introduction too far beyond its usual Length."
               It is to be wished that this Writer, since he was resolved not to exceed a certain Length in his Introduction, had omitted some Part of it, in order to introduce those Circumstances that were of infinitely more Consequence than any thing else he has said on the Subject of that old Ballad: if it was really written before Shake-spear's Play, that great Poet did not disdain to consult it, but has copied it more closely than either the Chronicle or Sidney. From thence (for 'tis mentioned no where else) he took the Hint of Lear's Madness, and the extravagant and wanton Cruelty his Daughters exercised on him; the Death of King Lear is also exactly copied.
               
                  Spencer seems to have furnished Shakespear with the Hint of Cordelia's Manner of Death: In the tenth Canto of the second Book of his Fairy Queen, he relates the Story of King Lear and his three Daughters; Cordelia, he tells us, after having restored her Father to his Crown, and succeeded to it after his Death, was by her Sister's Children dethroned, and confined a long Time in Prison, so that, over-come by Despair, she hanged herself. In Shakespear Cordelia does not hang herself, but is hanged by a Soldier; a very improper Ca-tastrophe for a Person of such exemplary Virtue.
               The following is the old Ballad I have men-tioned, which bears so exact an Analogy to the

Argument of Shakespear's King Lear, that his having copied it cannot be doubted, if indeed it be true, that it was written before that Tragedy.
               
                  KIng Leir once ruled in this Land,
                  With Princely Power and Peace.
                  And had all Things with Heart's Content,
                  That might his Joys increase:
                  Amongst those Things that Nature gave,
                  Three Daughters fair had he,
                  So Princely seeming beautiful,
                  As fairer could not be.
               
               
                  So on a Time it pleas'd the King
                  A Question thus to move,
                  Which of his Daughters to his Grace
                  Could shew the dearest Love:
                  For to my Age you bring Content;
                  Quoth he, then let me hear
                  Which of you Three in plighted Troth,
                  The kindest will appear.
               
               
                  To whom the Eldest thus began,
                  Dear Father mind, quoth she,
                  Before your Face, to do you good,
                  My Blood shall render'd be:
                  And for your Sake my bleeding Heart
                  Shall here be cut in twain,
                  E're that I see your rev'rend Age
                  The smallest Grief sustain.
               
               
                  And so will I, the Second said,
                  Dear Father, for your Sake,
                  The worst of all Extremities
                  I'll gently undertake:
                  
                     
And serve your Highness Night and Day,
                  With Diligence and Love;
                  That sweet Content and Quietness
                  Discomforts may remove.
               
               
                  In doing so, you glad my Soul,
                  The aged King reply'd;
                  But what say'st thou, my youngest Girl,
                  How is thy Love ally'd?
                  My Love [quoth young Cordelia then]
                  Which to your Grace I owe,
                  Shall be the Duty of a Child,
                  And that is all I'll show.
               
               
                  And wilt thou shew no more, quoth he,
                  Than doth thy Duty bind?
                  I well perceive thy Love is small,
                  When as no more I find:
                  Henceforth I banish thee my Court;
                  Thou art no Child of mine:
                  Nor any Part of this my Realm,
                  By favour shall be thine.
               
               
                  Thy eldest Sisters Loves are more,
                  Than well I can demand;
                  To whom I equally bestow
                  My Kingdom and my Land:
                  My pompous State and all my Goods,
                  That lovingly I may
                  With those thy Sisters be maintain'd,
                  Until my dying Day.
               
               
                  Thus flatt'ring Speeches won Renown,
                  By these two Sisters here:
                  The third had causeless Banishment,
                  Yet was his Love more dear:
                  
                     

                  The Tale of Geneura, from the Italian of Lodovico Ariosto, in the Fifth Book of his Orlando Furioso. Page 231
               
                  Plan of Much Ado About Nothing. Page 257
               
                  The History of Lear, King of the Britains, from Holingshed's Cronicle. Page 273
               
                  Fable of the Tragedy of King Lear. Page 279
            
         
      
      
         
            

                     VALENTINE.
                     What means your Ladyship? do you not like it?
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     Yes, yes, the Lines are very quaintly writ;
                     But since unwillingly, take them again;
                     Nay, take them.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     Madam, they are for you.
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     Ay, ay; you writ them, Sir, at my Re-quest;
                     But I will none of them; they are for you;
                     I would have had them wrote more movingly.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     Please you, I'll write your Ladyship another.
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     And when it's writ, for my Sake read it over;
                     And if it please you, so; if not, why so.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     If it please me, Madam, what then?
                  
                  
                     SILVIA.
                     Why if it please you, take it for your Labour:
                     And so good Morrow Servant. Exit.
                     
                  
                  
                     
For poor Cordelia patiently
                  Went wand'ring up and down,
                  Unhelp'd, unpity'd, gentle Maid,
                  Through many an English Town:
               
               
                  Until at last in famous France
                  
                  She gentler Fortunes found;
                  Though poor and bare, yet she was deem'd
                  The fairest on the Ground:
                  Where when the King her Virtues heard,
                  And this fair Lady seen,
                  With full Consent of all his Court,
                  He made his Wife and Queen.
               
               
                  Her Father, old King Lear this while
                  With his two Daughters staid,
                  Forgetful of their promis'd Loves,
                  Full soon the same deny'd;
                  And living in Queen Regan's Court,
                  The eldest of the twain,
                  She took from him his chiefest Means,
                  And most of all his Train.
               
               
                  For whereas twenty Men were wont
                  To wait with bended Knee:
                  She gave Allowance but to Ten,
                  And after scarce to Three:
                  Nay, one she thought too much for him,
                  So took she all away,
                  In hope that in her Court, good King,
                  He would no longer stay.
               
               
                  Am I rewarded thus, quoth he,
                  In giving all I have
                  Unto my Children, and to beg
                  For what I lately gave?
                  
                     
I'll go unto my Gonoril;
                  My Second Child, I know,
                  Will be more kind and pitiful,
                  And will relieve my Woe.
               
               
                  Full fast he hies then to her Court;
                  Where when she hears his Moan,
                  Return'd him Answer, That she griev'd,
                  That all his Means were gone:
                  But no way could relieve his Wants;
                  Yet if that he would stay
                  Within her Kitchen, he should have
                  What Scullions gave away.
               
               
                  When he had heard with bitter Tears,
                  He made his Answer then;
                  In what I did let me be made
                  Example to all Men.
                  I will return again, quoth he,
                  Unto my Regan's Court;
                  She will not use me thus, I hope,
                  But in a kinder Sort.
               
               
                  Where when he came she gave Command
                  To drive him thence away:
                  When he was well within her Court,
                  (She said) he would not stay.
                  Then back again to Gonorill,
                  
                  The woful King did hie,
                  That in her Kitchen he might have,
                  What Scullion Boys set by.
               
               
                  But there of that he was deny'd,
                  Which she had promis'd late:
                  For once refusing, he should not
                  Come after to her Gate.
                  
                     
Thus 'twixt his Daughters, for Relief,
                  He wander'd up and down;
                  Being glad to feed on Beggars Food,
                  That lately wore a Crown.
               
               
                  And calling to remembrance then
                  His youngest Daughter's Words,
                  That said the Duty of a Child
                  Was all that Love affords:
                  But doubting to repair to her,
                  Whom he had banish'd so,
                  Grew frantick mad; for in his Mind
                  He bore the Wounds of Woe:
               
               
                  Which made him rend his milk-white Locks,
                  And Tresses from his Head,
                  And all with Blood bestain his Cheeks,
                  With Age and Honour spread:
                  To Hills and Woods, and watry Founts,
                  He made his hourly Moan,
                  Till Hills and Woods, and sensless Things,
                  Did seem so sigh and groan.
               
               
                  Ev'n thus possess'd with Discontents,
                  He passed o're to France,
                  
                  In hope from fair Cordelia there,
                  To find some gentler Chance.
                  Most virtuous Dame! which when she heard
                  Of this her Father's Grief,
                  As Duty bound, she quickly sent
                  Him Comfort and Relief:
               
               
                  And by a Train of Noble Peers,
                  In brave and gallant Sort,
                  She gave in Charge he should be brought
                  To Aganippus' Court;
                  
                     
Whose Royal King, whose Noble Mind,
                  So freely gave Consent,
                  To muster up his Knights at Arms,
                  To Fame and Courage bent:
               
               
                  And so to England came with Speed,
                  To repossess King Lear,
                  
                  And drive his Daughters from their Thrones,
                  By his Cordelia dear:
                  Where she, true-hearted Noble Queen,
                  Was in the Battel slain;
                  Yet he, good King, in his old Days,
                  Possess'd his Crown again.
               
               
                  But when he heard Cordelia's Death,
                  Who dy'd indeed for Love
                  Of her dear Father, in whose Cause
                  She did this Battel move;
                  He swooning, fell upon her Breast,
                  From whence he never parted;
                  But on her Bosom left his Life,
                  That was so truly hearted.
               
               
                  The Lords and Nobles when they saw
                  The Ends of these Events,
                  The other Sisters unto Death
                  They doomed by Consents:
                  And being dead, their Crowns they left
                  Unto the next of Kin:
                  Thus have you seen the Fall of Pride,
                  And disobedient Sin.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   


                     SPEED.
                     O Test unseen inscrutable, invisible,
                     As a Nose on a Man's Face, or a Weather-cock on a Steeple,
                     My Master sues to her, and she hath taught her Suitor,
                     He being her Pupil, to become her Tutor:
                     O excellent Device! was there ever heard a better,
                     That my Master being the Scribe to himself should write the Letter!
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     How now, Sir, what are you reasoning with yourself?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Nay, I was rhiming; 'tis you that have the Reason.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     To do what?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     To be a Spokesman for Madam Silvia.
                     
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     To whom?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     To yourself, why, she wooes you by a Figure.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     What Figure?
                  
                  
                     

                     SPEED.
                     By a Letter I should say.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     Why, she hath not writ to me.
                  
                  
                     SEEED.
                     What need she.
                     When she hath made you write to yourself;
                     Why, do you not perceive the Jest?
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     No, believe me.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     No believing you, indeed Sir, but did you perceive her earnest?
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     She gave me none, except an angry Word.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Why, she hath given you a Letter.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     That's the Letter I wrote to her Friend.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     And that Letter hath she delivered, and there's an End.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     I would it were no worse.
                  
                  
                     

                     SPEED.
                     I'll warrant you, 'tis as well:
                     "For often have you writ to her, and she in "Modesty,
                     "Or else, for want of idle Time, could not "again reply;
                     "Or fearing else some Messenger, that might "her Mind discover,
                     "Herself hath taught her Love himself to write "unto her Lover."
                     All this I speak in Print; for in Print I found it.
                     Why muse you, Sir? 'tis Dinner-time.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     I have dined;
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Ay, but hearken, Sir; tho' the Cameleon Love
                     Can feed on the Air, I am one that am nou-rished
                     By my Victuals, and would fain have Meat:
                     Oh be not like your Mistress; be moved, be moved.
                  
               
               
                  Silvia, notwithstanding this seeming Indif-ference, is so violently in Love with Valentine, that being prevented in her Design of mar-rying him privately, and in Consequence of her refusing to marry Sir Thurio (a foolish Knight whom the Duke thinks a fit Match for the Princess, his Daughter, because he has a great deal of Money) being confined in a high Tower, resolves to forsake her Father's Court, and follow the banished Valentine to Mantua.
               
               
                  
The poor Princess being in such a perplex-ing Situation, confined, guarded, and not suf-fered to have any Correspondence with any Person, but her destined Husband Thurio, and her Lover's false Friend Protheus one would imagine some great Degree of Invention must be exerted to contrive a probable Stratagem to release her.
               The Poet gets over this Difficulty with wonderful Ease: Silvia is shewn talking from her Chamber-window in the Tower in broad Day, to Sir Eglamour, her Confidant, below, settling with him, whom she desires to accom-pany her, the Method of her Escape, which is to be effected by his meeting her with Horses at Friar Patrick's Cell, whither she intends to go to Confession.
               To make all this probable, 'tis necessary that the Spies and Guards set over this Prin-cess, must be all blind, otherwise she and Sir Eglamour must unavoidably be seen by them. —Tis also necessary that they should be deaf, or else they could not fail to hear the whole Contrivance; for her Chamber, we are inform-ed, is in a high Tower, at a great Distance from the Ground, which made it impassible for Sir Eglamour and her to settle their Schemes in Whispers: and lastly, 'tis absolutely neces-sary, that this confined Princess should have the Liberty of rambling alone out of her Tow-er to Confession, or she could not so confi-dently

make an Assignation with Eglamour at Friar Patrick's Cell, nor so securely keep it.
               Nothing, can be more inconsistent than the Character of Valentine; nothing more impro-per than the Manners attributed to him as a Lover.
               Passionately enamoured as he is with Silvia, he recommends a new Lover to her with the utmost Earnestness, and will not be satisfied 'till she promises to entertain him.
               When he is banished to Milan, and in the extreamest Despair for the Loss of his Mistress, the Fear of Death prevails upon him to be-come the Head of a Gang of Banditti, and having in this Situation fortunately rescued his beloved Silvia, from the Violence of his treacherous Friend, who was going to ravish her, a few repentant Words uttered by that Friend, makes him resolve to resign her to him, notwithstanding the generous Proof she had given him of her Tenderness, in run-ning so many Hazards to be with him.
               
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty Sorrow
                     Be a sufficient Ransom for Offence
                     I tender't here; I do as truly suffer
                     As e'er I did commit.
                  
                  
                     VALENTINE.
                     —Then I am paid:
                     And once again I do receive thee,
                     
                        
Who by Repentance is not satisfied,
                     Is nor of Heaven, nor Earth; for these are pleas'd
                     By Penitence the Eternal's Wrath's appeas'd,
                     And that my Love may appear plain and free,
                     All that was mine, in Silvia I give thee.
                  
               
               This Part of the Intrigue of the Play, such as it is, that relates to the Loves of Silvia and Valentine, is probably the Poet's own Inven-tion; but the Adventure of Julia and Pro-theus are copied closely from the Pastoral Ro-mance.
               The Poet drops the Story at the Flight of Silvia, and adds all the remaining Circum-stances.
               He also paints Protheus in much more dis-advantageous Colours, than he is represented in the Original; there we find him indeed in-constant to his Mistress, who loves him passi-onately, and forsaking her for one that treats him with the utmost Disdain.
               But Shakespear shews him treacherous in the highest Degree to his Friend, base and ungrateful to the Duke his Benefactor, and guilty of intended Violence towards the Wo-man he professes to love; yet, wicked as he is, he escapes not only without Punishment, but is made as happy as the renewed Tender-ness of his injured Friend, and the inviolable Fidelity of his once loved Julia can make him.
               
                  
The Character of Julia is much nearer the Original than that of Protheus; but in the Romance we find her, when she is in the Quality of a Page to Don Felix, exerting a very extraordinary kind of Generosity, in solli-citing her Rival's Favour for her Lover.
               
                  Shakespear very judiciously makes her act a quite contrary Part, instead of endeavouring to move her Rival's Compassion for Protheus, she tries to engage it for the unhappy Object of his former Affection, representing her Love, her Constancy, her Grief at being abandoned, in the most pathetic Terms, and by artfully intermixing some Praises of her Beauty, insi-nuates the little Reliance she ought to have upon the prostituted Vows of a Man so prone to change.
               The Behaviour of Felismena upon her Maid's offering her a Letter from Don Felix, in the Romance, is plainly the Foundation of the following Scene in the Play; and though the Dialogue is not copied, yet the ridiculous Prudery of the Mistress, and the artful Ma-nagement of the Maid, have so near a Re-semblance, that it cannot be doubted Shake-spear had it in his Eye.
               
                  

                  
                     
                        
                           SCENE JULIA's Chamber.
                           
                           
                              Enter JULIA and LUCETTA.
                           
                              JULIA.
                              But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
                              Woud'st thou then counsel me to fall in Love.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Ay, Madam, so you stumble not unheed-fully.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Of all the fair Resort of Gentlemen,
                              That ev'ry Day with parl encounter me,
                              In thy Opinion which is the worthiest Love?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Please you, repeat their Names; I'll shew my Mind
                              According to my shallow simple Skill.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
                              
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              As of a Knight well spoken, neat and fine;
                              But were I you, he never should be mine.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              What think'st thou of the rich Mercutio?
                              
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Well of his wealth, but of himself, so, so.
                           
                           
                              

                              JULIA.
                              What think'st thou of the gentle Protheus?
                              
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Lord, Lord, to see what Folly reigns in us!
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              How now, what means this Passion at his Name?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Pardon, dear Madam, 'tis a passing Shame,
                              That I unworthy Body as I am,
                              Should censure thus one lovely Gentleman.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Why not on Protheus, as of all the rest?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Then thus; of many good, I think him best.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Your Reason?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              I have no other but a Woman's Reason,
                              I think him so, because I think him so.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              And would'st thou have me cast my Love on him?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Ay, if you thought your Love not cast away.
                           
                           
                              

            Shakespear Illustrated.
            
               Fable of the TWO GENTLEMEN of VERONA.
               
               
                  VALENTINE, a young Gen-tleman of Verona, is sent by his Father to travel; he goes to Milan to attend the Emperor, and falls▪ in love with Silvia, Daughter to the Duke of that Place: she returns his Affection with equal Ardour, but being promised by her Father to Thurio, a Man whom she hates, they are obliged to keep their mutual Passion secret.
               
                  Protheus, the Friend of Valentine, remains at Veróna, courting Julia, a Lady with whom he had been long enamoured; just as he had obtained her Promise to reward his Love, his

                              JULIA.
                              Why he of all the rest hath never mov'd me.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Yet he of all the rest I think best loves ye.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              His little speaking shews his Love but small.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              The Fire that's closest kept, burns most of all.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              They do not love, that do not shew their Love.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Oh, they love least, that let Men know their Love.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              I would I knew his Mind.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Peruse this Paper, Madam.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              To Julia; say, from whom?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              That the Contents will shew.
                           
                           
                              

                              JULIA.
                              Say, say; who gave it thee?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Sir Valentine's Page; and sent, I think, from Protheus,
                              
                              He would have given it you, but I, being in the Way,
                              Did in your Name receive it; pardon the Fault, I pray.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Now, by my Modesty, a goodly Broker!
                              Dare you presume to harbour wanton Lines,
                              To whisper and conspire against my Youth?
                              Now, trust me, 'tis an Office of great Worth,
                              And you an Officer fit for the Place.
                              There, take the Paper, see it be return'd;
                              Or else return no more into my Sight.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              To plead for Love deserves more Fee than Hate.
                           
                           
                              JUILA.
                              Will ye be gone?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Thus you may ruminate. Exit.
                              
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              And yet I would I had o'erlook'd the Letter,
                              It were a Shame to call her back again;
                              And pray her to a Fault for which I chid her.
                              
                                 
What Fool is she, that knows I am a Maid,
                              And would not force the Letter to my View?
                              Since Maids in Modesty say No to that
                              Which they would have the Proff'rer construe, Ay.
                              Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish Love,
                              That like a testy Babe, will scratch the Nurse,
                              And presently, all humbled, kiss the Rod?
                              How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
                              When willingly I would have had her here;
                              How angerly I taught my Brow to frown,
                              When inward Joy enforc'd my Heart to smile,
                              My Penance is to call Lucetta back,
                              And ask Remission for my Folly past.
                              What, ho! Lucetta!
                              
                           
                           
                              Re-enter LUCETTA.
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              What would your Ladyship?
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Is't near Dinner-time.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              I would it were;
                              That you might kill your Stomach on your Meat,
                              And not upon your Maid.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              What is't that you
                              Took up so gingerly?
                           
                           
                              

                              LUCETTA.
                              Nothing.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Why didst thou stoop then?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              To take a Paper up that I let fall,
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              And is that Paper nothing?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Nothing concerning me.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Then let it lye for those that it concerns.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Madam, it will not lye where it concerns,
                              Unless it have a false Interpreter.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Some Love of yours hath writ to you in Rhime.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              That I might sing it, Madam, to a Tune;
                              Give me a Note, your Ladyship can set.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              As little by such Lays as may be possible;
                              Best sing it to the Tune of Light o' Love.
                              
                           
                           
                              

                              LUCETTA.
                              It is too heavy for so light a Tune.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Heavy! belike, it hath some burthen then.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              And why not you?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              I cannot reach so high.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Let's see your Song;
                              How now, Minion!
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Keep Tune there still, so you will sing it out;
                              And yet, methinks, I do not like this Tune.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              You do not?
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              No, Madam, 'tis too sharp.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              You, Minion, are too saucy.
                           
                           
                              

                              LUCETTA.
                              Nay, now you are too flat;
                              And mar the Concord with too harsh a Discant▪
                              
                              There wanteth but a Mean, to fill your Song.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              The Mean is drown'd with your unruly Bass.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Indeed, I bid the Bass for Protheus.
                              
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              This Babble shall not henceforth trouble me;
                              Here is a Coil with Protestation. tears it.
                              
                              Go, get you gone; and let the Papers lye;
                              You would be fingering them to anger me.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              She makes it strange, but she would be best pleas'd
                              To be so anger'd with another Letter. Exit.
                              
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Nay, would I were so anger'd with the same!
                              Oh hateful Hands, to tear such loving Words!
                              Injurious Wasps, to feed on such sweet Honey,
                              And kill the Bees, that yield it, with your Stings!
                              I'll kiss each several Paper for Amends:
                              Look, here is writ kind Julia,—unkind Julia,
                              
                              As in Revenge of thy Ingratitude
                              I throw thy Name against the bruising Stones;
                              Trampling contemptuously on thy Disdain.
                              Look here is writ, Love-wounded Protheus.
                              
                              
                                 
Poor wounded Name i
                                    •
                                  my Bosom as a Bed
                              Shall lodge thee, 'till thy Wound be throughly heal'd
                              And thus I search it with a sav'ring Kiss.
                              But, twice, or thrice, was Protheus written down;
                              Be calm, good Wind, blow not a Word away;
                              'Till I have found each Letter in the Letter,
                              Except mine own Name: That some Whirl-wind bear
                              Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging Rock,
                              And throw it thence into the raging Sea;
                              So here in one Line is his Name twice writ:
                              Poor forlorn Protheus, passionate Protheus,
                              
                              To the sweet Julia: that I'll tear away;
                              And yet I will not, sith so prettily
                              He couples it to his complaining Names:
                              Thus will I fold them one upon another;
                              Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
                           
                           
                              Enter LUCETTA.
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Madam, Dinner is ready, and your Father stays.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Well, let us go.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              What, shall these Papers lye like Tell-tales here?
                           
                           
                              

                              JULIA.
                              If thou respect them, best to take them up.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Nay, I was taken up for laying them down
                              Yet here they shall not lye, for catching Cold.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              I see you have a Month's Mind to them.
                           
                           
                              LUCETTA.
                              Ay, Madam, you may say what Sights you see,
                              I see Things too, although your judge I wink.
                           
                           
                              JULIA.
                              Come, come, will't please you go.
                           
                           Exeunt.
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Play every where abounds with the most ridiculous Absurdities in the Plot and Conduct of the Incidents, as well as with the greatest Improprieties in the Manners and Sen-timents of the Persons.
               The Princess, because it is necessary she should meet with her Lover in the Wood, without having the Power of making herself invisible, gets away from her Guards, and out of her high Tower, and gallops like an Ama-zon, attended only by one Squire to Mantua.
               
               'Tis no Wonder therefore, that in such an Equipage, and engaged in such a romantic De-sign, she should fall into the Hands of the

Banditti; nor that she should meet with her Lover amongst them, since the Poet had pre-pared us for this wonderful Incident, by a pre-ceding one, full as astonishing, in making the noble Youth the Captain of this Band of Villains.
               It seeming necessary also to the Poet's De-sign, that the Duke of Milan should fall into the same Danger, we find the good old Prince, upon the News of his Daughter's Flight, in-stead of dispatching several Parties of his Guards different Ways to overtake and bring her back, mounting his Horse himself, and with no other Attendants than Protheus, who is a Stranger in his Dominions, and Thurio, the foolish Knight he designed for his Son-in-law, riding-away in Search of her.
               'Tis easy to see, that by this Management he must fall into the Hands of the Banditti, and accordingly there we meet with him next. The Duke's bestowing his Daughter upon Va-lentine, whom he finds at the Head of this desperate Gang of Ruffians, after refusing her to him, when he lived in his Court with an unblemished Reputation, is indeed a little in-comprehensible, as is also Valentine's Willing-ness to resign his beloved Mistress to his false Friend, who had offered Violence to her Cha-stity, and Silvia's giving her Hand to him, after so striking a Proof of his Indifference and Ingratitude.
               I cannot omit taking Notice of one Blun-der among many others I shall pass over; Va-lentine;

after having just before declared, that it is with Difficulty he restrains the Villains who had chosen him for their Chief from the most brutal Outrages, recommends them to the Duke's Favour with these Words;

                     These banish'd Men that I have kept withal,
                     Are Men endow'd with worthy Qualities:
                     Forgive them what they have committed here,
                     And let them be recalled from their Exile;
                     They are reform'd, civil, full of Good,
                     And fit for great Employment, worthy Lord.
                  
               
               Their Reformation must be very sudden in-deed, for 'tis not more than three Minutes since he had complained of their Villainy, and he could have no Opportunity of knowing this Change in their Manners, for from that Time, 'till the End of the Play, he has no farther Communication with them.
               Yet it is not enough to make him sollicit their Pardon, but he must also recommend them to great Employments, and the poor easy Duke gives him an absolute Power of pro-viding for them as he pleases.
               The Wit in this Play consists in Puns, Quibbles, Antitheses's, and playing upon Words, and the Humour is all divided be-tween Launce and his Dog. The last of these Personages is indeed a Mute, which those, who contend for the Learning of Shakespear, may say, he introduced in Imitation of the Ancients, as he gives Rise like those in the

Father sends him likewise to the Emperor's Court: he parts with Julia with many Pro-testations of eternal Constancy; but, at his Ar-rival at Milan, being introduced by his Friend Valentine to Sylvia, he forgets Julia, falls pas-sionately in love with that Lady, and resolves to gain her for himself.
               
                  Valentine not suspecting this Treachery in his Friend, acquaints him with the History of his Love, and begs his Assistance in stealing away the Lady, who had consented to marry him privately that Night.
               
                  Protheus promises to serve him, but pre-tending Business to avoid him, goes to the Duke, to whom he relates all that his Friend had just before intrusted him with. The Duke in a Rage confines his Daughter in a Tower, and banishes Valentiné from Milan.
               
               
                  Protheus he employs to plead for Thurio to his Daughter, who by that Means getting Access to her, declares his own Passion, and is repulsed with Disdain.
               
                  Julia, ignorant of her Lover's Falshood, and impatient of his Absence, disguises herself in the Habit of a Page, and travels to Milan; there she lodges at the same Inn where her Lover does, and is informed by the Host that Protheus was in love with the Duke's Daughter, to whom that Night, in Thurio's Name, he gives a Serenade.
               
                  

ancient Comedy to several Incidents in the Play. I shall transcribe a Scene between Pro-theus and Speed, and a Speech of Launcet to his Dog, which may serve as a Specimen of the Wit and Humour of the Comedy.
               
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Sir Protheus, save you; save you, my Master.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     But now he parted hence, t'embark for Mi-lan.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,
                     And I have play'd the Sheep in losing him.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Indeed, a Sheep doth very often stray,
                     An if the Shepherd be awhile away.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     You conclude that my Master is a Shepherd then, and I a Sheep?
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     I do.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Why then my Horns are his Horns, whe-ther I wake or sleep.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     A silly Answer, and fitting well a Sheep.
                  
                  
                     

                     SPEED.
                     This proves me still a Sheep.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     True; and thy Master a Shepherd.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Nay, that I can deny by a Circumstance.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     It shall go hard, but I'll prove it by another.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     The Shepherd seeks the Sheep, and not the Sheep the Shepherd; but I seek my Master, and my Master seeks not me; therefore I am no Sheep.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     The Sheep for Fodder follows the Shepherd, the Shepherd for the Food follows not the Sheep; thou for Wages followest thy Master, thy Master for Wages follows not thee; there-fore thou art a Sheep.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Such another Proof will make me cry Baâ.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     But dost thou hear? gavest thou my Letter to Julia?
                     
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Aye, Sir, I, a lost Mutton, gave your Let-ter to her, a lac'd Mutton; and she, a lac'd

Mutton, gave me, a lost Mutton, nothing for my Labour.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Here's too small a Pasture for such Store of Muttons.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     If the Ground be over-charg'd, you were best stick her.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Nay, in that you are astray; 'twere best pound you.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Nay, Sir, less than a Pound shall serve me for carrying your Letter.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     You mistake: I mean the Pound; a Penfold.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     From a Pound to a Pin; fold it over and over, it is three-fold too little for carrying a Letter to your Lover.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     But, what said she? Did she nod?
                  
                  Speed nods.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     I.
                  
                  
                     

                     PROTHEUS.
                     Nod I: Why that's Noddy.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     You mistook, Sir: I said, She did nod:
                     And you ask me, if she did nod; and I said, I.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     And that, set together, is Noddy.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Now you have taken the Pains to set it to-gether, take it for your Pains.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     No, no; you shall have it for bearing the Letter.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Why, Sir; how do you bear with me?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Marry, Sir, the Letter, very orderly;
                     Having nothing but the Word Noddy for my Pains.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Beshrew me, but you have a quick Wit.
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     And yet it cannot overtake your slow Purse.
                  
                  
                     

                     PROTHEUS.
                     Come, come, open the Matter in brief: What said she?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Open your Purse, that the Money and the Matter may be both at once delivered.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Well, Sir; here is for your Pains. What said she?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Truly, Sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     Why? Could'st thou perceive so much from her?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     Sir, I cou'd perceive nothing at all from her:
                     No, not so much as a Ducat for delivering your Letter:
                     And being so hard to me that brought your Mind,
                     I fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling her Mind.
                  
                  
                     PROTHEUS.
                     What! said she nothing?
                  
                  
                     SPEED.
                     No, not so much as—take this for your Pains.
                     
                        
To testify your Bounty, I thank you; you have tester'd me;
                     In requital whereof, henceforth carry your Letter yourself;
                     And, Sir, I'll commend you to my Master.
                     
                        Enter LAUNCE with his Dog.
                     
                     When a Man's Servant shall play the Cur with him, look you, it goes hard: One that I brought up of a Puppy; one that I saved from drowning, when three or four of his blind Brothers and Sisters went to it; I have taught him even as one would say, precisely, Thus would I teach a Dog. I went to deliver him as a Present to Mrs. Sylvia, from my Master; and I came no sooner into the Dining-Chamber, but he steps me to her Trencher, and steals her Capon's Leg. Oh! 'tis a foul Thing, when a Cur cannot keep himself in all Companies. I would have, as one would say, one that takes upon him to be a Dog indeed, to be, as it were, a Dog at all things. If I had no more Wit than he, to take a Fault upon me that he did, I think verily he had been hanged for it; sure as I live he had suffered for't. You shall judge: He thrust me himself into the Company of three or four Gentlemen-like Dogs, under the Duke's Table. He had not been there (bless the Mark!) — — — Out with the Dog, says one: What Cur is that? says another: Whip him out, says a third: Hang him up, says the Duke. I having been acquainted with the Smell before, knew it was Crab; and goes me to the Fellow that whips the Dog; Friend, quoth I, you mean to whip

the Dog: Ay, marry, I do, quoth he: You do him the more Wrong, quoth I; 'twas I did the Thing you wot of. He makes no more ado, but whips me out of the Chamber. How many Masters would do this for their Servants! Nay, I'll be sworn, I have sat in the Stocks for Puddings he hath stolen; otherwise he had been executed. I have stood on the Pillory for Geese he hath killed; otherwise he had suffer'd for it. Thou think'st not of this now: Nay, I remember the Trick you served me; when I took my Leave of Madam Silvia, did I not bid thee mark me, and do as I do? — — — — &amp;c. &amp;c.
                  
               
            
            
               

               The Story of Troilus and Cressida, From CHAUCER.
               
                  THE Story of the Trojan War is well known; the Princes of Greece united in Arms for the Recovery of Helen, and to re-venge her Rape, had besieged Troy almost ten Years with va-rious Success; when Calcas, one of the prin-cipal Lords of Troy, went over to their Party.
               To this Nobleman, who was very well skilled in Divine Mysteries, Apollo revealed the certain Destruction of Troy, and to prevent his being a Partaker in the foredoom'd Desolation of his Country, he stole privately out of the Ci-ty, and fled to the Grecian Camp, making Use of his Skill in foreseeing Things to come, to recommend him to the Greeks, who finding great Advantage from this his Science, held him in high Esteem.
               The News of Calcas's Flight being spread through the City, the People enraged at his Treachery, were for sacrificing all the Rela-tions and Friends he had left behind him to their Revenge.
               
                  

                  Cressida, his only Daughter, a young Lady of exquisite Beauty, being wholly ignorant of her Father's Flight, was more than any other astonished at the News. Distracted with Shame for the Baseness and Treachery of her Father, and wild with her Fears of the Insults of the enraged Populace, she cast herself at the Feet of Hector in a mourning Habit, and, with Tears protesting her own Innocence, implored his Protection.
               The generous Heart of Hector was greatly moved with the Distress of the kneeling Beau-ty. He raised her up, and assured her, her Father's Treason should reflect no Dishonour upon her, that she should enjoy his Estates, and, if she pleased, live happy in Troy under his Protection.
               
                  Cressida thanked him with a graceful Hu-mility, and returning to her House, began, from thenceforward, to live with the greatest Privacy and Retirement; so nicely conscious she was of her Father's Disgrace, and so de-licately attentive to her own unhappy Situa-tion, that the People, charmed with her Con-duct, no longer remembered the Treason of her Father to her Disadvantage.
               It was the Custom in Troy to celebrate the Feast of Pallas in the Month of April, the King's Sons, with the Matrons and Maids of Quality, and the Knights of Troy, assisted at this Solemnity.
               
                  
The charming Cressida, though dressed in a Widow's Habit, appeared with a thousand Advantages among the Rest. Her Beauty, like a bright Star breaking through the Veil of an envious Cloud, dazzled the whole Assembly; unmoved with the murmured Praises she heard around her, and desirous of escaping Notice, she stood with humble Modesty near the Door; bending her lovely Eyes on the Ground, while the Blushes which sometimes crimsoned over her fair Face, and the sweet Pensiveness of her Attitude, shewed her Thoughts were more employed on her Father's Unhappiness, than the Admiration her Form excited.
               
                  Troilus, whose Eyes were ever wandering in search of fair Objects, though fixed on no particular one, was among the last, who took Notice of the beauteous Cressida. This young Prince, gay, handsome, and a Warrior, had never felt the soft Inquietudes of Love; he despised the Power of the winged Deity, and triumphing in his own Indifference, laughed at the Torments of others; roving, as was his Custom, through the Temple with some of his young Knights, and behold-ing with wandering Glances the Ladies as they stood, often slily leering on his Companions, to observe if any of them breathed a Sigh, or darted a desiring Look at one of them. The God of Love, offended with his continual Mockeries, bent his Bow that Moment in a Rage, and sent one of his keenest Arrows to

                  Julia is present at the Music, which being over, Protheus entertains Sylvia with his Passion, in the hearing of his disguised Mistress, who retires to her Inn in great Discontent, where Protheus coming soon after, sees her, and not knowing her, hires her for his Page.
               
                  Valentine in his Journey to Mantua, is seized in a Forest by some Out-laws, who make him their King.
               
                  Silvia having contrived to escape out of her Tower, follows her Lover, and passing through the Forest, is taken by those Out-laws: the Duke, Protheus and Thurio follow her, and Julia Protheus.
               
               
                  Protheus finding her in the Hands of these Ruffians, who were going to offer her Vio-lence, rescues her, but his Service being ill re-ceived, and his Love absolutely denied, he threat-ens her with Force likewise. This happening near Valentine's Cave, who, unseen, had been a Witness of his Friend's Treachery, he rushes out, delivers Silvia, and making himself known, passionately upbraids Protheus with his Baseness.
               
                  Protheus, struck with Remorse and Shame, acknowledges his Guilt, professes his Repent-ance, and implores of his Friend Pardon. Va-lentine readily grants it, and as a Proof of his sincere Reconcilement, offers to resign Silvia to him; the disguised Julia being present at this De-claration,

his Heart: the lovely pensive Cressida was the Object that fixed his Attention.
               Oh Heavens! cried he to himself, while his Eyes feasted on the ravishing Beauties of her Face, Where hast thou been hid thus long, thou that art so lovely fair? Where has such matchless Beauty been concealed, that my de-lighted Eyes were never blessed with it before? While he was thus contemplating her with Emo-tions he had 'till then been a Stranger to, Cres-sida raising her Head, turned her bright Eyes by Chance on Troilus, and with that Look com-pleated the Conquest of his Heart. He sigh-ed, as with an ardent Gaze he met the lan-guishing, yet too powerful Glance of the af-flicted Beauty; and she hastily averting her Face, again he sighed, and conscious of his former Injuries to Love, turned to his Com-panions to see if any of them observed his new Disorder, leaving the Temple, at length he went Home to his own Palace.
               Solitude now was all he sought, and dismiss-ing his Companions, on Pretence of private Business, he retired to his Chamber to indulge his new Meditations, there making a Mirror of his Mind, he contemplated the Image of the beauteous Cressida; his raptured Fancy dwelt upon the inchanting Look she gave him, and every recollected Charm added Strength to the fatal Passion that consumed him.
               Love giving new Ardour to the bright Flames of Glory, he rushed with more than

mortal Courage to the Field; yet was it not his Hatred to the Greeks, nor his Desire of preserving the Town, which poured the Thun-der of his resistless Arm upon the Foe: Re-nown he fought, but fought it only to make him more worthy of the lovely Cressida. True Love is ever accompanied with Diffidence and Fear: Troilus, though a Prince, young, love-ly, and the Object of general Esteem; yet pined in seeret, without daring to reveal his Passion to her who inspired it.
               Despair took Possession of his Soul at the same Moment that he became a Slave to Love; he passed whole Nights in S
                     •
                  ghs, Tears, and Complaints; his Cheeks had no longer the Freshness of Youth, his Eyes lost their spark-ling Lustre, Melancholy was painted in his Mien, and Dejection sat on every Feature.
               
                  Pandarus, the Uncle of Cressida, and the intimate Friend of Troilus, having for some time observed, and wondered at this strange Alteration, resolved to make him, if possible, disclose the Cause: For this Purpose he went early one Morning to his Palace, and entering his Apartment, without giving any previous Notice, found the unhappy Youth seated on his Bed, his Arms folded passionately on his Breast, his Head reclined, and all the Marks of the most profound Sorrow strongly impressed on his Countenance.
               
                  Pandarus, lost in Astonishment and Grief, stood some Moments at a Distance, contem-plating

him without being perceived by the love-sick Prince, whose Thoughts were so intensely fixed on the Idea of the lovely Cres-sida, that he had no Eyes or Ears for external Objects. O ye Gods! exclaimed Pandarus at last, what can this mean, is it the Greeks, my Prince, that have reduced you to this Con-dition? O Shame to Manhood! shall those Enemies of our Country boast of having over-thrown one of its strongest Pillars? Or has some enthusiastic Fit of Devotion siezed thy Mind, and given thee up to more than Wo-man's Softness? Art thou mourning for some imaginary Crime, and trying to appease the offended Deities with Tears?
               The artful Pandarus spoke in this Manner, not because he doubted the Courage of Troilus, of which he had given a Thousand glorious Proofs, but that by this Reproach, he might awake him from that Lethargy of Woe in which he saw him sunk, and rouse him to a more noble Passion.
               The Prince slowly raising his Head, and be-holding his Friend, with Eyes that betrayed no other Emotion than Grief; Ah, said he, with a Voice almost smothered with Sighs, what ill Chance brought thee hither to behold my lost Condition? Leave me, I conjure thee by the Gods, stay not to see me die, for well I know my Death will give thee Pain; and yet, alas, such is my extream Affliction, that Death is all the Relief I can expect; but yet, pursued he, after a little Pause, and raising his

Voice, while a faint Blush dispelled for a Mo-ment the languid Paleness of his Cheek, Think not, my Pandarus, that it is Dread of the Greeks which has brought thy Friend thus low; ah! 'tis a Power stronger far than theirs; not the united Force of their whole Army could sink thy Troilus thus. My Soul, my Soul's subdued, and that's beyond their Reach. Oh, my Pandarus, enquire no more; I cannot, dare not, will not tell thee more; leave me, again I bid thee leave me, it is not fit the Cause of my Despair should be revealed; no, let it rest in everlasting Silence, and perish with my-self.
               Alas! said Pandarus, excessively moved, what is this Affliction that is to be concealed from me? Oh, Prince, if ever there was Love and Truth betwixt us, do not, I beseech thee, do not commit so great a Cruelty, as to hide your Sorrows from me; if I cannot give you Comfort, I will partake your Pain. I have a Friend's Right in your Distress, deprive me not of it, lest I suspect your Truth, or ima-gine you doubt mine.
               Ah! said Troilus, sighing, you have con-quered, my Pandarus; to you, and you on-ly will I discover my Weakness. Love, to whose Power I have been so long a Rebel, hath shot his fiercest Fires into my Heart; I burn, I rage with ardent Passion; I languish with Desire, and, oh! Despair consumes me. What have I then to do but die? since Death alone can free me from my Torments!
               
                  
Ah, Prince! said Pandarus, it was unkind-ly done to conceal so long your Passion from your Friend. My Advice, my Assistance might, perhaps, 'ere this have made you happy. Alas! interrupted Troilus, thou who hast been so unsuccessful in Love, with what Confidence can'st thou undertake to make me happy?
               I have been unfortunate, 'tis true, replied Pandarus; but those Misfortunes have taught me that Experience which you want: hence am I qualified to give you Counsel that may prevent your falling into the Evils I have suf-fered. Oft have I seen a blind Man walk se-curely, where one who was blest with perfect Sight has stumbled. Well does the Proverb say,
A Fool full often may, a wise Man guide.
A Whetstone is not, indeed, an Instrument to carve with; but it sharpens those that do. If then you think I have committed Errors, let my Folly be your School; and learn therein to avoid what I have been undone by. Every-thing, my dear Prince, is best explained by its contrary. The Palate that never tasted Bitterness has not so quick a Relish for Sweets: The Heart that never languished with Distress, is blunted to the gentle Thrils of Pleasure. With White be Black compared; with Honour Shame; each by its different Qualities shews the other.
               
                  
The Prince appeared wholly insensible to this Discourse, not once lifting up his Eyes, or giving the smallest Indication that he heard it. Pandarus, whose Resentment was awakened by this Neglect, began to shake him by the Arm, as if he supposed him in a Lethargy; Rouse, rouse yourself, for shame, he cried, from this Stupidity; nor listen like the dronish Beast of Burden to what I say, who, when a Harp is playing, hears the Sound, but knows not that 'tis Music.
               
                  Troilus, at this Reproach, raising his Head, with a deep Sigh, and fixing a languishing Look upon his Friend—Peace, Peace, cried he, I am not deaf, I have heard all thy Discourse; but, in the Name of the immortal Gods! what are thy Proverbs to me? how will they help me? Leave me, O leave me to bewail my Fate: Thou can'st not cure me, Friend; I wish not to be cured; leave me, and let me die.
               Why, this is Madness, Prince, said Pan-darus (hastily)—But one Word more, tell me the Name of this powerful Beauty that has charmed you; I'll hasten to her; I'll plead your Cause; I'll force her to have Compassion on you.
               Oh, no! interrupted Troilus (vehemently) that must not be, Wilt thou then die for a Woman, resumed Pandarus! sigh out thy Soul inglorious here at home, and press a love-sick

Couch with thy languid Limbs? Ah! ra-ther case them in Armour as thou wast wont, rush on the insulting Foe, and turn your Grief to Fury and Revenge; so shall your Fall be useful to your Country: But if you sink thus poorly under your Passion, and rather than reveal it die, your Name will be consigned to Infamy for ever; your Death will be imputed to your Fear of the Greeks; and her you love, in common with the rest of the World, will scorn and hate your Memory.
               
                  Troilus, touched to his inmost Soul with this predicted Shame, started wildly from his Seat; and traversing the Room with great Emotion, stopt suddenly, and looking fixedly on his Friend, Oh! said he with a Sigh, what must I do!
               Tell me the Name of her you love, said Pandarus; say, do I know her? If so, I shall succeed the better in my Applications.
               This Question threw the love-sick Prince into such Confusion, that, not being able, to stand, again he sunk upon his Bed; his Face glowed with Blushes; his conscious Eyes bent their Looks upon the Ground; he sigh'd, he trembled, but continued silent.
               
                  Pandarus, heedfully observing his Emotion, exclaimed in a transported Tone; Ah, Prince! I see I am interested in this Fair One: by Venus and her sportful Son you shall conceal her Name no longer.
               
                  
And will you know her Name, said Troilus, (trembling) Oh, my Pandarus! the Name of my sweet Enemy is Cressida, thy Niece, my Friend.
               Here his Voice falter'd; he stop'd, he sigh'd, while Fear, Hope, and anxious Expectation at once assailed his Heart with all their Force, and gave such Meaning to his wishing Eyes, that Pandarus, eager to relieve his Inquietude, strained him to his Breast with an affectionate Embrace: Be comforted, my Prince, cried he (in a Tone that expressed the highest Degree of Satisfaction) Cressida shall be yours, if I have any Power over her; you are worthy of her and she of you; not Hellen herself can boast a brighter Form than Cressida; add to that, her blooming Youth, her amiable Modesty, the mingled Sweetness and Dignity of her Manners. —Oh, Prince! she shall be yours; I swear by Heaven she shall: no more complaining then; banish your Fears, and rely upon my Will and Power to make you happy.
               
                  Troilus, almost out of himself with Joy at this unexpected good Fortune, hung upon his Neck awhile in speechless Transports; then suddenly exclaiming, Come now, ye Greeks! cried he, oppose your whole united Force against this Breast; Troilus shall stand it all! his Love shall give him double Vigour, and ye shall feel it to your Cost! Oh, Pandarus! my Life and Death are in thy Hand; thou hast

restored me to myself; continue still thy friendly Offices, and be the Guardian God of Troilus.
               
               Farewell, my Friend, said Pandarus (getting loose from his Embraces) I will deserve your Thanks; assure yourself I will: In the mean time, strengthen your Heart with Hope; I go to seek your Happiness.
               With these Words he retired; and Troilus, now animated with double Fires, called eagerly for his Armour, and, mounting his Horse, rushed terrible to the Field: Happy was the Greek that fled the Thunder of his Arm that Day; inspired with more than mortal Courage, like a vast Torrent, he poured resistless on the Foe, and bore down all before him.
               In the mean time, Pandarus, anxiously sol-licitous to perform the Promises he had made to Troilus, went to his Niece's House; he found her alone in her Apartment, reading; and placing himself near her, after some general Discourse, he objected to her mourning Habit and solitary Way of Life; which, on Account of her Father's disgraceful Flight to the Enemies of his Country, she still continued to observe.
               Why, my charming Niece! said he (pursuing his Discourse) why do you waste your Days in Loneliness and Woe? Your Beauty was not given you to be wrapt in Shades; nor must your Bloom of Youth be lost in Sol
                     •
                  tude: Love courts you now with all his Train of Pleasures; admit the

smiling God into your Bosom; and bless some worthy Lover with your Charms.
               Ah! Uncle, interrupted Cressida, her Face glowing with Blushes, from you I little ex-pected to hear such Discourse; you, who ought rather to defend my Heart against the dan-gerous Power of Love; will you assist the sly Invader, and betray your Cressida to Bondage? Alas! it is not for me to mix among the happy Youth of Troy; pressed down as I am by my Father's Disgrace, and my too conscious feel-ing of it: No; let me in Retirement conceal the Part I take in his Shame; Retirement, which, from being necessary, is become my Choice: Love will not seek me here; he flies the Miserable, and only dwells with Chearful-ness and Peace.
               No more of these melancholy Reflexions, said Pandarus (kissing away the Tears that fell from her charming Eyes) you know not how bountiful the Gods have been to you. Oh, Niece! they have bestowed a Blessing on you greater than your most sanguine Wishes durst aspire at.
               He stopp'd abruptly here; and, thinking he had said enough to awaken the Woman's Curiosity in her, affected to talk of other Things; and, shortly after, rose up to be gone.
               
                  Cressida, who had been pleasingly alarmed by what her Uncle had said, and was greatly disappointed at his discontinuing the Discourse,

swoons away; recovering, makes herself-known, and Protheus reconciles himself to her. The Out-laws bring in the Duke and Thurio, whom they had taken Prisoners; Valentine releases the Duke, but seeing Thurio about to seize Silvia; whom he calls his own▪ he threatens him with instant Death if he does not resign his Pretensions. Thurio yields her with Contempt, which so displeases the Duke, who declares he is charmed with the Spi-rit and Constancy of Valentine, that he be-stows her upon him, and pardoning the Out-laws at his Request, they all return to Milan, to celebrate the double Nuptials.
               Part of the Plot of this Play is taken, from the Story of Felismena, in the Second Book of the Diana of George Montemayor, a Pastoral Romance, translated from the Spanish in Shake-spear's time; the Loves of Protheus and Julia, in the Play their Characters and Adventures are the same, with those of Felix and Felismena in this Romance, whose History is thus in-troduced.
               Three Nymphs dedicated to the Service of Diana, straying too far from the Temple of that Goddess, in which they resided, are met in the Woods by as many savage Men, who, struck with their Beauty, attempted to carry them away by force: their Cries drew a young Shepherdess to their Assistance, who being armed with a Bow and Quiver, shot her Ar-rows so successfully at the Ravishers, that, in a few Moments, she laid them all breathless at

saw him about to depart with Uneasiness; she wished to be delivered from the Perplexity his Hints had thrown her into, but Shame pre-vented her from asking an Explanation of them.
               
                  Pandarus observed her Confusion with Plea-sure; he moved on towards the Door; she fol-lowed him with downcast Eyes; he turned to bid her farewel; adieu! answered she, with Hesitation, then seeming to recollect at that In-stant what had past, But will you go, said she, (blushing, and half averting her fair Face) with-out telling me what good Fortune it is for which I ought this Day to thank the Gods?
               
                  Panadarus, having brought her to the Point he desired, took her Hand with a Smile, and lead-ing her to a Chair, seated himself close by her: It would be cruel, my dearest Niece, said he, to keep you longer in Suspence; know then you are beloved by one of the Sons of your King, the young, the brave, the lovely Troilus; never did any Heart glow with more ardent Fires than his: he languishes, he dies for you, my Cressida; compassionate his Pains, reward him with your Heart, and taste the Sweets of mutual Love.
               Ah, me! interrupted Cressida, and is it for a Lover then, that I must thank the Gods! Is this the glorious Fortune they have destined for me! and can you, Oh, my Uncle! can you resolve to lead me through the dangerous Paths of Pleasure? You, who ought rather to watch over my unguarded Steps, and save me from the treacherous Baits of Love! Oh, Pallas! Guardian

Goddess of my Youth, assist me now! direct me in this doubtful Maze of Fate, and save thy wretched Votary!
               
                  Pandarus, beholding her in this Emotion, rose from his Chair; I see, fair Niece, said he, you are not disposed to listen to the Passion my Friend has for you; your Disdain will kill him; I know it will; his Life depends upon your Smiles; and since my Interest with you is so small, I'll share his Fate: I cannot bear the Re-proaches he will with Justice load me, when he finds how ineffectual my Sollicitations have been.— Do you sigh, cruel Maid! said he; (for, almost unknown to herself, she breathed a deep-drawn Sigh) Ah, may it please the Gods to make you suffer in your Turn! As for me, since you suspect I would betray your Virtue, you shall not see me soon again; happy if, by sacrificing my own Life, I could save that of the noble Troilus; but it will not be: he loves too ardently to bear your Scorn without Despe-ration; but I will share his Fate, whatever it be; and since I cannot save him, I'll die with him.
               
                  Cressida, alarmed at this Menace of her Uncle's, and at his rising to leave her hastily, seized his Arm; Stay, Oh stay! she cried; all that is consistent with my Honour I'll do to save you both: I'll see the Prince; I'll treat him mildly; I'll not forbid him to hope;—but ask no more: my Honour's dearer to me than Life; swear your Designs extend no farther than what I have promised, and I am satisfied.
               
                  

                  Pandarus, assuring her, with the most so-lemn Oaths, that he would not press her to any greater Compliances, perceiving her Fears were quieted, began to talk of indifferent Mat-ters; which, Cressida, whose Soul was all in Tumult, listened to with great Impatience; interrupting him, at length; I would fain know, said she, (with a conscious Blush) in what Man-ner you first became acquainted with Prince Troilu's Passion for me? Did he declare it to you himself? Does he know how to gild a Love-sick Tale with soft prevailing Eloquence?
               
                  Pandarus, with a Smile of Pleasure at this Demand, related to her, succinctly, all that had passed between him and Troilus, and painted his Love and his Despair in Colours so lively, that the half-vanquished Cressida, unwilling her Uncle should see her Emotions, rose up, and begging his Excuse, retired to her Closet, to contemplate at leisure on what had befallen her: There first the Idea of Troilus, young, brave, and lovely as she had seen him; tender, pas-sionate, and languishing as her Uncle repre-sented him, rose to her Imagination. Softened and prepared by her artful Uncle to receive the dangerous Impression, her Fancy dwelt with a Pleasure, till then unknown, upon the Graces of his Form, his royal Birth, his exalted Cou-rage, in a Youth so blooming: her Vanity was flattered by the Preference he gave her to all the Trojan Beauties of the Court; and her Com-passion, insensibly engaged by the Pains he suf-fer'd for her Sake, Love first entering her Soul

in the Disguise of Gratitude, waked there a lambent Flame, whose pleasing Warmth play'd gently round her Heart, and filled it with a new and sweet Sensation.
               While she sat thus, wholly lost in pleasing Reflexions, she heard a loud Shouting in the Street, that roused her from her Reverie, and made her hastily run to her Window to see the Occasion of it; but what was her mingled Surprise and Confusion when she beheld Prince Troilus, the Object of her Contemplation!
               The young Hero having that Day performed the most amazing Acts of Valour, and driven the Greeks quite back to their Ships, was re-turning home, amidst the Acclamations of a numerous Croud, who made the Skies resound with their loud Praises: He was seated on a bay Steed, who, by reason of the Wounds he had received in the Fight, carried him along with a slow Pace; all richly armed he was, ex-cept his Head; so that his lovely Face being exposed to View, and made more lovely by the decent Shame which glowed in bright Ver-milion on his Cheek, he charmed the eager Gazers into a Rapture of Delight: His Hel-met, which hung carelessly by a String behind, was hewn in twenty Places; his Shield was pierced with Spears, and many Arrows were to be seen still sticking in different Parts of it; his Horse was marked with Blood that streamed from several Parts of his Body.
               
                  
In this fierce Equipage he would have look'd like the great God of War himself, had not his charming Face expressed a softer and more amiable Divinity: Cressida drew back her Head the Moment she beheld him; conscious of what passed in her Heart, a crimson Blush glowed in each lovely Cheek; but though she had determined in her Mind not to look on him, again her Eyes involuntary sought him out; again she blushed, alarm'd at her own Weak-ness; again with an averted Look she tried to conceal the new-born sweet Anxiety from her-self; but it was in vain: she could not resist the powerful Impulse that drew her Eyes, to-wards him; and kept them fixed upon him till he was out of Sight.
               This unexpected View of the young Hero, in all the Pomp and Pageantry of War, bear-ing away the chiefest Honours of the Field, and crowned with the grateful Praises of his de-livered Country, compleated what her Uncle's Artifices had begun, and made an entire Con-quest of her Heart: Love, with all its Train of gentle Wishes, Hopes, Fears, and soft In-quietudes, took Possession of her Breast: Awhile she resisted the sweet Invader, and opposed her Reason to the subtle Flame; but so unequal was the Contest, so weak her Defence, so powerful the Assault, that neither hoping, nor perhaps desiring to be free, she gave herself up a willing Slave to the soft Chains of Love.
               
                  
In the mean time Troilus, full of eager Anxiety to know his Fate, no sooner arrived at his own Palace than he dispatched some of his Attendants to different Places to find out Pandarus, and to bring him thither.
               
                  Pandarus immediately obeyed the Summons, and related, to his impatient Friend, all the Conversation that had passed between him and his Niece. He described her Looks, her Sighs, her Blushes, her sweet Irresolution, and thence derived sufficient Encouragement for the trembling Lover to write, and, in his own pathetic language, sollicit her future Favour.
               Love having dictated, to the ready Pen of Troilus, the softest and most persuasive Elo-quence that ever won a female Heart, Pan-darus undertook to deliver the Letter, and accordingly carried it that Instant to Cres-sida: The mounting Blood flush'd in her charming Face as soon as he offered the Billet to her Perusal; then ran again in Tides tumul-tuous to her Heart, and left her pale, trem-bling, and ready to sink before him; he took her Hand, he pressed it tenderly in his, he swore by all the celestial Deities, no Harm was meant to her Honour, and conjured her, if she had not resolved the Destruction of the noble Troilus, to read and answer his Letter.
               
                  Cressida, reassured by her Uncle's Protesta-tions, took the Letter from him, and retired to her Chamber to read it. The moving lan-guage

it contained, had so sudden and so power-ful an Effect on her soft Heart, that she was easily prevailed upon, by her Uncle to write a favourable Answer.
               The Correspondence thus happily begun, the officious Pandarus never failed every Day to carry Letters, Messages, and Presents be-tween the Lovers, nor ceased his Solicitations in favour of Troilus to his Niece, till he had won her to yield to his Desires.
               
                  Troilus, at once the happy Favourite of Cu-pid and of Mars, was as glorious in the Field as successful in his Love; the Greeks trembled at his Name, and the Trojans in him revered a second Hector.
               
               
                  Cressida still continuing her solitary way of Life, silently enjoyed the Praises of her beloved Hero; at her Feet the passionate Warrior of-fered all his laurels; for her he fought and conquered, and sought his Recompence only in her Smiles. But Fortune, weary of shower-ing Favours, on these happy Lovers, prepared a sad Reverse of Fate for them, and, when they least expected it, stunned them with the Blow.
               The Trojans in a general Battle with the Greeks, notwithstanding the godlike Valour of their Chiefs, received a dreadful Defeat; the Loss was so great, on their Side, that the venerable Priam found himself reduced to the

Necessity of desiring a Truce and an Exchange of Prisoners.
               When Chalcas, the Father of Cressida, heard of this Proposition, he presented himself before the Council of War, and earnestly intreated the Princes, that they would suffer Anterior, then a Prisoner in their Camp, to be exchanged for Cressida his Daughter, whom he had left in Troy at his Departure. The Greek Princes consented to his Request, and those that were named Commissioners for the Greeks with the Trojans, were ordered to demand Cressida in exchange for Antenor.
               
               At the Arrival of the Grecian Envoys in Troy, King Priam summoned a Council to meet, be-fore which they appeared and gave an Account of their Commission.
               As soon as Cressida was named, the great Heart of Troilus sunk within him, an ashy Paleness overspread his Face; convulsive shi-verings seized every Limb, and Grief and Rage were painted in his Eyes. With trembling Impatience he waited to hear the Opinion of the Council, revolving, in his distracted Soul, what he should do in case they gave up Cressida. Love suggested to him, that he ought rather to die than suffer Cressida to be ravished from his Arms; but Reason represented, that it was fit the Charmer of his Soul should be consulted, as to her Intentions, ere he proceeded to Ex-tremities, and then, if she approved his firm Design to keep her, he would defend her

against the united Force of all the Powers on Earth. Fain would he save her Honour, and prevent her Departure; and while his Thoughts were in this Tumult, Hector, who had well weighed the Grecians Demand, turned to the Envoys, and told them, that Cressida was not a Prisoner, and therefore could not be included in the Treaty for Exchange of Prisoners; and tell your Princes, added he, We sell no Wo-men here.
               Scarce had he uttered these Words, when a Murmur of Dislike ran through the whole As-sembly, which at last broke out into a tumul-tuous Exclamation against Hector for opposing the Return of Antenor on account of a Wo-man.
               The venerable Priam, by his Authority, put an End to the Contest; and, declaring that it was his Will the Daughter of Calchas should be exchanged for Antenor, the Assembly broke up satisfied with this determination.
               
                  Troilus, impatient of the smothered Grief and Rage that tore his inmost Soul, hastened to his own Palace; with a frantic Air he flew to his Apartment, shut every Door and Window, and having, as much as lay in his Power, ex-cluded the hateful Light, he threw himself, with a deep and deadly Groan, upon his Bed; there, giving a Loose to Sorrow, he passionately up-braided the cruel Gods as Authors of his Mis-fortunes; he cursed his Fate, the Greeks, hims-elf, and Troy: Then, in the fiercest Trans-port of his Grief, he threw his groveling Body

on the Ground; with cruel Blows he beat his groaning Breast, tore his dissheveled Hair, and abandoned himself to all the wild Excesses of the most confirmed Despair.
               These Agonies at length subsiding, a Calm of Grief ensued; again he fell extended on his Bed, and, in fast heaving Sighs and streaming Tears, gave Vent to the Anguish of his la-bouring Heart.
               
                  Pandarus entering his Chamber, and finding him in this Condition, endeavoured, by all the soothing Arts he was Master of, to give him Comfort; but Troilus was deaf to his Persua-sions, and exasperated rather than soothed by the ineffectual Arguments he urged; again his Grief rose up to Frenzy; again he uttered Im-precations against the Gods, and, in the Wild-ness of his Woe, devoted himself to Destruc-tion.
               
                  Pandarus, terrified at a Despair so vehe-ment, threw himself at his Feet, and conjured him to moderate his Affliction, and take no Resolutions to his own Prejudice till he had consulted Cressida, and heard what she had to propose; adding, that he would go immedi-ately to his Niece, and take Order for their private Interview.
               
                  Troilus listened attentively to this Proposal, and, a little soothed with the Hopes of seeing Cressida, pressed Pandarus to go that Instant and prepare her to receive him, promising his

her Feet, and delivered the Nymphs from the Danger that threatened them. Her uncommon Beauty, the Dignity of her Mien, but above all, her surprising Valour, persuaded the Nymphs she was some Goddess, who had descended from Heaven to save them from Dishonour.
               Full of this Idea they threw themselves at her Feet, and, addressing her as a Divinity, return Thanks for the Assistance she had vouch-safed them. The Shepherdess raising them from the Ground, assured them with Tears, that she was no Goddess, but a mere Wo-man, and one of the weakest of her Sex, undone by Love, and sinking under the Op-pression of the most cruel Fortune.
               The Nymphs, moved by Compassion, and a grateful Sense of the Obligation they owed her, endeavoured to sooth her sorrow, pressed her to relate her Story, and promised her their Assistance. The Shepherdess being willing to gratify their friendly Curiosity, they seated themselves on the Banks of a Rivulet that ran murmuring by them, when she thus began her Story.
               "Know, fair Nymphs of the chaste God-dess, that my native Country is Vandalia, a Province not far hence; my Father Andro-nius, eminent for his Birth, his Riches, and above all, for the native Sweetness and Integri-ty of his Manners, was married very young to a Lady named Delia, with whom he was passionately in love.
               
                  

Confidant to commit no Violence against him-self, but to acquiesce patiently in what his Mis-tress should ordain for him.
               
                  Pandarus satisfied with this Assurance, left him, and went to his Niece's House. The Report of her being exchanged for Antenor had already reached her Ears. She was reclined on a Couch in her Chamber, pale, motionless, and bathed in Tears. At her Uncle's Approach she newly raised her Head, a fresh Stream of Tears gushed from her charming Eyes, and pas-sionately clasping her ivory Hands together, "Oh! Uncle, cried she, with a Voice almost drowned in thick succeeding Sighs, to what Mi-sery hath Love and you introduced me!"
               Grief prevented her from speaking more; her beauteous Head, like a Lilly overcharged with Rain, sunk again upon her Pillow, and a Groan, that seemed to rend her lovely Frame to Pieces, spoke her Distress more elo-quently than the most expressive Words could do.
               
                  Pandarus seating himself near her, besought her, for her Lovers sake, whose Grief had almost deprived him of Reason, to moderate her Sorrow, and give him an Example of Pa-tience and Constancy that might, by inciting him to imitate it, prevent the fatal Effects of his Despair.
               
                  Cressida, alarmed for her Lover's Safety, and suffering more in his Affliction than her own,

summoned up all her Courage in Order to receive him with some Degree of Constancy. On his Entrance into her Chamber she rose and met him with an eager Embrace, endea-vouring, by a forced Serenity in her Aspect, to dispel that Cloud of Anguish that saddened eve-ry Feature; but alas! her Face, that Image of Paradise, was pale and wan; the rosy Bloom was fled, the laughing Loves that used to play upon each dimpled Cheek was gone; Tears had dimmed the Lustre of her starry Eyes, and all the sprightly Graces, that decked her every Look and Motion, were lost in languishing Dejection.
               
                  Troilus, stepping a few Paces back, gazed on her for some Moments in an empha-tic Silence; while the big Sorrow, labouring for a Vent, so totally oppressed his vital Powers, that, standing without Sense or Motion, he looked like the sad Image of Despair: Tears at one Instant gave Relief to both.
               The Power of Speech returned, and they broke into Complaints that might have pierced the most savage and insensible Hearts. A thousand Schemes were planned to prevent their Parting, but all upon Reflexion proved im-practicable: The passionate Troilus, incapable of listning to any Thing but the Dictates of his Love, was for leaving his King and Fa-ther, his distressed Country, his weeping Friends, blasting that Glory which in so many Well-fought Fields he had acquired, and only

sollicitous to preserve his Cressida, steal with her away from Troy, and give up all to Love.
               
                  Cressida heard this Proposal with Horror; she loved his Fame; she would not suffer him to sacrifice it to her; she represented to him the Weakness and Baseness of such a Resolution, and deeply vowed never to consent to any thing that might wound his Honour. Hear my Troilus, added she, the only Expedient Fortune has left in our Power; suffer me to be sent, according to the Decree of the Council, to my Father; I will carry with me a large Quantity of Treasure which I will pretend was sent to his Care by some of our Relations, who intend to take the first Opportunity of escaping to the Grecian Camp. Before the Truce is ex-pired I will urge him to let me come once more to Troy, in order to secure the Remainder of our Friends Treasure; he is covetous, and will be easily prevailed upon; on the tenth Day from my Departure you may expect me, and once more met, nothing but Death shall separate us.
               
                  Troilus, with Heart-breaking Sighs, gave a slow and sad Assent to what she had proposed; but, full of racking Apprehensions, a thousand Times he begged her to be true. And she, invoking all the celestial Deities, the Satyrs, Nymphs, and Fawns, and the infernal Gods, imprecated Curses on herself if ever she received a second Love. The Morning was now broke, with speechless Grief they parted.
               
                  

                  Troilus went home to put himself in a con-dition to attend his beloved Cressida to the ap-pointed Place, where she was to be exchanged for Antenor. At his return to her House he found Diomede one of the Grecian Chiefs, with many Attendants waiting her coming out. The unhappy Lover could hardly prevent the mingled Rage and Grief that took Posession of his Soul at this Sight, from breaking into some Act of Violence against the Man that was going to rob him of all his Soul held dear. But mindful of the sacred Truce, and more of his Cressida's Honour, he repressed the rising Fury, nor gave the smothered Anguish leave to vent itself in Sighs. This painful Restraint lasted not long; the beautious Cressida appear-ed, and saluting Diomede with a languishing Sweetness, she gave her Hand to Troilus; who having helped her on her Horse they rode apart from the rest of the Company, and poured out their Souls in mutual protestations of eternal Love and Fidelity.
               The Greeks, with Antenor, appearing in sight, Troilus was obliged to yield to the sad Necessity of parting. Remember, oh! re-member to be true, he cried, and keep your appointed Day. His faultering Tongue could pronounce no more. An ashy Paleness over-spread his Face; he turned away abruptly and joined Antenor, while Diomede eagerly flew to the weeping Cressida, and conducting her to the Grecian Camp, left her in the Embraces of her Father. The unhappy Troilus sinking un-der

the Weight of an unsupportable Sorrow, returned to Troy unable to endure the Sight or Conversation of any of his Friends; he gave himself wholly up to Solitude and Despair.
               The ten Days in which she had promised to come back, seemed, to his impatient Mind, as many tedious Ages; anxiously he counted the tardy Hours, and wondered at their un-usual Length; now eagerly wishing for the Shades of Night, and now as impatient for the rising Dawn.
               
                  Pandarus, whom only he would admit to his Presence, endeavoured to prevail upon him to bear the Absence of his Niece with Mode-ration, and to wait calmly for her Return; but the distracted Lover was incapable of follow-ing this Advice; his Soul was racked between the contrary Extremes of Hope and Fear; scarce were four Days of the destined Ten elapsed when, wild with Impatience, he rode to the Place where she had appointed to meet him; there stopping, he cast his wishing Eyes around, as if he expected to see her; and be-ing disappointed, returned with languishing Dejection to his Palace, and wore away the Night in Sighs and Tears.
               At length the appointed Day came; with fear-check'd Transport he traced the well-known Path, sending his longing Eyes be-fore to hail the wished Appearance of his Cressida; and now the whispering Bushes, and fleeting Shadows at a Distance, would

cheat his Ears and Eyes with her Approach; then would he passionately fold his Arms, as if already they inclosed her, and with an exulting Voice cry out to Pandarus, She comes, my Friend, she comes, dear, lovely, faithful Cressida, oh how shall I repay such wonderous Truth! But when Expectation was wearied by Delay, and no Cressida appear-ed to confirm the flattering Hope, then would he sink into a tender Despondency, and chide her Slowness with a Lover's Anger, which some new aspiring Hope again removed, and gave him up to eager Expectation again to be followed by Disappointment and Despair.
               The whole Day being past in this continued Succession of Hopes and Fears, the Approach of Night brought with it a sad Addition to his Grief; for having no longer any Probability of seeing his beloved Cressida, he resigned himself up to the most cruel Apprehensions; ah! with-out doubt she is false, he cried, the wretched Troilus is no more her Care! what have I to do but die, my Pandarus, since Cressida has forsaken me?
               
                  Pandarus, tho' greatly surprized at his Niece's Breach of Promise, and perhaps suspecting the worst, yet anxious to remove from the unhap-py Youth that Load of Anguish that seemed ready to overwhelm him, invented a hundred Excuses for her Delay; which he who dread-ed nothing so much as a Confirmation of her Falshood, eagerly grasped at, and, in Com-pliance with the pressing Instances of his Friend,

returned to the City. After a Night of ago-nizing Woe, no sooner did the Morning dawn than he arose, and flew again to the appointed Place, hoping, and anxiously wishing, he had mistaken the Day on which his Cressida had promised to meet him; for many successive Days did he continue this Practice, living all the while in such a Whirl of contrary Passions, as drove him almost to Frenzy.
               In the mean time Cressida, whose Violence of Grief had long ago subsided, and left only a gentle Sensibility in her Soul, that but dis-posed it for new Impressions, having found some Difficulty in prosecuting her Design of returning to Troy on the appointed Day, re-solved to lay aside all Thoughts of such a dan-gerous Enterprise, and began to listen favour-ably to the Vows of Diomede: This young Warrior, whose Heart the Sight of her in Troy had enflamed, made Use of all the pleasing Arts with which the God of Love inspires his Votaries, to engage her to return his Passion.
               
                  Cressida at first would melt into Tears, mur-mur the Name of Troy with a Sigh, and faintly own she had a Lover there who claimed a Right to her Affection. But the gallant Son of Tydieus was not so repulsed; well did he know the changing Sex, and how weak an Obstacle an absent Lover was; to those faint Remembran-ces he opposed his Royal Birth, his Fame in Arms, his never-dying Passion, flattering her Ambition with the Hopes of making her his Queen, and her Vanity with an Assurance that

she only could have subdued his Heart. He re-presented to her the certain Destruction that hung over Troy, and the little Probability there was of her being happy with a Lover of that devoted City.
               The ungrateful Cressida, influenced by these selfish Motives, forgot, or did not regard, her Vows of everlasting Faith to Troilus, and charmed with the Person, Valour, and exalted Dignity of her new Adorer, yielded, at length, to his Sollicitations; nor was the insulting Greek satisfied with thus triumphing in secret over his unhappy Rival: A rich Jewel which Troilus had given to Cressida at parting, and the abandoned Fair had now bestowed on Dio-mede, he wore upon his Armour in the Battle, as a Trophy of his Victory, and the Trojan Prince's Disgrace.
               
                  Troilus, still pining with Desire, and forsaken as he was by Cressida, yet not capable of think-ing her false, nourished the fatal Flame that preyed upon his Heart, with vain delusive Hopes of her return; which though every suc-ceeding Day proved to be ill-grounded, yet fond of the deceit he still hoped on, and, like a drowning Wretch, grasped eagerly at every faint Relief, to avoid that Death which was, notwithstanding, inevitable.
               Leaning anxiously one Day over the Walls of the City, from whence he sent many a longing Look towards the Grecian Camp, and breathed Heart-breaking Sighs at the Remem-brance

of his Cressida, he saw a Coat of Mail carried in Triumph before his Brother Dei-phobas, as he was returning from the Field of Battle.
               This Sight would have had but little Effect on the Heart of the now inglorious Youth, sunk as he was in the soft Lethargy of Love, consum-ing away with fruitless Wishes, and languish-ing with disappointed Hope, but a Jewel that blazed upon its Sleeve was no sooner observed than it claimed all his Attention; the Shape and Size, recalling to his Mind the Pledge he gave his Cressida at parting. With trembling Impatience, he fixed his eager Eyes upon it, his Heart took the alarm and beat as if it would have left his Breast; cold Damps bedewed his shivering Limbs, a mortal Paleness overspread his Face; yet still insatiate of the Sight, he gazed and trembling prayed it might not be what he feared; at length a near Approach put it past a doubt that it was the same Jewel, that, wet with his Tears, and hallowed by a thousand tender Invocations he had given his Cressida at the sad Moment of their parting; thunderstruck at this Conviction of her Falshood, wildly he raised his haggard Eyes to Heaven, then striking with his Hands his groaning Breast, "Oh! Cressida, he cried, where, where is now thy Faith?"
               Fixed, for a while, he stood in silent sad De-spair; then suddenly, looking up he demanded of some of the Soldiers, whose Armour that was which his Brother Deiphobas had won; they

replied, it was Diomedes. Grief giving way to Fury at the Sound of that detested Name, he ran transported with a Desire of Vengeance to his Palace; there, arming himself with a tu-multuous Haste, he rushed into the Field, and, with loud Cries, called upon Diomede; seeking his Rival amidst the thickest ranks of his Foes, madly he raged about the hostile Field, provoking Death, and sacrificing whole Hecatombs of slaughtered Greeks to his Re-venge; Rage and Despair rekindling all his martial Heat, sent him each Day with more than mortal Courage to the Fight.
               Pale Greece with horror beheld the matchless Chief thinning their Ranks, and driving whole Squadrons before his conquering Sword, but Diomede the partial Gods denied to his Re-venge. Rivals alike in Glory as in Love, they often met, oft fought, but neither van-quished. The Son of Tideus was reserved by Fate to meet a more ignoble End at Home, and Troilus could only fall by the resistless Force of Achilles.
               
            
            
               
Many Years elapsed, before it pleased the Gods to bless them with a Child; at length my Mother conceived in her old Age, and one Night, during her Pregnancy, being dis-composed with uneasy Apprehensions, and un-able to sleep, she desired my Father to dissi-pate her Anxiety by reading some amusing Story to her. My Father complied, and read The Judgment of Paris.
               My Mother taking Occasion to moralize on this Story, condemned the Partiality of the Shepherd's Sentence. Paris, said she, being intoxicated with a sensual Passion for Beauty, was incapable of considering, as he ought, the nobler Qualities of the Mind; heroic Virtue is the brightest of them all, and therefore the Goddess of Battles merited his Preference.
               The Contention was n
                     •
                  t for the Prize of Virtue, but Beauty, replied my Father; the Apple was to be given to the fairest; justly then did Paris bestow it upon Venus, whose Charms were so greatly superior to those of her Competitors.
               The Apple was indeed inscribed to the fairest, answered my Mother, but that was not to be understood of corporeal, but intellectual Beauty, Fortitude being one of the chiefest Virtues of the Mind, and the Exercise of Arms, an exterior Act of this Virtue; had Paris been a wise and dispassionate Judge, he would have given the Apple to the Goddess of Battles.
               
                  

               FABLE OF Troilus and Cressida.
               
               
                  CRessida, the Daughter of Calchas, a Trojan of Distinction, who had fled to the Grecian Camp, is in Love with, and beloved by Troi-lus, one of the Sons of Priam King of Troy. Pandarus, her Uncle, sollicits her in behalf of Troilus, and gives her up to his Embraces.
               The Greeks having taken Antenor Prisoner, a Trojan Nobleman of great Merit, Calchas petitions them to exchange him for Cressida his Daughter, whom he had left behind him in Troy. His Request is granted, the Lovers are obliged to part, and Diomede, when the Ex-change is made, conducts Cressida, with whom he falls passionately in Love, to the Grecian Camp.
               
                  

                  Hector sends a Challenge to the Greeks, in-viting the most valiant amongst them to a single Combat; Ajax accepts it, they fight, and when parted by the Heralds, Hector declares that Ajax is nearly related to him, being Son to his Aunt.
               This produces mutual Civilities on the Part of each Champion; Ajax invites Hector to the Camp, in which Request he is joined by Aga-memnon and Achilles; Hector consents; the Tro-jan Princes, who had attended him to the Field, follow him to the General's Tent; but Troi-lus, eager to see his beloved Cressida, takes Advantage of this Opportunity to intreat Ulys-ses would conduct him to Calchas's Tent.
               
                  Ulysses informs him that Diomede is in Love with Cressida, and that he sups there that Night; Troilus thereupon stands concealed to observe their Behaviour; Cressida, after co-quetting a little with Diomede, makes an Assignation with him, and he demanding a Pledge, she gives him a Sleeve which she had received from Troilus; but refusing to tell him to whom it belonged, he declares he will wear it on his Helmet the next Day in Battle, that he may sacrifice the Person who claims it to his Revenge.
               As soon as he is gone, Cressida, in a Soli-loquy, professes that she no longer loves Troi-lus, and that Diomede is Master of her Heart; Troilus, in a Transport of Grief and Rage, exclaims against her Inconstancy, vows to take

ample Vengeance on his Rival, and the next Day in Battle, performs such wonderful Acts of Valour, that the Grecians are almost put to flight.
               
                  Achilles having absented himself from the Field, in compliance with the Commands of Polyxena, Priam's Daughter, with whom he is in Love, and carries on a secret Correspon-dence, Hector, who had been warn'd in vain to desist from fighting that Day, rages uncon-trouled through the Field; at length, having killed Patroclus, Achilles, to revenge the Death of his Friend, arms and rushes into the Battle.
               
                  Hector observing a Greek in Golden Armour, fights with him and wins it, and satisfied with the Exploits of the Day, is beginning to disarm himself when Achilles, at the Head of his Myr-midons, appears.
               
                  Hector in vain pleads that he is unarmed, and taken at a Disadvantage; Achilles com-mands his Myrmidons to surround and slay him; that done he ties his Body to his Horse's Tail, and drags it through the Grecian Army.
               
                  Troilus brings the News of Hector's Death to the Trojans, and leads them back to Troy, while the Grecian Army, satisfied with the Death of Hector, sound a Retreat, and suffer their Enemy quietly to re-enter their City.
               The Story of this Play is partly taken from Chaucer's Poem of Troilus and Cressida, and

partly from an old Story Book, called The three Destructions of Troy.
               The first furnished Shakespear with the Love Plot, and the second with all the Incidents that relate to the War.
               This Play has been severely censured on ac-count of the Faults of its Plot (if that can be called a Plot which is only a Succession of In-cidents, without Order, Connexion, or any Dependance upon each other) as well as the Inequality of the Manners the Poet has given to his Persons.
               The Loves of Troilus and Cressida are, in all the Circumstances, exactly copied from Chau-cer; but these Circumstances are intirely de-tached from the rest of the Play, and produce no Event worthy our Attention.
               
                  Troilus and Cressida give Name to the Tra-gedy, and, by Consequence, are the most con-siderable Persons in it; yet Troilus is left alive, and Cressida, too scandalous a Character to draw our Pity, does not satisfy that Detesta-tion her Crimes raise in us by her Death, but escaping Punishment, leaves the Play without a Moral, and absolutely deficient in poetical Justice.
               The Manners of these two Persons, how-ever, ought to escape the general Charge of Inequality.
               
                  

                  Troilus, who is drawn exactly after Chaucer, is every where consistent with his Character of a brave Soldier, and a passionate and faith-ful Lover.
               From Cressida's first and second Appearance we may easily guess what her future Conduct will be; the deep Art with which she con-ceals her Passion for Troilus, her loose Con-versation with her Uncle, her free Coquettry with the Prince, and her easy yielding to his Addresses, prepare us for her Falshood in the succeeding Part of the Play, and all together make up the Character of a compleat Jilt: Her not being punished is indeed an unpardon-able Fault, and brings the greatest Imputation imaginable upon Shakespear's Judgment, who could introduce so vicious a Person in a Tra-gedy, and leave her without the due Reward of her Crimes.
               The Character of Cressida is much more consistent in Shakespear than Chaucer; the lat-ter represents her wise, humble, and modest, nicely sensible of Fame, fond of her Country, not easily susceptible of Love, hard to be won, and rather betrayed than yielding to the De-sires of her Lover.
               With all these amiable Qualities to engage our Esteem and those alleviating Circumstan-ces that attended her Fall with Troilus, we cannot, without Surprize, see her so soon changing her Love, violating her Vows, and

basely prostituting her Honour to Diomede. The inequality of Manners here is very ob-servable; but Shakespear in drawing her Cha-racter has avoided falling into the same Fault by copying Chaucer too closely, and Cressida, throughout the Play, is always equal and con-sistent with herself.
               That the old Story Book, called The three Destructions of Troy, furnished Shakespear with the other Part of the Plot, is plain from several of the Incidents being exactly copied from thence: Thus he makes Achilles to be in Love with Polyxena the Daughter of Priam, and this Passion to be the Cause of his refusing to fight against the Trojans; and Hector to be cowardly killed by Achilles, as he was intent on spoiling a Greek of his Golden Armour, which he had eagerly sought after in the Battle.
               This Circumstance, however, Shakespear has altered greatly for the worse: The Story says, that Hector having slain Patroclus and performed many wonderful Acts of Valour, satisfied with the Slaughters of the Day, was going to quit the Field, when happening to see a Greek with a compleat Suit of Golden Armour on, his Avarice was awakened and he resolved not to quit the Battle till he had gained this rich Prize; accordingly he assault-ed the Greek, took him Prisoner, and to lead him more easily out of the Throng, cast his Shield behind him.
               
                  

                  Achilles, whom the Death of Patroclus had brought into the Field, burning with a Desire of Revenge on Hector, hastened to seize him at this Disadvantage, and gave him a Blow with his Spear which killed him.
               
                  Shakespear makes Hector, in the same Man-ner, eager to win this Suit of Armour; but after he has slain the Greek who owned it, he disarms himself in the Field of Battle, and Achilles and his Myrmidons coming up, they all surround him, fall upon him and kill him.
               Thus has Shakespear made Achilles a greater Coward than the old Story Writer; for in the latter he only takes Advantage of his Enemy's Shield being thrown behind him to give him a Wound; but Shakespear makes him employ all his Myrmidons to kill one Man, and he dis-armed and calling for Mercy.
               The Absurdity of Hector's unarming him-self in the Field of Battle, with all his Foes about him, in order to facilitate this wonderful Enterprize, is too gross to need any Remark.
               
                  Hector's challenging any of the Grecian Princes to single Combat, in Honour of their Ladies Beauty, is a Circumstance borrowed from the Story Book, but surely very injudi-ciously. The following Message from the De-fender of Troy, a City almost ruined by a War of nine Years Continuance, can hardly be read without a Smile.
               
                  

                  We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
                  
                  A Prince call'd Hector (Priam is his Father)
                  Who in this dull and long-continued Truce
                  Is rusty grown; he bade me take a Trumpet,
                  And to this Purpose speak: Kings, Princes, Lords,
                  If there be one amongst the fairest of Greece,
                  
                  That holds his Honour higher than his Ease,
                  That seeks his Praise more than he fears his Peril,
                  That knows his Valour and knows not his Fear,
                  That loves his Mistress more than in Confession,
                  (With truant Vows to her own Lips, he loves)
                  And dare avow her Beauty and her Worth,
                  In other Arms than hers: To him this Chal-lenge.
                  
                     Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks
                  
                  Shall make it good (or do his best to do it)
                  He hath a Lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
                  Than ever Greek did compass in his Arms,
                  And will to-morrow with his Trumpet call,
                  Midway between your Tents and Walls of Troy,
                  
                  To rouze a Grecian that is true in Love.
                  If any come, Hector will honour him:
                  If none, he'll say in Troy, when he retires
                  The Grecian Dames are Sun-burnt, and not worth
                  The Splinter of a Lance,—even so much.
               
               
                  Aeneas begins with telling the Grecian Princes that, in Troy, they have a Prince called Hector, and that Priam is his Father, as if the Name and Quality of this redoubted Hero, the Bul-wark

of the Trojans and the Terror of the Gre-cians, could be unknown to them.
               
                  Shakespear, in this Passage, contradicts him-self as well as Common-sense; for we find afterwards, that they acknowledged the Valour of Hector to be so great that none but Achilles was thought an equal Match for him, and Ajax was urged to accept the Challenge, in order to raise the Jealousy of the discon-tented Achilles.
               
               
                  Aeneas also tells them, that their Champion is grown rusty during the dull and long conti-nued Truce; yet, in the foregoing Scene, the Trojan Heroes are represented returning from the Battle, and, after that, we find no mention of a Truce, or any Interval allowed to make it be supposed there had been one: How then comes it that Aeneas here speaks of a Truce? But these Blunders are very frequent in Shake-spear.
               
               The Poet likewise, following the old Story Writer, makes Hector and Ajax Cousin-Ger-mans; but in the Play, Ajax, as it would seem, knows nothing of the Matter till he is told of it, first by Aeneas, and afterwards by Hector; and then, when the Combat is ended, the two Heroes Embrace, and 'tis nothing but Cousin and Cousin, at every Word.
               The Story tells us, that Achilles had a long-ing Desire to see Hector unarmed; Shakespear
                  

makes use of this Thought, Achilles says, in the Play, to his Friend,

                     — — I have a Woman's Longing,
                     An Appetite that I am sick withal,
                     To see great Hector in the Weeds of Peace.
                  
The Conversation of these two Heroes, when they meet, which consists of mutual Threat-nings, doubtless gave Shakespear the Hint for that characteristic Discourse they hold together in the Play.
               Tho' Shakespear consulted this Book for Part of his Plot, yet, in drawing the Characters of his Grecian Princes, I cannot help thinking he had Homer in his Eye; and probably saw some old Translation of that Poet, for there was one in his Time.
               
                  Achilles, indeed, is a Character of his own Invention, ridiculous and inconstant to the last Degree, Brave, and a Coward; a Fool, yet a deep and accurate Reasoner: But, in the others, he seems to have endeavoured at an Imitation of Homer.
               
               Thus he makes Diomede bold and enterpriz-ing; Ulysses wise and artful; Nestor narrative, and ever ready to expatiate on his past Exploits; Thersites cowardly, satyrical, witty, and ma-licious: In the Interview between the Greek and Trojan Princes, he makes them all speak with great Propriety, and suitable to their re-spective Characters. Hector, indeed, by men-tioning

            
               Shakespear Illustrated: OR THE NOVELS and HISTORIES, On which the PLAYS of SHAKESPEAR Are Founded, COLLECTED and TRANSLATED from the ORIGINAL AUTHORS. WITH CRITICAL REMARKS. BY THE Author of the FEMALE QUIXOTE. VOL. II.
            
               LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR in the Strand. MDCCLIII.
         
         
            

our mutual Affection, I did not come here to invade his Territories, to seduce his Sub-jects from their Allegiance, or to conspire with his Enemies. Since therefore I have given him no Cause to seek my Death, I can-not believe him guilty of so unjust and trea-cherous a Design; but rather suspect the In-formation you have given me to be the Ef-fect of a Combination among the Bohemians, to create a Variance between me and their King."
               
                  Franion replied, "that it was dangerous to dally with the Rage of an incensed and secret Enemy; that if the Bohemians had intended any Harm to him they might easily accomplish it without revealing their Conspiracy; that it was unkind therefore in his Majesty to mis-construe his Zeal for his Preservation into a treacherous Design, for that his Intention was to prevent Treason, not to become a Traitor."
               He urged him then to fly with Speed in-to Sicily if he hoped to escape the Danger which threatned him, and begged his Majesty would permit him to go along with him, when if he did not fully prove that Pandosto had de-signed to poison him, he desired that his ima-gined Treachery might be punished with the most cruel Torments.
               
                  Egistus, weighing the Matter thoroughly in his Mind, gave many Thanks to Franion, and promising if he arrived safe in Sicily to re-ward him royally; he desired him to contrive the Method of their Escape.
               
                  

                           PENICULUS.
                           'Tis my Custom; I never fail to present my-self in the most seasonable Moments.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Are you desirous of hearing a noble Exploit?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Who is the Cook that has prepared the Meats? Shew me, if you please, what remains, I shall then be able to judge if he has succeeded well or ill.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Tell me, hast thou never seen painted in Fres-co upon Walls the Rape of Ganymede by the Eagle of Jupiter, who was in Love with the fair Boy; or that of the charming Adonis by Venus whose Heart he had conquered?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           One sees nothing else every where; but pray what are these Pictures to me? Alas! these Things are the least of my Concerns.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Look on me well; whom do you think I perfectly resemble?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           What Sort of Dress is this that you ap-pear in?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Confess to me that my Mien is excellent, and that in this Dress I appear to great Ad-vantage.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Where shall we sup?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Answer my Question first.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You are in the Right, therefore I say you are one of the handsomest Men in the World.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Hast thou not Courage enough to add some-thing of thine own?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Certainly, I say then, that you are a most agreeable Man.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Go on, go on.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           No, by my Faith, I will not go on unless you tell me the Matter. Oh! well thought on, you have quarrelled with your Wife, pray tell me the Occasion of your Dispute.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Where shall we find a Sepulchre, where, un-known to my Wife, we may bury the Day in supping voluptuously?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Let us go then, nothing can be better spoken, we will light the Funeral Pile wherever you please; there is no Time to be lost, for the Day is already half dead.—
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           But while thou triflest away the Time in speaking to me, thy own Happiness is delay-ed, ought not the Pile to be already on Fire?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           
                              Menaechmus, thrust out this Eye, tho' it is the only one I have, I am so prest with Hunger that I will not open my Mouth to speak a single Word unless you command me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Come farther from my Door?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           I obey.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Come yet nearer to me?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Most willingly.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How hard it is to make thee leave that Side? Retire, I say to thee, from the Den of that Lion.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           By the Temple of Pollux! I think you would make an excellent Jockey, a dextrous Leader of Horses.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Why pray?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You look back every Moment to see if your Wife does not follow you.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What is that thou say'st?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Me, Sir! I say whatever you please; to all your Affirmatives, I say, Yes; to all your Ne-gatives I say, No. I have the Honour to be your Eccho, both pro and con.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           When thou smellest any Thing, art thou able to guess what Sort of Odour it is that af-fects thy Sense? hast thou a delicate Nose?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Ah! in such a Case I my single Self can di-
                              
                                 •
                              ire better than the whole College of Augurs together.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Well, then, apply thy Nostrils to this Robe, which I carry under my Cloak: Smell it as thou shouldst; well what Scent has it? why do'st thou pause?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           One must smell the top of a Woman's Habit, for it is from that Place the Nose is affected with a Scent one can never get rid of after-wards.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Pleasant Peniculus, smell it here then? why dost thou turn aside?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Not without Reason, faith.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Reason? what does it smell of—An-swer me.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           It smells of three Things at once, Theft, a Whore, and a sumptuous Repast.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I am going from hence to carry it to Erotia, my Mistress, and will order her at the same Time to get a Supper prepared for herself, for thee, and me, and when we are seated at Table, we will protract the Debauch even till the rising of the Morning Sta.
                        
                        
                           

                           PENICULUS.
                           You speak like an Oracle! shall I knock at the Door?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Knock—but stay—stay a little.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           S'death Sir, how long will you delay the sublime Pleasure of eating and drinking?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Knock then—but knock softly.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Sure you think that this Door is made of Glass.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Hold—hold I conjure you by Hercules; see my Charmer herself, comes out of her House to meet us.—
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Look one Moment at the Sun I beseech you, see how the Lustre of that glorious Luminary is obscured in the Presence of this divine Per-son.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE III.
                        EROTIA, PENICULUS, and MENAECHMUS.
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Good-morrow Menaechmus, my dearest and most valued Lover.
                        
                        
                           

                           PENICULUS.
                           And pray what am I?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           You are not one of my Troop.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Treat me at least as a Soldier in the Corps de Reserve, who is in Time to fill up the Place of another.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Give Orders to have every Thing made ready for the Battle I design to have to Day at your House?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           I shall not fail.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           He and I will drink valiantly in this Battle; thou shalt judge which of us two Soldiers shews most Courage in emptying the Glasses; for it belongs to thee, as our General, to con-duct the Army; consider also with what Cham-pion thou wilt enter the Lists this Night. Ah! my Love, how I hate my Wife when I look upon thee, she becomes insupportable to me.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Nevertheless you cannot refrain from having something of hers about you, nay, you even wear her Cloaths. What Ornament is this tray that you wear on your Body?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           It formerly belonged to my Wife, but now 'tis thine, my fair one.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           If you go on at this Rate, my Love, you will certainly march at the Head of my amorous Troop, and be preferred to all those to whom I sell my pleasurable Nights.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           A Curtezan, when she sees the Prey ready to fall into her Hands, will not give herself Time to flatter and caress; but if you loved Me-naechmus, Madam, you would already have snatched away half of his Nose with the Ea-gerness of your Kisses.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Hold my Cloak, Peniculus, while I perform the Vow I have made, and consecrate these Spoils to my Goddess.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Give it me, but before you pull off the Robe, let us see you dance in it as I do, dance I con-jure you in the Name of the great Hercules!
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Me, dost thou bid dance. By the said great Hercules! I believe thou art mad.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           If I am mad, certainly you are not much

wiser; however pull off the Robe then, since you will not dance.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I have stolen this Robe to Day, but not with-out exposing myself to great Danger; Hercules, in my Opinion, undertook a less hazardous Enterprize when he forced the Girdle from Hippolita, the Queen of the Amazons, then I did in robbing my Wife of this Habit, re-ceive it from my Hands, my dear Erotia, 'tis yours, and you deserve it, since you are the only Woman in the World that has that Sweet-ness and Complacency, which I expect in the Person I love; 'tis thus that those whose Hearts are truly subjected ought to make known their Tenderness for the beloved Object.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Yes, those who desire to ruin themselves, and ride Post to the Hospital and Beggary.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           'Tis a Year since I bought this Robe for my Wife, it cost me four Minae.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           And so there are four Minae thrown away.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Dost thou know my Charmer what I expect from three.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Tell me, and your Will shall be exactly per-formed.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Give Orders then for a great Repast to be pre-pared at thy House, there will be only us three, do not delay to send to the Market, for what-ever can be found there the most delicate, but above all don't forget to have some Pigs Cheeks, a Ham, a Lamb's Head, and Hogs Puddings, and such other delicious Meats, as may when well seasoned excite a voracious Ap-petite. But the Business must be done imme-diately.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           By Fenus there shall be nothing wanting, depend upon it you shall have all you desire.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           We will go to the public Square, we will not stay long, and at our Return we will seek in the Bottle for Patience till Dinner is ready.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Return when you please, my Love, you shall find every Thing ready.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Let it be done then with all possible Dili-gence—Will you come Peniculus?
                           
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           That I will by Hercules! I will follow you, I will accompany you, I will watch you careful-ly, I would not leave you a Moment for the

                  Franion went immediately to consult with the Admiral of Egistus's Fleet, and it was agreed between them, that it should be put in Readiness to sail as soon as a fair Wind and Opportunity offered.
               In the mean Time Franion amused Pandosto with Hopes of soon having his so much de-sired Revenge accomplished, telling him that he was employed in preparing and compound-ing so subtle a Poison, that the Moment it was swallowed would procure immediate Death.
               
                  Pandosto received this News with a malignant Joy, every Hour seeming an Age to his im-patient Fury till His Revenge was satiated with the Death of those who had offended him.
               
                  Egistus being informed that a favourable Gale had sprung up, conveyed himself and his Sicilians, by the Assistance of Franion, out of a Postern Gate of the City, with such Secresy and Expedition, that they got on board their Ships without the least Suspicion, and spread-ing all their Sails to the Wind soon lost Sight of Bohemia.
               
               As soon as Pandosto was informed that Egistus had fled away in the Night, and that Franion was gone with him, he let loose all his Rage upon his Queen, whom he accused of conspiring with Egistus and the Traitor Franion, and commanded she should be led to Prison.
               The Bohemians were all alarmed, and sus-pected some Treason; and the furious Pandosto
                  

World. What a Fool shou'd I be if I did, when the Fortune of a God awaits me.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Who is there, some of you bid Cylindrus, my Cook, come hither—There is not a Mo-ment to lose, do you hear there.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE IV.
                        EROTIA, CYLINDRUS.
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Take a Basket and some Money, thou hast three Crowns, hast thou not?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Yes, Madam, I have.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Go then to Market, and buy provision to make an excellent Repast; but without Prodi-gality, I tell you before hand there are but three.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           With Submission, Madam, who are these three?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           
                              Menaechmus, his Parasite, and me.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           You increase the Number by seven, for the Parasite himself will eat a
                                 •
                               much as eight Per-sons, so I reckon there will be ten at Table.
                        
                        
                           

                           EROTIA.
                           I have named the Guests, do you take Care of the rest.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Look upon all as already done, you may sit down to Table when you will.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Don't trifle away the Time.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           I will return in a Moment.
                        
                     
                     End of the First Act.
                  
                  
                     

                     ACT II.
                     
                        SCENE I.
                        MENAECHMUS SOSICLES, MESSENION his Slave.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           IN my Opinion, my dear Messenion, these Sea-fearing Men know no greater Pleasure in the World than when after a long Voyage, they first discover Land.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           With Submission, Sir, I think the Pleasure is still more sensibly felt by those who after a te-dious Absence from their own Country behold again the well known Port, and are ready to touch the Shore: But tell me, I beseech you, Sir, what are we come to do here at Epidamnum, are you resolved to imitate the Sea, and go round all the Islands?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           We are come hither in Search of a Brother, a Twin Brother, whom I look upon as one half of myself.
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           But what do you imagine will be the Issue of this Search, 'tis now six Years since we have wandered on the Sea in a vain Expectation of finding him; we have sailed round all Istria, Spain, the Country of the Massilia and Illyria, we have overrun all the Adriatic Sea, bar-barous Greece, and all the Coasts of Italy that are washed by the Ocean? Had we been seeking for a Needle in a Bundle of Hay we should have found it by this Time, provided it was not invisible. In vain do we hope to find a dead Man amongst the Living, for if he were still in Being, shou'd we not have met with some one e'er now who cou'd have given some Intelligence of him?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I am determin'd never to give over my Search till I have found my Brother, or met with some Person, who having known him, can certainly inform me that he is dead. This pining Anxiety will then be at an End, and I will return to Syracuse; but till I have that Satisfaction, while Life animates this Body I will not cease to wander about the World, and seek him every where; too sensibly do I feel the Force of fraternal Affection to quit easily the Hope of seeing my Brother again.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Truly, Sir, you desire what can never possibly happen; in good Faith we wou'd do much better to return home, unless you design to write a History of the whole Earth.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           No more of these satyrical Speeches, good Sir, but beware of drawing my Anger upon thee, and do not imagine thou can'st oblige me by thy Importunities to follow thy imper-tinent Councils.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           How well, Sir, do you remind me that I am a Slave, you have said a great deal in very few Words, nothing cou'd be more clearly exprest, nevertheless it cannot prevent me from telling you my Thoughts.
                           Vouchsafe, Sir, to favour me with a Mo-ment's Attention. When I examine our Purse, when I count the Pieces that are in it, by my Faith, Sir, I find we have not suffici-ent to maintain us much longer; 'tis light, very light by Hercules! Therefore if you do not make Haste home 'tis probable you may soon see it empty, and instead of finding your Brother, you will yourself fall into the Jaws of Necessity and Misery. For you must know, Sir, the People of Epidamnum practise but little the Virtue of Hospitality; they are a voluptuous Pe
                                 •
                              ple, and immoderately addicted to Drink-ing. This City is full of Slanderers and Flat-terers, Men without Justice and Probity; there are here also a great Number of Courte-zans, who, as 'tis said, are the most alluring, and most dangerous of all that ever practised the Trade. In a Word, this City is called Epidamnum for this Reason, that every Stran-ger who enters it is damned.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           'Tis fit then that I shou'd be cautious, and look about me. Give me my Purse?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           What will you do with it?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What you have just now said fills me with Fear.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           And what is it you fear pray?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           That you may play me some damned Trick in Epidamnum, for I know thou art a great Debauchee, Messenion, and art cursedly fond of Women. Now I am easily excited to Anger, and in those Moments I am no longer Master of myself. Therefore by keeping my Money in my own Possession, I shall guard against two Inconveniencies. Thou wilt not have it in thy Power to be guilty of any Ex-travagances, and consequently I shall not have any Cause to be angry with thee.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Very well, Sir, there is your Purse, keep it yourself, that I may be as chaste as a Vestal, and you as peaceable as a Lamb.
                        
                     
                     
                        

                        SCENE II.
                        CYLINDRUS, MENAECHMUS SOSICLES, MESSENION.
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           I have bought Provision sufficient to make an excellent Repast for my three Guests, a Re-past worthy of my superior Skill in Cookery, but what do I see! Menaechmus at our Door already, woe to my poor Shoulders! the Eat-ers are ready to set down to Table before I am returned from Market with the Victuals that I am to dress for them, I must speak to him? Good-morrow Mr. Menaechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Now the Gods bless thee, Fellow, dost thou know me?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Know you, Sir! a pleasant Question by Hercules! where are your Companions?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           My Companions, whom dost thou mean Friend?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Your Parasite, for Example.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           My Parasite, the Fellow is certainly mad.
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           Did I not tell you, Sir, this City was full of Sharpers?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Pray, young Man, who is this Parasite thou takest of?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           
                              Peniculus.
                           
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           
                              
                                 Cylindrus is surprized at not seeing the Parasite, Peniculus, with Menaechmus, whom he takes for the Menaechmus of Epidamnum, and asks where he is, Messenion 
                                 
                                    •
                                 eplies, he has it safe in his Portmantua: The Equivocati-
                                 
                                    •
                                 n is pleasant enough, Cylindrus speaks of a Man, Messenion affects to believe he means a Brush, for that In-
                                 
                                    •
                                 trument was in Latin call'd, Peniculus, from Penè, or Cauda, 
                                 
                                    •
                                  Tail, it being generally made of one. Oh! I have it here safe in my Portmantua.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           You come in good Time, Sir, for Dinner, I am just returned from the Market, where I have bought what will make a delicious Re-past.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Answer me, young Man, at what Price do they sell here the white Hogs that are destined for Sacrifices?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           They are a Crown a Piece.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           See, here is a Crown, which I will give thee on Condition that thou wilt purchase with it one of those Hogs, and let it be offered for thy Cure; for whoever thou art, 'tis certain thou art mad to importune in this Manner, a Man with whom thou art not acquainted.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           I am Cylindrus, don't you know my Name?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What is thy Name to me, go about thy Bu-siness, I solemnly declare I know thee not, and what is more, I do not desire to know thee.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           However, Sir, I have the Honour to know you, your Name is Menaechmus, I think
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ay, now thou speakest like a Man in th
                                 •
                               Senses, that is indeed my Name, but wher
                                 •
                               is it thou hast seen me before?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Ah! mighty well, where have I seen yo
                                 •
                               you who are a Lover of Erotia, my fair M
                                 ••
                              
                              -tress.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules I am not in Love with a Woman, nor do I know who thou art.
                        
                        
                           

                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Strange! how can you say so? is it not I who so often fill your Glass when you are merry at our House.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Oh! that I had a good Cudgel in my Hand that I might break the Head of this Fellow.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           And so you often fill my Glass you say, I who am but this Moment arrived at Epidam-num, and was never here before in my Life.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Is it possible you can with a good Consci-ence deny what I say?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Deny it! yes, by Hercules! do I.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           And perhaps you will deny also that that House yonder is not yours, and that you do not actually dwell in it?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           May the Gods confound all the Males and Females that dwell in it, I say.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Certainly this Gentleman's Brain is crack-ed, or he would not curse himself in this terri-ble Manner? hark, Sir,
                        
                        
                           

believing the Queen not only guilty of disho-nouring his Bed, but of projecting the Flight of Egistus, sent his Guards with Orders to seize her.
               The innocent Bellaria not expecting the impending Storm, was playing with her lit-tle Son Garrinter, when the Guards, with much Reluctance, came to execute the King's Demands.
               The Queen was at first astonished and turned pale, but recollecting herself, and as-suming all the noble Pride of conscious Inno-cence and affronted Virtue, she gave her Hand to the Captain of the Guard, and without murmuring, suffered him to lead her to her Prison, where she spent the Time in patient Sorrow and absolute Resignation.
               
                  Pandosto, mad with the Disappointment of his Revenge upon Egistus, resolved it should fall doubly heavy on the Head of the injured Bellaria, he therefore caused it to be proclaim-ed throughout all his Dominions, that the Queen had committed Adultery with Egistus, and with his Cup-bearer, Franion, had conspir-ed his Death.
               Though the Queen's Life had hitherto ap-peared blameless, yet this confident Proclama-tion, and the Flight of the King of Sicily and Franion, raised many Suspicions against her in the Minds of the People, who notwithstand-ing daily offered up Prayers for her Deli-verance.
               Her Youth, her Beauty, the Sweetness of her Manners, but above all her Misfortunes, excited every one's Compassion.
               
                  

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What woud'st thou?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Take my Word for it, Sir, your Brain is a little disordered, you would do well with that Crown you promised me some Time ago, to buy a Hog for an expiatory Sacrifice for yourself, for by Hercules! Mr. Menaechmus, you are certainly under the Influence of an evil Spirit, to curse thus, and sport with the Anger of the Gods.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Detestable Rascal, how he plagues me!
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Ha! faith he is in one of his pleasant Hu-mours, he often jests and diverts himself with me, for provided his Wife be not with him, he is always in good Spirits, and rallies in-comparably.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What is that thou say'st?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Faith I know not what to say, you puzzle me so confoundedly, here, look into this Basket if you please, Sir, do you think I have bought Provision sufficient for you three, will what 
                                 
                               have here make a Repast good enough for you, your Parasite, and your Mistress.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Parasite, what Mistress do you talk of, Fellow?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           What Fury excites thee to torment this Gentleman as thou dost?
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Pray what Business have you with me? I know not who you are, suffer me to speak, without being interrupted by you, to this Gentleman, whom I know very well, and to whom I have the Honour to be known.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By the Temple of Pollux! Fellow, thou art mad, I know not if thou wert always so, but at present thou art absolutely mad, that's cer-tain.
                        
                        
                           CYLINDRUS.
                           Good Sir, jest no longer, I beseech you, I am going to dress all these good Things, and put them by an excellent Seasoning into a fit State to be devoured. I assure you, Sir, all shall be ready in a little Time, therefore do not go far from the Door, but walk here near 
                                 •
                              he Fumes of the Kitchen. Have you any Commands to your Venus?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I command thee to go hang thyself?
                        
                        
                           

                           CYLINDRUS.
                           But by Hercules! I think you would do bet-ter to come in, and seat yourself at Table, and drink a few Bumpers while I prepare your Dinner, pray do Sir.—Nay, if you won't I can't help it.—I'll go in myself and inform Madam Erotia that you are here, perhaps she will prevail upon you to come into the House and divert yourself; you will pass your Time much better there than here.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I am at last delivered from this Madman, by Pollux, this Beginning seems to be no bad Proof of what you told me of these Impos-tors of Epidamnum.
                           
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Be upon your Guard then, Sir, 'tis absolutely necessary, for by what I can understand from this Fool, the Mistress he talks of is certainly a Courtezan.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           But how should he know my Name, I am really surprized at it?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           By Hercules there is nothing surprizing in it; you are not acquainted with the Arts of these Courtezans; when any foreign Vessels arrive, they send their Slaves to the Port to observe the Passengers that come ashore, when they see a young Man who seems fit for their

Purpose they enquire his Name, his Family, and Country; they accost him, flatter, and sooth him, and draw him so dextrously into their Snares, that he is lost in Love before he enters the City: Ah! Sir, we are certainly attacked by a pirate Vessel, of which we have good Reason to be afraid.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Jupiter thy Advice seems to be just and reasonable.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I shall be convinced that you think so, if I see you take all those necessary and prudent Measures, which may prevent your dashing yourself against this dangerous Rock.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Favour me with a Moment's Silence I beseech you, the Door opens, let us see who comes out?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           With your Leave then, I will discharge my-self of this heavy Burden, here you Rowers, who are the Feet of your Vessels, take it to your Care.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE III.
                        EROTIA, CYLINDRUS, MENAECHMUS SOCICLES, MESSENION.
                        
                           ERIOTA.
                           
                              Speaking to her Servants within. Leave the Door open, go, I do not want

your Attendance, take Care to make every Thing ready within Doors; you Cylindrus, perform your Part well, and you Girls, pre-pare the Couches for the Table, burn the Perfumes, that my Lovers may be dissolved in Luxury and Ease, and nothing may be wanting to compleat the Voluptuousness of the Feast. Magnificence and Pleasures ruin our Gallants, but enrich us. But where is this teizing Man, who my Cook tells me is walking before my Door: Oh! I see him, the most generous, the most agreeable of all my Lovers, how much am I obliged to him for the Presents he is continually bestowing on me, I will treat him as I ought, with all the Distinction due to his Merit, and give him the Preference to all my other Lovers, 'tis fit I accost and speak to him first. My Love, what dost thou here? why dost not come into my House? thou who art more welcome to it than to thine own, nay, 'tis more thine than mine, for thou art Master both of it and me; every Thing is ready according to thy Order, all is prepared, every Wish shall be gratified, Dinner is served, there is nothing to hinder thee from placing thyself at Table.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           To whom does this Woman think she is speaking?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Certainly to you, my Dear.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Have we ever had the least Occasion to speak to each other before, pray where did our Ac-quaintance first commence?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           
                              Venus, my tutelary Deity, desirous of mak-ing me happy, brought thee first in my Way, thee whom I love more than the whole Race of Mankind besides, and by the Temple of Castor, in preferring thee to all other Men, I do thee but Justice, for 'tis to thy Liberalities alone that I am indebted for all the Pleasures I enjoy.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Certainly, Messenion, this Woman is either mad, or her Senses much disordered by Wine, that without knowing me, or having ever seen me before, she speaks to me as to the best Friend she has in the World.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Did I not foretel all this wou'd happen, Sir? ah! I knew it well, there is nothing more common here, 'tis the Leaves only at present which are falling on you, but if we stay here three Days longer, mark my Prediction, you will be crush'd by the Trees themselves. The Courtezans in this City have a wonderful Ad-dress, a charming Dexterity in emptying Purses, but with your Leave I'll venture to attack her myself. Good-morrow, Madam, will you permit me to speak a few Words to you?
                        
                        
                           

                           EROTIA.
                           Very willingly, what have you to say to me?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION,
                           I desire much to know where you have been acquainted with this Gentleman?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Here at Epidamnum, we have been long acquainted.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           At Epidamnum, you say you have been long acquainted with him, but how in the Name of the Furies can this be? since he but this Day arrived at Epidamnum, and was never here be-fore.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Pooh, this is only to divert yourself, we will pursue this Jest within. Come, my dear Menaechmus, let us go into the House, we shall be more at our Ease there.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By the Temple of Pollux this Woman knows my Name! I am astonish'd, how cou'd this happen?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           The Trull has a good Nose, she has smelt your Purse already, you shou'd have left it to my Care.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Faith thou art in the right, I have been guilty of great Folly in taking the Charge of the Money upon myself, here take it again, and now I shall see whether the Purse or my Per-son is the Object of her Love.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Come my Love, let us go in, the Repast it ready?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Certainly no Invitation was ever more agree-able; however, Madam, be pleased to accept my Thanks for your kind Offer, and dis-pence with me from accepting of it.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Since it is so, why did you order a great Repast to be prepared?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I! have I order'd it?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Yes, you; nothing is more certain than that you ordered a delicate Repast for yourself and your Parasite.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Parasite? s'death, how the Woman raves!
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Your Parasite, Peniculus.
                           
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who is this Peniculus, this Spunge, this Brush to clean Shoes?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           I protest you counterfeit Ignorance perfectly well; this Peniculus then is one who affords you a great deal of Amusement; this Penicu-lus is in Body and Soul the same identical Per-son that was with you when you brought me the Robe that you had secretly stolen from your Wife.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Very convincing, by Jupiter, what will she not invent at last! so I have robb'd my Wife of a Robe and presented it to you; seriously, Madam, your Head is a little touch'd, or like a Gelding, you sleep standing.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           What Pleasure can you find in making me your Jest? will you pretend to deny what pass'd before as many Witnesses as are present at this Instant?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Explain yourself more clearly, what is it that I deny?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           That you have given me to Day a Robe of your Wife's.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           And that I deny again, and will always deny it, I never had a Wife, and Thanks to the Gods, I have none at present. I never in my whole Life entered any House in Epidamnum; I never was in the City, I have dined in my Ship, and was but just come on Shore when I met you here.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Oh! Venus, how wretched am I! what Ship do you speak of?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           A Ship made of Wood, which for a long Time has been under Sail. Sails, casts An-chor, is refitted, and has received many Blows with a Hammer; 'tis exactly like the Working Place of a Skinner, one Stake stands near another.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Cease to torment me with this idle Raillery, come in I conjure thee, I begin to grow im-patient, no more of this Jest, but give me your Hand and come in with me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Believe me, Madam, I'm not the Person whom you seek, you take me for another.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Do I not know you well? are you not Menaechmus, the Son of Moschus? is it not
But the cruel Pandosto, in whose rocky Bosom Pity could find no Access, resolved to load the unfortunate Bellaria with every Kind of Infamy and Hardship; he would not allow her to be treated in the Prison with the Respect due to the Rank she once held, but caused her to be served and attended with the most cruel Neglect.
               The Cruelties he exercised on the Queen did but in Part satisfy his Revenge, he longed to make Egistus feel the Weight of his Fury: But this Monarch was so powerful by his Al-lies, having married the Emperor of Russia's Daughter, that he despaired of ever being able by open Force to accomplish his Re-venge.
               The unhappy Queen being informed of the vile Accusation against her so openly proclaimed, conscious of her own spotless In-nocence, and the Integrity of Egistus, earnest-ly intreated that she might be brought to a public Trial, confronted with her Accuser, and allowed to answer for herself.
               But the King was so inflamed with Rage and Jealousy that he would not receive her Petition; and while the poor Queen was thus languishing under the Weight of her Calami-ties, and hopeless of Redress, she perceived herself to be quick with Child.
               So affecting an Incident in her melancholy Condition drew Complaints from her, which softening the rugged Temper of her Keeper;

said that you was born at Syracuse, in Sicily? where Agathocles reign'd, after him Pinthia, then Linaro, who at his Death left the King-dom to Hieron, who is now upon the Throne.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           All this, Madam, is very true.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Oh! Jupiter, this Woman certainly came from your Country, she knows you so per-fectly.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! I cannot contradict, or refuse her any longer.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Ah! Sir, what do I hear? take Care how you give Way to this Inclination, if you once enter her House you are a lost Man.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I will not let so favourable an Occasion es-cape me, be silent then I command thee, I am resolved to acquies
                                 •
                              e in all she says; there is no great Matter in lying a little when it will procure me a good Inn, where the Entertain-ment shall cost me nothing. Madam, I have opposed every Thing you said a long Time, but it was through Fear that my Servant wou'd discover the Affair of the Robe and Repast to my Wife; now, if you please, I will go in with you.
                        
                        
                           

                           EROTIA.
                           I am satisfied, and pardon you for your Ma-lice in tormenting me thus long. But tell me, do you wait here for your Parasite?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I do not wait for him, I have no Inclination to see him, and if he comes I shou'd be glad you wou'd not permit him to enter.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           By Venus! I'll obey you willingly, but I have one Favour to intreat of you?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Speak, my Queen, command me freely, what is it you wou'd have me do?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           I wou'd have this fine Robe you have given me, carried to the Workman to be made fit for my Shape, and to have some little Orna-ments of my own Taste and Invention added to it.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! the Design is excellent, go, my Dear, I see you don't want Prudence; the Robe will by this means appear entirely new, and if even my Wife shou'd see it she will not be able to know it again.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Oblige me then by taking it to the Work-man

yourself when you go from hence, you promise me to do so, don't you, my Love?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Look upon it as already done, I give thee my Word of Love to perform it.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Let us go in then.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Do then, step in my Fair, I'll follow thee immediately, I must speak one Word to my Servant. Messenion—come hither.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Your Pleasure, Sir?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Softly, I have a Desire to know?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           What?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I must.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           What must you?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           The Business is begun.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           What Business?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Well, well, I know thou woud'st be giv-ing me Advice.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           And I know you value it but little.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           The Beast is taken I tell thee, I hold my Prey in my Hand, how dexterously have I managed her? I am going to give a Loose to Mirth, in the mean Time thou and thy Com-panions go to some Inn, and before Night re-turn and fetch me.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Ah, Sir! you know not these Courtezans, believe me, you wou'd do much better to fol-low my Council.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Be silent, I say to thee, if I am guilty of any Folly 'tis my Self that will suffer, this is no Business of thine, by what I have observ-ed this Woman is very silly, and easily impos-ed upon, 'tis she, and not I that will be the Dupe.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Ah! I die, he is lost.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Why dost thou not go?
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           I fly Sir? Ah! my Master is plunging him-self into an Abyss, from whence he will never come out; 'tis so, the Pirate's Vessel carries off our Barque at last, but I am a Fool to pre-tend to govern my Master—Have I forgot my Duty, he bought me for his Slave, not for his Governor, let me remember that, follow me Boys, I must come back in good Time to fetch my Master.
                        
                     
                     End of the Second Act.
                  
                  
                     

                     ACT III.
                     
                        SCENE I.
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           DURING these thirty Years, which I have lived, I have never been guilty of so wicked, so unhappy an Action as this Day; my cruel Destiny led me into an Assembly, where, while I lost my Time in gaping and staring about me, Menaechmus escaped me. Ah! without Doubt he is gone to the House of his Mistress, and was not willing that I shou'd accompany him, and be a Witness of his Pleasures: May the Gods pour down their fiercest Wrath upon him who first introduced Assemblies, and thereby hindered People who have important Affairs upon their Hands from pursuing their Business. Assemblies ought only to be composed of indolent and idle Per-sons, such ought to be summoned to appear, and when they don't obey, be punished by large Fines. A great many of the Inhabitants of this City eat always alone, and in private. Ci-tizens, wholly useless to their Country, who

have never performed the least Service to the Commonwealth, mean sordid Wretches, that invite no Person to their Table, and are never invited to others. Such as these ought regu-larly to assist at Assemblies and public Meet-ings.
                           If this excellent Order, this useful Custom had been observed, I shou'd not to Day have had the Misfortune of losing so plentiful and delicious a Repast, for I am as well assured that Menaechmus had once a Design to treat me this Day, as I am among the Number of the Liv-ing. However I will go to him as late as it is, I have always Hopes of finding some Remains of the Feast; this Thought alone consoles me, and raises my depress'd Spirits; but is not that Menaechmus himself that I see? he is com-ing out with a Crown of Flowers on his Head, ah! miserable that I am, the Feast is finish'd, they are risen from Table, by all the Furies! I am come too late.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE II.
                        MENAECHMUS SOSICLES, PENICULUS.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           If I bring you back to Day your Robe fit-ted to your Shape, and adorned as you desire, will you be contented, my Charmer? I will have it done in such a Manner that you your-self shall not be able to know it again.
                        
                        
                           

                           PENICULUS.
                           So, so, he is going to carry the Robe to the Workman after having filled himself well with Meat and Wine, without giving the poor Parasite his Share; by Hercules! I will for-feit my illustrious Name, I will cease to be myself rather than not demand the Cause of this Affront, and gratify my Vengeance on the Author of it; here will I watch the Mo-tions of my new Enemy, and when I have pe-netrated into his Designs I will accost him, and have a Conference with him.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ye Gods! who cannot die, although some-times ye desire Death: Immortal Gods! is there a Man in the World on whom in one Day you have conferred so many Benefits, and who expected them so little? I have eaten of most delicious Fare, I have drank plenti-fully, and what is still better, I have possessed a charming Courtezan, and to compleat my good Fortune, I carry away with me a rich Robe, which Erotia wou'd have done well to have given me to remember her by, for by the Faith of an honest Man she shall never see it again.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           How securely the Gentleman disburthens his Heart of its Gaiety! and now that his Bel-ly is full, without doubt he diverts himself at my Expence, and laughs in his Sleeve at

the Fast I have kept, while he was indulging himself over his good Cheer.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           She pretends that I have given her this fine Robe, and that I stole it from my Wife, I wou'd not undeceive her, but began to flatter and caress her as if I had been the most pas-sionate of her Lovers, I agreed to all she said, answered Yes, or No, as she pleased, in short I was never more splendidly, more voluptu-ously entertained in my Life.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Oh! I can no longer contain myself, I must speak to him.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who is this Man that comes to meet me?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           What can you say for yourself, light, wa-vering, and inconstant Man? tell me, oh, most wicked, most villainous most deceitful, most contemptible of all Mortals, what Crime have I been guilty of towards thee, that thou shouldst thus barbarously rob me of Life? how cou'd you leave me so basely in the pub-lic Square, and in my Absence bury a large Repast in your gluttonous Maw? how have you dared to commit such daring Injustice? for can you deny that a Share of this Feast was not my lawful Inheritance?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What is the meaning of this Outrage, young Man? what Business have you ever had with me? and why do you load with such injurious Reproaches a Man entirely unknown to you? do you want to oblige me to pay you for the ill Names you have called me with as many good Blows with my Cudgel?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You have done me more Misehief already than if you had beaten me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By your Leave, young Man, what is your Name, I have a great Curiosity to know it?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           What Joke is this, to pretend to be igno-rant of my Name, has our Acquaintance then commenced but this Moment?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By the Temple of Pollux this is the first Time I ever saw you, at least for what I know, but certain I am that I have no Ac-quaintance with you; but whoever you are for your own Sake cease your injurious Lan-guage, and torment me no longer with your mistaken Reproaches.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Dare you thus confidently deny that you know me?
                        
                        
                           

he caused the King to be immediately inform-ed of it, not doubting but the News would induce him to set her at Liberty.
               The Queen's Pregnancy however produced quite a contrary Effect; for the King no sooner heard of it than starting up in a violent Fury, he swore Bellaria and her Bastard should die, even though the Gods themselves should say no.
               The Queen, notwithstanding so many cruel Afflictions, was happily delivered of a Daughter; and Pandosto immediately declar-ed his Resolution to have both the Mother and Child burnt.
               The Noblemen of his Court used all the Arguments their Reason and Humanity could furnish them with, to prevail upon him to change his barbarous Purpose, but all they could do was to prevent the Murder of the Child.
               The Queen's Doom he told them was ir-revocably fixed, but though at the earnest So-licitations of his Nobles, he promised the Child should not be put to Death, yet the Resolution he took concerning it was little less cruel, since by it he only meant to protract its Faté.
               He sent a Person to the Prison with Orders to take the Infant from its wretched Mother, and putting it into a Boat and launching it into the Sea, leave it to the Mercy of the Wind and Waves.
               
                  

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           If I do know you, what Reason can I have to deny it?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Ah! Menaechmus, awake from this Dream, and recall your Senses?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules I think I am awake, and I have all the Senses that I received from Nature.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Is it possible that you don't know your Pa-rasite?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           You are mad, young Man, stark mad, by Jupiter.
                           
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Answer this Question, I beseech you, did you not rob your Wife of a Robe to Day to make a Present to your Mistress, Erotia?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules I have no Wife, nor have I given a stolen Robe to Erotia.
                           
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Amazing! you dream waking, the Thing is incontestable, did I not see you a Moment ago come out of Erotia's House with a Robe on your Body?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Confound you for an Ideot, you judge of others by yourself, and because you are a ri-diculous Fop, you think I am so also; so you really say you have seen me in a Female Ha-bit?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Yes, I maintain it, I have seen you,
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Go hang yourself, Blockhead, or rather go and offer an expiatory Sacrifice to the Gods, that they may cure you of this Folly, for you are certainly the most stupid of all Mortals.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           I swear by the Temple of Pollux! mark me, Menaechmus, that no Consideration whatever shall hinder me from telling your unhappy Wife this whole Affair; yes, she shall know every Thing that has passed without the least Disguise; and thus the Injuries you have done me shall fall heavy upon yourself; I will en-joy my Revenge at my Ease, and console my-self with that for the good Cheer you have had the Barbarity to deprive me of, for oh! this Disappointment to Day tortures me horribly, depend upon it I will be revenged, it shall ne-ver be said you have devour'd all this excellent Feast for nothing. I tell you again it shall cost you dear.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Will this Delusion never have an end? shall I be eternally mock'd in this Manner? every Person I see banters me, and accuses me of Things I am entirely ignorant of, by Hercules! this is very provoking, but the Door opens, what will come next?
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE III.
                        A Maid Servant, MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                        
                           Servant.
                           Mr. Menaechmus, my Mistress Erotia in-treats you will buy an Ounce of Gold to be ad-ded to the Robe, and that you will also carry this Bracelet to the Goldsmith, and desire him to mend it, and alter it so that it may appear quite new.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Go, my Child, tell thy Mistress from me that I will carefully perform her Commission, and not only this, but any other she pleases to command me, my Purse and my Person shall be always at her Service.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           Do you know this Bracelet?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           No, but I perceive it is Gold.
                        
                        
                           

                           Servant.
                           'Tis the same Bracelet which you said some Time ago you had stolen out of your Wife's Cabinet.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! I never said so.]
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           What! have you forgot it? give me the Bracelet again then, since you do not remem-ber it was yours.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Stay, stay, let me consider a little—Oh! I remember the Jewel perfectly well, yes it is the same Bracelet, I gave to my Mistress, the very same.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           You are sure of it then?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Very sure, but where are the two other Jewels that I gave her at the same Time?
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           You gave her no more than this Bracelet.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pollux! when I gave her this I gave her the others.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           Well▪ 
                              
                                 ••
                              ke Care of this.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           You may assure her that I will not neglect any Thing she commands, I will give the Workman Orders to send home the Robe, and the Bracelet at the same Time.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           Ah! sweet Sir, do me the Favour to give me a Pair of Gold Earings, about the Weight of two Crowns; come, Mr. Menaechmus, comply generously with this Request, and be assured I will always meet you with Smiles when you come to our House.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Oh! I will do this with Pleasure, only give me the Gold, and I'll take Care to have the Earings made, and will pay for the Fashion.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           Be so good, Sir, to lend me the Gold, I'll certainly pay you some Time or other.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           No, no, I insist upon your furnishing the Gold yourself; look into your Hoards and bring me the two Pieces.
                        
                        
                           Servant.
                           I'll enter into an Engagement to pay it back double.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I have no Gold at present.
                        
                        
                           

                           Servant.
                           Well, you'll oblige me when you have; have you any Commands to my Mistress?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Tell her the Robe and the Bracelet shall be sent very soon, and alter'd to her Fancy. So she is gone, the Door is shut. Oh! fortu-nate Menaechmus, certainly thou art highly fa-voured by the Gods? what a Profusion of Benefits have they showered upon thee? but what a Fool am I to linger here? why do I not seize this favourable Opportunity to make my Escape. Go then, Menaechmus, Courage, Man, haste away, and make good Use of thy Feet; I'll throw my Crown of Flowers on the left Hand, so if they shou'd take it into their Heads to pursue me, they will suppose I went that Way. Now will I go seek my Slave, Messenion, for I am impatient to tell him what good Fortune the Gods have sent me.
                        
                     
                     End of the Third Act.
                  
                  
                     

                     ACT IV.
                     
                        SCENE I.
                        The Wife of MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum, PENICULUS the Parasite.
                        
                           Wife.
                           HOW can I think of living with a Hus-band who robs me of my Cloaths to present to his Mistress?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           In the Name of Jupiter, Madam, make no Noise, you will spoil all; if you will be di-rected by me, you shall surprize this unfaith-ful Husband in the very fact. Come this Way, I beseech you, your Husband hath drank plentifully, and intoxicated as he is he wou'd not neglect carrying the Robe he robb'd you of to Day to the Workman, he had a festal Crown upon his Head. Ha! what do I see here? the very same Crown by Hercules, now I hope you do not doubt me, he has certainly

taken this Way, shall we follow him, or watch his Return where we are? by Pollux! here he comes, but I tell you beforehand he has not your Robe with him.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           What shall I do with this Man?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           What shall you do, have you not the same Weapon in your Possession that you al-ways had? the same Instrument of Vengeance? In short, have you not the same Tongue? make Use of it now then, and be reveng'd.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Your Advice is very good, I shall follow it, and truly I don't need many Persuasions to it.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Let us retire this Way a little, we will rush out upon him at once and surprize him.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE II.
                        MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum, his Wife, and PENICULUS.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           We have a Custom here that is no less foolish than troublesome, and yet the wisest and best of us continue to observe it exactly, we are extremely desirous of having a great Number of Dependants, and of being perpetually soli-cited

by Clients, but never give ourselves the Trouble to enquire whether they are good or bad; we never concern ourselves about their Probity, their Integrity, or the Merit of their Cause; all we desire to know is if they are rich. If the Client is poor, though his Behaviour be ever so unexceptionable, yet he passes for a Man who has very bad Principles; if he be rich, however wicked and base his Life and Manners, yet we extol him for a Man of great Virtue; there are some who regard nei-ther Law or Equity, who are continually per-secuting their Patrons, who deny to have re-ceived what has been given them, and who having acquired large Fortunes by Usury and swearing falsely, delight in continually involv-ing themselves and others in Lawsuits; when they have determined on a Day to have their Causes pleaded, they acquaint their Advocates or Patrons with it, and whatever Crimes they have committed, they must defend them whether the Cause be pleaded before the Peo-ple, before the Pretor, or before the Judge.
                           A Client of this Sort has been the Cause of all my Mortification to Day; he disappointed me in all my Designs, and robb'd me of those Hours I had resolved to dedicate to Pleasure, I have pleaded for him before the Ediles, and after a great deal of wicked Disputation I of-fered the adverse Party Conditions equally cruel and unjust, and mindful of my Disap-pointment, went no farther in my Pleading than what was just necessary to form an En-gagement

uponThe Pleaders on both Sides were obliged to lay down a certain Sum of Money, which each Party looked upon as the Reward of Victory, this Money was called a Fine, be-cause it was the design'd Punishment of a Law-suit unjust-ly undertaken.. Well what did my Client? Why he gave Security. I protest I never saw a Man so clearly, so manifestly convicted; the Crimes he was accused of were proved upon him by three Witnesses. May all the Gods punish him for the voluptuous Hours he has made me lose this Day! and may Heaven chas-tise me also for my Folly, in going to the As-sembly and depriving myself of a delicious Day.
                           I ordered a good Repast to be prepared, and I know my Mistress waits for me with great Impatience, I could not help this Delay, I left the Assembly as soon as possible, I do not doubt but Erotia will be extremely offended, but she will be appeased by reflecting on the fine Robe I stole from my Wife to present to her.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Do you hear? is it I that have made him confess this Villainy? what do you say to this?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I say that I am very unhappy in a Husband.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           But did you understand what he said?
                        
                        
                           
The Guards who assisted at this barbarous Deed, moved by the sweet Countenance of the innocent Babe, could not help accusing the King of great Cruelty; nevertheless Fear of his Resentment obliged them to execute his Commands.
               They put the Child into a Boat, covering it with Boughs to preserve it from the Incle-mency of the Weather, and set it into the Ocean, when immediately so great a Storm arose, that it was with much Difficulty they got to shore again.
               This horrid Deed accomplished, the King assembled his Nobles and Counsellors, and Bellaria was brought into Court, where she heard the Charge against her read.
               The Queen, who saw nothing but her Death would satisfy the incensed King, con-fiding in her own Innocence, assumed all the Courage her unhappy Condition required, and with a noble Haughtiness demanded to have Law and Justice; "for Mercy, said she, I do not expect; let my Accusers therefore appear in Court, and give their Evidences be-fore my Face."
               
                  Pandosto replied, "that the Witnesses were of such Credit that their Words alone were sufficient; that for her, indeed it was her Part to deny such a monstrous Crime, and forswear herself, seeing that she had overcome all Sense of Shame and Remorse in committing it; ne-vertheless,

                           Wife.
                           Too well, Oh! Gods too well!
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           If I act wisely I shall certainly go in here, where I shall be more at my Ease than at Home, and swim in Luxury and Pleasure.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Stay Wretch, for this Time I will disap-point you, Detection and Shame have over-taken you, thou shalt pay back with Interest the Robe you have robb'd me of, this is the Consequence of such Liberalities; were you such a Fool as to imagine such Crimes cou'd be long concealed or committed with Impu-nity?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What do you mean, Wife? what is the Matter?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Excessive Assurance! dare you ask me what is the Matter?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Wou'd you have me ask this Man then?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           No Coaxing—it will signify nothing, go on, Madam, maintain your Rights as you ought.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Cause have I given you, Peniculus, to treat me so ill?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           You ought to know.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           He is not ignorant of the Reason I have to c
                                 •
                              mplain of him, but the wicked Wretch pretends to know nothing about it.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           But come explain this Business to me?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           The Robe,
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Robe?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Who was it that carried away my Robe?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           What are you afraid, Sir?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Yes, faith, of one Thing, I confess this Robe makes me tremble.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           'Tis your Turn now, I trembled, Heaven knows, while you eat in my Absence that ex-quisite

Repast to which you had invited me; go on, Madam, do not spare this perfidious Husband, let him feel the Violence of your Resentment.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Wilt thou not be silent, ungrateful as thou art?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           No, by Hercules! I will not be silent, he makes Signs to me to say nothing.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! thou lvest, I made no Sign either with my Head or Eyes.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           How unhappy, how miserable am I?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           In what are you unhappy, tell me, Ma-dam?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           This Man has not his Equal for Impudence in the whole World, with what Confidence he denies a Thing as clear as the Sun.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I swear to thee, Wife, by Jupiter, and all the immortal Gods, I did not make any Sign to this Fellow. Are you satisfied?
                        
                        
                           

                           PENICULUS.
                           You need not take much Pains to persuade her to believe that, stay, stay, Sir, we have not done with you yet, pray come back?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Come back, for what?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           In my Opinion you cannot do better than to go to the Embroiderer and bring back the Robe, this is all you have for it now.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Robe is it that you both stun my Ears with thus?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           What have I to do but be silent since he pretends to have forgot this disgraceful Action?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Have any of my Slaves offended thee, Wife? I know Servants often answer saucily, and 'tis difficult to govern them, but you need only complain to me, and I will chastise them se-verely, I'll make them observe their Duty.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You are merry, Sir.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           You seem to labour with some violent Un-easiness,

Wife, Sorrow is painted on your Face, tell me the Cause.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You mock her certainly.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Has any of the Family offended her?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You are pleasant, you turn her into Ridi-cule.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Is it with me then that she is angry?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Aye, now you speak seriously.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pollux! I never did her the least Injury.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Now you begin to rally again.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Tell me, my dear Wife, what is the Cause of your Uneasiness?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           He begins to flatter now, beware of him.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Mischievous Fellow, can't you hold your Tongue, 'tis your Business to be neuter here,

I say nothing to you, why then do you tor-ment me?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Let my Hand alone, keep your Caresses for your Mistress.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Mind that, Sir, another Time make haste to devour the Feast in my Absence, and af-terwards laugh at me, insult me, and throw your Crown of Flowers on the Ground when you have eaten and drank plentifully.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What dost thou mean, I have not eaten to Day, I am yet fasting, nor have I been with Erotia since I parted from her with you.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Dare you deny it.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Yes, by Hercules, I dare, and will main-tain that your Reproaches are as false as Hell.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Most impudent of Men! did I not see you a Moment ago come out of Erotia's House with a festal Crown upon your Head? did you not treat me like a Fool or a Madman? swear you knew me not, and that you only this Day arrived at Epidamnum?
                           
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How is it possible I shou'd have had this strange Conversation with you, since I have never seen you since we parted at the Assem-bly till this Moment?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Ah, I know the very bottom of your Heart, you did not think I was capable of taking a severe Revenge for the Injury you did me, but by Hercules you was deceived, for I have told all to your Wife.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How! what is it thou hast told her?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           I have forgot, take the Trouble to ask her.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           'Tis well, Rascal. My dear Wife, what is it this Rogue of a Parasite has told you? tell me? why are you silent? speak freely, open your Heart to me without Disguise?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           As if you knew not the Cause of my Grief, my rich Robe is stolen from me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Is it possible! your rich Robe stolen, say you? what News is this you tell me?
                        
                        
                           

                           Wife.
                           Ought you to be surprised at this News?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           If I knew how it happened I wou'd pro-cure you Satisfaction.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           With what Assurance he dissembles and pretends Ignorance of the Fact! but it is all to no Purpose, your Roguery cannot be concealed; for by Hercules, I who know it have disco-vered all to your Wife.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What have you discovered?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Since you have lost all Shame, and are re-solved to persist in your Falsehood, hear me, Wretch, I will tell you the Cause of my Un-easiness, and what your Parasite has informed me of, my Robe is stolen out of my House.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           But seriously, have you been robb'd of a Robe?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Subtle Wretch, how he equivocates! the Robe is stolen that's certain, Madam, and stolen for a Whore.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What have you to do in this Affair? but what is it you tell me, Wife?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Must I repeat it eternally! I tell you again that my Robe is taken out of the House.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who has taken it?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           By Pollux he that took it knows the Thief very well.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who is that Man?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           One Menaechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Jupiter it was a villainous Action, but who is this Menaechmus?
                           
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Yourself.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Me! me! do you say?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Yes, you I say.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who is my Accuser?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Myself.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           And I also, nay more, I will prove that you stole away the Robe to carry it to your Mistress, Erotia.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I! have I given a Robe to any one?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           You, you, no other than you, must we bring an Owl hither to scream out You, with-out ceasing, in your Ears, your Wife and I are fatigued with repeating this Word so often.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I swear to you, Wife, by Jupiter, and all the Gods (sure this will satisfy you) that I have not given away your Robe.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           And we swear to you by Hercules! that we do not lye.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Then you know that I have not given away the Robe, I have only lent it for a little Time, upon Condition that when the Person

added he, you shall die, and die a most cruel and ignominious Death."
               The Queen, not terrified by these Threats, replied without any Emotion, "that to pro-ceed to Punishment without Proof, was Ri-gour, not Law."
               The Nobles approved of what she said, and required that her Accusers should be sworn and openly examined; and if the Queen's Guilt was fully proved, his Majesty might condemn her to suffer the Punishment ordain-ed by the Law for such Offences.
               The King answered, "that in this Case he could and would dispense with the Law, and that the Nobles should take his Word for suf-ficient Evidence, otherwise he would make the proudest of them repent it.
               This Threat struck them all dumb, but Bellaria, who despaired of Life, and dreaded Infamy more than Death, said, "if his Will must be the Law, the Jury's Verdict will be useless: Then falling on her Knees, she conjured the King by the Love he bore to the young Prince Garrinter his Son, that he would grant her one Request, which was to send six of his Nobles, in whom he placed the greatest Confidence, to the Island of Delphos, and there consult the Oracle of Apollo con-cerning the Crimes she was accused of."
               
                  Pandosto could not refuse so reasonable a Request, and having named six Embassadors to be dispatched with all Speed to Delphos, he

who borrow'd has made Use of it once, it shall be returned immediately.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           By the Temple of Castor! I never lend any of your Coats, or Cloaks, to any Per-son whatever, it belongs to me only to lend my Cloaths, and to you to do what you please with your own.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Don't be uneasy, your Robe shall be brought back to you, I will take that trouble upon myself.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           It will be your Interest to do so, for depend upon it if you do not bring back my Robe you shall never come into my House again.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How! will you shut my own Doors upon me? will you presume to banish me from my own House?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           But pray, Madam, what Reward will you bestow upon me for informing you of this Roguery?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           When such an Accident happens to you I will do you the same Service you have done me.
                        
                        
                           

                           PENICULUS.
                           By the Temple of Pollux I am in no Dan-ger of such an Accident happening to me, for I have nothing to lose. May the Gods confound the Husband and Wife, both I say, what can I do now? I must even go to the public Square, and see if I can fasten upon any body who will give me a Meal, for I have nothing more to expect from this ingrateful Family.
                        
                        
                           MANAECHMUS.
                           So my better Half imagines she has mortifi-ed me extremely by banishing me from home, Fool! as if I had not another Place to go to, where I shall pass my Time more agreeably than with a scolding Wife. If my Wife is offended I have the Consolation to think that my Erotia will receive me with open Arms; she will not banish me from her, no, she will welcome me with Transport—I will go to her immediately, and intreat her to give me back this cursed Robe which has occasioned so much Noise, and I will buy her a better. Hollo, who is there, what neither Porter nor Portress? open the Door, I say, and tell your Mistress I am here.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE III.
                        EROTIA, MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum,
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Who is it that asks for me?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           One that loves you more than his own Life.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           What is it you, my dear Menaechmus, why do you stay at the Door? what new Whim is this? come in my Love.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Stay a little, can you tell what occasions this Visit?
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           'Tis easy to guess, my Friend, you are come to take a little Repast with me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           You are mistaken, my Charmer, and not to keep you long in Suspence, hear what I have to say, though I am afraid it will not be very agreeable, in short I am come to intreat you will return me the Robe I gave you this Morning, my Wife has been informed of all that is past, you may judge if she be not in a great Rage; be so kind as to give me back her Robe, and I promise to buy you another of twice the Value, and you shall chuse it your-self.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Sure you know not what you say! my Dear, have you forgot that I gave you the Robe to carry to the Workman, and a Bra-celet

also at the same Time, which I desired you wou'd get alter'd for me?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What do you say? that you have given me the Robe and the Bracelet? there is not any Thing more false, go Child, look in your Drawers, or rather reflect a little, for since the Time that I gave you that Robe, and quitted you to the Assembly, I have not had the Pleasure of seeing your Face till this Mo-ment.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Ah! I see your Design, I have found you out, because I was silly enough to give you an Occasion to make a Fool of me, you are resolved to make Use of it.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pollux! I have no bad Intention in mak-ing you this Demand, you may believe what you please, but I assure you my Wife knows all.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Did I ask you to give me this Robe? did you not voluntarily make me a Present of it? you demand it again now, be it so, I am very willing to resign it, keep it, do what you will with it, return it to your Wife, but be assured you shall never enter my House again; and since you reward my Tenderness so ill, I am resolved for the future you shall obtain nothing of me but what you purchase with Gold—

Go—seek elsewhere for a Mistress, whom you can impose upon.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What, in the Name of Hercules, is all this Rage for? indeed you are in the wrong. What going, stay, I say, Erotia, return hi-ther.
                        
                        
                           EROTIA.
                           Are you there still? how dare you call me?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ha! she is gone in, and has shut the Door close after her, by Jupiter I am in a very a-greeable Situation, banish'd by my Wife, ex-cluded by my Mistress, shamefully dismissed by both. What shall I do? neither of them will trust me again, I must consult my Friends upon this Misfortune, and follow their Ad-vice.
                        
                     
                     End of the Fourth Act.
                  
                  
                     

                     ACT V.
                     
                        SCENE I.
                        MENAECHMUS SOSICLES, the Wife of ME-NAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I Committed a great Folly when I confided my Purse to the Care of Messenion, the Rascal is certainly wasting his Time and my Money in some Baudy-House.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I am impatient to know if my Husband will return home again. Ha! there he is, I am happy, he brings me back my Robe.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I cannot imagine where this Slave of mine is.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I'll meet him, and scold him as he deserves,

are you not ashamed, wicked Man, as you are to appear before me with that Robe.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Hey! what is the meaning of this? cer-tainly, Madam, you have lost your Wits.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           How! impudent Wretch, have you the Boldness to open your Mouth to answer me?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What Crime have I been guilty of to be condemned to keep my Mouth shut, pray?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Dare you ask that Question? insolent! shameless! most wicked of all Mortals!
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Hum—Pray, Madam, have you read His-tory enough to know why the Greeks call'd Queen Hecuba a Bitch?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Not I —
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Because Misfortunes having deprived this old Princess of her Senses, she talked in the Manner you do now, and loaded every Per-son she saw with Abuse. 'Twas with Justice therefore that the Greeks gave her the Appel-lation of Bitch.
                        
                        
                           

                           Wife.
                           'Tis absolutely impossible to bear with your Irregularities any longer, I wou'd much rather chuse to live like a Widow the remainder of my Days, than with a Husband that abandons himself to such monstrous Excesses.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           If you have Resolution enough to live without Man, and abandon your Spouse, what is that to me pray? is it the Custom in Epidamnum for Women of Distinction to fasten upon Strangers just arrived, and ac-quaint them with the Secrets of their Fami-lies?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Yes, I repeat it, our Union shall be dissolv-ed, I wou'd rather pass my Days in the most rigid Chastity than suffer any longer your hor-rible Disorders.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! with all my Heart, live a Widow to Eternity, you have my free Con-sent.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           But dare you, insolent that you are, dare you deny that you stole my Robe, when at this Moment you wear it on your Body as an Ornament? Wretch! how cou'd you be guilty of such an Action without blushing,

or rather without being ready to expire with Shame?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! Madam, this is past bear-ing, and all the Respect I owe your Sex can-not hinder me from telling you that you are as bold as wicked, to charge me with having robb'd you of this Robe, when it was given me by a Woman whom I believe you never saw, to get alter'd for her.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Ah! this is too much—they will make me desperate. By Castor I will send for my Fa-ther; and give him an exact Account of your fine Behaviour. Who's there? One of you go to my Father, and tell him I beg to see him immediately upon an Affair of Conse-quence. Now, Sir, your Debaucheries shall be all exposed, I will paint you in your pro-per Colours.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Are you crazy, Mistress, what Debau-cheries am I guilty of pray?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           When you rob me, who am your Wife, and a too too faithful one for such a Husband, when you rob me, I say of my Cloaths and Jewels, and give them publickly to your Whore, can you wonder that I complain of such Treatment?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           In the Name of Hercules, Madam, I be-seech you, tell me if you can, is there any Drug, any Potion, that if I drank wou'd give me Spirits to support your amazing Bold-ness? I wou'd fain know who you take me for? for my Part I declare I know you not, nor ever saw you before.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Though you divert yourself with turning me into Ridicule, yet sure you will have some Consideration, some Respect for my Father, whom I have sent for. Ha! here he comes, look on him, know you this venerable old Man, Sir?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Just as well as the Prophet Calchus, I tell you this is the first Time I ever saw him.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Wretch! wilt thou deny that thou know'st me or my Father?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Yes, by Hercules! and your Grandfather also.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Amazing Impudence.
                        
                     
                     
                        

committed the Queen to close Imprisonment till their Return.
               The Ambassadors performed their Voyage in three Weeks, and as soon as they landed at Delphos, they went to the Temple of Apollo, and with great Devotion offered Sacrifices to the God, and Gifts to his Priests, according to Custom, and then humbly besought an Answer to their Demands.
               They had not kneeled long at the Altar, when Apollo with a loud Vice said, "Bohemi-ans, what you find behind the Altar take and depart;" they obeyed the Oracle, and found a Scroll of Parchment, which the Priest com-manded them not to open but in the Presence of the King.
               The Ambassadors assured him of their ex-act Obedience to his Injunctions, and their Devotions being finished they left the Tem-ple, and sailed with a fair Wind for Bohemia, where they soon arrived, and hastened to Court.
               
                  Pandosto received them very graciously, and they after giving him an Account of their Voyage, presented the divine Scroll to him, intreating him at the same Time, since the Queen's Life or Death, her Innocence or Guilt, was contained in that sacred Writing, that he would summon the Nobility to meet in the Judgment Hall, and before them and the accused Queen cause the Oracle to be read.
               
                  

                        SCENE II.
                        The Old Man, Father-in-law of MENAECH-MUS of Epidamnum, the Wife of the same, and MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                        
                           Old Man.
                           I am going to my Daughter's House as fast as my great Age will permit me, but well I know this Walk will be very difficult, for every Step is slower than the former, I sink under the Weight of Years, and drag a heavy Body, which my Limbs are hardly able to support; my Strength is almost gone, I carry my Years on my Back like bad Merchandize, for this wicked old Age, whenever it comes, brings with it a great many Followers, a Croud of Inconveniencies and natural Defects; in short, old Age is subject to so many Miseries that if I undertook to recount them I shou'd die before the Detail was ended. But besides the Pain of being old, which is not small, I am assaulted by a new Affliction that touches me sensibly; my Daughter has sent for me in a violent Hurry, she intreats that I will come immediately; what can be the occasion of this Message? what Accident has happened? my Imagination represents a thousand different Things to me, all equally tormenting.
                           But what I am most surprised at is, that my Daughter has sent only a general Message, which gives me no Light into the Affair. Ah! she wou'd have done better to have spared

me this Anxiety by informing me exactly what the Business is. Mean Time I conjecture, I divine, and I am much deceived if I am not right, some new Family Storm, some domes-tic Hurricane has occasioned this Message. Women who bring large Portions to their Husbands expect to make them wear the Yoke; these Women I say are generally very bad, and if the poor Husband endeavours but ever so little to maintain his Right of Superiority, the House will be always full of Noise; the Husbands indeed often abuse their Power, and then 'tis they who are in the wrong. To ren-der the conjugal State happy, 'tis necessary that the Authority of the Husband ought to be exerted with Prudence; and the Submissi-on of the Wife be bounded by Reason; by Pollux! it certainly is not for any trivial Mat-ter that my Drughter has sent for me, 'tis something of Consequence, but whatever it is I shall know presently. Ha! do I not see this Couple before the Door of their House; the Husband has a discontented Air, his Un-easiness is painted in his Countenance, how well have I guess'd! they are quarrelling, ah! I am seldom deceived. I must begin my In-terposition by first speaking to the Wife.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           My dear Father.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           How do you, my Daughter? am I wel-come? what good News have you for me? but you look sad, what is the Cause? why

does your Husband look so angrily on you? you have certainly had a Battle between you, at least with your Tongues; tell me truly, Daughter, which of you two is most in Fault? and merits most the paternal Censure? tell me in few Words all I ought to be acquainted with, either as Judge or Mediator.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I must first assure you, my dear Father, that I am guilty of no Fault; you may rely abso-lutely upon this Testimony of my Innocence, though given by myself, but at the same Time, Father, I declare to you that it is impossible for me to live any longer here, I therefore conjure you to separate me from this Man, and take me home to you again.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           What's this I hear! have you Reasons sufficient to induce you to make me this De-mand?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I am slighted, I am despised, and am oblig-ed to bear the most cruel, the most shocking Indignities.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Who is it that treats you so unworthily?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           That Man there, who promised you to love me and make me happpy, him who bears

the Name of Husband to me, and oh! more wretched me, whose Wife I too certainly am.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           How often have I warned you, my Daugh-ter, to exert all your Prudence in avoiding Quarrels, that neither your Husband or you might have any Occasion to make me Com-plaints.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           But how can I obey you in this? my Fa-ther, you suppose the Thing possible, but I swear to you solemnly it is not.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Is it to me you address yourself?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Yes, if you will have the Goodness to hear me.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Alas! how many Times have I recom-mended it to you, Daughter, to conform to the Will of your Husband, you ought never to observe where he goes, or what he does, or endeavour to pry into his Diversions, or In-trigues.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           But he is in Love with a professed Courte-zan, who lives in our Neighbourhood.
                        
                        
                           

                           Old Man.
                           Is he so! faith I like him the better for it, and to reward you for your Diligence in dis-covering this Intrigue, I will do my best to forward it, and engage your Spouse in new Gallantries.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           But alas, Sir! his Debaucheries are not confined to Women alone, he drinks there to Excess, and buries himself in Voluptuousness in this infamous Brothel.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           What is it to you where he drinks? how far will you carry your Insolence? why do you not forbid him to go abroad, or to invite any Person to his Table? Do you expect that Husbands will relinquish their Authority, and take Pleasure in serving their Wives, and be-coming Slaves to their unreasonable Wills; you might with equal Justice expect your Husband to sit amongst your Maids and spin.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Alas, Father! you did not come I find to be my Patron; my Message has procured a good Advocate for my Husband? you are here indeed at my Request, but you plead only against me.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           If your Husband is faulty, I declare myself against him, and I shall condemn him more

severely than I have done you, from his Ad-vocate I shall become his Accuser; but since I find that he supplies you with every Thing you want, and maintains you in Elegance and Splendor, in my Opinion, a Woman of Sense ought to be contented with these Proofs of Affection, and endeavour to merit them by Sweetness and Complacency.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Ah, Father! I have only told you the slightest of his Faults—Wou'd you think it— This kind Husband opens my Cabinets, takes away my Cloaths, my Gold, my Jewels, to enrich and adorn his Whore.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Oh! if he does so he does very ill, but on the other Side, if this should be a Falshood, a Calumny, you are guilty of a most enor-mous Crime, in thus aspersing the Innocence of your Spouse.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I can give you an immediate Proof of the Truth of what I say; at this Instant he has a Robe and Bracelet of mine about him; he had given them to his Mistress, but finding I had discovered his Baseness, he brought back his Booty apparently through Shame and Ne-cessity.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           I will know from himself the bottom of this Affair, I will accost him, and give him Au-dience

in his Turn as a good and impartial Judge is obliged to do. Your Servant, Son-in-law, I wou'd fain know the Occasion of your Uneasiness, you seem to be angry with your Wife? what is the Subject of your Dispute, pray tell me?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Good Man, whoever you are, I take Jupiter and all the Gods to witness—
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Upon what Account? why do you thus invoke the Inhabitants of Heaven?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I swear by Jupiter, and all his Court, that I have not offered the least Injury whatever to this Woman here. She accuses me of no less than robbing her of a Robe, and this suppos'd Crime is so strongly impressed on her Imagina-tion, that she is ready to swear I am guilty of it. But I beseech you, Sir, take Notice of what I am going to say, if ever I was within the House of this Lady, I wish I may become the most miserable of all Mortals.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           What do you say, Menaechmus! are you mad? can any Thing be more extravagant than such a Wish? You swear you have never been within her House, and yet 'tis there that you dwell, surely this is a very wild and ridiculous Sally.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           And do you really say, Sir, that I actually dwell in this House here.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           And do you, Sir, dare to deny it?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Yes, by Hercules! and I will maintain it.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Then you will maintain a Falshood with the highest Degree of Impudence, unless you removed last Night, and fix'd your Dwelling in some other Place.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Come hither, Daughter. Well, Menaech-mus! what do you answer to that? have you really removed from hence?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           To go whither? and upon what Business?
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           By Pollux! I know not.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Indeed, Father, this Man laughs at you.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Daughter, be silent. Come, Menaechmus, be

serious I beseech you; you have jested with us long enough.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Prithee, White-head, what is your Busi-ness with me? from whence come you? who are you? what have I done to you? or what in Conscience and Honour has this Woman to reproach me with, that she torments me in this Manner?
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           How his Colour changes! how he trembles! observe his Eyes, my Father, how fierce and wild they look!
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           These wise People will have it that I am mad; 'tis well, I will confirm them in that Opinion, I cannot make use of a better Stra-tagem to free myself from their tormenting Importunities.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Come hither, Daughter, stand further from that Man.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           How wild and fierce he looks, he seems to be collecting all his Force to rush on us, great Gods! what shall we do?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Evoé, Evoé, Bromie. Oh! Son of Jupiter from what Part of the Forest dost thou call me to the Chace? I hear thy Voice, and wou'd obey, but cannot get loose from this Place, a

furious Woman, like an enrag'd Bitch, seizes me on the left Side, and on the other an old Man that stinks like a Goat; a Man that made the innocent perish by bearing false Witness against them.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Perish thyself, thou abominable Lyar.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ha! I hear Apollo from the Depth of his Sanctuary; he commands me to burn out the Eyes of this wicked old Man with two flam-ing Flambeaux.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           Alas! my Father, we are lost, he threatens to burn out our Eyes.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Have I not Cause to complain? they will have it that I am mad, yet certainly they themselves have lost the Use of their Reason if ever they had any, which indeed is much to be doubted.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Daughter, a Word with you.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           What shall we do, Father, in this new Dis-ress?
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           The best Thing we can do, I believe, is to get some Slaves to bind this Madman, and then carry him into the House, where he may
The King approved of their Advice, and on the Day appointed the King and the No-bles being all assembled in the Court, the Queen was brought to the Bar, and thus spoke.
               "How I have led my Life before Egistus came into Bohemia, I appeal, Pandosto, to thy Conscience, and to the immortal Gods; they only know whether I am guilty of the Crimes whereof I am accused; for me, I here protest my Innocence, and for the Truth of what I say, I refer myself to the divine Oracle.
               Here Bellaria being silent, the King com-manded one of his Nobles to open the Scroll, which he did, and read aloud the following Words, which were written in Letters of Gold.
               
                  The ORACLE.
                  "Suspicion is no Proof; Jealousy is a par-tial Judge; Bellaria is chaste, Egistus blame-less, Franion a true Subject; Pandosto trea-cherous; his Babe innocent, and the King shall die without an Heir, if that which is lost be not found."
                  After the Oracle was read the Court re-sounded with joyful Acclamations; the Queen's Innocence thus manifested, filled every Heart with Transport.
                  The King beginning now to be ashamed of his rash Jealousy and unjust Suspicions, not

be confined before he commits greater Disor-ders.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ha! will you so? faith, I believe this will prove a scurvy Jest after all if I don't extricate myself quickly out of their Hands, they'll cer-tainly carry me into the House and make me a Prisoner—Again I hear the Voice of Apollo, he commands me not to spare my Nails, but to make a dreadful Havoc in the Face of this old Man, unless he goes away immediately to hang himself—Yes, great Divinity, you shall be obeyed, nor will I fail to exercise the Vigour of my Arms upon the Face of the Woman also.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Fly, fly, my Daughter, secure yourself in the House, I am afraid this Madman will strike you.
                        
                        
                           Wife.
                           I go, but oh! my Father, take Care that he does not escape. Alas! unhappy Woman that I am, to see my Husband in this miserable Condition.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Good! I have succeeded in sending the Fury hence, I must now also put to Flight this old Wretch, this long Beard, this Tithon, this shivering Body, this Son of Cignus, with his white head. Great Apollo, you command me to bruise his Sides, to break his Bones, to

crush his Members, and that with the very same Stick which he carries in his Hand to sup-port his tottering Steps with.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Stay where you are, Madman, advance no farther, for if you have the Impudence to touch me, or only offer to approach me, you shall severely repent it.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I will faithfully follow your Orders, Apollo, my Master and Inspirer, I will take a Saw with two Edges, I will grind his Bones, I will rip up his Belly, and cut his Entrails to Pieces.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           I must be upon my Guard, he keeps his Eyes fix'd upon me, he has a menacing Air, he will certainly rush upon my poor Skeleton and do me a Mischief.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How many Orders you give me at one Time, divine Apollo, what shall I do first? Ha! thou sayst I must take a Set of untamed furious Horses, and ascend a Car to hunt this Lyon of Getulia, this stinking Lyon without Teeth, 'tis done—I am already mounted on the Car, I press the Seat, one Hand grasps the Reins, the other holds aloft my Weapon, come on then my brave, my valiant Horses, now show your Swiftness, your Vigour, and your Courage; make known your Fire by the Ra-pidity

of your Course; let your Steps be wing'd with Lightning, let the Earth resound with the Thunder of your Hoofs.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           What do you threaten to tear me in Pieces with your Horses, and to drive your Car over my Body?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Again, I feel the inspiring God, he bids me spring upon that Man and murder him. Ha! who is the presumptuous Wretch that dares to hold my Horses and stop my Car, whoever he be? he opposes the Execution of your Sentence, great God, he cancels the Decree of Apollo.
                           
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Alas! this is indeed a dreadful Disease, im-mortal Gods! deign to have Pity on us, how has this horrible Accident happened to him? my Son-in-law was once wise and discreet, and all of a sudden his Brain is distemper'd, this Misfortune requires a speedy Remedy, I must make Haste and get a Physician immedi-ately.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE III.
                        MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           So! I am at last delivered from these pleasant People, who are determined to believe me

mad, and yet I am very certain that I am per-fectly well; but now that I am safe, now that I am delivered from my Persecutors, what hinders me from making Haste to my Ship? Gentlemen grant me one Favour if you please, if the old Man should return, I intreat ye all, (and there is really a good Number of you,) I intreat ye all, I say, not to tell him which Way I have taken.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE IV.
                        
                           Old Man.
                           I have sat so long that my Back aches with anxiously waiting till the Doctor return'd from visiting his Patients. At last having finish'd his sick Rounds the hateful Fellow comes home. He must be a Man of eminent Knowledge, of an almost supernatural Skill in his Profes-sion; he recounts as two of his greatest Ex-ploits the having set the Thigh of Esculapius, and the Arm of Apollo; two admirable Cures it must be confessed; without the Assistance of this wonderful Operator, the God of Me-dicine himself wou'd have had Occasion for Crutches, and the glorious Apollo for an Arm of Silver. I really know not at present whe-ther this Man ought to be call'd a Physician or a Mechanic; for if he has cured two Di-vinities, there cannot be a more glorious Tes-timony of his Skill, or a greater Honour for his Profession; but if he has only refitted two broken Statues, the Exploit is not very extra-ordinary. Here he comes, a most grave and

comely Personage! how majestically slow he walks, he is indeed a very admirable Man!
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE V.
                        Physician, Old Man.
                        
                           Physician.
                           You were speaking to me about the Sickness of your Son-in-law, explain it to me now with more Clearness? let me know all the Symptoms? what is the Disease that he is af-flicted with? is he tormented by Phantoms, Spectres, or Hobgoblins? has he the Distem-per of the Goddess Ceres upon him? conceal nothing; is he lethargick, hydropical, or consumptive? 'tis necessary that the Physician shou'd be told every Thing.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           'Tis just the contrary, Mr. Doctor; for I desired you to come hither in order to be in-formed by you what Distemper my Son-in-law is afflicted with, and also with a Hope of having him restored to Health by your Assist-ance.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Nothing is less difficult, believe me, good Man, your Labour will not be in vain, I pro-mise you upon the Faith of a Physician, that your Son-in-law shall be cured from this Day.
                        
                        
                           

                           Old Man.
                           I wou'd have him treated with all imagin-able Care, and nothing spared which may con-tribute towards the Re-establishment of his Health.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Do not you trouble yourself, I will labour upon the Patient with an indefatigable Appli-cation, I will fatigue myself so much with my Endeavours to restore him, that I will sigh six hundred Times a Day through Weariness.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Hold, Sir, there is your Patient coming towards us.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Softly! let us observe him, let us see a little what he will do.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE VI.
                        MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum, the old Man his Father-in-law, and the Physician.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pollux! I certainly rose to Day under a malignant Influence, a miserable Day has it been to me! this rascally Parasite has disco-vered all my Secrets, this Rogue, this Mon-ster of Ingratitude, has in a Moment plung-ed me into Infamy and Fear, him who was my Ulysses, to whom I entrusted all my De-signs,

the Guide and Executioner of all my Schemes, he has betrayed his Agamemnon, and by his Perfidy drawn me out of a most sweet and happy Situation. If I live I will take away his Life, but I talk like a Fool; is it not from my Benevolence that he holds his Life? is he not supported by my Wealth? wou'd he not have perish'd a hundred Times by Hunger but for me? 'tis thus then that I will take away his Life, I will deprive him of my Assistance. As for this Whore, she main-tains very well the Honour of her Character, she does nothing unworthy her honest Profes-sion, I intreated her to return me the Robe, that I might pacify my Wife with it, mark her extream Cunning, and the Lye she in-vented immediately to keep it. She swears to me, that she gave it me some Hours ago.—Is it possible to carry Impudence farther than this? Alas! it must be confest I am extremely mi-serable.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Do you hear what he says?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           He deplores his Unhappiness.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Be so good to accost him.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Mr. Menaechmus, your Servant, pray why do you stretch yourself thus? you are not sensible of the Hurt it does you: This Ex-tension

of your Arms encreases the Violence of your Distemper.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What does this Quack mean? go hang thy-self with thy Doctorial Visions.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Do you feel any Thing?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Why shou'd I not feel? I have all my five Senses.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           It will cost more than an Acre of Helebore to cure this Head, but let's try him again. Well, Sir, what good News can you tell us?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What wou'd you have me to tell you?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Answer precisely to the Question I ask you; is the Wine you commonly drink White or Red?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           May the Furies carry thee away with thy impertinent Curiosity.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           By Hercules! his Madness begins to seize him, he grows wild.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Why do you not ask me whether the Bread I generally eat is Purple, Red, or Yellow, or enquire if the Birds which are served up to my Table, have Scales, or the Fish Wings?
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Good Gods! what Extravagancies he ut-ters, do you not mark him, Doctor? haste then, and make him swallow some salutary Potion before his Distemper increases, and he becomes quite furious.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Have Patience, be silent, I want to inter-rogate him a little longer.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Aye, aye, according to the laudable Cus-toms of your Art, you murder the poor Pati-ents with the Gravity of your nonsensical Speeches.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Tell me, do not you feel your Eyes grow hard?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Do you take me for a Grasshopper?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Don't you perceive that your Bowels make a great Noise?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Wh
                                 ••
                               
                              
                                 
                               Bell 
                                 •
                              is full my Bowels are very peacea
                                 •••
                               
                              
                                 ••
                              d sleep profoundly, but when I 
                                 
                               they growl horribly.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           This Answer is wide from the Purpose, it denotes a distemper'd Brain. When you are in B
                                 •
                              d do you sleep easily? are not your Slumbers unquiet and interrupted? do you ge-nerally sleep till Day?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I always sleep well but when my Mind is disturb'd by the Fear of some importunate Cre-ditor. But may Jupiter and all the Gods confound thee, thou eternal Questioner! when wilt thou have done?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Oh, oh, our Man begins to grow furious, these Words alone ought to be sufficient to make you be on your Guard.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           You are mistaken, he is calmer at present. and less abusive than he has been since his Senses were first disordered; it is not long since he called his Wife an enraged Bitch.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By your Leave, pray, when did I use such a Word?
                        
                        
                           

daring to approach the wronged Bellaria, desir-ed his Nobles to implore her to forgive the In-juries he had offered her; and stung with Re-morse and Horror at his past Actions, he pub-lickly confessed his Design against the Life of Egistus.
                  
                  While he was thus laying open his own Treachery, a Messenger came hastily into the Court, and informed the King that the Prince Garrinter was dead.
                  
                     Bellaria, whose Soul had been overwhelm-ed with Joy by the divine Oracle, which had declared her Innocence, was seized with such an Excess of Sorrow at these dreadful Tidings, that her tender Heart, not able to support the Force of these contrary Extreams, burst with the mighty Weight, and sinking down she expired in a Moment.
                  The King became senseless at this dreadful Sight, and being carried to the Palace, not-withstanding all the Endeavours of the Physici-ans he lay speechless three Days.
                  The Bohemians were in the utmost Despair, nothing but Mourning and Complaints were to be seen and heard; the Death of the Queen and Prince, and the extream Danger the King was in, filled the whole City with Grief and Consternation; at length he recovered his Senses and his Speech, and this News in some Measure revived the drooping Bohemians.
                  
                  But the King's Despair was so violent that he attempted to murder himself, and was with

                           Old Man.
                           I say you are mad, my Friend, quite mad, and fit for Chains.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How! mad! am I mad?
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Yes, you! have you not threatened to crush me under the Wheels of your Chariot? had I not heard your Extravagancies with my own Ears, I would not thus freely have call'd you mad.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           And with the same Certainty I know that you have stolen the sacred Crown of Jupiter, and that for this horrible Sacrilege you was thrown into Prison, from whence you are now taken out to be hang'd. I know also that you have stabb'd your Father, and sold your Mother for a Slave. Well, Father-in-law, do I speak now like a Man in my Senses? is it not fit to answer Calumny with Calumny, and false Imputations with others as false, and more attrocious.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Doctor I conjure you lose no Time; what you are to do, do quickly. See you not how he is transported?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           The best Thing you can do is to send the Patient to my House.
                        
                        
                           

                           Old Man.
                           Is this your Opinion?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Certainly, he will then be wholly under my Care, and I may treat his Distemper my own Way.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Do what you think most proper to be done.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Come, Mr. Menaechmus, come along with me, I will regale you well! for these twenty Days to come, you shall drink nothing but Helebore, is not that fine?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Rascal! I will cut thy Throat.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           Come, venerable Father, let us go and get some People to carry him to my House.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           How many are necessary?
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           His Distemper is so violent at present that no fewer than four lusty strong Fellows will be necessary to carry him away.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           They shall be here in a Moment; mean

Time, good Mr. Esculapius, watch your Pa-tient carefully, don't let him escape.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           I watch him! excuse me, Sir, I have very urgent Business, nay, you know I am obliged to go home and give the necessary Or-ders for his Reception. Go, go, send the Slaves hither, and let them bring him to my House immediately.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           He shall be there as soon as you.
                        
                        
                           Physician.
                           I'll be gone then.
                        
                        
                           Old Man.
                           Adieu.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE VII.
                        MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum alone.
                        So they are gone, my Father-in-law and the Physician, and I am at last delivered from their Hands. Great Jupiter! what Adven-ture is to follow those which have happened to me this Day? They declare publickly here that I am mad; it passes for certain, so there is the Reputation and Honour of my poor Brain dead and buried. But how can this be, for I am very sure that since my first Entrance into Life I have never been seiz'd with any

Symptoms of this Distemper. Is this black Suspicion owing to Malice or Mistake? 'Tis strange! 'tis unaccountable! surely I am not mad. I neither insult, quarrel with, or strike any Persons that come in my way; my Mind is calm, my Thoughts are reasonable; my Behaviour is not different from other Peo-ple; when I speak to them they reply, when they speak to me I answer them again, and with as much Judgment as ever I did before. 'Tis not I then that am mad, but those who reproach me with Madness have their own Brains cracked; People that labour under such Disorders, suspect others to be what they are themselves.
                        But this is not all that afflicts me, for how shall I dispose of myself at present? to which Side shall I turn? I dare not attempt to get into my own House, for my Lamb of a Wife will refuse me Entrance, and from my Mis-tress nothing is to be expected; her Door is shut against me, no one will venture to in-troduce me, we are upon such bad Terms with each other.—I have no other Resource but to wait here for the Approach of Night, my Wife perhaps may be then seiz'd with Compassion, and will permit me to take Part of her Bed.
                     
                     
                        SCENE VIII.
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           The Merit of a good Slave consists in tak-ing great Care of his Master's Substance, in laying it out wisely, in being attentive to his

Interests; in short, a good Slave shou'd in his Master's Absence manage his Money in the same Manner as if he was present, or rather with more Circumspection.
                           A wise Domestic will always consider his Shoulders more than his Mouth, he will think it more necessary to provide for the Ease of his Legs than for the filling his Belly, and have the Reward he expects from his Master continually before his Eyes. But what is the Reward that a wicked idle Slave has Reason to hope for? in what Coin is he paid? why, with heavy Stripes, Fetters, grinding in Mills, cruel Fatigues, ravenous Hunger, and perishing Cold; these are the natural Con-sequences of Disobedience and Guilt.
                           As for me, I am a declared Enemy to all these Things; there is not one of them con-venient, not one that suits my Taste, or does not put me into a horrible Fear; 'tis for this Reason that I am firmly resolved to be good for something, and always prefer good Service to bad. I am not moved by harsh Language, or Reproaches, however unde-served; for after all they are only Words, and Words strike nothing but the Air, but as for Blows, your humble Servant; I am not for them, I hate them mortally, the Impression they make, is a little too strong.
                           I must confess, also, that I eat much more willingly what the Labours of others supply me with, than my own; Bread made with Flower of my Grinding wou'd taste very bit-ter,

but it goes down very pleasantly, when done by the Fatigue of my Comrades. There-fore I am always ready to obey my Master's Commands, I execute his Orders punctually, I serve him with Diligence and Alacrity, and I find myself in a very happy Situation, with these my servile Maxims.
                           Those Slaves, who because of their good Behaviour have nothing to fear, and yet are naturally timid, those Slaves, I say, are ge-nerally most useful to their Masters; on the contrary, those who are bold, determined, and arrogant, are the greatest Tremblers in the World, when by their Faults they have drawn the Indignation of their Masters upon them.
                           Thanks to the Gods, I have no Reason to be afraid, my Master will in a little Time re-ward me for my faithful Service; in the mean Time this is my governing Principle, to do always what is most for the Ease of my Back.
                           After having secured my Master's Servants and Baggage in the Inn, as he commanded me, I came back to wait his Orders, 'tis fit I knock at the Door, that he might be informed that I am here. Oh! that I may be so hap-py as to see him come out safe and sound from this damn'd House; but I fear I am come too late, and that it will be after Death the Phy-sician.
                        
                     
                     
                        

                        SCENE IX.
                        The Old Man, MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum, Slaves, MESSENION.
                        
                           Old Man.
                           To the Slaves.
                           I conjure you by the Gods! and by Men! not to neglect any of my Orders, carry him im-mediately to the Physician's House; I have commanded you to do it, and I now repeat my Command; obey then as you ought, un-less your Backs and your Thighs are of lit-tle Consideration to you: Do not be frighted from your Duty by his Menaces—Well, why do you stand still? why fix yourselves like Statues in one Posture? is it thus you obey my Orders? you ought already to have laid him across your Shoulders, make Haste, I will go before you, to the Physician's.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I am undone! what can this mean? Ras-cals! why do you fall upon me? what do you want? why do you surround me thus, voracious Birds of Prey? whither do you want to convey me? — Ah! I am ruin'd! Help, dear Fellow-Citizens of Epidamnum.— I implore your Relief, hasten to my Assistance, and deliver me from these Blood-hounds?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Immortal Gods, what do I see! Oh, Misery! my Master, my good Master, treated with

the vilest Indignity; by all the Furies! they want to carry him away by Force.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ah! what brave Man will have Courage enough to embrace my Interests, and under-take my Defence.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I will, my dear Master; I will defend you while I have one Drop of Blood remaining. Oh! wicked Attempt. Oh! execrable Vil-lany. Ye Citizens of Epidamnum, will ye suffer an honest free Stranger to be treated like a Slave and a Criminal in the midst of your Streets? and in a City that is at Peace with all the World? Can any Thing dishonour you more? Be gone ye Ministers of Perfidy and Violence, and release the Innocent, whom you oppress.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Generous Unknown! whoever you are, I earnestly implore your Assistance, do not let me suffer so cruel, and so public an Affront.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Yes, Sir, I will assist you, my Arm and my Life are at your Service, I will not suffer you to be injur'd; if one of us must perish, it is just that that I should be the Person. Cou-rage then, Master, strike out I beseech you the Eye of this Rogue, that holds you by the Neck; as for me I will deal my Blows plentifully amongst these other Gentlemen

here. By Hercules! Villains, you shall re-pent your having undertaken this Task to Day. Once more, Rascals, will you leave my Master at Liberty?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pluto! I have got this Rogue's Eye in my Hand.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Good! very good! he has something to remember you by. Off, off, ye Robbers, Murderers, Villains.
                        
                        
                           Slaves.
                           Mercy! for the Love of the great Hercules, Mercy.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Leave this Gentleman then.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Strike! strike! have no Compassion on them, who had the Insolence to seize me.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           If you wou'd have me spare you, fly, leave this Place, be gone this Instant, and may the Gods punish ye, Villains, as ye deserve. How! what makes you lag behind your Fellows? there, take that for being the hind-most, by Hercules! a good Blow, thy Face is in admirable Order, and now I am satisfied, my Work is done. Faith, Sir, I came in

good Time, you began to want my Assist-ance.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           May the Gods be favourable to thee always, generous Stranger! for 'tis certain, without thy Assistance, this Day had been fatal to me, I shou'd not have lived till Sunset.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Then, Sir, I may hope you will reward my Service with that good which exceeds every other Liberty.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Must I make thee free, Friend?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Yes, certainly you, my Master? since you acknowledge I have saved your Life.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Is it me you call Master? you are deceived, and take me for some other Person.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           How can I be deceived? how can I take you for another Person? I do not understand you Sir.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I swear by the Father of the Gods I am not your Master.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Good Sir, do not talk in this Manner.
                        
                        
                           

            CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
            
               THE History of Dorastus and Fawnia. 1
               
               Observations on the Use Shakespear has made of the foregoing Novel, in his Play called The Winter's Tale. 71
               
               The Menaechmi of Plautus. 95
               
               Observations on the Use Shakespear has made of the Menaechmi of Plautus, in his Comedy of Errors. 219
               
               The Story of Amleth, translated from the Danish History of Saxo-Grammaticus. 241
               
               Observations on the Use Shakespear has made of the foregoing Story in his Tra-gedy of Hamlet. 261
               
            
         
      
      
         
            

Difficulty prevented by his Nobles, who used all the Arguments they could think of to calm his Mind and perswade him to bear his Mis-fortunes patiently.
                  Their dutiful Cares at last succeeded, the King grew more patient and resigned, and gave Orders for the Interment of his Queen and Son, which was performed in the most solemn and splendid Manner.
                  Once in every Day he went to Bellaria's Tomb, and with Tears of Penitence and Sorrow lamented her unhappy Fate, and his own Misfortunes.
                  Here we must leave this distressed Prince for a while, to relate what befell the Royal In-fant whom we left floating on the Ocean.
                  The Boat in which it was laid being tost for two Days with the Wind and Sea, and every Moment ready to perish in the Waves; it pleased the Gods to direct it at last to the Coast of Sicily, where it was drove on Shore.
                  It fortunately happened that a Shepherd who had missed one of his Sheep, not finding it in any of the Covers hard by, came to the Sea-side in Hopes it was there browsing on the Sea-Ivy, and hearing the Voice of a Child, which he at first mistook for the Bleating of a Sheep, went to the Sands and saw a Boat driven on Ground; he immediately waded to-wards it, and discovered a most beautiful Babe lying at the Bottom, wrapt in a Scarlet

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           I tell you I am not your Master, I never had a Slave capable of doing what you have done for me.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           If you will not acknowledge me for your Slave, give me Liberty to go where I please.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Hercules! I will enfranchise thee as far as it is in my Power; be free, my Friend, and go where thou wilt.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Do you command me to do so, Sir?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Yes, by Hercules! I command thee by all the Authority I have over thee.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Oh! my good, my worthy Master, I will serve you still, faithfully, in the Character of your new freed Man.
                        
                        
                           A Slave,
                           Companion of MESSENION.
                           I congratulate you, Messenion, upon the Liberty you have acquir'd.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           By Hercules, my Friend, I do not in the least doubt but that your Congratulation is

sincere. But, Sir, I must intreat you will grant me one Favour, and that is, that you will continue to command me any Thing for your Service, with the same Authority, as when I was your Slave, I will stay with you, and when you return home, I will follow you.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           No, that must not be.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I will go immediately to the Inn, and bring the Baggage and Money; your Purse is seal'd and put into your Portmantua, I will deliver it into your Hands.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Do so, thou art a brave Fellow.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I will give you back the Purse in the same Condition as when you confided it to my Care. Have a little Patience, and wait for me here.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           What am I to think of all this? what wonderful Accidents have happened to me this Day! Some will not acknowledge me, but impudently maintain that I am what I am not, and from thence take Occasion to shut me out of my House; others pretend, not-withstanding all my Assurances to the con-trary, that I am their Master. The Man who has just left me, wou'd engage himself

to all the Furies in Hell, that he is my Slave, and therefore I must give him Freedom; the Madman has promised me a Purse full of Money, if he keeps his Word I shall very chearfully take Leave of him, I will throw the Reins over his Neck, and suffer him to go where he pleases; for to be plain, I shall be afraid that when he is restor'd to his Senses he will remember the Money he has given me, and demand it back again, perhaps with Interest too: My Father-in-law and the Phy-sician treat me like a Madman; from whence can it proceed? I am wrapt in Wonder at it. —Let me consider; am I awake, or is all this a Vision?—No, 'tis but too certain; what then shall I do? after so many Storms I be-lieve I cannot do better than to go to this Courtezan, and by Prayers and Flatteries pre-vail upon her to give me back the Robe; if I should have the Good-luck to succeed with this Woman, who like all the rest of her Trade is true to her own Interest, I will car-ry it home immediately, and do not doubt but with such a Passport I shall gain Admit-tance, and restore Peace again to my Fa-mily.
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE X.
                        MENAECHMUS SOSICLES, MESSENION.
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Hast thou the Impudence to persist in say-ing thou hast seen and spoke to me a few Mi-nutes ago? Was there ever a more infamous

Falshood? I indeed commanded thee to come and fetch me, or at least to meet me here, neither of which thou didst; thou wert taken up, I suppose, with some more agreeable Busi-ness.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Is it possible, Sir, that you can speak so contrary to your own Knowledge? certainly you mean to divert yourself, for you can-not have forget the Service I did you just now. Did I not deliver you from four great Mastiffs, who were carrying you away by Force? You stormed, you cried aloud for Succour, and called both Gods and Men to witness the horrible Violence that you suf-fered; in vain you struggled to free yourself from their Arms, I was destin'd to be your Deliverer; finding you in this Danger I ran, I flew to your Assistance, I fell furiously up-on your Ravishers, and by a Shower of dread-ful Blows I forced them to fly; thus I again made you Master of yourself, and restored you to Liberty. This Action, which shew'd my ardent Zeal for your Safety, moved your Heart; you thought, and with Reason, that you cou'd not reward so important a Service with less than Liberty, therefore you made me free.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           How! have I made you free? have I per-mitted you to go where you please?
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           There is nothing more certain.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           And I protest that it has been long my Re-solution, rather to sell myself for a Slave, than give you Freedom. How will you reconcile these Contradictions?
                        
                     
                     
                        SCENE XI.
                        MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum, MENAECH-MUS SOSICLES, MESSENION.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum,
                           
                           speaking, as he comes out of EROTIA's House.
                           By Hercules! though you shou'd swear by all that is most dear to you, that I have carried away the Robe, and the Bracelet, it would nevertheless be false, you are all villainous Lyars.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Oh! Heaven, oh! ye immortal Gods! what do I behold?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           What is it you see?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Your living Mirror, Sir.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           What dost thou mean by that?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Your other Self, never was there so perfect a Resemblance.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           By Pollux! if the Idea I have of my own Figure be true, this Man is not different from myself.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHUMS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Well met again, young Man, who ever thou art, I shall look upon thee as my Deli-verer.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I conjure you, Sir, by the great Hercules! tell me your Name.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           My Name is Menaechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           By the Temple of Pollux! that is my Name also.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I am of Syracuse in Sicily.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           There was I also born, and in that City am I settled.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           What is it you say?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Nothing but Truth.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           That I can witness, for I ought to know this Gentleman well, since I am one of his Slaves. Aye, this is my Master, but in good Faith, I have taken you for him, and firmly believed I belonged to you. This Mistake has been the Cause of my giving my Master Offence, and letting some imprudent and dis-respectful Words escape me, for which I most humbly ask your Pardon, Master.
                        
                        
                           To Menaechmus of Epidamnum.
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Sure thou art mad! hast thou forgot that this Day you landed with me at Epidamnum?
                           
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Very true, Sir, — Yes, without doubt 'tis you that are my Master? and as for you, young Gentleman, with the deceitful Appear-ance, you must seek another Slave. I must bid you adieu, my new Master, for I insist upon it that this is the true Menaechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           And I insist upon it, that 'tis I who am Me-naechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           What Farce are we playing here? you are Menaechmus, you say?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Yes, I say I am Menaechmus, the Son of Moschus, a Citizen of Syracuse.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           How! are you the Son of my Father?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Not that I know of, young Man, I am the Son of my own Father, and in naming him I had no Design of claiming yours.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Immortal Gods! accomplish, I beseech you, my Hope, although it be almost against Hope itself, yet oh! may it please you to confirm my Conjecture. These two, if I am not de-ceived, are the twin Brothers of Syracuse. I must consult with my Master, Mr. Menaechmus.
                           
                        
                        
                           Both.
                           What woudst thou?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I speak but to one at a Time; answer me which of you two have wandered a long Time with me on the Sea?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Not I.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           No certainly, for it was me.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Then 'tis with you I wou'd speak; be so good to come aside with me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Well, what hast thou to say to me now?
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           One of these two Things must certainly be true; either this Man is an Impostor, and a Cheat, or he is your twin Brother; for my Part I must confess, the more I examine him the more I am lost in Astonishment, I never in my whole Life beheld a Man who so per-fectly resembled another as he does you; be-lieve me, Sir, for of this I am a better Judge than you, one Drop of Water is not more like another; besides, he says he is of the same City and Country as you are; therefore, if you think proper, we will interrogate him on some Facts.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           By Hercules! thy Advice is good, and I am much obliged to thee; go on I conjure thee in the Name of the Gods! to clear up this Affair, and if thou provest him to be my Brother, I will reward thee with Liberty.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I am in great Hopes of being able to give you this Satisfaction, my Heart whispers Suc-cess to me.
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           I will patiently wait the Event.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Well, Sir, you who would make us believe you to be Menaechmus, will you maintain it?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Yes, and I will say nothing but what is true.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           'Tis certain that my Master's Name is Menaechmus; you say you are of Syracuse, in Sicily, in that City was he born; Moschus you tell us was your Father, so was he my Master's; are you willing to give me your Assistance in clearing up this Matter, to the Satisfaction of you both?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Well dost thou deserve that I should com-ply with all thy Demands, and although I am free, yet will I blindly obey thee as if thou hadst bought me for thy Slave.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I do not doubt but that you will be found to be the Twin Brothers of Syracuse, born in one Day, of the same Father and Mother.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Your Words surprize me! you fill me with Astonishment and Joy. May the Gods grant that you may be able to prove this clearly to me.
                        
                        
                           

Mantle embroidered with Gold, and a Chain of rich Jewels about its Neck.
                  The Shepherd, astonished at this Adventure, beholding the Beauty of the Infant, and the Riches that were about it, began to think it was some little Divinity, and was going to adore it; when the weak Cries of the Child, who seemed to be just perishing with Cold and Hunger, persuaded him it was a meer Mortal.
                  Compassion took the Place of Reverence; he approached the Child, took it into his Arms, and supposing by the extraordinary Magnificence of its Dress that it was of noble Birth, he resolved to carry it to the King.
                  As he was wrapping the Mantle close about it to preserve it better from the Cold, a Bag of Money fell from it at his Feet; which he take-ing up, was so captivated with the Sight, that changing his Design he determined to breed up the Infant himself, and apply the Money to his own Use; then returned a bye Way to his Cottage lest any one should per-ceive what he carried in his Arms.
                  As soon as he entered the Door the Child began to cry; which alarming his Wife, who supposed he was bringing home a Bastard to nurse, she rated him very severely for his In-fidelity.
                  The Shepherd begged her to be pacified, and told her if she would be secret and cauti-ous their Fortunes were made for ever; then

                           MESSENION.
                           Well then, stand by each other, and both of you answer precisely to the Questions I shall ask you.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Ask what you please, I promise to answer you truly.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Are you call'd Menaechmus?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           'Tis my true and only Name.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           And yours also, Sir?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Nothing is more certain.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           You declare yourself the Son of Moschus, who when alive was a good and honest Citizen of Syracuse?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I repeat that Declaration.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           The same Menaechmus was my Father also.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           You are then a Syracusan?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Certainly.
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           And you also, my Master?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Yes, thou knowest it.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Hitherto all goes Right, your Answers a-gree perfectly well, but for a greater Confirm-ation I beseech you, Sir, the Citizen of Epidamnum, that you will be pleased to tell us what you remember at the greatest Distance of Time.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I remember that my Father took me with him to Tarentum, whither he went to trade; at our Arrival we stood to behold some Games that were celebrating, and I lost my Father in the Croud, I wandered about, and at last fell into the Hands of a rich Citizen of this Place, who stole me away, and brought me here to Epidamnum.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Supreme, and all powerful Jupiter bless me! and crown thy Work.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Have Patience, Master, do not interrupt me. How old were you when your Father took you with him to Tarentum?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           Seven Years; I remember I was then get-ing

new Teeth. After this Adventure hap-pened to me I never more saw my Father.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           How many Brothers were of you in the Family?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           We were but two as I remember.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Which of you was the eldest?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I think we were of the same Age.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           How can that be?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           'Tis not difficult to guess, we were Twins.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           The Gods at last are favourable!
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           I assure you, Sir, if you interrupt me again I will not ask him any more Questions, I will be silent.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           I had much rather be silent myself.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           There yet remains one Difficulty, which I

am afraid will not be easy to get over. How happens it that your Brother and you have the same Name?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I don't know that we have, as for myself I am called Menaechmus, and I was always cal-led so, but my Brother had another Name, which if I remember right was Sosicles.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Ah! 'tis too much; one half of these Proofs had been sufficient to convince me, I cannot any longer contain my fraternal Tenderness, I must embrace him, my dear Brother! my Twin Brother! I, I am Sosicles.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           But why are you call'd Menaechmus?
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           When the Family was inform'd that our Father was dead, and that you was lost; our Grandfather, who always loved you more than me, supprest my Name, and gave me yours.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I believe all you tell me, one little Scruple remains, which I beg you to remove.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Most w
                                 •
                              llingly; speak!
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           What was our Mother's Name?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           
                              Theusimarcha.
                           
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           The same! come to my Arms, my dear Brother, whom, for so many Years, I have not seen, and whom I never thought to have seen again! how happy has this unexpected Meet-ing made me?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           And oh! how has it blest me! me, my dear Brother, who have sought thee so long a Time with incredible Labour and Fatigues, but now they are all overpay'd.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Now, Master, the Behaviour of the Cour-tezan is explained; she called you by your Name, and invited you to Dinner, believing you to be your Brother.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           By the Temple of Pollux! I had ordered her to prepare a Repast, and intended to dine with her, nay, I gave her a Robe, which I stole to Day from my Wife.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Is not this the Robe you speak of, Brother?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           By what Chance did it come into your Pos-session?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           The Woman who lives in that House, in-vited me to dine with her; she assured me that I had given her this Habit; I was very well entertained, eat and drank plentifully, and to compleat my good Fortune, brought the Robe away with me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           By the Temple of Pollux! I am rejoiced that you fared so well upon my Account; this Creature, when she invited you in, certainly mistook you for me.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Well, the Affair is now finish'd, I have fulfilled my Engagement, 'tis now your Turn, Sir, to perform your Promise, by giving me my Liberty.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           His Demand is too just, and reasonable, to be refused, come Brother, make him free for my sake.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           You are in the right, my Brother, to be-lieve that your Mediation must be dear to me. Well, Messenion, to comply with my Promise, and more especially to gratif my other Self, I make you free from this Instant.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I sincerely congratulate thee, Messenion, on thy Liberty.
                        
                        
                           

                           MESSENION.
                           May the Gift be made me under happier Auspices than it was before, that my Liberty may be as durable as my Life!
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           Since we have thus happily met, contrary to all Expectation, I intreat you, Brother, to quit Epidamnum, and let us return together to our dear Country.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           I will do whatever you please from hence-forward. I hope our Inclinations will be as like as our Persons. All my Possessions here shall be sold; in the mean Time let me make you known to my Eriends, and find out, if possible, some Means of distinguishing us from each other; come walk into my House.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           With all my Heart, I'll follow you every where.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           Stay, Gentlemen, I have a Favour to beg of you, be so kind as to prefer the Office of public Crier on this Occasion upon me.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS SOSICLES.
                           'Tis granted.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           If you please then I will begin from this

Time to publish the Sale, on what Day shall I fix it?
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum.
                           
                           The seventh.
                        
                        
                           MESSENION.
                           On the seventh Day from this in the Morn-ing will be sold, all the Goods moveable and immoveable, of Mr. Menaechmus, his Estates, Slaves, and Houshold Furniture, for ready Money only, and if a Purchaser can be found for her, he will also fell his Wife. The whole will certainly amount to no less than two Hundred Thousand Crowns. And now farewel, Spectators, favour us with your Ap-plause.
                        
                     
                     End of the Fifth and last Act.
                  
               
            
            
               

               
                  OBSERVATIONS on the Use Shakespear has made of the Menaechmus of Plautus, in his Comedy of Errors.
               
               
                  SHAKESPEAR's Comedy of Errors has been generally allowed to be founded on the Menaechmi of Plautus. Mr. Langbain, in his Account of the Dramatic Poets, says that if it be not a just Translation of it, it is at least a Paraphrase, and in his Opinion far be-yond a Translation, called Manaechmus, Print-ed at London, 1593.
               From this Translation of Plautus's Me-naechmi, Shakespear certainly borrowed his Comedy of Errors; but not being able to pro-cure a Copy of it, and being wholly unac-quainted with the Latin Tongue, I have turn-ed Monsieur Gueudiville's French Translation of the Menaechmi into English, which al-though, as I am informed, it be not very li-teral as to the Dialogue, yet the Plot, the In-cidents, and Characters, being exactly the same with the Latin Poet's, it will serve to shew how much of the Plot Shakespear has borrowed in his Comedy of Errors.
               
               
                  
That we may be the better able to trace him in his Imitations, it will be neces-sary to examine the Comedy of Errors Scene by Scene, and take the Story a little higher than the Commencement of the Action of the Play.
               The Cities of Syracuse and Ephesus being at War with each other, a Law was made in both, by which it was provided, that if any Ephesian Merchant was seen to traffic in Syracuse, or any Syracusan Merchant in Ephesus, his Goods should be confiscated, and himself condemn-ed to Death.
               An old Merchant of Syracuse, named Aegeon, landing at Ephesus, is apprehended upon this Law.
               Here the Action of the Play begins, as Aegeon is leading to Prison, the Duke of Ephesus meeting him, demands the Cause of his hav-ing left his native Country, and coming to Ephesus; Aegeon thereupon gives a long Ac-count of himself and his Family, which, in order to understand well the following Inci-dents, I will transcribe.
               
                  In Syracusa was I born, and wed
                  Unto a Woman, happy but for me,
                  And by me too, had not our Hap been bad:
                  With her I liv'd in Joy, our Wealth in-creas'd,
                  By prosperous Voyages I often made
                  To Epidamnum, 'till my Factor's Death;
               
               
                  

putting the Child in her Arms he produced the Gold and Jewels he found with it, which so pleased the poor Woman that she resolved to nurse the Child carefully, and make their Neighbours believe it was their own.
                  The Gold and Jewels they concealed, and the Shepherd returned to the Care of his Flocks, while his Wife employed herself in nursing the Foundling, to whom they gave the Name of Fawnia.
                  
                  In a few Years after the Shepherd purchas-ed a good Farm, and from tending the Flocks of other People became Master of a consi-derable one himself.
                  When Fawnia arrived at the Age of ten Years, Porrus and Mopsa, for so her supposed Father and Mother were called, committed the Care of their Flocks; to her, and the young Shepherdess, whose Beauty at those early Years was the Astonishment and Admiration of all that beheld her, applied herself with the ut-most Diligence to her pastoral Employment, so that every Thing prospered under her Hands.
                  
                     Porrus now purchased Land, which he de-signed to leave Fawnia at his Death; and she growing to fifteen Years old, many of the rich Farmer's Sons made their Addresses to her.
                  The fair Shepherdess was not the only Ad-miration and Wonder of the Country, her Wit and Judgment was equal to her Beauty, and

                  And he great Store of Goods at random leaving,
                  Drew me from kind Embracements of my Spouse;
                  From whom my Absence was not six Months old,
                  Before herself (almost at fainting under
                  The pleasing Punishment that Women bear)
                  Had made Provision for her following me,
                  And soon and safe arrived where I was.
               
               
                  There she had not been long but she be-came,
                  A joyful Mother of two goodly Sons;
                  And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
                  As could not be distinguish'd but by Names.
               
               
                  That very Hour, and in the self-same Inn,
                  A poor mean Woman was deliver'd
                  Of such a Burthen, Male-Twins both alike:
                  Those (for their Parents were exceeding poor)
                  I bought, and brought up to attend my Sons.
               
               
                  My Wife, not meanly proud of two such Boys,
                  Made daily Motions for our home Return:
                  Unwilling I agreed, alas! too soon!
                  We came aboard.
               
               
                  A League from Epidamnum had we sail'd,
                  Before the always-Wind-obeying Deep,
                  Gave any tragic Instance of our Harm;
                  
                     
But longer did we not retain much Hope:
                  For what obscured Light the Heavens did grant,
                  Did but convey unto our fearful Minds,
                  A doubtful Warrant of immediate Death;
                  Which though myself would gladly have em-brac'd,
                  Yet the incessant Weeping of my Wife,
                  Weeping before for what she saw must come,
                  And piteous Plainings of the pretty Babes
                  That mourn'd for Fashion, ignorant what to fear,
                  Forc'd me to seek Delays for them and me:
                  And this it was (for other Means were none)
                  The Sailors sought for Safety by our Boat,
                  And left the Ship then sinking-ripe to us;
                  My Wife, more careful for the elder born,
                  Had fasten'd him unto a small spare Mast,
                  Such as Sea-faring Men provide for Storms;
                  To him one of the other Twins was bound,
                  Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
               
               
                  The Children thus dispos'd, my Wife and I
                  Fixing our Eyes on whom our Care was fixt,
                  Fasten'd ourselves at the End of either Mast,
                  And floating streight, obedient to the Stream,
                  Were carry'd towards Corinth, as we thought.
               
               
                  At length the Sun gazing upon the Earth,
                  Disperst those Vapours that offended us;
                  And by the Benefit of his wish'd Light,
                  The Seas wax'd calm, and we discover'd
                  Two Ships from far making amain to us;
                  Of Corinth that, of Epidauris this;
                  
                     
But ere they came—Oh! let me say no more;
                  Gather the Sequel by what went before.
               
               
                  DUKE.
                  Nay, forward, old Man, do not break off so,
                  For we may pity, tho' not pardon thee.
               
               
                  AEGEON.
                  
                     Oh! had the Gods done so, I had not now
                     Worthily term'd them merciless to us;
                     For ere the Ships could meet by twice five Leagues,
                     We were encounter'd by a mighty Rock;
                     Which being violently borne upon,
                     Our helpless Ship was splitted in the midst:
                     So that in this unjust Divorce of us,
                     Fortune had left to both of us alike
                     What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
                  
                  
                     Her Part, poor Soul! seeming as burden'd
                     With lesser Weight, but not with lesser Woe,
                     Was carry'd with more Speed before the Wind,
                     And in our Sight they three were taken up
                     By Fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
                  
                  
                     At length the other Ship had seiz'd on us,
                     And knowing whom it was their Hap to save,
                     Gave helpful Welcome to their shipwreck'd Guests,
                     And would have rest the Fishers of their Prey,
                     
                        
Had not their Bark been very slow of Sail;
                     And therefore homeward did they bend their Course.
                  
                  
                     Thus have you heard me sever'd from my Bliss.
                     Thus by Misfortunes was my Life prolong'd,
                     To tell sad Stories of my own Mishaps.
                  
               
               
                  DUKE.
                  And for the Sakes of them thou sorrow'st for,
                  Do me the Favour to dilate at full
                  What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
               
               
                  AEGEON.
                  
                     My youngest Boy, and yet my eldest Care,
                     At eighteen Years became inquisitive
                     After his Brother, and importun'd me
                     That his Attendant, (for his Case was like,
                     Rest of his Brother, but retain'd his Name,)
                     Might bear him Company in quest of him:
                     Whom whilst I labour'd for a Love to see,
                     I hazarded the Loss of whom I lov'd.
                  
                  
                     Five Summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
                     
                     Roaming clean through the Bounds of Asia,
                     
                     And coasting homeward, came to Ephesus:
                     
                     Hapless to find, yet loth to leave unsought,
                     Or that, or any Place that harbours Men.
                     But here must end the Story of my Life;
                     And happy were I in my timely Death,
                     Could all my Travels warrant me they live.
                  
               
               
                  
Here ends the first Scene; the Appearance of Aegeon is of no other Use than to tell the Spectators several Circumstances antecedent to the Action of the Play, which it is necessary they should be acquainted with; this Plautus does in his Prologue.
               The Story, though borrowed from Plautus, is yet very different; the Circumstance of two Brothers being so extremely like each other, that it was impossible to distinguish them, is highly improbable in the Latin Poet.
               
                  Shakespear however doubles the Miracle, and presents us with two Pair of Twins in-stead of one, with the same wonderful Re-semblance.
               
                  Plautus accounts very naturally for the Bro-thers having both the same Name; the Grand-father upon the Loss of the eldest, whom he loved best, to preserve the Remembrance of him, gives his Name to the youngest.
               
                  Shakespear, without assigning any Reason for it, makes the Twin Sons of Aegeon be both called Anthipholis, and the Twin Brothers, their Slaves, both Dromio.
               
               The Separation of the Husband and Wife, and their Children, from whence all the di-verting Mistakes in the Comedy of Errors arise, is brought about without the least Re-gard to Probability.
               
                  

                  Aegeon sails from Syracuse to Epidamnum, to settle his Affairs there, which were left in Confusion by the Death of his Factor, and his Wife, though near the Time of her Ly-ing-in, follows him, for no Reason indeed but to be delivered at an Inn, where a poor Wo-man, who like her, having born two Male Twins, she may buy them for Slaves to her own Sons; and that returning to Syracuse they may be shipwrecked, and separated from each other.
               When the Storm arises the Merchant and his Wife, who, as it shou'd seem, have a View to the diverting Perplexities which are to fol-low, fasten one Antipholis, and one Dromio together, so when the Ship splits they are very conveniently separated. Had they, like other fond Parents, been more sollicitous for the Preservation of their own Offspring than their little Slaves, and used their joint Endeavours for that Purpose only, the Father and Mother, and their Twin Sons, might have been all taken up together by the Corinthian Vessel, but thus equally dividing their Affection between their Children and their Slaves, and that ex-cellent Contrivance of fastening a Twin of each Sort together, occasioned their falling into different Hands, and gave to each Anti-pholis his Dromio, for the future Business of the Play.
               The Mother and the elder Antipholis be-ing separated, he and his little Slave Dromio
                  

are carried to Ephesus, where in Process of Time he is married to a rich Lady, and set-tles there: Here the younger Antipholis comes to seek for his Brother, and his Father after-wards for him; the old Man is immediately seized, and condemned to die, as has been mentioned, but the Duke respites him for the Space of one Day, in order to try if he can raise the Sum of one Thousand Marks to buy his Life.
               In the second Scene Antipholis of Syracuse makes his Appearance with the Merchant of the City, who informing him of what had happened to the Syracusan Merchant, advises him to give out that he came from Epidam-num.
               
               
                  Antipholis of Syracuse sends his Man, Dromio, with a Thousand Marks to lay up safe at his Inn, and being left to himself, de-clares the Cause of his wandering about the World to be the Hopes of finding his Mother and Brother, whose Loss he deplores. While he is standing in the Street, Dromio of Ephesus comes up to him, and taking him for his Master, tells him his Dinner is ready, and that his Wife waits for him.
               
                  Antipholis, deceived by the Resemblance, supposes this Dromio to be his Slave, reproves him for his ill timed Jests, and asks him where he had left his Money? Dromio talks of Six-pence he had given him two or three Days ago.
               
                  

                  Antipholis asks for his Thousand Marks? Dromio tells him of his Dinner, his House, his Wife, and presses him to come home. Antipholis at last, in a Fury, strikes him, Dro-mio runs off, and Antipholis, full of Uneasi-ness about his Money, returns to his Inn to look after it.
               In the second Act the Scene is the House of Antipholis of Ephesus, his Wife complains to her Sister of her Husband's long Stay, and wonders the Slave she sent for him is not re-turned. Dromio then enters, and humorously repeats what had past between his supposed Master and him, declaring that he believes him to be mad, the Wife frets, and orders him to go back again and fetch him.
               
                  The Scene changes again to the Street,
                  
                     Antipholis of Syracuse enters, and informs the
                  Audience that his Money is safe, and adds,
               
               
                  "By Computation, and mine Host's Report
                  "I cou'd not speak with Dromio since at first
                  "I sent him from the Mart."
               
               Yet notwithstanding this Reflexion, the Moment his own Slave, Dromio of Syracuse, appears, he reproaches him with his having denied receiving his Gold, and with talking to him about his Wife, and a Dinner; and though the poor Fellow assures him that he never spoke such Words to him, and had not

seen him since he sent him to the Inn till now, yet Antipholis falls into a Rage, and beats him.
               A Dialogue of Puns and Quibbles ensues between the Master and Man, which is in-terrupted by the Entrance of Adriana, the Wife of Antipholis of Ephesus, and her Sister.
               
                  Adriana, 
                  
                     
                   this Antipholis, and this Dromio, 
                  
                     
                   band and his Slave, re-proaches him with his Neglect of her, and intreats him to come home to dinner.
               
                  Antipholis protests he does not know her, and that he is but just arrived at Ephesus; the Sister chides him, and tells him his Wife had sent for him home to Dinner by Dromio. Dromio is surprised, and denies it. Antipholis
                  ▪ who had had that Message delivered to him by the other Dromio, storms at the Slave for lying, the Fellow assures him he had never seen her. Antipholis asks how she could be acquainted with their Names if he had not seen her be-fore, and informed her of them. Adriana; vexed at this Jesting, as she thinks it, intreats Antipholis to go home with her, and charges Dromio to keep the Gate for that Day, and let no one in to interrupt them.
               
                  Antipholis, though amazed to the last De-gree at all this, resolves at last to
               
                  

                  Say as they say, and persevere so,
                  "And in this Mist at all Adventures go.
               
               In the third Act, the Scene is the Street be-fore the House of Antipholis of Ephesus. An-tipholis of Ephesus, and his Slave Dromio, with a Merchant and a Goldsmith, whom An-tipholis has invited to dine at his House enter.
               
                  Antipholis, fearing lest his Wife should be angry at his long Stay, desires the Jeweller to excuse it, by saying that he lingered at his House seeing the making of her Bracelet, and chides his Man for having dared to tell him he met him on the Mart, and charged him with a Thousand Marks in Gold, and with having denied his Wife and House. He then knocks at his Door, but is refused Entrance.
               
                  Adriana, who supposes her Husband is dining with her above, is surprised at the Fel-low below, who calls her Wife, and insists upon Admittance, and renews her Orders to Dromio of Syracuse to keep the Door shut.
               A smart Dialogue follows between the two Dromio's, the one within Doors and the other without; the Husband and his Guests not be-ing suffered to enter, he resolves to go and dine with a Courtezan at the Porcupine, and desires the Jeweller to bring the Gold Chain thither to him, that as he says, he may, to spight his Wife, bestow it upon the Courte-zan, and accordingly they all go off.
               
                  

those uncommon Charms of Mind and Per-son made her even be talked of at Court.
                  She who believed herself to be the Daugh-ter of Porrus, was not elated with the Praises that were bestowed on her, but with a sweet Humility conformed to the Lowliness of her Condition, and tended her Flocks with the utmost Diligence and Care.
                  Though she was not vain of the Graces of her Person, yet her rural Habit was always exactly neat, her lovely Hair was bound up with a graceful Negligence, and she took Care to choose the freshest and most becoming Flowers to compose the Garland which shaded her charming Face from the Sun.
                  The King of Sicily had only one Son, named Dorastus, a beautiful and accomplish-ed Youth, of whom the Sicilians had great Hopes.
                  The King, desirous of seeing him married before he died, sent an Ambassador to the King of Denmark to demand the Princess Euphania his Daughter, and the Heir to his Dominions, in Marriage for the Prince of Sicily.
                  
                  The King of Denmark agreeing to the Proposal, Egistus acquainted his Son with the Treaty he had entered into; he enlarged on the Beauty and Virtues of the Princess Euphania, on the Advantages of an Alliance with the King of Denmark, and concluded with praising the Gods for the happy Success of his Negociation.
                  
                     
In the next Scene Antipholis of Syracuse makes Love to Luciana, Sister to Adriana, she upbraids him with his Falshood to his Wife; he swears he is not married to her Sister, and that he cannot be happy without her. Luciana threatens to acquaint his Wife with his Trea-chery, and leaves him.
               His Slave, Dromio, then enters, and Anti-pholis, from the strange Accidents that had happened both to himself and his Slave, be-lieving the Place inhabited by Witches, re-solves to be gone immediately, and orders Dromio to go to the Harbour, and bring him Intelligence if any Bark was to sail that Night, telling him he will walk in the Mart till his Return.
               
                  Dromio goes away to perform his Commis-sion; and the same Moment the Jeweller, Angelo, enters with the Chain, and gives it to Antipholis of Syracuse, whom he takes for the other.
               
                  Antipholis denies that he had ever ordered such a Chain to be made, but the Jeweller in-sisting that he had, and telling him that he will call in the Evening at his House for the Money: Antipholis offers to pay him immedi-ately, lest, as he says, he should never see the Chain or Money more, which the Jeweller refusing, and leaving him, Antipholis goes to the Mart to wait for Dromio, which ends the third Act.
               
                  
In the fourth Act a Merchant, to whom the Goldsmith, Angelo, owes a Sum of Mo-ney, demands instant Payment, or threatens to arrest him by an Officer, whom he has with him. Angelo tells him Antipholis owed him just as much Money as he was indebted to him for a Gold Chain, which he had deli-vered to him a Moment ago, and desired him to go with him to his House to receive the Money for it.
               
                  Antipholis of Ephesus, and his Slave, Dromio, enter, as from the House of the Courtezan, where they had dined. Antipholis orders Dromio to go and buy a Rope's-end, that he may chastise his Wife, he says, for locking him out of Doors, and that in the mean Time he will go to the Goldsmith; but seeing him, he reproaches him with not bringing the Chain as he had promised.
               
                  Angelo desires him to pay the Money for the Chain to the Merchant there present, to whom he owes as much. Antipholis replies, that he has not so much Money about him, but bids the Jeweller take the Gentleman and Chain to his House, and his Wife would pay for it. Angelo says he gave him the Chain, and presses him to pay for it. Antipholis denies it. The Merchant, weary of this Altercation, ar-rests the Jeweller, and he arrests Antipholis.
               
               
                  Dromio of Syracuse then enters, and taking Antipholis of Ephesus for his Master, tells him that a Ship is ready to sail, and that he had

carried their Baggage on board as he com-manded him. Antipholis calls him a Madman, and asks him for the Rope's-end, which he had sent him to buy: Dromio tells him he sent him to the Bay to see if any Bark was ready to sail, not for a Rope.
               
                  Antipholis, in a Passion, threatens him with future Punishment, and then orders him to go to Adriana, tell her he was arrested in the Street, and give her the Key of his Desk, and bid her send the Purse of Ducats that was in it to him. Dromio remembers that Adriana is the Lady with whom they had dined, and accordingly he goes thither, tells her what had happened, and she dispatches him away with the Gold.
               The Scene then changes to the Street, Antipholis of Syracuse enters alone, and a Mo-ment after Dromio of Syracuse meets him, and gives him the Purse. Antipholis, full of Won-der, questions his Man about it, and he talk-ing enigmatically of Arrests and Durance, An-tipholis thinks him distracted, and prays ear-nestly to be delivered out of that City.
               The Courtezan then enters, and seeing the Gold Chain about Antipholis's Neck, whom she takes for Antipholis of Ephesus, who had dined with her, she requires him to per-form his Promise, and give her the Chain in-stead of the Diamond Ring he had taken from her. Antipholis flies from her, and Dromio follows.
               
                  
The Courtezan, from this strange Behavi-our, concluding him mad, resolves to go to his House, and tell Adriana that he had forci-bly taken her Ring from her, hoping to re-cover it again by this Means. She goes out, and Antipholis of Ephesus enters with the Jaylor, whom he had desired to accompany him to his own House for Money to release him. As they are going thither Dromio of Ephesus returns with the Rope he had been sent to buy; his Master asks him for the Mo-ney he went to fetch from Adriana. Dromio protests he had been sent not for Money, but for a Rope's-end. Antipholis, violently en-raged, beats him, and whilst he is thus em-ployed, his Wife, whom the Courtezan had alarmed with an Account of his being mad, enters with one Pinch, a Conjurer, whom she employed to cure her Husband of his Frenzy.
               
                  Antipholis growing furious at this Treat-ment, his Wife calls for People to bind him, the Jaylor opposes it, he being his Prisoner, but upon Adriana's promising to pay him, he suffers Antipholis to be carried off: And as Adriana is going out with the rest, Anti-pholis and Dromio of Syracuse enters with their Swords drawn, and they supposing him to be the Antipholis who they had just before sent away bound, crying out for Help, and Anti-pholis and Dromio again set out for the Port.
               
                  
In the fifth Act the Scene is a Street before a Priory, the Jeweller, and Merchant who arrested him appear, and while they are dis-coursing about Antipholis's denying that he re-ceived the Chain, Antipholis and Dromio of Syracuse enter. Angelo, seeing him with the Chain about his Neck, reproaches him with having denied the Receipt of it, and refusing to pay for it. Antipholis protests he neither denied the one or the other; the Merchant hereupon taxes him with Fashood, Antipholis draws his Sword, and as the Merchant and he are fighting, Adriana enters, cries out that he is mad, and orders some People she had brought with her to bind both him and Dromio, and carry them home. Antipholis and Dromio to avoid this, take Shelter in the Monastery, and immediately the Lady Abbess appears, and demands the Cause of the others throng-ing thither.
               
                  Adriana tells her that her Husband, who ran into her House, is mad, and that she wants to have him fetched from thence, and carried home. The Abbess, after cunningly questioning her concerning her Behaviour to her Husband, and taking Advantage of her Answers, to prove that she had occasioned his Disorders, declares that she will not let him depart, but undertake the Cure herself.
               The Duke that Moment, who is attend-ing the Execution of old Aegeon, enters, and Adriana, throwing herself at his Feet, de-mands

Justice against the Abbess, whom she accuses of keeping her Husband from her, and recounts all the mad Actions he had been guilty of that Day. The Duke sends to bid the Lady Abbess come out and answer to this Accusation, and in the mean Time a Servant of Adriana's enters, and tells her that his Master and Dromio, who had been left bound at home, had broken loose, and committed the most terrible Outrages on the Doctor and Servants at home, Adriana, who had seen him, as she thought, go into the Priory a few Minutes before, insists upon it that this Re-port is false, when immediately Antipholis and Dromio of Ephesus enter.
               
                  Antipholis complains to the Duke of his Wife's having locked him out of Doors; she declares that he had dined with her that Day; Antipholis goes on to relate all that had hap-pened to him. The Jeweller, the Merchant, the Courtezan, his Wife, and her Sister, hav-ing been all deceived by the Resemblance of the two Antipholis's, charge the one they are speaking to with all that had passed between them and the other; his occasions a great deal of Confusion and Perplexity. Old Aegeon, on seeing Antipholis of Ephesus, and taking him for his Son Antipholis, whom he had parted from seven Years before in the Port of Syracuse, tells the Duke that he has now found a Friend who will pay his Fine, and save his Life, and accordingly goes up to him, and naming him, asks him if he does not know his Father.
               
                  

                  Antipholis protests he never saw him before; the old Man reminds him that it is seven Years since they parted at Syracuse, and deplores his own Misery in having been so soon for-gotten by his own Son. Antipholis tells him he never saw his Father in his Life, nor was ever in Syracuse, which the Duke confirmed.
               In the midst of this new Perplexity the Abbess enters with Antipholis and Dromio of Syracuse, all stand amazed at the exact Like-ness of the two Gentlemen, and their Slaves; the Abbess spying Aegeon, owns herself to be Emilia, his Wife, the Mother of those two Antipholis's and informs him that she and the elder Antipholis, with the Twin Dromio, were taken out of the Sea by Men of Epidamnum, but that some Fishermen of Corinth took away her Son and Dromio, and left her with the Epidamniens, that what became of them af-terwards she never knew, but that herself ar-rived to the Fortune of being Abbess of that Priory.
               The two Antipholis's being now discover-ed, all the Mistakes which arose from their Resemblance are cleared up, Aegeon has his Life given him by the Duke, and they all go into the Priory to discourse more at large up-on their several Fortunes.
               The Unity of Time is exactly observed in the Comedy of Errors; the Incidents of this

Play take up the Space of one Day like those of the Menaechmi; but the Action which in the last is single, and the most simple that can pos-sibly be, is by Shakespear multiplied into se-veral, some of which are far from being either probable or necessary. He has taken all the Characters in the Menaechmi, except Peniculus the Parasite, and the old Man, Father-in-law to Menaechmus of Epidamnum, and has added several others; every one of the Incidents he has likewise made Use of, but varied and ad-ded Circumstances so freely, that his Play seems to be rather an Imitation, than, as Lang-bain calls it, a Translation or Paraphrase of the Menaechmi.
               
               The Addition of the two Dromio's increases the Business of the Play, but renders the Ob-ject still more improbable, which is suffici-ently so in the Menaechmi, where but half the Degree of Credulity is necessary to make it be relished.
               The Mistakes which arise from the Resem-blance of the Twins, are conducted with much less Art by Shakespear than Plautus.
               
               In the Latin Poet all appears the Effects of Chance, in Shakespear of Design; the Per-sons in his Drama are hardly ever introduced with Propriety; they appear on the Stage, and go off again, evidently for no other Pur-pose than to give Occasion for the Blunders which ensue.
               
                  
Thus Antipholis of Syracuse being resolved to leave Ephesus, sends Dromio to the Port to see if any Vessel is ready to sail, and bids him come to him to the Mart, where he will wait his Return, accordingly they separate, and it may now be reasonably supposed that Anti-pholis is gone thither, but instead of that we find him a Scene or two afterwards standing in the same Place, where he is met either by the Wife, the Friends, or the Servants of the other Antipholis; and after having with great Difficulty disengaged himself from a-bundance of perplexing Adventures, again he declares he is going to the Mart, and goes off for that Purpose, and again he is found in the same Place to give Rise to new ones.
               In this Manner the whole Business of the Comedy of Errors is conducted. Those Errors do not as in the Play, which Shakespear bor-rowed from, arise out of a natural and pro-bable Succession of Incidents, but every Thing is put out of its Course to introduce them, and each Error is produced by an Absurdity.
            
            
               

               The Story of Amleth, translated from the Danish History of Saxo-Gram-maticus.
               
               
                  IN the Reign of Roderic, Hor-wendil and Fengo, Sons of Gerwendil, had the Garrison of Jutland committed to them by the King. Horwendil was the bravest Pirate on the Sea, and for the Fame of his Exploits envied by Coller, King of Norway, who sailed in pursuit of his Rival; they met, they fought, and the King was slain.
               The Encounter of these Heroes, with the extraordinary Manner of their Meeting each other alone in the Recesses of a Wood, with other Circumstances as improbable as any in Romance, are related in the true Stile of such Writings, by Saxo-Grammaticus, in the third Book of his Danish History.
               
                  

                     Dorastus heard all this with such apparent Indifference that the King was amazed, and asked him if he had any Objection to the Match?
                  The Prince answered coldly, "That his Heart was yet a Stranger to Love, that all Women were indifferent to him, and that Marriage was an Engagement he had no In-clination to enter into."
                  The King, extremely offended with this Reply, threatened him with the severest Effects of his Displeasure if he did not endeavour to conform to his Will; and finding the Prince continued in a sullen Silence, and would give him no Satisfaction, he quitted him in great Displeasure.
                  
                     Dorastus was sensibly afflicted at his Fa-ther's Anger, and ardently wished he could conquer that Repugnance he felt in his Soul to Marriage, that he might not offend him by an absolute Refusal; but the more he struggled to overcome that Dislike which forced him to seem disobedient to his Father, the deeper he found it rooted in his Breast.
                  A short Time after this Discourse had pas-sed between the King and the Prince, there happened to be a Meeting of all the Shep-herds Daughters in Sicily.
                  
                  
                     Fawnia was chosen Queen for the Day, and drest in her best Cloaths presided over their rural Sports; the Day being past in such innocent Diversions as Shepherdesses, when
After the Death of Coller, and his Sister Selam, Horwendil, having for three Years given the greatest Proofs of Valour, destines his rich Spoils and choice Prey for Roderic, that he might rise in his Friendship. Grown fa-miliar, he obtains his Daughter, Geruth, in Marriage, and by her had a Son, Amleth.
               
               
                  Fengo, fired with Envy at his Brother's Happiness, is resolved, by Treachery, to ruin him. So that Virtue is not always secure a-gainst the Designs of such as are the nearest to, and the most intimate with us. For when an Opportunity offered to commit Fratricide, he with bloody Hand satiates the dire Lust of his Heart, poisoned with Envy; and enjoying the Wife of his murdered Brother, adds foul Incest to his Fratricide. He who submits to one Offence too readily offends again, for one Crime is often the Provocation to another.
               He contrived this Villany with such Art and Impudence as to frame an Excuse for his Guilt from counterfeit Benevolence, and give to Fratricide the Colour of Love. Geruth was of so mild a Disposition as never to give the least Offence, and yet he said she had incurred the severest Hatred of her Husband, and that he had killed his Brother for her sake, and to save her, thinking it ungenerous so gentle a Lady, and without Gall, should endure the extream Moroseness of that Man.
               His Success was equal to his Wishes, for Princes may be deceived, and made to believe

Untruths in Courts where Buffoonery is some-times favoured, and malicious Detraction ho-noured. Fengo hesitated not with murderous Hands to embrace a Brother's Wife, and with equal Villany commits a double Impiety.
               
                  Amleth sees this, but that he might not raise Suspicions in his Uncle by an over prudent Care for his own Safety, puts on the Guise of Folly, and feigns himself distracted, and by this Sort of Device he not only covers his Design, but saves himself. He lazily stretch-ed himself out every Day before his Mother's Hearth, rolling on the Ground, and covering himself with Filth; his Face discoloured and besmeared with Gore and Nastiness, presented the ridiculous Extravagance of a Natural. Whatever he said was like the Ravings of a Madman; whatever Action he performed sa-voured of extream Ignorance. In short, you would not say he was a Man, but a ridiculous Monster, produced by Fortune in a Frenzy.
               Sometimes sitting by the Fire, and raking the Embers with his Hand, he would make wooden Hooks, and harden them in the Fire, and fasten the Ends within one another, that they might hold more firmly together; and when asked what he was about, would say he made sharp Spikes to revenge his Father.
               He was not a little laughed at for this An-swer. The Vanity of such a ridiculous Per-formance was treated with Contempt by all,

though it afterwards was of Use to him in the Prosecution of his Design.
               This Ingenuity gave to those of better Judg-ment the first Suspicion of his Subtilty. The latent Ability of the Workman for greater Matters was seen by his Skill in lesser ones. Nor could it be thought that his Senses were impaired, who by the Work of his Hands discovered such ingenious Artifice. Besides, he preserved his Heap of Brands that he had burnt at the Points to make them hard with the greatest Care.
               There were those, who asserting that he was of uncommon Strength and Quickness of Parts, that he hid his good Sense under the Pretence of Folly, and covered the deep De-sign of his Mind with crafty Invention, and that his Advice could not be more readily dis-covered than by introducing to him at any Time in his Recesses a beautiful Woman, who might call forth his Mind to the Allure-ments of Love.
               So prone is Nature to the Passion of Love, that no Artifice can disguise it, and it is too violent to be interrupted by Policy. And therefore, if his Ignorance were counterfeit he would, when Occasion offered, yield Obe-dience to the Power of Love.
               Certain Companions therefore are employ-ed, who should engage him to ride to distant

Parts of the Forest, and try him with that Temptation.
               Amongst them there happened to be a Youth, who had the same Nurse with Amleth, and still preserved in his Heart the Regard that naturally arises in those who are brought up together.
               He preferring the Remembrance of former Fellowship to the present Charge, attends up-on Amleth, with the rest of his appointed Comrades, with a Purpose to inform rather than betray him; which he could not doubt would happen at last if he discovered the least Sign of a sound Mind, and especially if he should openly indulge the Passion of Love.
               Which was no Secret to Amleth himself; for when commanded to get on Horseback he purposely seats himself so as to turn his Back to the Horse's Head, and face his Tail, to which he began to apply the Bridle, as if he was by that Part to govern the Speed of his Horse. By means of this Contrivance he baffles the Design of his Uncle, and defeats his Arts. It was very ridiculous to see the Horse go forward without the usual Check of the Reins, the Rider directing only the Tail.
               
                  Amleth in the Way met with a Wolf a-mongst the Trees; his Companions saying they had met with a young Horse, he replied there were few such in Fengo's Troops; by

this modest and witty Prevarication he rallied the Riches of his Uncle.
               When they added that he had made a sensi-ble Answer; he affirmed that he intended that he might so to do, not in any Degree seem to favour a Falshood. For desiring to be thought incapable of lying, he blended Craft and Truth together that he might not seem entirely to de-viate from Veracity in whatever he said, nor discover the Richness of his Parts by too much Exactness.
               Passing along the Shore, when his Compa-nions found the Rudder of a ship-wrecked Vessel, they said they had found a Knife of prodigious Size: It is therefore fit, says he, to cut up a large Ham, meaning the Sea in-deed, to which the Size of the Rudder did well agree. Passing also by the sandy Clifts, and being directed to look upon the Beach, as if it were Corn, he said the same was ground by the foaming Billows of the Sea. This Answer being commended by his Attendant, be assured them it was discreetly said by him.
               Being left by them on Purpose, that he might with greater Freedom indulge his Lust, in a private Place he meets a Girl, sent by his Uncle, as if it were by Chance, and would have lain with her, had not the Foster-bro-ther warned him of the Snare by a secret kind of Information.
               
                  
For he, considering how he might best dis-charge the Office of an unknown Monitor to his Friend, and prevent the Danger of his wanton Appetite, fixed a Straw he found on the Ground in the Tail of a Buzze, or Bee, flying by, and drove him towards the Place where he knew Amleth was. By this Act he conferred the greatest Benefit on the unguard-ed Youth.
               Nor was this Notice more cunningly con-veyed than readily understood; for Amleth see-ing the Fly, and the Straw that he carried in his Tail, and having carefully considered it to be a tacit Admonition to beware of Frauds: Alarmed therefore with the Suspicion of inju-rious Designs against him, that he might more securely indulge his Wishes, he catch-ing the Girl in his Arms, carries her a consi-derable Distance into a Marsh, and unfre-quented, and after Enjoyment earnestly in-treats her not to declare it to any one.
               With equal Concern therefore is Silence urged and obtained. For their being brought up together under the same Guardians from their Infancy, produced the greatest Famili-arity between her and Amleth.
               
               Upon his Return home, being asked by every one whether he had gratified his Lust, he owned he had lain with the Girl. Being asked again in what Place he had done it, or what Pillow he had used, answered, The Hoof

of an Animal that carries a Burthen, Oestrus or Oestrum has a double Signification, either a Gad-bee as above, or a Coxcomb, as in this Place. the Comb of a Cock, and under an arched Roof. He had put all these Particulars, when under Trial, that he might avoid the telling a Lie. This Account excited much Laughter in those about him, although, for the Jest sake, he did not diminish any Thing of the Truth.
               The Girl also being questioned (kept her Word with him) and declared he had done no-thing. Credit is given her, and the rather, as it appeared that his Guards knew nothing of the matter. Then he who had marked the Buzze for a Token, to shew that the Safety of Amleth was owing to his Conceit, said that he was lately the only one who took Care of him, and that the young Man's An-swer was to the Purpose.
               Nor was the Merit of the Token forgot: he related how he saw the little Carrier of the Straw with hasty Flight passing near him, and that the Straw was stuck in the hinder Parts of his Body. As this Relation excited greater Laughter in the rest, the Friend of Amleth was no less delighted with his Pru-dence.
               All of them being defeated, and unable to gain Admittance into the Secrets of this young Man's Stratagems; one of the Friends of Fengo, more presumptuous than politic, deni-ed

that this unextricable Scheme of Subtilty could be unravelled by common Artifice; for he was too obstinate to be moved by Trials of little Moment: An ordinary manner of Trial would not reach such Variety of Craft. But he had discovered by superior Sagacity a more subtle Manner of trying him, not improper for Execution, but most effectual for the Dis-covery of the Thing proposed.
               The Scheme was this, "That Fengo should under the Pretence of Business of great Con-sequence withdraw himself, and Amleth be shut up with his Mother alone in her Apartment, Care being taken to have a Man, who un-known to either of them, should be placed in some secret Part of the Room unseen, to hear attentively whatever passed in Conversa-tion between them. For if the Son was really in his Senses he would have no Difficul-ty in speaking freely to a Mother's Ear, nor mistrust the Fidelity of her that bore him. And that he might not seem more forward to advise than ready to execute, he desired him-self to be the Spy.
               
                  Fengo approved the Scheme, and sets out with the Pretence of taking a long Journey.
               Mean while the Projector having privately stole to the Chamber where Amleth and his Mother were, lay hid under the Matt of the Bed.
               
                  
But Amleth was not the Dupe of this Trea-chery. For suspecting that he might be over-heard by some officious Listener, he has at first Recourse to his accustomed Folly, and imitates the crowing of a Cock, and flapping his Arms as if they were Wings, he jumps up and down upon the Bed to try if any Thing lay hid there. And when he found a Mass under his Feet he examined the Place with his Sword, and stabs the Man who was under-neath, and dragging him forth put him to Death. Cutting the Body in Pieces, he boils them, and pours them out through the Sewer to be devoured by the Hogs.
               And thus was the miserable Body rendered undistinguishable from the Dung of the Stye.
               Having escaped this Snare, he returns to his Mother's Apartment, and when she with great Lamentation and Tears began to bemoan the want of Understanding in her Son now present, "Why; O! worst of Women, says he, dost thou endeavour to disguise the foulest Crime under a false Species of Wailing? Thou, who sporting with the Wantonness of a Strum-pet, and yielding to the vile and impious Condition of your second Marriage, embrace in your incestuous Bosom the Murderer of your Husband, and fawn upon, and please with lewdest Transport the very Man who put to death the Father of your Offspring; so Mares are coupled with Horses that subdued their Foremates. It is for Beasts alone to be

dragged to any, and to every Male. By this Example it appears that you have lost all Memory of your former Husband. It is not without Reason that I bear the Resemblance of a Fool; for I cannot doubt that he who could destroy a Brother would with like Cruelty rage against his other Kindred. It is safer to wear the Garb of Folly than of Sense, and I must borrow a Safeguard from the lowest Species of Madness. Yet the Care of revenging my Father is ever present to my Mind, but I wait for Times and Seasons. The same Place suits not with every Scene or Purpose against a dark and cruel Mind, much Thought is re-quisite. But for you to lament my Madness is vain, when you ought rather to deplore your own Infamy; you should therefore not lament another's but your own Failing, for the rest be on your Guard and keep the strictest Silence. By such Reproach did he endeavour to recall his Heart-rent Mother to the Practice of for-mer Habits of Virtue, and to teach her to prefer the former Flames of chaster Love to the present criminal Transports."
               
                  Fengo returns, and of every one, and every where enquires for his injudicious Spy; but he is no more to be found, nor does any one re-member to have seen him. Amleth, in jest, is asked whether he could discover any Tracts of him; and replies, "that he went in at the Sewer, fell to the Bostom, was kept down by the Mud, and devoured by the Hogs, who thronged to the Draught." Which Declara-tion,

Evening approached they separated, and Fawnia desiring a neighbouring Sheperdess to go with her to see if her Flock was folded, Dorastus, who was returning from Hawk-ing, met the two Virgins as they were going home, and struck with Admiration at the Beauty of Fawnia, he stopt and asked her se-veral trifling Questions, in order to have an Opportunity of gazing on her.
                  
                     Fawnia aswered him with so much sprightly Wit and so graceful an Air, that the Prince already half vanquished by the Charms of her Person, was wholly subdued by those of her Mind. Love, offended at the former Obsti-nacy of this young Rebel, resolved now to make him feel the utmost Effects of his Power, and with the keenest Arrow in his Quiver, pierced that once insensible Heart.
                  The Prince sighed with Pain and Pleasure; he could not remove his Eyes from the lovely Face of Fawnia, which was all overspread with a rosy Blush; he saw her Confusion, and ashamed of his own Weakness he resolved to force himself away, and clapping Spurs to his Horse he hastily bid the Shepherdesses farewel, and rode home to the Palace.
                  
                     Fawnia, who had surveyed the Prince with a curious Eye, began as soon as he was gone 
                        •
                     o praise him to her Companion; she admired his Youth, his Beauty, his sweet Affability: The pleasing Theme transported her beyond her usual Moderation, her Thoughts were

though true, seeming idle and foolish, was treated as ridiculous.
               When Fengo no longer doubted of the Sub-tilty of his Son-in-law, he resolved to destroy him, but was afraid to execute his Purpose on account of his Grandfather, Roderic, and the Displeasure of his own Wife. To cover his Guilt by the Service of another, he purposes to have him destroyed by means of the King of Britain. Thus desirous of con-cealing his Cruelty, he chuses rather to pol-lute his Friend than to be thought infamous himself.
               
                  Amleth, departing in secret, directs his Mother to furnish the Hall with Hangings well knotted together, and at the Expiration of a Year to report him dead, and celebrate his funeral Obsequies, and at that very time he promises to return.
               He is attended by two of Fengo's Officers, bearing Letters inscribed on Wood (for that was once a famous Manner of Writing) by which it was given in Charge to the King of Britain to destroy the young Man that was sent to him.
               Whilst these Officers slept, Amleth examin-ing their Baggage discovers these Tablets; having read them, he rubs out what was writ-ten therein, and inserting other Characters, changes the Tenor of the Mandate from his own Destruction to the Death of his At-tendants.

Nor satisfied with this Alteration, whereby he saves his own Life and exposes that of his Guards, he adds, as the earnest Entreaty of Fengo, that the King of Britain would be-stow his Daughter in Marriage upon that Youth he had sent him, who was most wise and prudent.
               When they came to Britain the Envoys waited on the King, and presented the In-strument for their own Destruction, though they thought it threatned not them but their Companion.
               The King, taking no Notice to them of the Instructions delivered him, entertains them with great Magnificence and Hospitality, when Amleth, despising the Splendor of the royal Tables as if they contained but common Food, abstains in a surprising Manner from the richest Exhibition of Dainties, both in Meats and Drinks.
               All admired that a Youth of foreign Ex-tract should nauseate the choicest Dainties of the royal Board and most excellent Luxury, as if it were coarse and homely Fare.
               The Banquet ended, the King dismissed his Friends that they might retire to Rest, but took Care, by one sent privately and hid in their Apartments, to be informed of the Con-versation of his Guests. When Amleth be-ing asked by his Comrades why he abstained from the Entertainment of Yesterday as from

Poison? "replied that the Bread was sprinkled with the Contagion of Blood, that the Wine tasted of the Sword, that the animal Food savoured of the Corpse of a dead Man, and was as offensive as the Smell of a Sepulchre."
               He added "that the King had mean Eyes, that the Queen in three Instances resembled a Servant;" railing not only at the Feast but at the Authors of it.
               His Companions, upbraiding him with his former want of Understanding, began to abuse him for having found Fault with approv-ed good Things, blamed what was proper, and slandered with indecent Language a great King, and a Queen of refined Manners, and treated with Disgrace and Indignity those who really deserved Applause.
               Which Circumstances being related to the King by his Officer, he declared the Wisdom or Madness of him who had related such Things of more than mortal Growth in so few Words to shew such Extent of Know-ledge. He sent for the Steward, and enquir-ed of him where he had the Bread, and when he was told that it was made by the Baker to the Houshold, he asked again where the Corn grew, and if there was any Sign of human Slaughter in that Place?
               He answered "that there was a Field not far off covered with the Bones of Men long since slain, yet manifestly exhibiting the Remains

of ancient Slaughter, which he, with Expec-tation of greater Plenty, as the richer Soil had sown with Spring Corn, and therefore he did not know whether the Bread might not have contracted a disagreeable Taste."
               When the King heard this, believing Amleth had spoken Truth, he took Care to know whence the Bacon came.
               The Man owned that the Swine, straying from his Care, had fed upon the Carcase of a Thief, and so perhaps the Meat might taste something like Corruption.
               When the King found that his Opinion was true, demanded in this Instaece likewise with what Liquor he had mixed the Drink? as he knew it to be made of Corn and Water; the Situation of the Spring being shewn him he set about digging, and found many Swords eaten with Rust, from whence he supposed the Water had contracted that Smell.
               Others said the Drink was found fault with because in the Draught he had met with Bees that had been bred in the Belly of a dead Man, and tasted of Comb. By which the King, seeing there was sufficient Reason to complain of the Taste of these Things, finding that he himself was reproached on account of his Eyes, and knowing that this must allude to Baseness of Birth, taking his Mother aside, de-manded of her who was his Father, she de-claring she knew no other than the King, by

threatning her with Death unless she confessed; he discovered himself to be the Son of a Servant.
               Thus by the extorted Confession he came to understand that his Origin, which had been reflected on, was at least ambiguous. He is confounded with Shame at this Discovery of his Condition, but no less charmed with the young Man's Wisdom; and asked him why he had reproachfully slurred the Queen as one of servile Manners? But whilst he laments that the gentle Disposition of his Wife was attack-ed by the Discourse of his Guest in the Night, he learns that her Mother was a waiting Wo-man; and whereas he said she exhibited three Defects of a servile Nature, they are these. One, "that she dressed her Head in the same Manner as Servants do, another, that she tucked up her Gown in walking, the third was, that she picked her Teeth with a Skewer, and eat the Pickings of them. He took No-tice that her Mother was reduced to Servitude by becoming a Captive, so that she was not less servile in her Birth than her Manners."
               Such Sagacity being reverenced by the King, as if it were divine, he gave him his Daughter in Marriage, and received his Affir-mation of any Thing as if it bore the Testi-mony of Heaven. But as for his Compani-ons, that he might perform the Behest of his Friends, he hanged them up the next Day, which, though an Advantage, Amleth seemed to resent as an Injury, feigning a Distress of Mind, and received Money by way of Com-position

from the King; which he afterwards took Care secretly to melt down and pour in-to hollow Staves.
               Having stay'd with him a Year, he obtains Leave to depart, and returns home again, taking nothing out of the Magazine of royal Treasure but the hollow Staves, in which he had poured the Gold. When he arrived at Jutland, he resumed his old Behaviour, chang-ing his late Elegance for the ridiculous Man-ner he had before employed. And when he entered the Hall, covered with Nastiness, where the Funeral Rites were celebrated, he threw every body into great Amazement, be-cause a false Report had been spread of his Death. At length their Astonishment was turned into Laughter, and the Guests rallied each other upon the Presence of him alive, to whom they had performed Honours as dead.
               When questioned concerning his Compani-ons, he said, shewing the Staves he held, "Here is both the one and the other;" which was said with equal Wit and Truth, for though it ap-peared an unmeaning Speech to most who heard it, yet swerved not from his customary regard to Truth, shewing the Compensation instead of the Men that were executed.
               Then mixing with the Waiters, that he might heighten the Mirth of the Table, he supplied them with Liquor with more than or-dinary Diligence, and that his flowing Habit might not obstruct his moving up and down,

he girt it round him with his Belt, and often with Design, drawing his Sword, he cut his Fingers with the Point; Care therefore was taken by those about him to fasten his Sword in the Scabbard with a Nail.
               That he might the more securely effect his Purpose he charged the Nobility with Excess of Liquor, till all were overcame with Drink-ing, and, unable to walk, were obliged to take up their Rest in the Hall, and sleep where they had been feasting. And when he observed them in a Condition fit for his Designs, be-lieving the Execution of it was in his Power, he puts the Brands he had formerly prepared into his Bosom, and then re-entering the Hall where the Nobles lay stretched on the Ground, oppressed with Sleep and Surfeit, he let fall the Curtain his Mother had wove, by cut-ting the Lines that held it round the sides of the Room, which he drew over them, and fastened with the Hooks in so artful a Manner, that not one of them, though he strove with never so much Strength, could possibly get up.
               After this he sets fire to the Room, which spreading far and wide, soon set the whole House in a Blaze, destroyed the Palace, and burnt all, both those that continued asleep, and those who laboured to rise but in vain. Thence hasting to Fengo's Apartment, who had been before conducted thither by his Attendants, he took his Sword that hung

by his Bed, and put his own in its room; then rousing his Uncle, he told him that his Nobles were destroyed by Fire, that Amleth was there, and furnished with the Hooks he had formerly made, and was now present with him eager to inflict the Venge-ance due for his Father's Death.
               On hearing this, Fengo jumps from his Bed, and was murdered, while disappointed of his own he vainly endeavours to draw Amleth's Sword. O! brave Man! and worthy everlast-ing Renown, who, furnishing himself wisely with counterfeit Folly, covered more than human Wisdom under the Guise of a Na-tural, not only secured his own Safety by that Artifice, but obtained the Means of compleatly revenging his Father, and having so done, it is left for every one to judge which was greater, his Bravery or Wisdom.
               
                  The End of the Third Book of the History of Denmark, by SAXO-GRAMMATICUS.
                  
                  The next Book opens with the Convention of the Nobles, before whom Amleth making an Oration, in which he owns and justifies his Conduct, all are moved, some to Pity, some to Tears, and they proclaim him King.
                  After this he repairs to Britain to revisit his Wife and Father-in-law. The King had long been under an Engagement to revenge any In-jury to Fengo; and this prevails over his Affecti-on for a Son-in-law; but unwilling to execute

this Vengeance himself, he sends him to Her-mutruda, Queen of Scotland, upon an Em-bassy to court her for him, his Wife being dead, and this Scottish Lady was reported to be of so cruel a Temper as to put to Death her Suitors; but she discovering the Dispositi-on and Actions of Amleth, loves and prevails on him to marry her.
                  They go to Britain, his first Wife forgives him, and her Father attacking him with his Forces, is by the Danes defeated and slain.
                  
                     Amleth returns home again with both his Wives; where he finds Viglet, the Successor of Roderic, who was dead. This new So-vereign had stript his Mother of her royal Treasures, and denied the Right of her Son to Jutland.
                  
                  
                     Amleth at last is forced to engage him in un-equal War, and is slain. And the fair Her-mutruda, who had taken the Camp, and de-termined to share his Fate, willingly yielded herself to the Conqueror's Arms. Viglet died in Years, and was succeeded by Wermund.
                  
               
            
            
               

               
                  OBSERVATIONS on the Use Shakespear has made of the foregoing Story in his Tragedy of Hamlet.
               
               The Fable of the Tragedy of Hamlet.
               
               
                  CLAUDIUS, the reigning King of Den-mark, having secretly murdered his Bro-ther, in order to possess himself of his Throne afterwards, married his Widow; the Ghost of the deceased King appears to some Cen-tinels, who were posted on the Platform before the Palace; these Soldiers tell Marcellus, their Officer, what they had seen, and he ac-quainting Horatio, the Friend of Hamlet, Son to the deceased King, with it; these two Gen-tlemen watch one Night on the Platform, with an Intention to speak to the Apparition if it should appear. The Ghost at the accustomed Hour appears. Horatio solemnly conjures it to speak, and unfold the Cause of its Appearance, but the Ghost continues silent and stalks away.
               
                  Horatio thereupon resolves to tell Hamlet what had happened; the Prince, full of Grief

full of the Prince's Perfections, she could not find Words sufficient to express her Admira-tion; she perceived at length, and blushed at, her Indiscretion, and remained silent and com-posed during the rest of their Walk.
                  She took Leave of her Companion at the Door of her Cottage, and retired to Bed full of a pleasing Anxiety for which her inexperi-enced Innocence could not yet find a Name.
                  The Prince, whose Mind was still more restless and uneasy than Fawnia's, because he better understood the nature of his Distemper, passed the Night in various and tormenting Thoughts: Fain would he have banished the sweet Image of Fawnia from his Remem-brance, but Love had engraved it too deeply in his Heart, and finding his Endeavours to for-get her fruitless, he sought to excuse and justify his Passion, by reflecting on the inevitable Charms of her that caused it.
                  "Oh, cruel! oh, injurious Fortune! cried he, transported with the bright Idea, to hide such Perfection in a Cottage, and lavish Crowns and Scepters often on Deformity."
                  "Oh! Fawnia, was that inchanting Form made only to grace the Fields? were these bright Eyes ordained to shine in humble Vales, and only bless rude Swains with their Love darting Beams? was that sprightly Wit and those native Graces of thy Mind given thee to be for ever clouded in a Cottage?"
                  "Ah! no, it cannot be, the Gods are just and equal in their Dispensations, and though they did not make you born a Princess, they did more, and made you deserving to be one;

for his Father's Death, displeased at his Mo-ther's incestuous Marriage, and discontented with the Behaviour of his Uncle, immediately concludes from this Account of his Father's Spirit appearing that all was not well, and de-clares to his two Friends that he will watch with them that Night on the Platform, and speak to the Spirit.
               Accordingly at Midnight he meets them at the appointed Place, and the Ghost soon after appearing, Hamlet in a most earnest and af-fecting Manner conjures it to speak, and ac-quaint him with the Cause of its appearing. The Ghost beckens him to follow it; his Companions, apprehending some Danger might happen to his Person, endeavour to re-tain him, hut in vain, Hamlet breaks from them and follows the Ghost, who bringing him to a remote Place declares that he is the Spirit of his Father, that he was poisoned in his Garden by his Brother, who lusted for his Wife and Crown; he then charges him to re-venge his Murder, and vanishes.
               
                  Hamlet vows to fulfil his Commands, and to conceal the Grief and Indignation which prey upon his Heart, and his vowed Purpose of Revenge, counterfeits Madness; which alarm-ing the guilty King, and troubling his Mother, they send for two of his School-fellows to a-muse him, and engage him in Diversions to abate the Force of his Melancholy.
               
                  

                  Polonius, an old Lord, very faithful to the King's Interests, and whose Daughter, Ophelia, Hamlet is in Love with; from her Report of a frantic Visit he made her, con-cludes he is mad for her; she having, accord-ing to his Orders, returned his Letters and Presents, and refused to hear his Professions as usual. Pollonius, having as he thought dis-covered the Cause of Hamlet's Madness, ac-quaints the King and Queen with his Suspici-ons: Ophelia is designedly thrown in his way, while the King and Polonius conceal them-seves to hear their Discourse.
               
                  Hamlet, after uttering a great many sensible Extravagancies, leaves Ophelia firmly con-vinced of his Madness, which she affection-ately deplores; but the King, who had heard all his Discourse, being persuaded that Love was not the Cause of his Melancholy, and that there might be Danger in it, resolves to send him to England to demand the Tribute, the Payment of the Tribute which had been long neglected.
               
                  Polonius, to whom he communicates this Scheme, approves of it, but advises that the Queen should first send for him, and in a pri-vate Conversation intreat him to discover the Cause of his Uneasiness.
               The King consents, mean Time Hamlet having engaged some Players to represent a Piece something like the Murder of his Father,

invites the King and Queen to the Play; and he doubting that the Spirit that appeared to him might be a lying Spirit, resoves to make the Play the Test of the King's Conscience; he therefore desires his Friend, Horatio, to join with him in carefully observing the King's Countenance during the Representation of one particular Scene, which resembles the Circumstance of his Father's Death, adding,

                     ——If his occult Guilt
                     Do not itself unkennel in one Speech,
                     It it a damned Ghost that we have seen.
                  
               
               Accordingly the King is so much struck with that Scene that he rises abruptly and goes out, by which Hamlet is convinced that the Ghost had told him nothing but Truth. The Queen then sends for Hamlet with an Intention to question him concerning his late Behaviour, and Polonius, with her Consent, conceals himself behind the Arras to hear their Discourse.
               The Queen being frighted at her Son's rude Treatment of her, cries out for Help, Po-lonius behind the Arras echoes her, and Hamlet, supposing it was the King who had concealed himself there, kills him.
               After a severe Lecture to his Mother, he charges her not to discover that his Madness is feigned, declares that he suspects some Treason in the Embassy he is sent on to Eng-land,
                  

yet resolves to go, and madly takes Leave of the King and her for that Purpose.
               
                  Ophelia, at the News of her Father's being murdered by Hamlet, grows distracted; her Brother, Laertes, fired by Rage and Grief, raises a Mutiny to revenge his Father. The King declares that he is innocent of his Fa-ther's Death, informs him of the Manner of it, and joins with him in conspiring the Mur-der of Hamlet.
               
               
                  Hamlet, suspecting the Letters his two Schoolfellows carried to England contained some dangerous Instructions concerning him-self, steals them, and upon examining them finds therein an earnest Request from his Uncle to the King of England, to put him to Death on his Arrival at his Court.
               
                  Hamlet suppresses this Letter, and writes another in the Name of his Uncle to the same King, in which he desires him to put the Bearers of that Letter to Death; this Packet he lays in the Place from whence he had taken the other.
               The next Day they are attacked by a Py-rate, they fight, and Hamlet boarding it alone, is taken Prisoner, and his two Companions continue their Voyage to England.
               
               
                  Hamlet prevails upon the Pirates to land him in Denmark; the King hearing of his Re-turn, urges Laertes, who breathes nothing but

Revenge against him, to kill him treacherous-ly as they are fencing with Foils, to which he will engage him, by pretending to lay a Wa-ger on his superior Skill at that Exercise.
               
                  Laertes consents, and adds that he will anoint the Point of his Sword with a strong Poison, that if he draws Blood he may be sure to kill him.
               In the mean Time the distracted Ophelia is accidentally drowned; the King, the Queen, and her Brother attend her Funeral: As soon as she is laid in the Earth, Laertes, in a Tran-sport of Grief, leaps into her Grave. Hamlet, understanding that it is Ophelia whom they had buried, wildly asserting his Claim as a Lover to superior Sorrow, leaps into the Grave like-wise, where Laertes, quite overcome with Rage and Grief, furiously fastens on him; they are with Difficulty parted by the King's Command, and some time after the King, as if nothing had happened, sends a Message to Hamlet, requesting him to fence with Laertes for a considerable Wager; Hamlet obeys, they meet in a Hall, the King and Queen be-ing present.
               The King, to make sure Work, after drinking Hamlet's Health, poisons the Wine, and offers the Cup to Hamlet; he refuses it, and the Queen, not knowing that the Wine is poisoned, drinks, though the King endea-vours to prevent her. Laertes wounds Ham-let with the poisoned Rapier, in the Scuffle

they change Weapons, and Hamlet wounds Laertes, they both bleed; the Queen is seiz-ed with the Agonies of Death, she tells her Son that the Wine is poisoned, and expires.
               
                  Laertes, full of Remorse for the Treachery he had been guilty of, confesses the whole Contrivance, and the Part the King had in it. Hamlet stabs the King with the poisoned Sword that had wounded both him and Laertes, and upon the King's calling for Help obliges him to drink of the Wine he had poisoned.
               The King dies, and Hamlet and Laertes exchanging Forgiveness with each other, both expire. Hamlet with his last Breath com-manding his Friend, Horatio, who would have killed himself, to live and do Justice to his Fame, by declaring his Story to the World.
               The Translation of the Story of Amleth from the Danish History of Saxo-Grammati-cus, I was favoured with by a Friend; the Story itself is full of ridiculous Fancies, wild and improbable Circumstances, and as it is con-ducted, has more the Appearance of a Ro-mance than an Historical Fact.
               That Shakespear founded his Tragedy of Hamlet upon it is very plain, but is it uncer-tain whether he saw a literal Translation of it, or met with the Incidents drest up like a Novel, and perhaps with those Alterations which he has adopted in his Play. All the principal Circumstances are the same in the

Play as the History. In both a Prince mur-ders his Brother, usurps his Dignity, and marries his Widow: The Son of the mur-dered Prince resolves to revenge his Father; for that Purpose he feigns himself mad, and at last accomplishes his Design; several of the lesser Circumstances are also as exactly co-pied, and others have afforded Hints for new ones.
               
                  Amleth has a private Interview with his Mother, and kills the Spy who had been ap-pointed to overhear their Conversation. Hamlet likewise visits the Queen in her Apartment, and kills Polonius, who had concealed himself behind the Hangings.
               When the Spies are removed the Discourse of the two Princes is much the same; they reproach their Mothers with their incestuous Marriage, sharply reprove them for their Crimes declare their Madness to be feigned, and enjoin them to Secresy.
               The Embassy to England is designed after the History. Shakespear indeed makes Hamlet, after two Days Absence, be set on shore a-gain at Denmark; and Amleth in the History arrives in England, has his Companions hang-ed, and marries the King's Daughter before he comes back. But Shakespear's Plan re-quired the immediate Return of Hamlet; however the Contrivance of changing the Let-ters are the same, and of punishing the trea-cherous Bearers of them. Shakespear makes

those Bearers the Schoolfellows, and profest Friends of Hamlet; a Circumstance which heightens their Baseness, and justifies the Ar-tifice he uses to procure their Punishment.
               The Design of entrapping Amleth by means of a Girl, has not been wholly neglected by Shakespear, though he manages this Incident much more decently. Ophelia, with whom he is in Love, is ordered to throw herself in his way, and the King and his Confident listen to their Conversation. 'Tis very easy to see he took the Hint of this Stratagem from the Story, though it is very differently conduct-ed, for Ophelia is not a loose Wanton as in the History, but a Woman of Honour, with whom he is in love. The accidental killing of her Father, and her Distraction, which was caused by it, is all his own Invention, and would have made a very affecting Episode if the Lady had been more modest in her Frenzy, and the Lover more uniformly af-flicted for her Death; for at his first hearing it he expresses only a slight Emotion; pre-sently he jumps into her Grave, fiercely de-mands to be buried with her, fights with her Brother for professing to love her, then grows calm, and never thinks of her any more.
               The Ghost is wholly the Invention of Shakespear, as is likewise the King's concert-ed Scheme with Laertes, to kill Hamlet trea-cherously as they fenced, or if he failed to poison the Wine. The King is killed by Hamlet both in the History and the Play, but

in the Play he is stabb'd in the midst of his Friends, Guards, and Attendants; in the History as he is rising in Confusion from his Bed, and unable to draw his Sword to defend himself.
               Here the Historian, romantic as his Relati-on seems, has the Advantage of the Poet in Probability. After Amleth has secured his Uncle's Attendants, taken away his Sword from him, and placed his own, which was fastened to the Scabbard, in its stead; it was not difficult for him to kill him disarmed, and without any Assistance.
               But Shakespear makes Hamlet execute his Vengeance on the King in a public Hall, crouded with his Attendants and Guards, and surrounded by his Friends; none of these of-fer to assist him, and Hamlet has leisure enough after he has stabbed him to make him drink some of the Wine he had poisoned, lest his Sword had not compleated the Work.
               The Queen's Death, by drinking ignorantly of the poisoned Wine is a beautiful Stroke of the Poet's. The History shews her unfortu-nate, but Shakespear makes the same Man who seduced her to Wickedness be her invo-luntary Murderer, and at once the Cause and Punisher of her Guilt.
               
                  Shakespear has with Reason been censured for the Catastrophe of this Tragedy. The brave, the injured Hamlet falls with the Mur-derers

he punishes; one Fate overwhelms a-like the innocent and the guilty. In the History we find he did not live long after the severe Revenge he took for his Father's Mur-der, but was unfortunately killed in Battle. Shakespear would not so far deviate from the History as to leave him happy and in Peace, though he has hastened his Death as well as changed the Manner of it. He is killed by the treacherous Contrivance of the King, and Laertes is the Instrument of that Treachery, which is afterwards turned upon himself.
               As Laertes is a subordinate Character in the Play, it seems to be a Fault in Shakespear to shew him with a Similitude of Manners, under the same Circumstances, and acting up-on the same Principles as Hamlet, his Hero. Laertes is brave and generous; his Father is murdered basely as he is informed; Duty and Honour incite him to revenge his Death, and he does so.
               This Sameness of Character, and Parity of Circumstances with the Hero, lessens his Importance, and almost divides our Attention and Concern between them; an Effect which Shakespear certainly did not intend to produce, nor can it be lessened by the Consideration of the treacherous Measures Laertes was prevail-ed upon to enter into against Hamlet, who had murdered his Father. In this he does not differ much from Hamlet, who did not attempt by open Force to revenge his Father's Mur-der

I am their Instrument to raise you to the Rank for which Nature designed you, and which no other can so worthily fill.
                  The amorous Prince paused at these Words, then suddenly giving Way to new Reflexions, "How would it please my Father, cried he, to know that my Heart is capable of Love? oh! divine Law, feared by all Men, because honoured by the Gods themselves."
                  "But alas! Dorastus, added he, breathing a deep and dreadful Sigh, who is it that is the Object of thy Passion? a rural Maid, the Daughter of a simple Shepherd. Does this Match suit with the Dignity of thy Birth? thou who art the Son of a King, and Heir to a powerful Kingdom. Ah! let me rather die than poorly submit to such a shameful Weak-ness; for 'tis better to perish nobly than to live with Contempt."
                  The wavering Prince, resting a while upon this thought, endeavoured to collect his whole Force of Reason to support a Resolution which seemed worthy of himself; but Love, who laughed at all his vain Attempts to elude his Power, again imprest the lovely Image of Fawnia upon his Fancy.
                  "Oh! Beauty, said the sighing Prince, how absolute is thy Empire over the Heart! sweet and imperious Tyrant thou shalt be obeyed, I yield to thy irresistable Force; yes Fawnia, lovely and adorable Fawnia, thou shalt be mine, thy humble Birth shall be no Obstacle to my Desires."
                  
                     

on his Uncle, but designed to accomplish it by Subtilty and Craft.
               The same Equality is preserved in their Deaths, and in their Actions throughout the Play. Laertes wounds Hamlet with the poi-soned Weapon, in the Scuffle they change Rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes, and they exchange Forgiveness with each other be-fore they die.
               Thus has Shakespear, undesignedly, no doubt given us two Heroes instead of one in this Play; the only Difference between them is that one of them is a Prince, the other a No-bleman, and but for this slight Distinction the Play might have been as well called the Tra-gedy of Laertes as Hamlet.
               
               It ought to be observed that Shakespear has not been led into this Error by the History; the Character of Laertes, and all the Circum-stances relating to him is his own, which he has introduced by making the Spy, who is killed, Father of Laertes.
               
               The Madness of Hamlet seems to be less essential to the Play than the History; in the latter it affords him the Means of executing a Contrivance, which, absurd as it is, secures the Accomplishment of his Revenge; but in the Play it is of no other Use than to enliven the Dialogue, unless its Usefulness may be de-duced from its bringing on such Accidents as it was assumed to prevent; for Hamlet's Mad-ness

alarms the King's Suspicion, and that produces the treacherous Embassy to England, which failing, the Contrivance of the poison-ed Rapier followed, and that does the Busi-ness.
               But since the King's conscious Guilt and Terror might reasonably have created a Distrust of Hamlet, and that Distrust, and a Desire of Security induced him to seek his Death, what need had Shakespear to make his Heroe's Sense and Discretion appear doubtful, by shewing him feigning a Madness, destructive to his Safety, and which he himself knows to be so, and yet persists in.
               
                  Shakespear has indeed followed the History in making Hamlet feign himself mad; but that Madness being of no Consequence to the prin-cipal Design of the Play, as it is in the His-tory, or if of Consequence it hurts the Repu-tation of his Hero, 'tis certainly a Fault; for at least he only produces the same Events by a Blunder, which might have happened without it.
               The Violation of poetical Justice is not the only Fault that arises from the Death of Hamlet; the revenging his Father's Murder is the sole End of all his Designs, and the great Business of the Play, and the noble and fixed Resolution of Hamlet to accomplish it, makes up the most shining Part of his Character; yet this great End is delayed till after Hamlet
                  

is mortally wounded: He stabs the King im-mediately upon the Information of his Trea-chery to himself! thus his Revenge becomes interested, and he seems to punish his Uncle rather for his own Death, than the Murder of the King, his Father.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            

            BOOKS Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand.
            
            
               1. THE FEMALE QUIXOTE; or the Adven-tures of ARABELLA, 2 vols. The Se-cond Edition, revised and corrected. Price 6s.
               2. The Life of HARRIOT STUART, 2 vols. Price 5s. The above by the Author of SHAKESPEAR Illustrated.
               3. The Works of Mr. THOMPSON. In 3 vols. Octavo, with Cuts.
               4. Ditto Four Volumes Twelves. To both which are added, Some POEMS never before printed.
               5. The Seasons, in a Pocket Edition, and most of his Pieces separate.
               6. The Works of Mr. MALLET, consisting of Plays and Poems.
               7. POEMS in 2 vols. The Second Edition.
               8. The TEA-TABLE MISCELLANY: Or, A Collection of Scots and English Songs, 4 vols.—N. B. The 4th Volume is to be had alone, to complete the Sets of such as bought the 3 Vols. The Eleventh Edition.
               9. The History of the ADVENTURES of JO-SEPH ANDREWS, and his Friend Mr. ABRA-HAM ADAMS. Written in Imitation of the Man-ner of CERVANTES, Author of Don Quixote. The Fifth Edition, revised and corrected, with Al-terations and Additions, and illustrated with Cuts. 2 vols.
               10. MISCELLANIES. In 3 vols. Containing

                     Vol. 1. All his Works and some short Es-says in Prose
                     Vol. 2. A Journey from this World to the next, &amp;c.
                     
                     Vol. 3. The History of that tr
                           ••
                        y renowned Person Jonathan Wild, 
                        Esq In which not only his Character, but that of divers other great Personages of his Time are set in a just and true Light.
                  
               
               
                  
11. The History of TOM JONES, a Found-ling. The Fourth Edition, in 4 vols.
               12. AMELIA, 4 vol. 12mo. These Four by Henry Fielding.
               
               13. The ADVENTURES of DAVID SIMPLE: Containing an Account of his Travels thro' the Cities of London and Westminster, in the Search of a REAL FRIEND. By a LADY. The Second Edition, revised and corrected, with Alterations and Additions; and a Preface by Henry Fielding, 
                  Esq 5 vols. 15s. Note, The Third and Fourth Volume containing Familiar Letters, may be had separate: As also the Fifth, being the Conclusion of his Adven-tures.
               14. The GOVERNESS: Or, The LITTLE FE-MALE ACADEMY. Calculated for the Enter-tainment and Instruction of young Ladies in their Education. By the Author of DAVID SIMPLE. The Second Edition, revised and corrected. A Book entirely adapted, and exceeding proper, for the Use of Schools.
               15. The HISTORY of CORNELIA.
               16. LEONORA: Or, Characters drawn from real Life. Containing a greater Variety of In-cidents, interspersed with Reflections Moral and Entertaining. The Second Edition, 2 vols.
               17. The LADY's DRAWING-ROOM. Being a faithful Picture of the Great World. In which the various Humours of both Sexes are display'd. Drawn from the Life,; and interspersed with en-tertaining and affecting Novels.
               18. A POETICAL TRANSLATION of the Works of HORACE: With the Original Text and Notes, collected from the best Latin and French Commentators on that Author, By the Reve-rend Mr. PHILIP FRANCIS, Rector of Skeyton in Norfolk. In 4 vols. Octavo.
            
         
      
   

"The Gods themselves have not disdained to love; Jupiter was enamoured of Danaë, and the bright Apollo woed the inexorable Daphne; these were mortal Beauties, and they were Deities; why then, though a Prince, may not I love a Shepherdess? but their Pas-sions were dishonourable, mine is pure and chaste, 'tis true, and herein I surpass the Gods: Be still then, oh my Soul, for 'tis decreed Fawnia, the adorable Fawnia shall be mine."
                  The Prince having thus taken his Resolu-tion, his Mind grew easy and composed, but it was far otherwise with the charming Shep-herdess, strange and unusual Dreams perplex-ed her roving Fancy the whole Night.
                  That homely Couch, which before had only supplied calm and unrufled Slumbers, and chearful Dreams of pleasant Labour and in-nocent Amusements past, now gave Birth to anxious Wishes, delusive Hopes, and uneasy Repinings.
                  She awaked, but not as usual refreshed with her Repose; her renewed Spirits sparkling in her chearful Eyes, and eager to begin the rural Labours of the Day, but heavy, languishing, and full of uneasy Perturbations, she rose be-fore her wonted Hour, and thinking to banish the various Thoughts which tormented her by industrious Toils; she drove her Flocks to the Field, shifted the Folds, and doubled her Morning's Work; at last fatigued and breathless she sat down at the Foot of a Tree, and thus began to accuse the Folly and Pre-sumption of her new Passion.
                  
                     
"Unfortunate Fawnia! said she softly sigh-ing, thy Shepherdess's Hook expresses thy mean Condition, and thy Desires shew thy aspiring Mind: Ah! simple Maid, Thoughts above Fortune bring Contempt, 'tis for the Eagle only to gaze on the Sun, art thou not a poor Shepherdess? the Daughter of a Country Swain? be content then to stand securely in the Vale, and do not by endeavouring to climb the Hills hazard the Danger of a Fall: But oh! Love is a powerful Lord and will be obeyed. I love Dorastus, ah! the more wretch-ed I, the less Cause I have to hope: Will Eagles catch at Flies? or Cedars stoop to Brambles? Dorastus is a Prince, and knows what his Sta-tion requires of him, I am the poor Daugh-ter of a Shepherd, and forget my humble Con-dition."
                  "Cease then to love unhappy Fawnia, or if thou canst not do that, conceal at least thy wrong placed Passion, for it is better to die with Grief than live with Shame; but oh, Gods! why did you give me a Soul capable of the most exalted Passion? and yet place me in a Condition which makes that Passion Pre-sumption?"
                  The lovely Shepherdess having thus given Vent to her uneasy Thoughts, rose up and be-gan to walk round her Flock, gathering up he straggling Sheep to prevent them from go-
                     
                        •
                     ng among the Corn, and while she was thus employed, endeavoured to conquer her too much raised Desires, by contemplating her

            Shakespear Illustrated.
            
               The History of Dorastus and Fawnia.
               
               
                  BEFORE Christianity appear-ed in the World, there reign-ed in Bohemia a King, named Pandosto, who was married to a Princess of exquisite Beauty and consummate Virtue, cal-led Bellaria. The Harmony that subsisted between this royal Couple gave the greatest Satisfaction to all their Subjects, whose Hap-piness was greatly increased by the Felicity of their Sovereigns.
               At the End of the first Year of their Mar-riage Bellaria was delivered of a Son, who was named Garrinter. The Bohemians upon

mean Estate, and the apparent Impossibility of ever accomplishing her Wishes.
                  Mean Time Dorastus, consumed away with impatient Desire, his former Pleasures now grew tasteless to his Sense, Company was tedious, Music only soothed his sweet Disorder, and added Fewel to his Fires.
                  Weary at length of the intolerable Restraint his Pride had forced him to lay upon his Wishes, he resolved to satisfy his longing Eyes with another Sight of the sweet, but dangerous Fawnia.
                  
                  For this Purpose he stole secretly out of the Palace, and without any Attendants took his Way to the Fields where he had first seen the beauteous Shepherdess Fawnia.
                  
                  There he walked some Time without meet-ing with the Object his passionate Eyes were every where in Search of. Enraged at his Dis-appointment, a thousand Times he curst both Love and Fortune, and just as he was resign-ing himself to the most bitter Despair for his ill Success in this first Attempt, a casual Glance discovered Fawnia to him, sitting on the Side of a Hill, selecting the most beau-tiful Flowers out of a large Heap, which in sweet Confusion were scattered about her to make a fresh Garland for her Head.
                  The passionate Prince stood at a little Dis-tance for some Moments, contemplating her with an Excess of Wonder and Delight, when Fawnia happening to look up, she met

his ardent Gaze, and this sudden and unexpected Sight gave her so much Emotion, that her fair Face was in an Instant dyed with a rosy Blush.
                  She rose however from her Seat and curt'sied to the Prince, but with such native Ele-gance and Grace, that Dorastus, who could not conceive how a Country Maid bred up in the Fields and Woods could have so much Politeness in her Manner, was lost in Asto-nishment and Admiration.
                  "Fair Virgin, said he approaching her, either your Poverty is great, or the Life of a Shepher-dess is very sweet, that you can take such De-light in rural Labours, is it because you are so like a Nymph that you resolve to imitate the Nymphs, and waste your Days in Woods and Lawns? Tell me, sweet Maid, what Plea-sures are there in a Country Life to balance 
                        •
                     ts Fatigue?"
                  "Sir, said Fawnia, with an inchanting Bashfulness, to be contented is to be rich, that Condition is most to be coveted in which 
                        •
                     here is most Tranquility; as we Shepherdesses are not born to Honour, and little beholden 
                        •
                     o Beauty, so Fame or Fortune is beneath our Care; we are not solicitous for any Thing 
                        •
                     ut the Necessaries of Life; we think our Rayment fine, if it preserves us sufficiently from the cold, and our Food dainty if it suf-fices Appetite; our greatest Enemy is the Wolf, and our Chief Care is to keep our Flocks in Security; we spend the Day in rural

Songs, and delight more in talking of Pan and Country Sports, than Venus and her trifling Toys; our Toil is to shift our Folds, but the attending our Flocks is only an agree-able Amusement; our Wealth consists in not desiring more than we possess; our Honour in not aiming to be higher than we are; Envy looks not so low as a Shepherd; Shepherds do not raise their Thoughts to Ambition, we are rich because we are content with our Poverty, and proud only in knowing we have no Cause to be proud."
                  
                     Dorastus was charmed with this sprightly Answer: Oh! thought he, if this fair Crea-ture's Birth was equal to her Wit and Beauty, she would be a Wife for the greatest Prince in the World.
                  "I perceive, Fawnia, said the Prince, ad-dressing himself to her again, that 'tis owing to your not being acquainted with the Enjoy-ments of a Court, that you are so contented with a Country Life; I commend your Wit and Prudence, but I pity your Poverty and low Condition. Will you forsake your Fa-ther's Cottage, and attend on a Lady a
                        •
                      Court?"
                  "'Tis dangerous, Sir, answered Fawnia to tempt Fortune; she is a fickle Goddess and often raises poor Mortals only to throw them down again: I was born to toil for the Court, and not live in it, and am entirely sa-tisfied with my present Condition."
                  
                     
"Ah! Fawnia, said Dorastus, with a Sigh he could not suppress, I guess the Cause of your Fondness for a rural Life, you love a Country Shepherd."
                  "Sir, replied Fawnia, smiling, pardon me if I tell you, you have not guessed right: Shep-herds! alas, they cannot love they are so sim-ple, and Maids must not if they are no older than I am."
                  "In my Opinion, pretty one, said the Prince, Maids ought to love because they are young, Cupid is a Child, and the Goddess of Love is painted young?"
                  "Age may indeed be painted with false Colours, said Fawnia, and Youth may have Actions too forward but what Art too little conceals in one, Ignorance reveals in the other."
                  
                     Dorastus, who thought this Conversation the most pleasing of any he ever had, would have perhaps drawn it out to a conside-rable Length, but perceiving some of his At-tendants approaching, he was willing to know a little more of her Heart before he parted from her.
                  "Perhaps, Fawnia, said he, taking her Hand, I love thee; if so you must needs yield me your Heart, for I am a Prince you know, and may command you."
                  
                     
"I acknowledge your Power, Sir, said Fawnia, in all just and reasonable Things, but with Submission, I must say my Heart is only at my own Disposal; constrained Love is Force, and Force you have no Right to use over me: and believe me, it is not a vain Beast I make, when I tell you that poor as I am I set so great a Value upon my Chastity, that I would rather die than be the Mistress of the greatest King upon Earth, and my Birth is so mean and groveling that I am not fit to be a Farmer's Wife."
                  The lovely Shepherdess ended these Words with a Sigh, which escaped her unawares.
                  The Prince, after a little Pause, replied, "It seems then, Fawnia, that you cannot love Dorastus."
                  
                  "Yes, said Fawnia precipitately, when Dorastus becomes a Shepherd."
                  The Prince's Attendants being now come near, he hastily went to meet them, leaving Fawnia alone and pensive, her Imagination filled with a thousand new Ideas.
                  She seated herself again at the Foot of the Hill, revolving in her Mind all the Prince had said to her, and this second View of him, to-gether with the Affability of his Behaviour, and some flattering Hopes she began to enter-tain, entirely compleated the Conquest of her Heart.
                  For some Moments she resigned herself up to the most soothing Reflexions, but when the Lowness of her Condition rushed upon her

Thoughts, and broke the sweet Delusion she was so fond of, then she began to blame the Extravagance of her Wishes, and tried to re-collect her scattered Reason.
                  "Ah! Fawnia, whispered she, why dost thou gaze at the Sun and grasp at Wind? Stars are to be beheld at a Distance, not aimed to be touched with the Hand; Hopes are to be measured by Fortune, not impelled by Desire, and Falls come by climbing high, not by sit-ting low. But what then? added she after a little Pause, must all fall who endeavour to rise because some do? no, Happiness comes by Chance, and Fortune winds those Threads which the Destinies spin. Alas! what strange Perplexity am I in, favoured by a Prince, yet obliged through Prudence to reject that Fa-vour, Denial in my Words, and Desire at the bottom of my Heart; I love Dorastus, yet I seem displeased with his Courtship. Ah! 'tis our Sex's Fault to fly from those we eagerly wish to meet. But take Heed, Fawnia, said she sighing, for if the Prince is repulsed by thy Shyness, thou wilt severely repent; for un-less he loves thou must die. Ah! die then, simple Maid, for Dorastus only jests with thee, Dorastus cannot stoop to love a Shep-herdess; sit down then in thy Sorrow, and pine in secret. Ah me! how am I changed? I was wont to pass away my Days in chearful Songs, now I waste them in Sighs and Com-plaints."
                  
                     
While Fawnia was thus giving Vent to the tender Anxieties of her Soul, the Approach of Night put her in Mind that it was Time to put her Sheep in the Fold, which having done with a heavy Heart, she hastened to her poor Cottage.
                  While Love made this Havock in the inno-cent Breast of Fawnia, he raged with such Violence in the Heart of the passionate Prince, in which the Pride of royal Birth maintained an unequal Conflict, that sinking under the Force of those contrary Passions, he became a Prey to Melancholy and Despair; he loathed his Food, Sleep fled from his Eyes, he grew pale and wan, and fell into a languishing Dis-ease.
                  The King, amazed at the Alteration in his Son, and trembling for his Life, ordered the Attendance of the ablest Physicians in his Kingdom; but their Art was all in vain.
                  The Prince himself grew apprehensive of the Danger he was in, he found he could not live without Fawnia, and thought it great Folly to die for what it was in his Power to obtain; Honour long opposed the Gratificati-on of his Desires, but Love, resistless Love, at Length prevailed.
                  The Prince, wholly abandoning himself to the Power of this sweet Tyrant, procured a Shepherd's Habit and a Crook, and making them to be conveyed to a secret Place, he

went privately out of the Palace, and attiring himself in those rural Weeds, took his Way to the Place where his charming Shepherdess fed her Flocks.
                  As he went along some uneasy Reflexions arose in his Mind when he surveyed his homely Dress.
                  "Ah! Dorastus, said he to himself, what a strange Alteration is here, a Prince transform-ed to a Peasant! does this wild Folly suit with the Dignity of thy Birth? but indeed thy Habit suits well with thy groveling Thoughts; this is thy proper Dress, thou wert always dis-guised before. Oh! Gods, for what Crime am I assigned this Penance? Oh! Love, what a fond Ideot hast thou made of me?"
                  "Yet why should I blush at this Disguise? have not the heavenly Deities descended to Earth, and changed their glorious Forms for Love? Love made Jupiter a Bull, Neptune a Ram, and Apollo, like myself, a Shepherd. If they who were Gods submitted to that all-compelling Power, shall I, who am a Mortal, dare to rebel against it."
                  While the Prince was thus justifying the strange Effects of his Passion by those great Examples, he spied Fawnia at a Distance, running after one of her Sheep which had strayed from the rest: The Sight of that lovely Face supprest in a Moment all other Emoti-ons but those of Love and Joy.
                  He flew towards her, and she, who did not know him in that Disguise, but thought

it was some genteel young Shepherd coming to meet her, secretly wished it had been her Lot to have placed her Affections upon such a one, whom with Reason she might have loved, and hoped to have obtained.
                  The Prince's nearer Approach convinced her of her Mistake, she sighed and blushed with Pleasure and Surprize, and stopping curt'sied to him with her usual Gracefulness.
                  
                     Dorastus taking her Hand, prest it with passionate Tenderness to his Heart, and then fixing an ardent Kiss upon it, begged her to sit down and listen to him a few Moments.
                  The lovely Shepherdess, trembling with the mixed Emotions which Love, Hope, and Fear excited in her Soul, sat down with him un-der the Shade of a spreading Oak, and the Prince, after gazing on her for some Time with a fixed Attention, thus spoke.
                  "You wonder Fawnia, no Doubt, at my strange Apparel, but if you knew my Thoughts you'd wonder more, the one indeed disgraces my outward Shape, but the others disturb my Mind."
                  "I love you, Fawnia, for how can I do otherways? formed as you are to inspire all who see you, with that Passion. You promised to love me when I became a Shepherd, be-hold your Prince transformed to a Country Swain. Now then I claim the Performance of your Promise since I have fulfilled your Desire."
                  
                     
"'Tis true, my Lord, said Fawnia, you are changed in Appearance, but 'tis in Appear-ance only; painted Eagles are not Eagles, and Zuexis' Grapes, as I have read, were only Paint-ed Grapes; rich Ornaments do not make Prin-ces, nor rural Weeds a Swain; Shepherds are not called so because they wear pastoral Attire, and have a Crook and Scrip, but because they at-tend their Flocks, and take Care of their rural Affairs; this Apparel therefore has not made a Shepherd of a Prince, but makes a Prince appear like a Shepherd."
                  "Had I been born a Shepherd, replied Dorastus, I should have loved you willingly, and being a Prince I am constrained to love you, do not then with an unseasonable Coy-ness reject a Passion which you only could have inspired, now is your Time to love and be beloved, while that sweet Bloom glows in your charming Face, and every Feature smiles with the Gaiety of Youth. Have you not observed the Fate of these beautiful Flowers with which you so often adorn your lovely Hair, they bud, they bloom, they wither and are neglected; such is your Beauty Fawnia; in Youth it is praised, admired, and coveted, in Age forgotten and despised, yield then to virtuous Love, for notwithstanding the Inequality of our Conditions, I mean to make you my Wife."
                  
                     "Fawnia, transported with Surprize and Joy at this unhoped for Declaration, no lon-ger

this Occasion made great Rejoicings over all the Kingdom. And the King, as well to express his own Satisfaction at this happy In-cident, as to comply with the Desires of the People, appointed Justs and Tournaments in Honour of the young Prince; to which not only many foreign Noblemen resorted, but also several neighbouring Kings and Princes came to exercise their Valour and Judgment at these martial Entertainments.
               The Sports lasted twenty Days, during which Time the King made a general Feast for all his Subjects; and the Kings and Prin-ces, who had been royally entertained, re-turned home to their respective Countries, full of Admiration of the great Magnificence of Pandosto.
               
               The Smiles of Fortune are seldom sincere or lasting; the fickle Goddess, weary of be-stowing Favours upon Pandosto, while he was wholly taken up in the Enjoyment of them, prepared a sad reverse of Fate for him and the lovely Bellaria. Pandosto, from his earliest Youth, had contracted and maintained a strict Friendship and Correspondence with Egistus, the young King of Sicily.
               
               This Prince being desirous of shewing that neither Time nor Distance of Place could weaken the Force of his Affection for Pan-dosto, resolved to visit him in his own Domi-nions, to congratulate him upon his Marriage and the Birth of a Son. For this Purpose he ordered a small Fleet to be prepared, and with

kept up her forced Indifference, but be-holding the Prince with a languishing Sweet-ness, her Face being all o'erspread with Blushes, "Ah! my Lord, said she, I am ashamed to discover the Thoughts which have long filled my Mind: Ought I, Beggar as I am, to own my Desires have reached at a Prince? Oh! Dorastus! I dare not say I love you, because you are the Son of a great King, and I am a poor Shepherdess, but the Gods know how I have honoured Dorastus! receive then my humble, my dutiful Affection, and look on me as your Handmaid, ever ready to obey your Will in all Things which are not prejudicial to my Honour.
                  
                     Dorastus, overjoyed at this sweet and mo-dest Confession of her Love for him, em-braced her with a passionate Tenderness, cal-ling all the Gods to witness the Vows he made her of everlasting Love and Fidelity, and now the Lovers began to consult upon the Measures they should take to be united for ever.
                  
                     Dorastus, who knew his Father would be excessively enraged at such a Match, told Fawnia there could be no Safety for them in Sicily, and that therefore he would provide a sufficient Quantity of Money and Jewels to support them till some favourable Change hap-pened in their Affairs, and with the Treasure fly into Italy and there solemnize their Nuptials.
                  This Proposal was agreed to with great Joy by Fawnia, who trembled at the Thoughts of the King's discovering their Love, believing

that nothing less than Death would be inflicted on her for her Presumption: She therefore urged the Prince to make the necessary Pre-parations for their Flight with the utmost Speed, lest Fortune should cruelly prevent their Intentions.
                  The Prince, whose eager Passion prompted him no less than her Fears to hasten their De-parture, assured her all should be ready in a few Days, and now the approaching Night warn-ing them to depart, he took Leave of Fawnia with a tender Embrace, and repairing to the Place where he had left his Cloaths, threw off his Shepherd's Frock and returned to the Pa-lace.
                  
                     Fawnia was so transported with the unex-pected Tide of good Fortune which had come rushing on her, that for some Time she could hardly persuade herself that all was not a Dream; but when the Tumult of her Joy was a little allayed, and calmer Reflexions succeed-ing, convinced her of the Reality of her Hap-piness, she thanked the Gods devoutly for their amazing Bounty to her, and beseeched them to continue their Favour and Protection to her and her beloved Prince.
                  In the mean time Dorastus lost no Oppor-tunity of seeing his lovely Shepherdess; she drove her Flocks to the Fields every Day, and continued to watch them as usual, not from any Delight she now took in her pastoral Em-ployment, but in the dear Hope of seeing her beloved Lord.
                  
                     

                     Dorastus, notwithstanding he always came to meet his Fawnia in the Habit of a Shep-herd, was at last discovered by some that knew him to be the Prince; so that his frequent Visits to Fawnia making much Noise among the Country People, some of Porrus's Neigh-bours, out of good Will to the old Shepherd, advised him to keep his Daughter at home, and keep a strict Eye over her, lest by going so often to the Field she should bring him home a young Son at last, for that the young Prince came often to her, and would certainly, if he had not yet, delude her and make her his Con-cubine.
                  This News greatly surprized and alarmed the good old Man, who, after thanking his Neighbours for their kind Informations, hasten-ed home to his Wife, and calling her aside, and wringing his Hands, the Tears fast falling down his aged Cheeks, "O Wife! said he, I fear, I fear our Daughter Fawnia has com-mitted Sin, and that she will buy Repentance at a dear Rate: I have sad News to tell you: My Neighbours tell me that the young Prince Dorastus looks upon Fawnia with a wistful Eye, and if that is the Case I would not give a Wisp of Straw for her Honesty at the Year's End.
                  "I tell thee, Wife, that Beauty is a great Snare to entrap young Men, and fair Words and fine Promises are great Enemies to a Maiden's Honesty; the Poor may entreat and be refused, but Princes, if Entreaties won't

                     
                        •
                     o, may command, and then who can resist 
                        •
                     hem?
                  "But it is a hard Case though, said the old Man, sobbing, where the Lust of a Prince is 
                        •
                     he Law, and that he should bind poor Folks to that which he himself freely breaks."
                  "Take heed what you say, said the good Wife, with a sagacious Look; speak no more than you should, lest you hear what you would not; do what you can, but no more than you may; great Streams may be stopped by Art, but not by Force; take Care of yourself, lest by en-deavouring to save Fawnia's Honesty you lose your own Head: It is dangerous, the Proverb says, to play with edged Tools, and bad to sport with Princes; remember the Wolf had his Skin stripped over his Ears for looking in-to the Lion's Den."
                  "You speak like a Fool, said Porrus, who could not relish his Wife's sage Council, if the King should hear that Dorastus loves our Daughter, his Fury would be such that we might lose our Goods, if not our Lives. A Thought has just now entered my Head, by which I will prevent the King's being offend-ed with us, and perhaps it may not dis-please the Prince: I will carry the Chain and Jewels I found with Fawnia to the King, and confess that she is not my Daughter, and tell him the whole Story of my finding her; the King may perhaps take her under his own Care, and then whatever happens we shall be blameless."
                  
                     
The good Wife was well enough pleased with this Proposal, and it was resolved between them to take the first Opportunity of speaking to the King.
                  In the mean time, Dorastus had com-municated his Design of leaving Sicily to a faithful Domestic, who had attended his Person from his Childhood, named Capnio. This Man at first endeavoured to dissuade him from so rash and dangerous an Enterprize, but finding the Prince determined to depart, he ceased to trouble him with any more fruit-less Expostulations, and prepared to assist him in the Prosecution of a Design, which, though he did not approve, he saw it was impossible to prevent, unless by betraying his Master to the King, a Piece of Treachery he could not bring himself to commit, being bound as well by his own Inclinations, as a sacred Oath the Prince had made him take to the contrary.
                  He therefore with great Secrecy and Expe-dition provided a Vessel to transport them to Italy, and the Prince having furnished himself with a great Quantity of Money and Jewels, gave Orders to Capnio to get some rich Apparel for Fawnia; the Baggage was all safely con-veyed on board, and the Master of the Ship perceiving the Wind likely to be favourable in a few Hours, he gave Capnio Notice that they must come on board early the next Morning.
                  
                     Capnio having informed the Prince of this, he sent him to Fawnia desiring her to be in the Fields by break of Day, where he would meet her and carry her to the Port.
                  
                     
She slept but little that Night: Love, Fear and anxious Expectation kept her waking. At the first Dawn of Light she rose, and unfold-ing her Sheep, drove them to the Fields, giv-ing many a longing look for her beloved Prince; at last he appeared on Horseback, she ran eagerly to meet him, and he dismounting, after printing a hasty Kiss upon her trembling Lips, took her up behind him, and galloped as fast as possible to the Haven where the Ship lay.
                  The Sailors perceiving him at a Distance rowed to Shore with their Boat, and taking in the Lovers, carried them safe on board, where we must leave them to see what happened at Land.
                  
                     Porrus having heard that the King intend-ed to take the Air that Morning, put on his Holiday Cloaths, and taking the Chain and Jewels he found with Fawnia concealed in his Bosom, he took his Way to the Palace, in-tending to watch the King's coming out, at the Gate.
                  Fortune, determining to favour the Lovers a little longer, flung Capnio, who was hasting to the Port with a Casket, in the old Man's Way.
                  
                     Capnio seeing him taking the Road to the Palace, and knowing him to be the Father of Fawnia, asked him where he was going so early?
                  
                     Porrus, who knew him to be a Courtier, replied, that Prince Dorastus had dealt very hardly with him; I have but one Daughter,

said the good Man, who, to say the Truth, has some share of Beauty, I have Reason to apprehend the Prince has seduced her, and I am going to complain to his Majesty of this Injury.
                  
                     Capnio immediately foreseeing all the fatal Consequences that might attend the old Man's Complaint at that critical Time resolved to prevent it, and therefore began to wheedle him by blaming the Prince for so unworthy a Design, and added, because he was a poor Man and had no Friends to stand by him, himself would assist him in all he could, but, said he, you will lose your Labour if you go to the Palace; for the King designs to take the Air to day on board a Ship that lies in the Harbour, and is already set out; therefore if you will be ruled by me, as I am going to give them Notice of his Majesty's coming that they may be prepared to receive him, I will take you with me, and place you so conveniently, that you shall have all the Liberty you can de-sire to make your Complaint.
                  
                     Porrus thanked his new Friend with great Submission for his proffered Kindness, and went with him to the Port, still complaining of the Prince, but concealed the Chain and Jewels, and mentioned nothing concerning Fawnia's being a Foundling.
                  The Sailors seeing Capnio, sent a Boat for him, but now Porrus's Heart failed, he be-gan to suspect some Design upon him, and when Capnio asked him to go into the Boat he refused, under Pretence of being afraid of the

Sea; Capnio pressed him, but to no Purpose; whereupon, as there was no Time to be lost, he ordered the Mariners who came in the Boat to carry him in by Force.
                  
                     Porrus now saw he was betrayed, but think-ing it would be fruitless to cry out or exclaim against his false Friend, he civilly entreated him and the Sailors to be kind to him, and pity his Condition, who was but a poor Man and lived by his Labour, and should be undone if he was absent long from his Flocks.
                  But they were as deaf to his Entreaties as the Winds and Waves to the Prayers of sink-ing Mariners, and laughed to see him so much afraid; having reached their Ship they obliged him to go on board, where the first Objects he cast his Eyes on, were the Prince and Fawnia.
                  
                  She being drest in rich Apparel, he scarce knew her at first, so much was her native Beau-ty heightened by the Magnificence of her Cloaths, in which she appeared with such a graceful Ease, that it seemed as if she had ne-ver been accustomed to any other.
                  
                     Porrus stood gazing on her at a Distance, greatly astonished at what he saw, and won-dering where it would end; and the Prince and Fawnia who were equally surprized to see him there, eagerly asked Capnio for what Pur-pose he was come?
                  
                     Capnio informed them that he met him as he was going to complain to the King of the Injury he suspected the Prince had offered him in the Person of his Daughter, and that he had prevented his Design by Artifice, 
                        •
                     nd brought him forcibly to the Ship, adding

that it was absolutely necessary they should take him with them to Italy, otherwise their Dis-covery would be inevitable.
                  The Prince approved this Advice, but Fawnia, who loved and respected the old Shep-herd as her Father, heard this Resolution with great Concern.
                  
                     Porrus understanding that he should be car-ried from his Wife, his Country, and Friends, into a strange Land, burst into Tears and Complaints, and falling on his Knees, earnest-ly entreated Dorastus to pardon his rash Folly, and permit him to return home, assuring him he would be as secret as the Grave: But the Prince could not be prevailed upon by all his Protestations to hazard the Danger of a Dis-covery, and though Fawnia herself with Tears conjured him to grant her Father's Request, he continued obstinate in his Refusal, assuring her their Ruin was inevitable if he complied: Fawnia then applied herself to comfort the old Man as well as she could, and the Ship with a fair Gale pursued her Voyage.
                  While this passed at Sea, Egistus, who in-tended to hunt that Morning the Prince de-parted, sent to desire his Son's Company in that Diversion, hoping it would help to re-move the Melancholy which had of late hung upon him.
                  The Gentleman of his Bed-Chamber re-turned Answer, that the Prince went that Morning very early to walk as he supposed in the Grove as was his daily Custom; whereupon

                     
                        •
                     he King sent some of his Attendants to look 
                        •
                     or the Prince in that Place, but they coming 
                        •
                     ack without him, the King attended by his No-
                     
                        •
                     les, went to the Chace, and after spending the Day, in hunting returned to the Palace; sur-
                     
                        •
                     rized at not finding his Son yet come home, 
                        •
                     e ordered strict Search to be made for him; 
                        •
                     is not appearing that Night filled him with a 
                        •
                     housand uneasy Apprehensions, and the next Day Messengers were dispatched all over the 
                        •
                     ingdom to seek for him.
                  The unhappy King at length supposing he 
                        •
                     ad fallen a Prey to the wild Beasts in the 
                        •
                     orest, ordered several Parties of Horse to 
                        •
                     our the Country round, and if possible bring 
                        ••
                     m some Intelligence of his Fate.
                  Some of these Men meeting a Fisherman 
                        •
                     ear the Sea-side mending his Nets, they en-
                     
                        ••
                     ired if he had seen or heard any thing of 
                        ••
                     e Prince, and he very ingenuously told them 
                        ••
                     at a few Days ago he had seen the Prince, 
                        •
                     ith Fawnia the Daughter of Porrus, the old 
                        •
                     hepherd himself, and Capnio, all go on board 
                        
                      Ship which instantly put off to Sea.
                  This News was immediately carried to the 
                        •
                     ing, who, full of Surprize and Grief, or-
                     
                        •
                     ered the Wife of Porrus to be brought before 
                        ••
                     m, and examined her himself concerning 
                        ••
                     e Flight of her Husband and Daughter with 
                        ••
                     s Son.
                  The old Woman told the King that her 
                        •
                     eighbours had informed her Husband the 
                        •
                     rince was too familiar with his Daughter, he apprehending

a small but select Number of Attendants ar-rived in Bohemia.
               
               
                  Pandosto and his Queen, with a numerous Retinue, went to meet Egistus at his landing, and carried him to the Palace in the midst of most expensive Shows and magnificent Arches, which had been prepared and erected for his Reception.
               
                  Pandosto, whose Heart overflowed with grateful Transport for this Demonstration of Friendship in Egistus, intreated his Queen to shew all imaginable Respect and Esteem to a Prince whom he loved so much, and to whom he was so highly obliged.
               The sweet Bellaria, who had no other Will but that of her Husband, was easily pre-vailed upon to comply with a Request to which her own Inclinations naturally incited her, for the noble Qualities she observed in Egistus had al-ready produced suitable Effects in a Mind, that being virtuous and sensible to the highest Degree itself, could not chuse but love those Perfections in another.
               
                  Bellaria therefore, as well in Obedience to her Husband's Commands, as in Consequence of the Friendship she had conceived for Egistus, gave him every Day a thousand innocent Marks of her Esteem, which that Prince, who admired and loved her Perfections with all the Warmth of a disinterested Friend, did not fail to return with every Instance of Gra-titude and Respect.
               
                  

something worse would follow, and hearing his Majesty intended to hunt a few Days ago, he rose early in the Morning with an Intention to complain to his Majesty of the Injury he feared the Prince intended to do Fawnia, and added, with Tears, that she had never seen her Hus-band since.
                  
                     Egistus perceiving the unfeigned Simplicity with which she told her Tale, dismissed her; but reflected so deeply upon the dishonourable Action his Son had committed, that he fell in-to a Fever, and continued so weak and ill that his Physicians had no Hopes of his Recovery.
                  But Dorastus, who regarded neither Fa-ther, Country nor Crown, now he was in Possession of his beloved Fawnia, never trou-bled himself about the Grief his strange Flight would occasion the King and all the Sicilians, but resigned himself wholly up to the Contem-plation of his present Happiness, which he would not have quitted for all the Empires in the World.
                  The Winds for some Time seemed to fa-vour their Flight, and they steered their Course to Italy without any Interruption; but one Morning the Sky began to be over-cast with Clouds, the Winds grew high, the Sea swelled, and at last a Storm ensued, which raged during three Days with such unceasing Fury that the Ship was so much damaged the Sailors expect-ed every Moment it would sink.
                  
                     
Poor Fawnia was almost dying with her Fears, but the Sight of Dorastus, who never left her a Moment, yielded her some Comfort amidst the Horrors of approaching Death: On the fourth Morning the Storm abated, and the Sailors discovered Land, which they soon knew to be the Coast of Bohemia.
                  
                  Their confused Shouts of Joy gave Dorastus to understand they were in Sight of some Har-bour, and with Tears of Joy and Tenderness he congratulated Fawnia on their Safety.
                  But when he was told it was the Coast of Bohemia upon which they were driven, re-membering the Enmity there was between the King of that Country and his Father, whom he had sought to poison, he was greatly per-plexed, not knowing what to do; or whether it was better to trust to the Fury of the Winds and Waves than the Treachery and Cruelty of the inhuman Pandosto.
                  
                  
                     Capnio, who saw it was impossible to ex-pect any Safety at Sea, advised the Prince to conceal his Name and Country and take up his Residence in some small Village till they could procure a Ship to carry them to Italy.
                  
                  
                     Dorastus approved this Scheme, and ordered Capnio to bid the Ship's Crew give out that his Name was Meleagrus, a Gentleman of Tra-palonia, and assure them in his Name of a large Reward for their Secrecy.
                  This done they went on Shore, and hired Lodgings at a Farm House in a Village, a Mile distant from the chief City of Bohemia; as soon as they were recovered from the Fatigues

they had endured at Sea during the Storm, Dorastus, impatient to be united to his be-loved Fawnia, gave Capnio Orders to make Preparations for their Marriage.
                  But in the mean time the Fame of Fawnia's Beauty was spread through all the Village, and from thence reached the City, and at last the Court; nothing was talked of but the lovely Stranger, whose wonderful Beauty was the Subject of general Admiration.
                  
                     Pandosto, though at that Time above sixty Years old, was fired with the Reports he con-tinually heard of this young Miracle, and was resolved to see her; and being informed they affected great Privacy, and lodged in a very mean House, he determined to have them seized on Suspicion of their being Spies, and brought before him in order to be examined by himself.
                  Accordingly he sent a small Party of his Guards to apprehend them, who coming to the House where they lodged, informed them that they must come before the King.
                  
                     Dorastus, not in the least daunted by this Message, took Fawnia by the Hand, and leaving Porrus to take Care of the Treasure, followed the Guards together with Capnio.
                  
                  Being introduced to the King, they paid their Obeisance to him with a respectful Con-fidence that might have persuaded him of their Innocence had he really suspected them to have come into his Country with any bad Intention.
                  
                     
But the King, at the first Glance of Faw-nia, was so astonished at her wonderful Beauty, that, forgetting what he had to do for seve-ral Minutes, he stood motionless like a Statue, not able to remove his Eyes from that en-chanting Object; recovering himself at last, he turned to Dorastus, and asked him sternly who he was, of what Country, and with what Intent he had landed in Bohemia? "Sir, said Dorastus, with a Countenance unchanged, and a resolute Tone of Voice, my Name is Me-leagrus, a Knight, born and bred up in Tra-palonia; this young Woman, whom I intend to make my Wife, is a Native of Italy, from whence I brought her; the Reason I have so small a Train, is, that her Friends being unwilling to consent to her Marriage, I took her away privately with an Intent to carry her to Trapalonia; as we were sailing a vio-lent Storm arose which drove us upon this Coast, and I propose to stay no longer here than till our Ship is refitted, and put into a Condition to pursue her Voyage."
                  
                     Pandosto, either not satisfied, or pretending not to be satisfied, with this Account, rose from his Seat in a Rage; "Meleagrus, said he, I am not to be imposed upon by this un-likely Tale; this Lady appears to be of a much higher Quality than you represent her, and by the graceful Loveliness of her Person, fitter to be the Wife of a great Prince, than a simple Knight, as you declare yourself to be."
                  "You have stolen away this young Lady from her unhappy Parents, like a false Traitor,

and as you have made them miserable by your Theft, will, no doubt, shortly make her so too; therefore, till I can be thoroughly in-formed of her Birth, and till you have pro-duced a Certificate from Trapalonia to con-firm the Account you have given of yourself, I will detain ye all in Bohemia."
                  
                  The noble Mind of Dorastus could but ill brook the base Suspicions and injurious Lan-guage of Pandosto, and almost forgetting the Character he assumed he looked on him with a Frown of Anger and Disdain, and with a haughty Accent thus replied:
                  "It is unworthy the Honour and Dignity of a Prince to reproach any Man with having committed scandalous Crimes without any Proof of his Guilt, or even Suspicion to form a Belief on; inoffensive Strangers ought to be treated with Kindness and Benevolence, not with Distrust and Cruelty, which is contrary to the Laws of Nations, and the Customs of all civilized People; but the Gods will severely revenge the Cause of those, who, through In-ability to right themselves, are obliged to put up with Wrongs and Injuries."
                  
                     Pandosto was so enraged at this bold and re-solute Language, that he immediately ordered his Guards to carry the audacious Stranger to Prison, and likewise ordered all the Ship's Crew to be put in a close Dungeon. For Fawnia he ordered an Apartment in the Pa-lace to be prepared, and recommended her to the Care of some of the Court Ladies.
                  
                     

                     Dorastus heard the Order for his Confine-ment with a contemptuous Silence, and fol-lowed the Guards without deigning to cast a Look on the enraged King, and only by a passionate Glance at Fawnia, expressed the Anguish of his Soul at being thus torn from her.
                  She, with streaming Eyes, saw him depart, 
                        •
                     nd retiring to the Apartment allotted for her, 
                        •
                     esigned herself up to the deepest Despair, and 
                        •
                     ontinued wholly insensible of all the Conso-
                     
                        •
                     ations that were offered her.
                  Mean Time Pandosto in whose old Bosom Love had again kindled a Flame, lost no Op-
                     
                        •
                     ortunity of seeing the beauteous Stranger, 
                        •
                     t first, he fancied he was only giving Way to 
                        
                      pleasing Amusement when he sought the 
                        •
                     ight and Conversation of Fawnia, but he 
                        •
                     oon perceived that she was become necessary 
                        •
                     o his Happiness.
                  His restless Anxiety when he was absent 
                        ••
                     om her, his disordered Wishes when with 
                        •
                     er, the Perturbations of his Mind when he 
                        •
                     ought of Meleagrus, convinced him that 
                        •
                     is unknown Virgin had conquered his Heart; 
                        •
                     e blushed at his own Weakness; he reflected 
                        •
                     n his advanced Age; his exalted Rank; on 
                        •
                     er Youth, Beauty, and mean Condition; 
                        ••
                     d sought for Reasons against his yielding to 
                        ••
                     e Force of his misplaced Passions, Reasons 
                        
                      found many, but Love was stronger 
                        •••
                     n them all.
                  
                     
In vain he represented to himself that Fawnia loved the unknown Knight, and that a Heart already prepossessed with a young and amiable Object, was not likely to yield to his Sollicitations; his Passion seemed to gather Strength from the Obstacles which op-posed it, and he resolved, if Persuasions failed, to make Use of all his Power, to compel Fawnia to his Desires.
                  For this Purpose he sent a Messenger to her one Day when he was walking in a Park be-hind his Palace, to tell her he wanted to speak to her.
                  
                     Fawnia went to him unwillingly, and as she approached, the King taking her Hand walked with her a few Steps, then stopping suddenly, he looked earnestly at her a Mo-ment, and thus spoke.
                  
                     "Fawnia, I am charmed with thy 
                        
                      and Beauty, I pity thy distrest Situation, an
                        •
                      am willing to make thy Fortune, provide
                        •
                      thou wilt forsake that despicable Knight wh
                        •••
                      brought thee hither. — He is unworthy 
                        
                      possess an Object so lovely, thou art fit for th
                        •
                      Embraces of a King, and if thou wilt yie
                        ••
                      to be my Mistress, I will advance thee bo
                        ••
                      to Dignity and Riches."
                  "I little expected, replied Fawnia, with noble Disdain, to hear a Proposal so base a
                        ••
                      so unworthy the Majesty of a King, fro
                        •
                      
                     Pandosto. Is it for you Sir, for one of yo
                        ••
                      Dignity and Age to attempt to seduce an u
                        •
                     
                     -happy

Virgin, whom Fortune and your own Injustice has put into your Power? But know, my Lord, that your Endeavours to engage me from Meleagrus are all in vain; he won my Heart by honourable Love, and he only shall possess it; my unhappy Fate drove me in-to your Dominions, where I have been sepa-rated from Meleagrus, and am persecuted by you; but these Misfortunes cannot lessen my Love, or shake my Constancy. True Love like true Virtue, gathers Strength and Firm-ness from Distress. No, though your Ma-
                     
                        •
                     esty has imprisoned my Lover without any Cause, contrary to all the Laws of Hospita-
                     
                        •
                     ity and Justice, and by that Means I am 
                        •
                     eft alone and without any Protection in your Court, yet think not that the most terrible Threats, or most alluring Temptations, can make me consent to any Thing that is disho-
                     
                        •
                     ourable. I have a noble Mind, though the Gods have been pleased to cover it with ple-
                     
                        •
                     ean Clay; I cannot be terrified by Threats, 
                        •
                     r soothed by Flatteries into a base Compli-
                     
                        •
                     nce, therefore be assured, I would rather 
                        •
                     huse to be the Wife of Meleagrus, and share 
                        •
                     ith him the greatest Miseries that cruel For-
                     
                        •••
                     ne can inflict, than be the Concubine of 
                        
                           •
                        andosto, and live in all the Splendor he can 
                        •
                     estow."
                  The King, though greatly surprized and 
                        ••
                     rplexed with this resolute Answer of Faw-
                        
                           ••
                        a, yet would not give over his Solicitati-
                     
                        ••
                     s; when he found he could not prevail up-
                     
                        ••
                      her to yield to his Desires by Promises of

Wealth and Grandeur to herself, he swore that he would not only set Meleagrus at Li-berty, but that he would confer Honours and Dignities on him, and raise him to a Rank equal to the greatest of his Noblemen."
                  But Fawnia replied, "that she would not purchase his Liberty, ardently as she loved him, with the Loss of her Honour," and Pandosto seeing her so fixed in her Resolution not to forsake Meleagrus, would press her no further at that Time, and left her to her-self.
                  
                     Fawnia, as soon as she was alone, began with Sighs and Tears to bewail this new Mis-fortune which had befallen her, anticipating by her Fears the Distresses her Refusal of the King's Offers might bring upon Dorastus and herself.
                  "Oh! unfortunate Fawnia, said she, how well has thy Presumption, in daring to love a Prince, been punished by the Calami-ties thou endurest at present, and those greater ones which thou hast Reason to expect. Ah! fond and inconsiderate Maid, hadst thou been contented with the humble Condition of a Shepherdess, in which thou wert born, thou hadst escaped these Evils; but thy rash Folly has not only undone thyself, but ruined him whose Happiness is and ought to be dearer to thee than thy own!"
                  "Oh! Dorastus, Dorastus, thou who wert born a Prince, art now a Prisoner for my Sake; those Hands which were formed for Scepters are loaded with shameful Irons for

me, unworthy me, what Miseries has thy fa-tal Passion for the wretched Fawnia brought upon thee? too lovely and too generous Prince, thou hadst been still great and happy but for me. Oh! that by my Death I could free thee from thy unworthy Bonds, but alas! thy Freedom can only be procured by the Sa-crifice of my Honour, and that Sacrifice thou wouldst never consent to; no, my dear Prince, 'tis only by my Fidelity to thee that I can re-quite thy wonderous Love, and here I swear by the immortal Gods, no Temptations, no Threats, not even of Death itself, shall ever make me forsake thee."
                  
                     Fawnia having thus given Vent to the se-cret Sorrows of her Soul, retired to her A-partment in the Palace, and past the melan-choly Hours in bewailing the Confinement of her beloved Prince, and offering up Prayers to the Gods for his Deliverance.
                  Mean Time Dorastus in a close Prison, loaded with Irons like a common Criminal, and now a thousand bitter Reflexions rose in his Mind; Rage and Shame at the unworthy Treatment he received, made him sometimes regret his ill placed Passion, which had brought him into so wretched a Condition.
                  But this Thought seldom dwelt long upon his Mind, and he was more ready to accuse the Gods of Cruelty and Injustice for divide-ing him from Fawnia, and subjecting him to such Miseries, than to repent the Folly that had caused them.
                  Oh! wretched Dorastus, would he cry, when assaulted by a vainly supprest Remorse,
This mutual Esteem gave rise to an easy Confidence and familiar Intercourse between them; so that Pandosto being often engaged with his Ministers in Affairs of State, Bellaria and Egistus passed away the Time in his Ab-sence in various Discourses and innocent A-musements, all which at first was very pleas-ing to Pandosto.
               
               But that unhappy Prince, either because he was conscious of the superior Merit of Egistus, or through the natural Bent of his Disposition, began to look with suspicious Eyes on a Friend-ship and Familiarity which he had been so soli-citous to form: Doubtful and uneasy Thoughts arose in his Mind, he reflected on the irressist-able Charms of Bellaria, and the manly Beauty and noble Qualities of Egistus, and thought it impossible that two Persons so formed to please should be insensible to each others Merit.
               These Doubts having entered his Mind, he fed his growing Jealousy with continual Ob-servations on the Looks and Words of his Friend and Wife; and prejudiced as he now was, their innocent Familiarity appeared to him to be a convincing Proof of their guilty Passion; Suspicion was now changed to abso-lute Certainty; he no longer looked upon Egistus as his Friend and Guest, but as the Destroyer of his Honour, and the Violater of his Queen.
               A violent Hatred succeeded the tender Af-fection he once bore to Egistus; and those Smiles of Love with which he had always

oughtest thou in Reason to repine at thy Fate? are not worse Punishments, if possible, than what thou now endurest due to thy Unwor-thiness and Folly? couldst thou expect to be favoured by Heaven, thou who didst forget the Duties of thy Station, and hast disgraced thy Rank and Dignity? the Wrath of Heaven is levelled at the Wretch who disobeys his Father, and oppresses his old Age with Shame and Sorrow, thou hast done this Dorastus, and mayst with Reason expect the severest Punishments will be inflicted on thee; behold me then ye Gods ready to suffer all your Ven-geance, and willing to expiate my Offence by Death: But on me, on me only let loose all your Fury, spa
                        •
                     e the lovely, the innocent Fawnia, shield and defend her helpless Youth from the inhuman Tyranny of Pandosto, and if my Death can procure her Safety, hasten it ye heavenly Powers, and let my Punish-ment attone for all."
                  While the two Lovers thus groaned under the cruel Tyranny of Pandosto, his Passion for Fawnia gave him no less Disquiet; her Denials instead of abating increased his unlawful De-sires; his Discontent appeared in every Look and Action, so tha
                        •
                      his Courtiers, who saw him al-ways disturbed and uneasy, wondered from whence the sudden Alteration proceeded.
                  Though the resolute Behaviour of Fawnia in the last Interview he had with her gave him no Reason to hope for any Change in her Sen-timents, yet being impatient to see her again and assail her Virtue with new Sollicitations,

he ordered her to be brought privately into his Apartment.
                  
                     Fawnia, with great Reluctance, suffered herself to be conducted to his Presence, and the King, as soon as he saw her, ordered all his Attendants to withdraw, and with a sooth-ing Look and Voice thus spoke to her.
                  "Well, charming Fawnia, have you consi-dered upon the Purport of my last Conversa-tion with you, when we walked together in the Park? are you become less obstinate, and more wise? Will you prefer the Love of a King to the Affection of a miserable Knight? I persuade myself you are not so insensible to the Charms of Ambition as not to think it better to be the Favourite of a King, than the Wife of a poor Subject."
                  "My Lord, replied Fawnia, I am sensible that I am in your Power, and have indeed severely felt the arbitrary Exertion of it; is it just, is it reasonable, my Lord, to inflict upon innocent Persons such Punishments as are only due to guilty ones? What Crime has Meleagrus committed against you that he must be loaded with Chains and confined in a horrible Prison? And what Right have you over my Person, that you detain me here in your Palace, and force me to listen to your infamous Proposals? Meleagrus has never attempted to seduce your Subjects from their Allegiance to you; why then do you attempt to allure me from the Fi-delity I owe to him? but know, unjust Prince, though Fortune has put my Person in your

Power, my Mind can never be subdued, but disdains alike your Promises and Threats, I have vowed to keep myself for my beloved Meleagrus, and nothing but Death shall pre-vent my keeping that Vow."
                  
                  "Is it possible then, said Pandosto, that you can persist in refusing the Love of a King, for the Sake of that wretched Man? foolish and ungrateful Girl, you say you are in my Power, yet I forbear to use it to your Preju-dice, and what I might compel by Force, am contented only to sue for, by Prayers; yield then and reward my ardent Passion with your Love, Meleagrus shall be set at Liberty, your Countrymen discharged, and all that your utmost Wishes can suggest, shall be fulfilled by a King who burns in Love for you."
                  "Why do you talk of Love? replied Fawnia, with a beautiful Disdain, you who are a Stranger to that godlike Passion, alas! 'tis Profanation to call the Inclination you have for me by the Name of Love, such Love as yours, my Lord, is worse than Death to a modest Virgin, and to avoid it I will freely sacrifice my Life. Well may you threaten me with your Power, you who are capable of making so ill an Use of it, but know, lasci-vious Prince, that all your Power is insuffi-cient to force me to a Crime the Gods ab-hor, and since I dare die to preserve my Ho-nour, your impious Attempt will gain you nothing but eternal Infamy."
                  
                     

                     Pandosto, enraged at her unalterable Love for Meleagrus, and fixed Resolution to refuse his Offer, ordered her, with Eyes sparkling with Fury, to quit his Presence, swearing at the same Time that unless she disposed herself soon to yield to his Desires, he would force her to comply, whatever might be the Conse-quences.
                  
                     Fawnia, not in the least terrified at his Menaces, quitted his Apartment and retired to her own, arming her Soul with Fortitude to escape his threatened Force by Death, if Heaven afforded her not some other Means of Relief.
                  In the mean Time the King of Sicily was informed by some Bohemian Merchants, who had discovered Meleagrus to be Dorastus, that his Son was in Bohemia, and confined in Prison by the King.
                  
                     Egistus, though extremely offended with his Son for his Disobedience and Desertion of him, yet could not hear of the shameful Treatment he received from Pandosto without feeling great Affliction; and reflecting that Bellaria and himself had been cleared by the Oracles of Apollo of the Crime the King sus-pected them guilty of, he did not doubt but Pandosto would send back his fugitive Son, at the Request of his Ambassadors.
                  He therefore ordered a small Fleet, well manned to be prepared, and giving a Com-mission to some of his principal Nobles to de-mand

the Prince of Pandosto, they embarked and set sail for Bohemia.
                  
                  
                     Pandosto received the Sicilian Ambassadors with great Respect, which filled them with Hopes of returning to their Master with Suc-cess, and soon after their Arrival related to them the Adventure of the Trapalonian Knight, who he said had come into his Do-minions in a very suspicious Manner, bring-ing with him a young Lady, named Fawnia, and no Attendants but a Shepherd, and an old Man.
                  The Ambassadors immediately perceived this Trapalonian Knight was no other than their Prince Dorastus, but they dissembled the Matter for the present till the King granted them a public Audience, and then in the Name of their Sovereign they demanded the Prince of Sicily of him, who was in his Dominions under the Name of Meleagrus.
                  
                  They then proceeded to acquaint his Bohe-mian Majesty that the Prince of Sicily had contrary to the Will of the King his Father, quitted the Kingdom, and carried with him a young Maid, named Fawnia, the Daughter of an old Shepherd, called Porrus, and that Capnio, one of the Prince's Attendants, had accompanied him in his Flight.
                  They concluded with telling the King that it was the Request of their Sovereign Egistus, that Prince Dorastus should be freed from his Confinement and sent home with them, and

that Capnio, Porrus, and his Daughter, Fawnia, should be put to Death.
                  
                     Pandosto heard this Embassy with great A-stonishment, and willing to reconcile himself to Egistus, and to shew how much he desired to renew their long interrupted Friendship, he resolved punctually to execute his Will, and to sacrifice Fawnia both to his Policy and his injured Love.
                  He therefore sent Orders immediately for the Release of Dorastus, who was greatly sur-prized at this unexpected Favour, but he was still more so, when being conducted into the King's Presence, he saw several Noblemen be-longing to his Father's Court, who, as soon as he appeared, approached, and paid their Duties to him with the utmost Respect.
                  
                     Pandosto rising from his Chair of State em-braced him with many Expressions of Tender-and Respect, mingling Apologies for what had passed, while his Birth and Quality were un-known, then seating him on his right Hand, he declared to him the Purport of the Embassy, he had received from the King, his Father.
                  
                     Dorastus, in great Confusion to find the Cause of his Flight was thus publickly known, held down his Head to hide the Blushes which overspread his Face, but when the King went on to relate the Punishment that he was required to inflict upon Fawnia and that other Partners of his Flight, he was not able to conceal the strong Emotions of his

Soul, but in the most passionate Terms he ex-claimed against the Cruelty and Injustice of his Father, and earnestly conjured Pandosto not to execute so inhuman a Sentence.
                  The King, without being moved by his In-treaties, ordered Fawnia, Capnio, and Porrus to be brought before him, and giving Way to the Fury of his Resentment against Fawnia, whose noble Resistance had changed the For-mer Love he bore her into Hatred, he accost-ed the trembling Maid with these reproachful Words.
                  "Mean and contemptible Wretch, said he, how durst thou raise thy dazled Eyes to Honour, and in thy base born Soul nourish the Flames of Ambition. Was it for thee, thou Beggar, to entertain Hopes of marrying a Prince? and practise Arts to induce the Son of a great King to forsake his Country to gratify thy insolent Desires? but know, thou dangerous Syren, Death shall be the Reward of thy daring Ambition; and thou old doat-ing Fool, said he, to the pale trembling Porrus, whose insolent Folly has prompted thy Daugh-ter to this rash Undertaking, thy Life shall pay for thy Presumption."
                  "But for thee, Capnio, added the enraged King, Death is too easy a Punishment, thy Treason and Falshood merits something worse, I therefore condemn thee to have thy Eyes put out, and till thou diest grind continually in a Mill, like a blind Horse."
                  
                     

                     Dorastus, whom the Sentence that was past on Fawnia, had thrown into a silent Agony of Grief, Rage, and Despair, perceiving they were about to lead her away, rose up to speak in her Defence, but overcome with the Vio-lence of these different Emotions, he sunk down again in his Chair, without any Appear-ance of Life.
                  By the timely Assistance of the King's Physicians he recovered, his Senses, and at their Instances, he was removed from the Sight of Fawnia, who, as soon as he was taken out of the Room, spoke in this Manner.
                  "If my Death will be the Means of pro-curing Peace and Happiness for Prince Doras-tus, who is my betrothed Lord, and whose sacred Vows, the Gods have heard, and regis-tered in Heaven, and which no Power on Earth can dissolve, I am then content to die, but my innocent and tender Passion for him, I shall carry to my Grave; my last Breath shall be spent in begging Blessings for him, in im-ploring the Gods to shed their choicest Gifts upon him, that when he succeeds to the Throne of his Father, he may rule his Sub-jects with Prudence, Equity, and Moderati-on, for Wisdom and Mercy are divine Attri-butes, and a Monarch's true Safety and Hap-piness consists in the Love, and not the Fear of his People. Behold me then, O King, prepared to suffer all the Rigour of your Sen-tence. But oh! my Father, what has he done, that his gray and venerable Hairs must

by Violence be brought to the Grave, alas! he is absolutely innocent of the Engagement, between the Prince and me; he neither coun-sel'd my Flight, nor consented to accompany me in it, but was brought forcibly on board the Ship, and compelled to be the Partner of our Voyage; must he then die for an invo-luntary Crime? Oh unjust and cruel Destiny! —But who art thou, King Pandosto? who judgest thus the Subjects of another King, who not having committed any Thing worthy of Punishment, since they came into thy Terri-tories, hast nevertheless passed Sentence of Death upon them? But something within me says thou hast a Power to judge Fawnia; be it so then; and welcome Death, which will bring me to those Regions of Bliss, where eternal Justice, Mercy and Compassion reigns.
                  The old Shepherd, moved with the af-fectionate Entreaties of Fawnia in his Favour, and perceiving there was no more Hope of Life, resolved, before he died, to discover that she was not his Daughter, and, after entreat-ing a few Moments Audience, spoke thus:
                  "King of Bohemia, and ye noble Ambas-sadors of Sicily, seeing that I am, though inno-cent, condemned to die, I am willing to dis-burthen my Conscience of a Secret I have too long concealed: I will tell ye as much as I know, and no more than is true: Fawnia, who has been disdained as a vile Beggar, is not my Daughter; I found her, and thus it hap-pened: Being a poor Shepherd in Sicily, and living by keeping other Mens Flocks, upon a

certain Day, one of my Sheep straying down to the Sea-side, I went to look for it, and saw a little Boat driven upon the Sands, wherein I found a Babe, about six Days old, wrapt in a scarlet Mantle, with a Chain about its Neck: Compassion moved me to take Care of the Child, and being covetous of the Treasure I had found with it, I carried it home to my Wife, who nursed it as her own, and when it grew up set it to keep Sheep; this Lady, Faw-nia, is the Child whom I found, and here is the Chain and the Jewels that were about her; who she is, and of what Parentage, I know not, but I solemnly declare she is not mine."
                  
                     Pandosto, who had with Difficulty re-strained his Emotions while Porrus war speak-ing, as soon as he was silent, impatiently de-manded to know the Season of the Year when he found this Babe, the Boat in which it was laid, and several other Circumstances; and ful-ly satisfied with his Answers, he suddenly sprung from his Seat, and in a Rapture of pa-ternal Affection, he catched Fawnia in his Arms, bathing her tender Face, which he pressed close to his own, with Tears of Sur-prize and Joy, and crying in broken Accents, "Oh, Fawnia! my long lost Daughter! I am thy Father, Fawnia."
                  
                  These Exclamations and sudden Passion filled all that were present with Amazement, especially Fawnia, who stood motionless with Surprize, her lovely Face expressing at once the Extremes of Joy, Hope, Fear and Won-der.
                  
                     

been accustomed to behold the charming Bellaria, gave Place to sullen Reserve and gloomy Frowns: Racked with the torment-ing Remembrance of his fancied Wrongs, the Desire and Hope of Revenge afforded him some Intervals of Ease.
               He resolved therefore to poison Egistus, and while his Mind was labouring how to execute his cruel Purpose with Security, his Words and Behaviour still wore an Appearance of Friendship and Respect.
               
                  Pandosto had a Cup-bearer, named Franion, whom, because he had always shewn an inviola-ble Attachment to his Person, he believed it would be easy to persuade to execute his purposed Vengeance on the King of Sicily.
               
               To this Man therefore the jealous Mo-narch communicated his ungenerous Design, and promised him a large Reward, if when the next Time that Egistus called for Drink at his Table, he would put Poison in his Cup.
               
                  Franion shuddered with Horror at this in-human Proposition; and with all the Freedom of a good Man and a faithful Subject he en-deavoured to dissuade his King from his bar-barous Purpose. He represented to him that Murder was an unpardonable Offence to the Gods, and abhorred by all Mankind, that such unnatural Crimes not only drew down the Wrath of Heaven upon the Perpetrators of them, but the Revenge of Men. He urged to him the sacred Laws of Hospitality,

                     Pandosto, as soon as the first Violence of his Transports was abated, sent for Dor
                           •
                        stus, who was by this Time perfectly restored to his Senses, and holding Fawnia by the Hand, he declared, that she was his Daughter, of whom his Wife Bellaria, had been delivered while she lay under the false Suspicion of Adultery, and was therefore by his Orders ex-posed in an open Boat to the Fury of the Waves: He then ordered Porrus, to tell the Prince where he had found her, and his Re-lation finished, he again embraced her, and publicly acknowledged her for his Daughter.
                  
                     Fawnia, now assured of the Reality of her Happiness, indulged her Joy at this unex-pected good Fortune; Dorastus was transport-ed out of himself, and the Sicilians no longer repined at their Prince's Choice, but rejoiced in the Expectation that the Enmity which had so long subsisted between Egistus and Pandosto, would now be changed into a firm Friend-ship and perpetual Peace between the King-doms of Sicily and Bohemia.
                  
                  The News was soon spread through Pan-dosto's Dominions; the Streets rung with Ex-clamations of Joy for the King's having found his Daughter, and that there was now a law-ful Heir to the Crown of Bohemia; nothing but magnificent Shews were every where to be seen, and the most extravagant Demonstra-tions of Joy.
                  
                     
The King conferred the Honour of Knight-hood on old Porrus, who had been so long the reputed Father of Fawnia; and causing a no-ble Fleet to be put in readiness to sail, he em-barked with Dorastus, Fawnia, and the Si-cilian Ambassadors, with a numerous Retinue, and soon arrived at Sicily, where he was kind-ly received by Egistus, who was perfectly sa-tisfied with his Son's Fortune.
                  The nuptial Ceremonies between the Prince and Princess were performed with great Mag-nificence; and soon after, Pandosto giving way to a thousand gloomy Reflexions, which the Consideration of his unjust Jealousy of Bellaria, his designed Cruelty to Egistus, but above all his unnatural Passion for his Daughter, had inspired, a deep Melancholy seized his Spirits, which turning to a Phrenzy, he one Night, took Advantage of the Absence of his Attend-ants, and stabbed himself with a Dagger.
                  His Death was much lamented by Dorastus, Fawnia and the good Egistus; his Body being embalmed, the young King and Queen of Bohemia took Leave of the King of Sicily, their Father, and carried the Corpse of the deceased Monarch with them to Bohemia, where the funeral Obsequies were performed with great Splendor; and they ascended the Throne, to the universal Joy of the whole Kingdom.
               
            
            
               

               
                  OBSERVATIONS on the Use Shakespear has made of the foregoing Novel in his Play called The Winter's Tale.
               
               The Fable of the WINTER's TALE.
               
               
                  POLIXENES, King of Bohemia, and Leontes, King of Sicilia, having been bred together in their Youth, and maintained a strict Friendship and Correspondence with each other after they succeeded to the Thrones of their Fathers; Polixenes desirous of seeing again his beloved Companion, pays him a Visit in his own Dominions, where, after staying a con-siderable Time, he proposes to take Leave and return to his own Kingdom; but Leontes, un-willing to part with him, presses him to a lon-
                  
                     •
                  er Stay; Polixenes refuses; whereupon Leon-tes desires his Queen Hermione to solicit him; she obeys; and Polixenes, at her Request, con-sents to remain a little longer in Bohemia.
               
               
                  Leontes takes Occasion, from the Earnest-ness of his Wife's Entreaties and the easy Compliance of Polixenes, to suspect them both 
                     •
                  f Adultery; and growing furious with Jea-
                  
                     •
                  ousy, he endeavours to persuade Camillo, one

of his Courtiers, whom he had made Cup-Bearer to Polixenes, to poison him.
               
                  Camillo promises to perform his Orders, but secretly discovers them to the King of Bohemia, who, thus warned, makes his Escape by Night, accompanied by his Preserver, Camillo.
               
               
                  Leontes, enraged at their Flight, and sup-posing that his Queen was privy to it, pub-licly accuses her of Adultery with Polixenes, and of conspiring with Camillo to take away his Life.
               
                  Hermione is sent to Prison, where she is deli-vered of a Daughter: Paulina, an old Lady, Friend to the Queen, carries the Child to Leontes, who swears it is a Bastard, and threat-ens to have both it and the Mother burnt; be-ing with Difficulty dissuaded from this cruel Resolution, he orders Antigonous, the Hus-band of Paulina, to carry the Child to some desert Place, quite out of his Dominions, and there leave it.
               
                  Antigonous being instructed in a Dream how to dispose of it, carries it into Bohemia, and leaves it in a Wood, but as he is returning to his Vessel, he is devoured by a wild Bear, and the Ship is wrecked.
               
                  Leontes having sent Messengers to Delpho to consult the Oracle of Apollo concerning hi
                     •
                   Queen's Infidelity; as soon as they return, th
                     •
                   Queen is brought to her Trial, and her Ac-cusation

being read, which she courageously denies, and refers to the Oracle, it is broke open and read aloud, and pronounces her In-her Inocence.
               The King declares the Oracle is false, and orders the Court to proceed in the Tryal, when a Messenger brings him an Account of the sudden Death of the Prince his Son, the Queen falls into a Swoon at this News, and is carried out.
               
                  Leontes, believing the Death of his Son to be a Punishment for his Profanation in deny-ing the Truth of the Oracle, repents his un-just Accusation of Hermione, asks Pardon of Apollo, and resolves to make his Queen Amends, for the Injuries he had offered her.
               While he is making these penitent Reso-lutions, Paulina enters, and informs him the Queen is dead. Leontes, in great Affliction, vows to visit her Tomb once in every Day while he lives, and weep ever it.
               In the mean Time the little Perdita, his Daughter, is found by a Bohemian Shepherd, who breeds it up as his own Child: Prince Florizel, the Son of Polixenes, falls in love with Perdita, and resolves to marry her. The King, his Father, discovers his Intention, and threatens Perdita with Death if she ever again presumes to receive his Son's Addresses; Camillo, who ardently desired to visit his own Country, Sicilia, and his old Master Leontes,
                  

persuades Prince Florizel, since he was deter-mined not to quit Perdita, to steal her away and carry her to Sicilia, and feign an Embassy from his Father to Leontes, which would se-cure him a kind Reception.
               
                  Florizel goes on board a Ship with Perdita, and sails to Sicilia, where he is received with great Friendship by Leontes, but immediately after King Polixenes himself arrives, having been persuaded by Camillo to follow his Son, and prevent his Marriage with Perdita.
               
               The supposed Father of Perdita having been decoyed on board the Prince's Vessel, as he was going to the King to discover how he came by Perdita, and to show him the Tokens he found with her; she is by his Means discovered to be the Daughter of Leontes.
               
               
                  Paulina, overjoyed at this happy Discovery, invites the two Kings, with the Prince and Princess, to her House to see a Statue of Her-mione, which she says is just finished, they follow her, and she shews them Hermione her-self, who they supposed dead, standing upon
                     •
                   Pedestal; after they have gazed on her some Time, still thinking it was a Statue of the de-ceased Queen, Paulina orders the Music to play, and bids the Statue descend, which it does, and is discovered to be the living Hermione.
               
               
                  Leontes receives her again with Transport Prince Florizel is married to his beloved Perdita
                  

and the good old Paulina is rewarded with a-nother Husband, in the Room of her lost Antigonous.
               
               It has been mentioned as a great Praise to Shakespear that the old paltry Story of Dorastus and Fawnia served him for a Winter's Tale, but if we compare the Conduct of the Inci-dents in the Play with the paltry Story on which it is founded, we shall find the Original much less absurd and ridiculous.
               If Shakespear had even improved the Story, and cleared it of great Part of its Inconsisten-cies, yet he would still have been accountable for what remained, for why indeed did he chuse a Subject so faulty for the Story of a Play; his Claim to Praise would have been but very small, by making what was bad bet-ter, since he was free in the Choice of his Subject; but certainly he can have no Preten-sions to it at all by changing bad to worse; that he has done so will be easily proved by ex-amining some of the principal Incidents, as they are differently managed by the Novelist and the Poet.
               The King's Jealousy is the Foundation of all the Adventures that followed, but extra-vagant as its Consequences are in both, yet the Rise and Progress of this terrible Passion is better accounted for in the Novel than the Play: In the first we are told that Pandosto, charmed with the friendly Visit Egistus paid him in his Dominions, desired the Queen to

treat her royal Guest with, the Respect and Esteem that was due to his Merit and the Friendship he had for him; the Queen, like an obedient Wife, complies with her Hus-band's Directions, and perhaps over-acts her Part. The King begins to think he has been too officious; the innocent Familiarity be-tween his Wife and Friend creates Suspicions, which meeting with a Mind prepared by a natural Distrustfulness to receive them, pro-duces those Sparks of Jealousy which his in-terested Observations on all their Looks, Words, and Actions, afterwards blew into a Flame.
               This Account of the King's Jealousy does not absolutely clash with Probability. But let us see how Shakespear manages it in the Play; the two Kings make their first Ap-pearance in the second Scene in high Friend-ship and Confidence; Polixenes reminding his Friend of the Length of his Visit, tells him he is now resolved to be gone.
               
                  Leontes, not able to part with him, presses him earnestly to stay longer, Polixenes urges the Necessity of his speedy Departure, and truly, as he observes, nine Months is a great while for a good King to be out of his own Dominions.
               
                  Leontes, after many fruitless Intreaties, re-proaches his Queen for not endeavouring to detain Polixenes, she, in obedience to his Com-mands, presses him to gratify her Lord by a

little longer Stay; Polixenes complies at her Request, and certainly he must be a very ill bred Monarch had he done otherwise.
               All this Conversation passes in the Presence of Leontes, who from hence takes Occasion to be jealous, and passes in an Instant from the greatest Confidence, Security, and Friend-ship imaginable, to the last Extremity of Jea-lousy and Rage. What wonderful Contriv-ance is here? The Legerdemain, who shews you a Tree that buds Blossoms and bears ripe Fruit in the Space of five Minutes, does not put so great a Cheat on the Senses, as Shakes-pear does on the Understanding; for this Jealousy of one Minute's Growth we see take Root before our Eyes, and so far from there being the smallest Progression in the several Actions of budding, blossoming, and bear-ing ripe Fruit, that we have the first and the last at one and the same Instant.
               The extravagant Effects of the King's Rage and Jealousy are carried far enough in all Conscience in the Novel, and Shakespear is not a Whit more moderate; only he has altered a Circumstance which entirely destroys the lit-tle Probability the Novelist had preserved in the Relation.
               In the Story, the King being in his own Mind firmly persuaded of the Queen's Guilt, 
                     ••
                  rders her to be imprisoned, and the Daughter 
                     ••
                  at she was delivered of in Prison to be burnt; 
                     
                   the Intreaties of his Courtiers he reverses

the Sentence past on the Child, and com-mands it to be exposed in a Boat, but declares that his Queen shall die.
               She insists upon being confronted with her Accusers, whereupon she is brought to a Tryal; but finding she was likely to meet with no Jus-tice in a Court over-ruled by the Power of her Husband, she on her Knees protests her In-nocence, and intreats the King to consult the Oracle of Apollo concerning the Crimes of which she was accused. This so reasonable a Request being made in open Court, the King could not refuse it, and therefore sends Am-bassadors to Delphos; who return with the An-swer of the God; which being read, declares her Innocence, and the King is satisfied.
               
                  Shakespear makes the King in the Heighth of his Frenzy of Jealousy send himself to the Oracle of Apollo, and in the mean Time com-mit the most barbarous Cruelties on his Queen and Child. How inconsistent is this! why does he consult the Oracle if he is resolved to proceed to Extremities before the Answer ar-rives? The Request comes very naturally from the Queen in the Novel, and the King's Compliance with it is very well accounted for, but in the Play nothing can be more absurd than that the King should be reasonable enough to consult voluntarily the Gods concerning the Infidelity of his Wife; and while the An-swer was expected, and her Guilt yet doubt-ful, punish her with as much Rigour as if the Oracle had declared her an Adultress. Her
                     •
                  
                  

that Egistus was his Guest, his Friend and Ally; that any Cruelty committed upon his Person would brand his Name with perpetual Infamy, and sow the lasting Seeds of Discord and Hatred between the Sicilians and Bohemi-ans; and that even his own Subjects would murmur at such an unexampled Piece of Cruelty and Treachery.
               These Arguments had no Force with the determined Pandosto, who, persisting still in his cruel Resolution, gave Franion his Choice either to poison Egistus, and be rewarded with Riches and Honours, or to suffer Death for his Disobedience.
               
                  Franion, staggered by these dreadful Threat-nings on one Hand, and allured by those great Promises on the other, told Pandosto that he would obey him, and as soon as a fair Opportunity offered he would poison Egistus.
               
               The King was very well pleased with this Promise, and resolved as soon as his designed Vengeance on Egistus was executed, to sa-crifice Bellaria in the same Manner, to his abused Love and injured Honour.
               When the King was departed, Franion having no longer that dreadful Object before his Eyes, threatening Death and Torments if he did not murder the innocent Prince, be-gan to reflect seriously upon the horrid Deed he had engaged to perform: Murder he thought, however secretly and securely committed, might for a Time avoid Danger, but never wholly escape Punishment; that no Balm, no Leni-tive

again the paltry Story has the Advantage of the Play. Let us go on to examine a few more of the Incidents.
               In the Novel, the Persons who perform the hateful Office of exposing the Infant Princess are some of the King's Guards.
               In the Play, it is a Nobleman of high Rank, who had Courage enough to reprove the King for his violent and unjust Jealousy, yet basely submits to take an Oath to perform his Commands, though he had Reason to think they would not be very mild, and still more basely keeps that Oath, though it enjoins him to carry the innocent Babe to a Desert, and there leave it to the Mercy of the wild Beasts.
               In the Novel, the Accidents that happen to the exposed Infant are governed by Chance; the Boat into which it was put being left in the midst of the Ocean, is driven by the Winds to the Coast of Bohemia, and being spied by a Shepherd is drawn to Land.
               In the Play, Antigonous, who is bound by Oath to leave the Child in some desert Place quite out of its Father's Dominions, is warn-ed in a Dream by its unhappy Mother to call the Infant Perdita, and carry it to Bohemia, and there leave it.
               
                  Antigonous obeys, and this done, it is abso-lutely necessary he should never return to Sicily, otherwise it may be discovered where the Princess is left, and all the future Adven-tures would fall to the Ground, therefore a Bear rushes out of the Woods and devours

him; the good-natured Bear, as it should seem, resolved not to spoil the Story, passes by the little Princess, who is to make so great a Fi-gure hereafter, and a convenient Storm arising, splits the Ship in which she was brought thither, so that all the Sailors perishing, though they were near enough the Shore to have sav-ed themselves, no one is left to ca
                     •
                  ry back any Account of the Affair to Sicily, and thereby prevent the Adventures which are to follow.
               All this is very wonderful: Shakespear mul-tiplies Miracle upon Miracle to bring about the same Events in the Play, which Chance, with much more Propriety, performs in the Novel.
               The Loves of the young Prince of Bohemia and the royal Shepherdess are carried on much in the same Manner by the Poet as the No-velist; Shakespear has even borrowed some of the Thoughts from the latter in this Speech of Florizel to Perdita.
               
               
                  The Gods themselves,
                  Humbling their Deities to Love, have taken
                  The Shapes of Beasts upon them. Jupiter
                  
                  Became a Bull, and bellow'd the Green. Neptune
                  
                  A Ram and bleated; and the fire-rob'd God,
                  Golden Apollo, a poor humble Swain,
                  As I seem now. Their Transformations
                  Were never for a Piece of Beauty rarer,
                  Nor in a Way so chaste. Since my Desires
                  Run not before my Honour, nor my Lusts
                  Burn hotter than my Faith.
               
               
                  

                  Dorastus speaks almost the same Words in the Novel, "The Gods themselves have not disdained to love: Jupiter was enamoured of Danaë, and the bright Apollo woo'd the inex-orable Daphne; these were mortal Beauties, and they were Deities; why then, though a Prince, may not I love a Shepherdess, but their Passions were dishonourable, mine is pure and chaste, 'tis true, and herein I surpass the Gods; be still then, O my Soul, for 'tis decreed, Fawnia, the adorable Fawnia, shall be mine."
               The Escape of the two Lovers is very dif-ferently managed in the Novel and Play; in the first, the Prince being pressed by his Fa-ther to marry, resolves to leave Sicily with Fawnia, and fly into Italy, where he intend-ed to live concealed till his Father's Death, or that he could reconcile him to his Marriage with the beautiful Shepherdess; having pro-cured a Ship, and a sufficient Quantity of Money and Jewels, he meets Fawnia early in the Morning and carries her to the Port, they embark, and steer their Course for Italy, but are driven by contrary Winds to Bohemia, where they are obliged to land.
               In the Play, Florizel disguised in the Habit of a Shepherd for the Sake of Perdita, as-sists at a Sheepshearing Feast. The King, his Father, being informed of his Son's Resort to the House of a Shepherd, goes there dis-guised with his Confidant, Camillo, and comes

very opportunely to hear the Prince, his Son declare his Passion for the Fair Shepherdess pub-licly, and his Intentions of marrying her; nay he carries his Indiscretion so far as to join Hands with her before all the Country People who are present; can any Thing be more absurd?
               The King, sufficiently informed of his Son's Designs, discovers himself, and forbids the Bans: this is indeed a terrible Stroke; one would be puzzled to think how the Lovers will escape; for is it not natural to suppose that the enraged King will keep his Son in a strict Con-finement to prevent this unequal Match; but it happens quite otherwise; for the King, after some severe Menaces, goes back to his Palace, and leaves his Son at Liberty to run away with the Country Girl, which he accordingly does.
               The Part Camillo acts in this Affair is not more consistent; he longs to see again his old Master Leontes and his native Country Si-cilia, which he had quitted to preserve Po-lixenes, and because this Monarch loved him so well that he could not bear his Absence, and gently denied him Permission to go, Camillo betrays the Confidence he reposed in him, con-sents to the Prince's Flight, and advises him to take Refuge in Sicilia, in Hopes that Polixenes, to whom he intended to discover where the Prince was gone, would follow him, and thus he might again return to his own Country.
               This double Treachery and self-interested Views are very inconsistent with the Character

of so honest a Man as Camillo is represented to be; besides the Contrivance is absolutely ridi-culous; for what Reason had the Prince to sup-pose that Leontes, who passionately desired to be reconciled to the King his Father, whom he had so greatly injured, would offend him anew by protecting his Son, who had fled from him in order to marry a poor Shepherdess, for he could not expect the Story, however he disguised it, would be long concealed from him; and why should Camillo suppose that Polixenes, when he was informed of his Son's Flight, would quit his Dominions to follow him, and put his Person again in the Power of a King who had once designed to murder him: was it not more likely that he would send Ambassa-dors to demand the Prince of Leontes, who would then have an Opportunity of shewing if his Penitence was sincere by sending him back again; but Shakespear has fallen into all these Absurdities in order to bring the chief Characters in his Play together at Sicilia, tho' for some of them there was not the least Oc-casion.
               The several Incidents that lead to the Dis-covery of Fawnia are conducted with some Shadow of Probability in the Novel, but are much the worse for Shakespear's Alterations.
               In the Novel Capnio, the Prince's Confi-dant, as he is hastening after him to the Port, meets the Father of Fawnia going to Court,

and suspecting his Design, he artfully persuades him to follow him, and, partly by Stratagem, and partly by Force, carries him on board the Vessel in which the Prince and Fawnia were embarked; the old Man had taken with him when he left his House the Chain and Jewels he found with Fawnia in order to shew them to the King and relate the Manner in which he found her; but being prevented in this De-sign by Capnio, who obliged him to be the Com-panion of their Flight, he very prudently con-tinues to conceal from Fawnia the Circum-stance of her Birth; and, to secure to himself a respectful Treatment from the Prince and her, suffers her still to believe him her Father; but when at Bohemia the King of Sicilia's Am-bassadors discover who they are, and the old Shepherd and Fawnia are by the King of Bo-hemia ordered to be put to Death for deluding the Prince of Sicily, he then declares that Faw-nia is not his Daughter, and produces the Chain and Jewels he found with her as Proofs that her Birth was not mean; the King at the Sight of these Tokens knows and acknow-ledges his Daughter.
               Thus these Circumstances are altered by Shakespear.—The Prince having changed Cloaths with a cheating Pedlar, escapes with his Mistress to the Ship; the Pedlar imme-diately over-hears a Conversation between the reputed Father of Perdita and his Son, in which it is resolved that he shall carry the Jewels to the King and declare how he found Perdita; the Pedlar supposing it would be an

Advantage to the Prince to know this, decoys the old Shepherd and his Son aboard; now one would imagine that all must come out; but see what strange Accidents conspire to hinder it.
               The Pedlar, though he over-heard the old Shepherd say that Perdita was a Foundling and not his Daughter, neglects to tell the Prince this important Circumstance, though it was with that very Design he came and forced the two Clowns along with him.
               
                  Perdita, though her Father and Brother are in the same Vessel with her, never sees or speaks to them: the old Shepherd and his Son make no Attempts to speak to her; and the Prince has so little Consideration for the Fa-ther and Brother of his Beloved that he takes no Notice of them; how wonderful is all this! the most unlikely Things imaginable fall out to postpone the Discovery of Perdita till their Arrival at Sicily.
               
               The Novel makes the Wife of the jealous King die through Affliction for the Loss of her Son; Shakespear seems to have preserved her alive for the sake of her representing her own Statue in the last Scene; a mean and absurd Contrivance; for how can it be imagined that Hermione, a virtuous and affectionate Wife, would conceal herself during sixteen Years in a solitary House, though she was sensible that 
                     •
                  er repentant Husband was all that Time con-suming

away with Grief and Remorse for her Death; and what Reason could she have for chusing to live in such a miserable Confinement, when she might have been happy in the Pos-session of her Husband's Affection and have shared his Throne: how ridiculous also in a great Queen, on so interresting an Occasion, to submit to such Buffoonery as standing on a Pedestal, motionless, her Eyes fixed, and at last to be conjured down by this magical Com-mand of Paulina.
               
               
                  Music, awake her; strike;
                  'Tis Time, descend; be Stone no more; ap-proach;
                  Strike all that look upon with Marvel; Come
                  I'll fill your Grave; up stir; nay, come away;
                  Bequeath to Death your Numbness, for from him
                  Dear Life redeems you.
               
               After this solemn Incantation, her Majesty comes down from the Pedestal and embraces her Husband, and her new found Daughter, for whose Sake she declares she had preserved her Life.
               To bring about this Scene, ridiculous as it is, Shakespear has been guilty of many Ab-surdities, which would be too tedious to men-tion, and which are too glaring to escape the Observation of the most careless Reader.
               The Novel has nothing in it half so low and improbable as this Contrivance of the

Statue; and indeed wherever Shakespear has altered or invented, his Winter's Tale is great-ly inferior to the old paltry Story that furnish-ed him with the Subject of it.
               Sir Thomas Hanmer, in his Edition of Shakespear, has this Note at the Beginning of the Winter Tale.
               
               This Country, here called Bithynia, hath in all former Editions been printed Bohemia, an inland Kingdom, situated nearly in the Center of Europe; whereas many of the great Incidents of the Play turn upon its be-ing a maritime Country, of which Polixenes was the King. This is a Blunder and an Ab-surdity, of which Shakespear in Justice ought not to be thought capable, and as he hath turned quite anew the Story contained in the old paltry Book of Dorastus and Fawnia, changing most of the main Circumstances, and all the Names of the Persons; it is pro-bable he removed this Impropriety, and plac-ed the Scene in Bithynia, which the Ignorance and Negligence of the first Transcribers, or Printers, might corrupt and bring back again to Bohemia, by a less Variation in the Letters than they have been guilty of in numberless other Places of this Work.
               
                  Shakespear, in his Two Gentlemen of Verona, makes Protheus travel from Verona to Milan by Sea. Yet both those Cities are in-land, and both more than eighty Miles distant from the Sea. Unless this Blunder can be also charged upon the Transcribers, or Printers, 'tis reasonable to suppose that Shakespear, who was guilty of the one, might be so of the other.
            
            
               

               THE MENAECHMI. A COMEDY of PLAUTUS. Translated from the French OF Monsieur GUEUDIVILLE.
               
                  

could heal the Stings of a wounded Con-science, and the Guilt of innocent Blood would always be accompanied with Remorse and Horror.
               He reflected that, though he was a Subject, his King had no Right to his Obedience when his Commands were contrary to the express Will and Pleasure of the Gods, to whom he owed a higher Duty.
               He considered, that the peaceful Calm of a contented Mind in an humble Condition was preferable to the restless Turbulence of Dignity and Riches, when purchased with Crimes and stained with Blood, and that honest Poverty was infinitely better than shameful Grandeur.
               Seeing therefore that he must either die with a clear Mind, or live with a foul and spotted Conscience; his Soul was so perplexed be-tween these two Extremes that he could take no Rest; at last he determined to discover the Affair to Egistus, and for that Purpose he went to his Apartments, and desiring a private Au-dience of the King of Sicily he was admitted to his Presence, and in a few Words laid open the whole Conspiracy against him.
               The Brave and Generous are not easily in-duced to believe those they love are capable of Baseness and Ingratitude. Egistus judging of Pandosto's Heart by the Rectitude of h
                     •
                  s own, told Franion with a severe Countenance, that he would not entertain a Thought to the Prejudice of the King of Bohemia's Honour.
               
                  "Pandosto, continued he, is my Friend and Ally, no Suspicion has ever yet interrupt-ed

                  The PERSONS.
                  The PROLOGUE.
                  
                     Menaechmus of Epidamnum, Son of Moschus and Theusimarcha, and Brother of Sosicles.
                     
                        An old Man, Father of the Wife of Menaech-mus of Epidamnum.
                     
                        The Wife of Menaechmus of Epidamnum,
                     Erotia, the Mistress of Menaechmus of Epi-damnum.
                     
                        Physician.
                     
                     Peniculus, Parasite of Menaechmus of Epi-damnum,
                     
                        A Servant of Menaechmus of Epidamnum.
                     
                        Slaves.
                     
                     Cylindrus, Cook to Menaechmus of Epidamnum, and Erotia.
                     Menaechmus Sosicles, Brother to Menaechmus of Epidamnum.
                     Messenion, Slave of Menaechmus Sosicles.
                  
                  The EPILOGUE.
                  
                     SCENE, Epidamnum in Macedonia.
               
               
                  

                  PROLOGUE.
                  I Begin, Gentlemen, with telling you that I wish you all as well as myself; here is a Comedy of Plautus which I bring you, and intreat you will give it a favourable At-tention; listen now to the Subject of the Play, and be silent, I shall endeavour to comprise it in as few Words as possible.
                  'Tis customary with Poets in their Come-dies to make one believe that all passes at Athens, to the End that the Subject may ap-pear entirely Grecian, and may be more esteemed by the Spectators; as for me I shall not pretend to say that what we are going to represent here to Day happened in any other Place than where it really did.
                  The Subject of this Piece is truly Grecian, yet notwithstanding that it is not Attick, but Sicilian, and what I have hitherto said is only the Introduction to it.
                  In explaining the Argument to you I shall not amuse myself with shewing you Patterns only, but present you with the whole Piece, for it is my Intention to be very full in the Exposition of this Intrigue.
                  
                     
There was formerly at Syracuse a good plain simple Man, a Merchant by Profession, his Wife was delivered of two Sons at one Birth, who so perfectly resembled each other, that the Nurse who suckled them, and the Mother who bore them were not able to distinguish the one from the other. This I was told by a Person who saw them; for my own Part I ne-ver did see them, and I tell you so that you may not be deceived.
                  When these two Children arrived to the Age of seven Years, their Father took one of them with him on board a Vessel which he had loaded with Merchandize, and carried him to Tarentum, whither he went to trade, leav-ing the other at home with his Mother.
                  It happened that when they arrived at Ta-rentum they were celebrating Games, which, as it is usual with public Spectacles, drew to-gether great Numbers of People.
                  The little Boy straying from his Father was taken up by a Merchant of Epidamnum, who carried him into his own Country; the Fa-ther's Affliction for the Loss of his Son was so great that it deprived him of his Senses, and a few Days after of his Life.
                  This News being carried to Syracuse, the Grandfather of the two Children understand-ing that one of them was taken away at Ta-rentum, and that the Father was dead, changed the Name of his Grandson who remained with him, and gave him that of his Brother that was lost, whom he had loved extremely and was desirous of preserving the Remembrance

of; he called him therefore Menaechmus, a Name that was common to himself as well as to the Twins.
                  This Circumstance I remember very well, having heard it proclaimed by the public Criers; and that you may avoid Mistakes, I inform you beforehand, that these twin Bro-thers have both the same Name.
                  But I must now return to Epidamnum: Is there any one among you who has Occasion for any Thing from that Country? If there be, he needs only to speak, and command me freely; however, he must understand, that it will be necessary to give me Money to enable me to perform his Commission; for to give me no Money would be a very great Folly, and to give me Money a still greater; I return then to the Place from whence I came; ne-vertheless, I do not budge from this Spot.
                  This Merchant of Epidamnum, of whom I have spoken so much, and who took away one of the twin Brothers, had no Chil-dren, but in every Thing else he was very rich; he adopted therefore the stolen Child; bred him up as his own Son; married him to a Woman with a large Fortune; and made a Will by which he left him his whole Estate: One Day, when he went into the Country, 
                        •
                     t rained violently, and being obliged to pass a very rapid River, not far from the City, the Force of the Stream carried away this Ra-visher

of Children, and hurried him to the Fu-ries in Spite of his Teeth.
                  Behold now the young Man established a Epidamnum in Possession of a great Fortune; his Brother brought up at Syracuse, is this Da
                        •
                      arrived at Epidamnum with his Servant it Search of this other Brother; for this Rea-son the City of Epidamnum will be the Scene of this Comedy; when we play another the Scene also shall be changed; for you know the Subjects are not always the same; some-times we play a Merchant of Slaves, some-times a young Debauchee, sometimes a poor Man, a Beggar, a King, a Parasite, or a Fortune-teller.
               
               
                  

                  THE MENAECHMI of Plautus.
                  
                  
                     ACT I.
                     
                        SCENE I.
                        PENICULUS the Parasite.
                        
                        
                           THE Name of Peniculus, which I bear, was given me by the young People of the City, be-cause when I am at Table I know so well how to make it clean. Th
                              •
                           se Masters who load their fugitive Slaves with Chains, are in my Opinion guilty of great Folly; for a poor Wretch who sees a new Evil added to those he suffered before is but the more incited to commit new Rogueries, and to avoid Punishment by Flight; these Peo-ple never fail of extricating themselves out of Difficulties: Sometimes they force open the

Lock with a File; sometimes they break the Hinges of the Door with a Stone; all the Pre-cautions one takes with them are useless; the best Way to prevent a Servant from flying, is to attach them to one's self by good Nourish-ment; tye these Sort of Animals to a good Rack and give them Plenty of Provender, and take my Word for it they will not run away whatever Fault they have committed; they may be easily guarded if you make use of these Chains to retain them; the Ligaments of the Jaws are so pliant, that the more they are stretched the closer they may be drawn.
                        For a Proof of this I am going to the House of Menaechmus to get myself tyed in this Manner, and voluntary submit to a Sentence which has been long ago passed upon me; Menaechmus is a Man who not only feeds People well, but even gives them a new Birth and new Life; he is the first Man in the World for perform-ing wonderful Cures; he is blest with a noble Appetite himself; you would say that each of his Repasts is a Feast; so well he knows how to furnish a Table; there is nothing to be seen on all Sides but Pyramids of Dishes, so that if one wants any Thing from the other End of the Table, one is obliged to raise one's self quite up from the Bed to reach it.
                        I have been many Days absent from him, dur-ing which Time I have remained shut up at home with my dear little Family, for I cannot eat or drink any Thing that does not cost me very dear, therefore I am sometimes obliged to fast for Want of Money: I am now going to visit

                           Menaechmus—but his Door opens—'tis himself who is coming out.
                     
                     
                        SCENE II.
                        MENAECHMUS of Epidamnum. PENICULUS.
                        MENAECHMUS to his Wife 
                           within.
                        
                        If you were not foolish and unreasonable to the last Degree, you wou'd not have a Mind at once so stubborn and so weak; it ought to be sufficient that a Thing does not please your Husband to make it unpleasing also to you; but be assured, if you ever take the Liberties with me which you have just now done, I will send you back to your Father and never see you more: When I have an Inclination to go abroad, you always endeavour to detain me; call me back; enquire where I am going; what I intend to do; what Affairs I have to transact from home; what I want; what I carry out with me; what I do when I am out; in short, I have a Tutor instead of a Wife, to whom I am obliged to give an exact Account of all my Actions: I have hitherto had too much Indulgence for you, but do not imagine will have it for the future; when I give you in Abundance whatever you can desire, Servants, Jewels, rich Cloaths, 
                              •
                           ll your Wishes can aim at; you ought, if 
                              •
                           ou were wise, to enjoy this Happiness, and 
                              •
                           ease to be continually watching your Hus-
                           
                              •
                           and; but that you may not do it to no Pur-
                           
                              •
                           ose this Time, I shall inform you myself that

I design to have a Rendezvous with a Mistress, and am now going to take her with me to Sup-per at an appointed Place.
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           This Man is persuaded he has vexed his Wife heartily, when at the same Time it is I who suffer; for if he sups abroad, I shall be dis-appointed, and not his Wife.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Most glorious Triumph! my Noise has oblig-ed my Wife to retire: Where are the intrigu-ing Husbands? why come they not in Crouds to load me with Presents, and congratulate me on my Dexterity in drawing myself out of Dif-ficulties? I have contrived to take away this Robe from my Wife, and am going to carry it to my Mistress; 'tis thus we ought to trait those inquisitive Dames who are continually prying into all our Affairs: Yes; I am ready to prove to any one who shall deny it, tha
                                 •
                               this Exploit of mine is fine, equitable, plea-sant, and cunningly performed; at my own Expence I have robb'd one wicked Woma
                                 •
                               to make a Present to another who is quite a bad; I have at least, however, the Glory and Pleasure of spoiling my Enemies to enrich my Allies.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           But pray tell me, Menaechmus, wha
                                 •
                               Share of the Spoil have you destin'd fo
                                 •
                               me?
                        
                        
                           

                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Ah! Wretch that I am! I am lost! I am fal-len into an Ambuscade.
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           No, no, quite the contrary; you have met with a Reinforcement.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Who is there?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           'Tis I.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Oh! the most convenient, the most favourable of all my Friends! good Morrow, Peniculus.
                           
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Good Morrow, incomparable Patron.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Well, what News hast thou to tell me?
                        
                        
                           PENICULUS.
                           Delightful Meeting! I hold my tutelary Ge-nius by the Hand.
                        
                        
                           MENAECHMUS.
                           Thou could'st never have come more conve-niently.
                        
                        
                           
CHAP. III. In which the Interview is ended, not much to the
Lover's Satisfaction, but exactly conformable to
the Rules of Romance.
                  CHAP. IV. In which our Heroine is greatly disappointed.
                  CHAP. V. Some curious Instructions for relating an History.
                  CHAP. VI. A very Heroic Chapter.
                  CHAP. VII. In which our Heroine is suspected of Insensibility.
                  CHAP. VIII. By which, we hope, the Reader will be differently
affected.
               
               
                  BOOK IV.
                  CHAP. I. In which our Heroine discovers her Knowlege in
Astronomy.
                  CHAP. II. In which a very pleasing Conversation is left unfi-nished.
                  CHAP. III. Definition of Love and Beauty—The necessary
Qualities of an Hero and Heroine.
                  CHAP. IV. In which our Heroine is engaged in a new Adven-ture.
                  CHAP. V. Being a Chapter of Mistakes.
                  CHAP. VI. In which the Mistakes are continued.
                  
                     

his Daughter's Books, since it had proved the
Means of restoring him to her Favour.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Which contains a very natural Incident.
               
               FROM this Time Mr. Glanville, tho' he
was far from coming up to Lady Bella's
Idea of a Lover, yet, by the Pains he apparently
seemed to be at in obliging her, made every
Day some Progress in her Esteem. The Mar-quis
was extremely pleased at the Harmony
which subsisted between them; tho' he could
have wished to have seen their Marriage advance
a little faster; but Glanville, who was better ac-quainted
with Arabella's Foible than the Mar-quis,
assured him, he would ruin all his Hopes,
if he pressed her to marry; and intreated him
to leave it intirely to him, to dispose her to con-sent
to both their Wishes.
               The Marquis was satisfied with his Reasons,
and, resolving not to importune his Daughter,
upon that Subject, any more, they lived for
some Months in a perfect Tranquillity; to which
an Illness the Marquis was seized with, and
which was, from the first, thought to be dan-gerous
gave a sad Interruption.
               
                  Arabella's extreme Tenderness upon this Oc-casion,
her anxious Solicitude, her pious Cares,
and never-ceasing Attendance at the Bedside of
her sick Father, were so many new Charms,

that engaged the Affection of Glanville more
strongly. As the Marquis's Indisposition in-creased,
so did her Care and Affiduity: She would
not allow any one to give him any thing but her-self;
bore all the pettish Humours of a sick Man
with a surprising Sweetness and Patience; watched
whole Nights, successively, by his Bedside; and
when, at his Importunity, she consented to take
any Rest, it was only upon a Couch in his
Chamber, from whence no Intreaties could
make her remove. Mr. Glanville partook with
her in these Fatigues; and, by his Care of her
Father, and Tenderness for her, confirmed her
in the Esteem she had entertained of him.
               The Marquis, who had struggled with the Vi-olence
of his Distemper for a Fortnight, died
on the Fifteenth Day in the Arms of Arabella,
who received his last Looks; his Eyes never re-moving
themselves from her Face, till they were
closed by Death. Her Spirits, which the De-sire
she had of being useful to him, had alone
supported, now failed her at once; and she fell
upon the Bed, without Sense or Motion, as soon
as she saw him expire.
               Mr. Glanville, who was kneeling on the other
Side, and had been holding one of his Uncle's
Hands, started up in the most terrible Conster-nation,
and, seeing the Condition she was in,
flew to her Relief: Her Women, while he sup-ported
her, used all the Endeavours they could
think of to recover her; but she continued so
long in her Swoon, that they apprehended she
was dead; and Glanville was resigning himself
up to the most bitter Sorrow, when she opened
her Eyes; but it was only to close them again.

Her Faintings continued the whole Day; and
the Physicians declaring she was in great Danger,
from her extreme Weakness, she was carried
to Bed in a Condition that seemed to promise
very little Hopes of her Life.
               The Care of the Marquis's Funeral devolving
upon Mr. Glanville, he sent a Messenger express
for his Father, who was appointed Guardian
to Lady Bella; the Marquis having first asked
her if she was willing it should be so. This
Gentleman arrived Time enough to be Witness
of that sad Ceremony, which was performed
with a Magnificence suitable to the Birth and
Fortune of the Marquis.
               Lady Bella kept her Bed several Days, and
her Life was thought to be in Danger; but her
Youth, and the Strength of her Constitution,
overcame her Disease; and, when she was so
well recovered as to be able to admit of a Visit
from her Uncle, Mr. Glanville sent for Permis-sion
to introduce him: The afflicted Arabella
granted his Request; but, being then more in-disposed
than usual, she intreated they would de-fer
their Visit for an Hour or two, which they
complied with; and, returning at the appointed
Time, were conducted into her Dressing-Room
by Lucy, who informed them her Lady was just
fallen into a Slumber.
               Mr. Glanville, who had not seen her for
some Days, expected her waking with great
Impatience; and pleased himself with describing
her, with a Lover's Fondness, to his Father,
when the Sound of her Voice in the next Room
interrupted him.
            
            
               

               CHAP. III.
               
                  Which treats of a consolatory Visit, and
other grave Matters.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, being then awaked from her
Slumber, was indulging her Grief by Com-plaints,
which her Women were so used to hear,
that they never offered to disturb her. Merci-less
Fate! said she, in the most moving Tone
imaginable, Cruel Destiny! that, not contented
with having deprived my Infancy of the soft
Cares, and tender Indulgences, of a Mother's
Fondness, has robbed me of the only Parent I
had left, and exposed me, at these early Years,
to the Grief of losing him, who was not only
my Father, but my Friend, and Protector of
my Youth!
               Then, pausing a Moment, she renewed her
Complaints with a deep Sigh: Dear Relics of
the best of Fathers! pursued she, Why was it
not permitted me to bathe you with my Tears?
Why were those sacred Remains of him, from
whom I drew my Life, snatched from my Eyes,
ere they had poured their Tribute of Sorrow
over them? Ah! pitiless Women! said she to
her Attendants, you prevented me from per-forming
the last pious Rites to my dear Father!
You, by your cruel Care, hindered me from
easing my sad Heart, by paying him the last
Duties he could receive from me! Pardon, O
dear and sacred Shade of my loved Father!
pardon this unwilling Neglect of thy afflicted

Child, who, to the last Moment of her wretched
Life, will bewail thy Loss!
               Here she ceased speaking; and Mr. Glanville,
whom this Soliloquy had much less confounded
than his Father, was preparing to go in, and
comfort her; when the old Gentleman stopping
him with a Look of great Concern: My Niece
is certainly much worse than we apprehend,
said he: She is in a Delirium: Our Presence may,
perhaps, discompose her too much.
               No, Sir, replied Glanville, extremely con-fused
at this Suspicion; my Cousin is not so bad
as you suppose: It is common enough for Peo-ple
in any great Affliction to ease themselves by
Complaints.
               But these, replied the Knight, are the strangest
Complaints I ever heard, and savour so much of
Phrensy, that I am persuaded her Head is not
quite right.
               
                  Glanville was going to reply, when Lucy, en-tering,
told them her Lady had ordered their
Admission: Upon which they followed her into
Arabella's Chamber, who was lying negli-gently
upon her Bed.
               Her deep Mourning, and the black Gawse,
which covered Part of her fair Face, was so ad-vantageous
to her Shape and Complexion, that
Sir Charles, who had not seen her since she grew
up, was struck with an extreme Surprize at her
Beauty, while his Son was gazing on her so
passionately, that he never thought of introducing
his Father to her, who contemplated her with
as much Admiration as his Son, though with less
Passion.
               
                  

                  Arabella, rising from her Bed, saluted her
Uncle with a Grace that wholly charmed him;
and, turning to receive Mr. Glanville, she burst
into Tears at the Remembrance of his having
assisted her in her last Attendance upon her Fa-ther.
Alas! Sir, said she, when we saw each
other last, we were both engaged, in a very
melancholy Office: Had it pleased Heaven to
have spared my Father, he would, doubtless,
have been extremely sensible of your generous
Cares; nor shall you have any Reason to accuse
me of Ingratitude, since I shall always acknow-lege
your Kindness as I ought.
               If you think you owe me any Obligation, re-turned
Glanville, pay me, dearest Cousin, by
moderating your Sorrow: Indeed your suffer
yourself to sink too much under an Affliction
which is impossible to be remedied.
               Alas! answered Arabella, my Grief is very
slight, compared to that of many others upon
the Death of their Relations: The Great Sysi-gambis,
who, questionless, wanted neither For-titude
nor Courage, upon the News of her
Grand-daughter's Death, wrapt herself up in her
Veil; and, resolving never more to behold the
Light, waited for Death in that Posture.
               
                  Menecrates, upon the Loss of his Wife, built
a magnificent Tomb for her; and, shutting him-self
up in it, resolved to pass away the Remain-der
of his Life with her Ashes. These, in-deed,
were glorious Effects of Piety and Affec-tion,
and unfeigned Signs of an excessive Sor-row:
What are the few Tears I shed to such
illustrious Instances of Grief and Affection, as
these?
               
                  

                  Glanville, finding his Cousin upon this Strain,
blushed extremely, and would have changed the
Subject; but the old Gentleman, who had never
heard of these two Persons she mentioned, who
expressed their Sorrow for their Losses in so
strange a Manner, was surprised at it; and was
resolved to know more about them.
               Pray, Niece, said he, were you acquainted
with these People, who could not submit to the
Dispensation of Providence, but, as one may
say, flew in the Face of Heaven by their Impa-tience?
               I am very well acquainted with their History,
resumed Arabella; and I can assure you, they
were both very admirable Persons.
               Oh! Oh! their History! interrupted the
Knight! What, I warrant you, they are to be
found in the Fairy Tales, and those sort of Books!
Well, I never could like such Romances, not
I; for they only spoil Youth, and put strange
Notions into their Heads.
               I am sorry, resumed Arabella, blushing with
Anger, that we are like to differ in Opinion
upon so important a Point.
               Truly, Niece, said Sir Charles, if we never
differ in any thing else, I shall be very easy about
this slight Matter; tho' I think a young Lady
of your fine Sense (for my Son praises you to
the Skies for your Wit) should not be so fond
of such ridiculous Nonsense as these Story-Books
are filled with.
               Upon my Word, resumed Arabella, all the
Respect I owe you cannot hinder me from tell-ing
you, that I take it extremely ill you should,
in my Presence, rail at the finest Productions in

the World: I think, we are infinitely obliged
to these Authors, who have, in so sublime a Style,
delivered down to Posterity the heroic Actions
of the bravest Men, and most virtuous of Wo-men:
But for the inimitable Pen of the famous
Scudery, we had been ignorant of the Lives of
many great and illustrious Persons: The war-like
Actions of Oroondates, Aronces, Juba, and
the renowned Artaban, had, haply, never been
talked of in our Age; and those fair and chaste
Ladies, who were the Objects of their pure and
constant Passions, had still been buried in Obscu-rity;
and neither their divine Beauties, or sin-gular
Virtue, been the Subject of our Admira-tion
and Praise. But for the famous Scudery,
we had not known the true Cause of that Action
of Clelia's, for which the Senate decreed her a
Statue; namely, Her casting herself, with an
unparalleled Courage, into the Tyber, a deep
and rapid River, as you must certainly know,
and swimming to the other Side. It was not, as
the Roman Historians falsly report, a Stratagem to
recover herself, and the other Hostages, from the
Power of Porsena; it was to preserve her Ho-nour
from Violation by the impious Sextus,
who was in the Camp. But for Scudery, we had
still thought the inimitable Poetess Sappho to be
a loose Wanton, whose Verses breathed nothing
but unchaste and irregular Fires: On the con-trary,
she was so remarkably chaste, that she
would never even consent to marry; but, loving
Phaon, only with a Platonic Passion, obliged
him to restrain his Desires within the Compass
of a Brother's Affection. Numberless are the
Mistakes he has cleared up of this Kind; and

I question, if any other Historian, but himself,
knew that Cleopatra was really married to Julius
Caesar; or that Caesario, her Son by this Mar-riage,
was not murdered, as was supposed, by
the Order of Augustus, but married the fair
Queen of Ethiopia, in whose Dominions he took
Refuge. The prodigious Acts of Valour, which
he has recounted of those accomplished Princes,
have never been equalled by the Heroes of either
the Greek or Roman Historians: How poor and
insignificant are the Actions of their Warriors
to Scudery's, where one of those admirable He-roes
would put whole Armies into Terror, and
with his single Arm oppose a Legion!
               Indeed, Niece, said Sir Charles, no longer
able to forbear interrupting her, these are all
very improbable Tales. I remember, when I
was a Boy, I was very fond of reading the Hi-story
of Jack the Giant killer, and Tom Thumb;
and these Stories so filled my Head, that I really
thought one of those little Heroes killed Men an
hundred Feet high; and that the other, after a
great many surprising Exploits, was swallowed
up by a Cow.
               You was very young, Sir, you say, interrupted
Arabella tartly, when those Stories gained your
Belief: However, your Judgment was certainly
younger, if you ever believed them at all; for
as credulous as you are pleased to think me, I
should never, at any Age, have been persuaded
such Things could have happened.
               My Father, Madam, said Glanville, who
was strangely confused all this Time, bore Arms
in his Youth; and Soldiers, you know, never
trouble themselves much with reading.
               
                  

Has my Uncle been a Soldier, said Arabella,
and does he hold in Contempt the Actions of
the bravest Soldiers in the World?
               The Soldiers you speak of, Niece, said Sir
Charles, were indeed the bravest Soldiers in
the World; for I don't believe, they ever had
their Equals.
               And yet, Sir, said Arabella, there are a great
Number of such Soldiers to be found in Scudery.
               
               Indeed, my dear Niece, interrupted Sir Charles,
they are to be found no-where else, except in
your Imagination, which, I am sorry to see, is
filled with such Whimsies.
               
               If you mean this to affront me, Sir, resumed
Arabella, hardly able to forbear Tears, I know
how far, as my Uncle, I ought to bear with
you: But, methinks, it is highly unkind to ag-gravate
my Sorrows by such cruel Jests; and,
since I am not in an Humour to suffer them,
don't take it ill, if I intreat you to leave me to
myself.
               Mr. Glanville, who knew nothing pleased his
Cousin so much as paying an exact Obedience
to her Commands, rose up immediately; and,
bowing respectfully to her, asked his Father, If
he should attend him into the Gardens?
               The Baronet, who thought Arabella's Beha-viour
bordered a good deal upon Rudeness, took
his Leave with some Signs of Displeasure upon
his Countenance; and, notwithstanding all his
Son could say in Excuse for her, he was ex-tremely
offended.
               What, said he, to Mr. Glanville, does she
so little understand the Respect that is due to me
as her Uncle, that she, so peremptorily, desired
CHAP. VII. In which the Mistakes are not yet cleared up.
                  CHAP. VIII. Which contains some necessary Consequences of the
foregoing Mistakes—A Soliloquy on a Love-Letter.
                  CHAP. IX. Containing a Love-Letter in the heroic Stile, with
some occasional Reasonings by Lucy, full of
Wit and Simplicity.
               
            
            
               VOL. II.
               
                  BOOK V.
                  CHAP. I. A Dispute very learnedly handled by two Ladies,
in which the Reader may take what Part he
pleases.
                  CHAP. II. Which inculcates, by a very good Example, that a
Person ought not to be too hasty, in deciding a
Question he does not perfectly understand.
                  CHAP. III. In which our Heroine is in some little Confusion.
                  CHAP. IV. Wherein the Lady extricates herself out of her for-mer
Confusion, to the great Astonishment, we
will suppose, of the Reader.
                  CHAP. V. In which will be found one of the former Mistakes
pursued, and another cleared up, to the great
Satisfaction of two Persons, among whom, we
expect, the Reader will make a third.
                  
                     

me to leave her Room? My Brother was to
blame to take so little Care of her Education;
she is quite a Rustic!
               Ah! don't wrong your Judgment so much,
Sir, said Glanville; my Cousin has as little of
the Rustic as if she had passed all her Life in a
Court: Her fine Sense, and the native Elegance
of her Manners give an inimitable Grace to her
Behaviour; and as much exceed the studied Po-liteness
of other Ladies I have conversed with,
as the Beauties of her Person do all I have ever
seen.
               She is very handsome, I confess, returned Sir
Charles; but I cannot think so well of her Wit
as you do; for methinks she talks very oddly,
and has the strangest Conceits! Who, but her-self,
would think it probable, that one Man
could put a whole Army to Flight; or commend
a foolish Fellow for living in a Tomb, because
his Wife was buried in it? Fie, fie! these are
silly and extravagant Notions, and will make
her appear very ridiculous.
               Mr. Glanville was so sensible of the Justness
of this Remark, that he could not help sighing;
which his Father observing, told him, That,
since she was to be his Wife, it was his Business
to produce a Reformation in her; for, added
he, notwithstanding the immense Fortune she
will bring you, I should be sorry to have a
Daughter-in-law, for whom I should blush as
often as she opens her Mouth.
               I assure you, Sir, said Mr. Glanville, I have
but very little Hopes, that I shall be so happy as
to have my Cousin for a Wife; for, tho' it was
my Uncle's Command I should make my Ad-dresses

to her, she received me so ill, as a Lover,
that I have never dared to talk to her upon that
Subject since.
               And pray, resumed Sir Charles, upon what
Terms are you at present?
               While I seem to pretend nothing to her, as a
Lover, replied Mr. Glanville, she is very obli-ging,
and we live in great Harmony together;
but I am persuaded, if I exceed the Bounds of
Friendship in my Professions, she will treat me
extremely ill.
               But, interrupted Sir Charles, when she shall
know, that her Father has bequeathed you one
Third of his Estate, provided she don't marry
you, 'tis probable her Mind may change; and
you may depend upon it, since your Heart is so
much set upon her, that, as I am her Guardian,
I shall press her to perform the Marquis's Will.
               Ah! Sir, resumed Mr. Glanville, never at-tempt
to lay any Constraint upon my Cousin in
an Affair of this Nature: Permit me to tell you,
it would be an Abuse of the Marquis's generous
Confidence, and what I would never submit
to.
               Nay, nay, said the old Gentleman, you have
no Reason to fear any Compulsion from me:
Tho' her Father has left me her Guardian, till
she is of Age, yet it is with such Restriction,
that my Niece is quite her own Mistress in that
Respect; for tho' she is directed to consult me
in her Choice of an Husband, yet my Consent
is not absolutely necessary. The Marquis has
certainly had a great Opinion of his Daughter's
Prudence; and I hope, she will prove herself
worthy of it by her Conduct.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville was so taken up with his Re-flections
upon the State of his Affairs, that he
made but little Reply; and, as soon as he had
disengaged himself, retired to his Chamber, to
be at more Liberty to indulge his Meditations.
As he could not flatter himself, with having
made any Impression upon the Heart of Arabella,
he foresaw a thousand Incoveniences from the
Death of the Marquis; for, besides that he lost
a powerful Mediator with his Cousin, he feared
that, when she appeared in the World, her
Beauty and Fortune would attract a Croud of
Admirers, among whom, it was probable, she
would find some one more agreeable to her
Taste than himself. As he loved her with great
Tenderness, this Thought made him extremely
uneasy; and he would sometimes wish the Mar-quis
had laid a stronger Injunction upon her in
his Will to marry him; and regretted the little
Power his Father had over her: But he was too
generous, to dwell long upon these Thoughts,
and contented himself with doing all that was
honourable to obtain her, without seeking for
any Assistance from unjustifiable Methods.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  Which contains some common Occurrences,
but placed in a new Light.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, in a few Days, leaving her
Chamber, had so many Opportunities of
charming her Uncle by her Conversation,

which, when it did not turn upon any Incident
in her Romances, was perfectly fine, easy, and
entertaining, that he declared, he should quit
the Castle with great Regret; and endeavoured
to persuade her to accompany him to Town:
But Arabella, who was determined to pass the
Year of her Mourning, in the Retirement she
had always lived in, absolutely refused, strong
as her Curiosity was, to see London.
               
               Mr. Glanville secretly rejoiced at this Resolu-tion,
tho' he seemed desirous of making her
change it; but she was unalterable; and, there-fore,
the Baronet did not think proper to press
her any more.
               Her Father's Will being read to her, she
seemed extremely pleased with the Articles in fa-vour
of Mr. Glanville, wishing him Joy of the
Estate that was bequeathed to him, with a most
inchanting Sweetness.
               Mr. Glanville sighed, and cast his Eyes on
the Ground, as he returned her Compliment,
with a very low Bow; and Sir Charles, observ-ing
his Confusion, told Arabella, that he thought
it was a very bad Omen for his Son, to wish
him Joy of an Estate, which he could not come to
the Possession of, but by a very great Misfortune.
               
                  Arabella, understanding his Meaning, blushed;
and, willing to change the Discourse, proceeded
to consult her Uncle upon the Regulation of her
House. Besides the Legacies her Father had
bequeathed to his Servants, those, who were
more immediately about his Person, she desired,
might have their Salaries continued to them:
She made no other Alteration, than discharging
these Attendants, retaining all the others; and

submitting to her Uncle the Management of her
Estates, receiving the Allowance he thought
proper to assign her, till she was of Age, of
which she wanted three Years.
               Every Thing being settled, Sir Charles pre-pared
to return to Town. Mr. Glanville, who
desired nothing so much as to stay some time
longer with his Cousin in her Solitude, got his
Father to intreat that Favour for him of Ara-bella:
But she represented to her Uncle the Im-propriety
of a young Gentleman's staying with
her, in her House, now her Father was dead,
in a manner so genteel and convincing, that
Sir Charles could press it no further; and all
that Mr. Glanville could obtain, was, a Permis-sion
to visit her some time after, provided he
could prevail upon his Sister, Miss Charlotte
Glanville, to accompany him.
               The Day of their Departure being come, Sir
Charles took his Leave of his charming Niece,
with many Expressions of Esteem and Affection;
and Mr. Glanville appeared so concerned, that
Arabella could not help observing it; and bade
him adieu with great Sweetness.
               When they were gone, she found her Time
hung heavy upon her Hands; her Father was
continually in her Thoughts, and made her ex-tremely
melancholy: She recollected the many
agreeable Conversations she had had with Glan-ville;
and wished it had been consistent with
Decency to have detained him. Her Books
being the only Amusement she had left, she ap-plied
herself to reading with more Eagerness
than ever; but, notwithstanding the Delight
she took in this Employment, she had so many
Hours of Solitude and Melancholy to indulge

the Remembrance of her Father in, that she
was very far from being happy.
               As she wished for nothing more passionately
than an agreeable Companion of her own Sex
and Rank, an Accident threw a Person in her
Way, who, for some Days, afforded her a little
Amusement. Stepping one Day out of her Coach,
to go into Church, she saw a young Lady enter,
accompanied with a middle-aged Woman, who
seemed to be an Attendant. As Arabella had
never seen any one, above the Rank of a Gen-tleman
Farmer's Daughter, in this Church, her
Attention was immediately engaged by the Ap-pearance
of this Stranger, who was very mag-nificently
dressed: Tho' she did not seem to be
more than eighteen Years of Age, her Statute
was above the ordinary Size of Women; and,
being rather too plump to be delicate, her Mien
was so majestic, and such an Air of Grandeur
was diffused over her whole Person, joined to
the Charms of a very lovely Face, that Arabella
could hardly help thinking she saw the beautiful
Candace before her, who, by Scudery's Descrip-tion,
very much resembled this Fair one.
               
                  Arabella, having heedfully observed her Looks,
thought she saw a great Appearance of Melan-choly
in her Eyes, which filled her with a gene-rous
Concern for the Misfortunes of so admira-ble
a Person; but, the Service beginning, she
was not at Liberty to indulge her Reflections
upon this Occasion, as she never suffered any
Thoughts, but those of Religion, to intrude
upon her Mind, during these pious Rites.
               As she was going out of Church she observed
the young Lady, attended only with the Wo-man
who came with her, preparing to walk

home, and therefore stept forward, and, salu-ting
her with a Grace peculiar to herself, in-treated
her to come into her Coach, and give
her the Pleasure of setting her down at her own
House: So obliging an Offer from a Person of
Arabella's Rank could not fail of being received
with great Respect by the young Lady, who was
not ignorant of all the Forms of Good-breeding;
and, accepting her Invitation, she stepped into
the Coach; Arabella obliging her Woman to
come in also, for whom, as she had that Day only
Lucy along with her, there was Room enough.
               As they were going home, Arabella, who
longed to be better acquainted, intreated the
fair Stranger, as she called her, to go to the Ca-stle,
and spend the Day with her; and she con-senting,
they passed by the House where she
lodged, and alighted at the Castle, where Ara-bella
welcomed her, with the most obliging Ex-pressions
of Civility and Respect. The young
Lady, tho' perfectly versed in the Modes of
Town-Breeding, and nothing-meaning Ceremo-ny,
was at a Loss how to make proper Returns
to the Civilities of Arabella: The native Elegance
and Simplicity of her Manners were accompa-nied
with so much real Benevolence of Heart,
such insinuating Tenderness, and Graces so ir-resistible,
that she was quite oppressed with
them; and, having spent most of her Time be-tween
her Toilet and Quadrille, was so little
qualified for partaking a Conversation so refined
as Arabella's, that her Discourse appeared quite
tedious to her, since it was neither upon Fa-shions,
Assemblies, Cards, or Scandal.
               Her Silence, and that Absence of Mind, which
she betrayed, made Arabella conclude, she was

under some very great Affliction; and, to amuse
her after Dinner, led her into the Gardens, sup-posing
a Person, whose Uneasiness, as she did
not doubt, proceeded from Love, would be
pleased with the Sight of Groves and Streams,
and be tempted to disclose her Misfortunes,
while they wandered in that agreeable Privacy.
In this, however, she was deceived; for, tho' the
young Lady sighed several times, yet, when she
did speak, it was only of indifferent Things, and
not at all in the manner of an afflicted Heroine.
               After observing upon a thousand Trifles, she
told Arabella at last, to whom she was desirous
of making known her Alliance to Quality, that
these Gardens were extremely like those of her
Father's-in-Law, the Duke of—at—
               At this Intimation, she expected Arabella
would be extremely surprised; but that Lady,
whose Thoughts were always familiarized to Ob-jects
of Grandeur, and would not have been
astonished, if she had understood her Guest was
the Daughter of a King, appeared so little moved,
that the Lady was piqued by her Indifference;
and, after a few Moment's Silence, began to
mention going away.
               
                  Arabella, who was desirous of retaining her a
few Days, intreated her so obligingly to favour
her with her Company, for some time, in her
Solitude, that the other could not refuse; and,
dispatching her Woman to the House where she
lodged, to inform them of her Stay at the Castle,
would have dispensed with her coming again to
attend her, had not Arabella insisted upon the
contrary.
               The Reserve, which the Daughter-in-Law
of the Duke of—still continued to maintain,

notwithstanding the repeated Expressions of
Friendship Arabella used to her, increased her
Curiosity to know her Adventures, which she
was extremely surprised, she had never offered
to relate; but, attributing her Silence, upon this
Head, to her Modesty, she was resolved, as was
the Custom in those Cases, to oblige her Wo-man,
who, she presumed, was her Confidante,
to relate, her Lady's History to her; and send-ing
for this Person one Day, when she was
alone, to attend her in her Closet, she gave
Orders to her Women, if the fair Stranger came
to inquire for her, to say she was then busy, but
would wait on her as soon as possible.
               After this Caution, she ordered Mrs. Morris
to be admitted; and, obliging her to sit down,
told her, she sent for her in order to hear from
her the History of her Lady's Life, which she
was extremely desirous of knowing.
               Mrs. Morris, who was a Person of Sense,
and had seen the World, was extremely surprised
at this Request of Arabella, which was quite
contrary to the Laws of Good-breeding; and,
as she thought, betrayed a great deal of imperti-nent
Curiosity: She could not tell how to account
for the free Manner in which she desired her to
give up her Lady's Secrets, which, indeed, were
not of a Nature to be told; and appeared so
much confused, that Arabella took Notice of it;
and, supposing it was her Bashfulness which
caused her Embarrassment, she endeavoured to
re-assure her by the most affable Behaviour ima-ginable.
               Mrs. Morris, who was not capable of much
Fidelity for her Lady, being but lately taken

into her Service, and not extremely fond of her,
thought she had now a fine Opportunity of re-commending
herself to Arabella, by telling her
all she knew of Miss Groves, for that was her
Name; and, therefore, told her, since she was
pleased to command it, she would give her what
Account she was able of her Lady; but in-treated
her to be secret, because it was of great
Consequence to her, that her Affairs should not
be known.
               I always imagined, said Arabella, that your
beautiful Mistress had some particular Reason
for not making herself known, and for coming
in this private Manner into this Part of the
Country: You may assure yourself therefore,
that I will protect her as far as I am able, and
offer her all the Assistance in my Power to give
her: Therefore you may acquaint me with her
Adventures, without being apprehensive of a
Discovery that would be prejudicial to her.
               Mrs. Morris, who had been much better
pleased with the Assurances of a Reward for the
Intelligence she was going to give her, looked
a little foolish at these fine Promises, in which she
had no Share; and Arabella, supposing she was
endeavouring to recollect all the Passages of her
Lady's Life, told her, She need not give herself
the Trouble to acquaint her with any thing that
passed during the Infancy of her Lady, but pro-ceed
to acquaint her with Matters of greater Im-portance:
And since, said she, you have, no
doubt, been most favoured with her Confidence,
you will do me a Pleasure to describe to me, ex-actly,
all the Thoughts of her Soul, as she has
communicated them to you, that I may the
better comprehend her History.
            
            
               
CHAP. VI. Containing some Account of Thalestris, Queen of
the Amazons; with other curious Anecdotes.
               
               
                  BOOK VI.
                  CHAP. I. Containing the Beginning of Sir George's Hi-story,
in which the ingenious Relater has ex-actly
copied the Stile of Romance.
                  CHAP. II. In which Sir George, continuing his surprising
History, relates a most stupendous Instance of a
Valour only to be paralleled by that of the great
Oroondates, Caesario, &amp;c. &amp;c. &amp;c.
                  CHAP. III. A Love-Adventure, after the Romantic Taste.
                  CHAP. IV. The Adventure continued.
                  CHAP. V. An extraordinary Instance of Generosity in a Lo-ver,
somewhat resembling that of the great
Artaxerxes in Cassandra.
                  
                  CHAP. VI. In which it will be seen, that the Lady was as ge-nerous
as her Lover.
                  CHAP. VII. Containing an Incident, full as probable as any
in Scudery's Romances.
                  CHAP. VIII. A single Combat fought with prodigious Valour;
and described with amazing Accuracy.
                  CHAP. IX. In which the Reader will find a Description of a
Beauty, in a Stile truly sublime.
                  
                     

               CHAP. V.
               
                  The History of Miss Groves, interspersed
with some very curious Observations.
               
               THOUGH, Madam, said Mrs. Morris,
I have not been long in Miss Groves's Ser-vice,
yet I know a great many Things by the
means of her former Woman, who told them
to me, tho' my Lady thinks I am ignorant of
them; and I know that this is her second Trip
into the Country.
               Pray, interrupted Arabella, do me the Fa-vour
to relate Things methodically: Of what
Use is it to me to know that this is your Lady's
second Trip, as you call it, into the Country,
if I know not the Occasion of it? Therefore be-gin
with informing me, who were the Parents
of this admirable young Person.
               Her Father, Madam, said Mrs. Morris, was
a Merchant; and, at his Death, left her a large
Fortune, and so considerable a Jointure to his
Wife, that the Duke of—, being then a Wi-dower,
was tempted to make his Addresses to
her. Mrs. Groves was one of the proudest Wo-men
in the World; and, this Offer flattering
her Ambition more than ever she had Reason to
expect, she married the Duke after a very short
Courtship; and carried Miss Groves down with
her to—, where the Duke had a fine Seat,
and where she was received by his Grace's
Daughters, who were much about her own Age,
with great Civility. Miss Groves, Madam, was
then about twelve Years old, and was educated

with the Duke's Daughters, who, in a little
time, became quite disgusted with their new
Sister; for Miss Groves, who inherited her Mo-ther's
Pride, tho' not her Understanding, in all
things affected an Equality with those young
Ladies, who, conscious of the Superiority of
their Birth, could but ill bear with her Insolence
and Presumption. As they grew older, the Dif-ference
of their Inclinations caused perpetual
Quarrels amongst them; for his Grace's Daugh-ters
were serious, reserved, and pious. Miss
Groves affected noisy Mirth, was a great Romp,
and delighted in masculine Exercises.
               The Duchess was often reflected on for suf-fering
her Daughter, without any other Com-pany
than two or three Servants, to spend great
Part of the Day in riding about the Country,
leaping over Hedges and Ditches, exposing her
fair Face to the Injuries of the Sun and Wind;
and, by those coarse Exercises, contracting a
masculine and robust Air not becoming her Sex,
and tender Years: Yet she could not be prevailed
upon to restrain her from this Diversion, till it
was reported, she had listened to the Addresses
of a young Sportsman, who used to mix in her
Train, when she went upon those Rambles, and
procured frequent Opportunities of conversing
with her.
               There is a great Difference, interrupted Ara-bella,
in suffering Addresses, and being betrayed
into an involuntary Hearing of them, and this
last, I conceive to have been the Case of your
Lady; for it is not very probable, she would
so far forget what she owed to her own Glory,

as to be induced to listen quietly to Discourses
like those you mention.
               However, Madam, resumed Mrs. Morris,
the Duchess thought it necessary to keep her
more at home; but, even here, she was not
without meeting Adventures, and found a Lo-ver
in the Person who taught her to write.
               That, indeed, was a very notable Adventure,
said Arabella; but it is not strange, that Love
should produce such Metamorphoses: 'Tis not
very long ago, that I heard of a Man of Qua-lity,
who disguised himself in a poor Habit, and
worked in the Gardens of a certain Nobleman,
whose Daughter he was enamoured with: These
things happen every Day.
               The Person I speak of, Madam, said Mrs.
Morris, was never discovered to be any thing
better than a Writing-master; and yet, for all
that, Miss was smitten with his fine Person, and
was taking Measures to run away with him,
when the Intrigue was discovered, the Lover
dismissed, and the young Lady, whose faulty
Conduct had drawn upon her her Mother's Dis-like,
was sent up to London, and allowed to be
her own Mistress at Sixteen; to which unpar-donable
Neglect of her Mother she owes the
Misfortunes that have since befallen her.
               Whatever may be the common Opinion of
this Matter, interrupted Arabella again, I am
persuaded the Writing-master, as you call him,
was some Person of Quality, who made use of
that Device to get Access to his beautiful Mistress.
Love is ingenious in Artifices: Who would
have thought, that, under the Name of Alcippus,
a simple Attendant of the fair Artemisa Princess

of Armenia, the gallant Alexander Son of the great
and unfortunate Antony, by Queen Clcopatra,
was concealed, who took upon himself that
mean Condition for the sake of seeing his adored
Princess? Yet the Contrivance of Orontes, Prince
of the Massagetes, was far more ingenious, and
even dangerous; for this valiant and young
Prince, happening to see the Picture of the beau-tiful
Thalestris, Daughter of the Queen of the
Amazons, he fell passionately in Love with her;
and, knowing that the Entrance into that Coun-try
was forbid to Men, he dressed himself in
Womens Apparel; and, finding means to be
introduced to the Queen, and her fair Daughter,
whose Amity he gained by some very singular
Services in the Wars, he lived several Years un-discovered
in their Court: I see, therefore, no
Reason to the contrary, but that this Writing-master
might have been some illustrious Person,
whom Love had disguised; and, I am persuaded,
added she, smiling, that I shall hear more of him
anon, in a very different Character.
               Indeed, Madam, said Mrs. Morris, whom
this Speech of Arabella had extremely surprised,
I never heard any thing more about him, than
what I have related; and, for what I know, he
continues still to teach Writing; for I don't sup-pose
the Duchess's Displeasure could affect
him.
               How is it possible, said Arabella, that you
can suppose such an Offence to Probability? In
my Opinion, 'tis much more likely, that this
unfortunate Lover is dead thro' Despair; or,
perhaps, wandering over the World in Search

of that Fair one, who was snatched from his
Hopes.
               If it was his Design to seek for her, Madam,
resumed Mrs. Morris, he need not have gone
far, since she was only sent to London, whither
he might easily have followed her.
               There is no accounting for these Things, said
Arabella: Perhaps he has been imposed upon, and
made to believe, that it was she herself that ba-nished
him from her Presence: 'Tis probable too,
that he was jealous, and thought she preferred
some one of his Rivals to him. Jealousy is insepara-ble
from true Love; and the slightest Matters ima-ginable
will occasion it: And, what is still more
wonderful, this Passion creates the greatest Dis-orders
in the most sensible and delicate Hearts.
Never was there a more refined and faithful
Passion, than that of the renowned Artamenes for
Mandana; and yet this Prince was driven al-most
to Distraction by a Smile, which, he fan-sied,
he saw in the Face of his Divine Mistress,
at a time when she had some Reason to believe
he was dead; and he was so transported with
Grief and Rage, that, tho' he was a Prisoner in
his Enemy's Camp, where the Knowledge of his
Quality would have procured him certain Death,
yet he determined to hazard all Things for the
fake of presenting himself before Mandana, and
upbraiding her with her Infidelity; when, in
Reality, nothing was farther from the Thoughts
of that fair and virtuous Princess, than the Light-ness
he accused her of: So that, as I said before,
it is not at all to be wondered at, if this disguised
Lover of your Lady was driven to Despair by
Suspicions as groundless, perhaps, as those of

                  Artamenes, yet not the less cruel and torment-ing.
               Mrs. Morris, finding Arabella held her Peace
at these Words, went on with her History in
this manner:—Miss Groves, Madam, being
directed by her Woman in all things, took up
her Lodgings in her Father's House, who was a
broken Tradesman, and obliged to keep himself
concealed for fear of his Creditors: Here she
formed her Equipage, which consisted of a
Chair, one Footman, a Cook, and her Wo-man:
As she was indulged with the Command
of what Money she pleased, her Extravagance
was boundless: She lavished away large Sums
at Gaming, which was her favourite Diversion;
kept such a Number of different Animals for
Favourites, that their Maintenance amounted
to a considerable Sum every Year: Her Wo-man's
whole Family were supported at her Ex-pence;
and, as she frequented all public Places,
and surpassed Ladies of the first Quality in Fine-ry,
her Dress alone consumed great Part of her
Income. I need not tell you, Madam, that my
Lady was a celebrated Beauty: You have your-self
been pleased to say, that she is very hand-some.
When she first appeared at Court, her
Beauty, and the uncommon Dignity of her Per-son,
at such early Years, made her the Object
of general Admiration. The King was particu-larly
struck with her; and declared to those about
him, that Miss Groves was the finest Woman
at Court. The Ladies, however, found means
to explain away all that was flattering in this
Distinction: They said, Miss Groves was clumsy;
and it was her Resemblance to the unwieldy Ger-man
                  

Ladies that made her so much admired by
his Majesty. Her Pride, and the Quality Airs
she affected, were the Subject of great Ridicule
to those that envied her Charms: Some Cen-sures
were maliciously cast on her Birth; for,
as she was always styled the Duchess of—'s
Daughter, a Custom she introduced herself, she
seemed to disclaim all Title to a legal Father.
Miss Groves, as universally admired as she was,
yet made but very few particular Conquests.
Her Fortune was known to be very considerable,
and her Mother's Jointure was to descend to her
after her Death: Yet there was no Gentleman,
who would venture upon a Wife of Miss Groves's
Taste for Expence, as very few Estates, to which
she could pretend, would support her Extrava-gance.
—The Honourable Mr. L—Brother
to the Earl of—, was the only one, amidst
a Croud of Admirers, who made any particular
Address to her. This Gentleman was tolera-bly
handsome, and had the Art of making him-self
agreeable to the Ladies, by a certain Air of
Softness and Tenderness, which never failed to
make some Impression upon those he desired to
deceive.
               Miss Groves was ravished with her Conquest,
and boasted of it so openly, that People, who
were acquainted with this Gentleman's Cha-racter,
foreseeing her Fate, could not help pi-tying
her.
               A very few Months Courtship completed
the Ruin of poor Miss Groves: She fell a Sacri-fice
to Oaths which had been often prostituted
for the same inhuman Purposes; and became
so fond of her Betrayer, that it was with great

Difficulty he could persuade her not to give him,
even in public, the most ridiculous Proofs of
her Tenderness. Her Woman pretends, that she
was ignorant of this Intrigue, till Miss Groves
growing big with Child, it could no longer be
concealed; it was at length agreed, she should
lie-in at her own Lodgings, to prevent any Su-spicions
from her retreating into the Country;
but that Scheme was over-ruled by her Wo-man's
Mother, who advised her to conceal her-self
in some Village, not far from Town, till
the Affair was over.
               Miss Groves approved of this second Proposal,
but took Advantage of her Shape, which, being
far from delicate, would not easily discover any
growing Bigness, to stay in Town as long as
she possibly could. When her Removal was
necessary, she went to the Lodgings provided for
her, a few Miles distant from London: And,
notwithstanding the Excuses which were framed
for this sudden Absence, the true Cause was
more than suspected by some busy People, who
industriously inquired into her Affairs.
               Mr. L—saw her but seldom during her Ill-ness:
The Fear of being discovered was his Pre-tence:
But her Friends easily saw through this
Disguise, and were persuaded Miss Groves was
waning in his Affections.
               As she had a very strong Constitution, she re-turned
to Town at the End of three Weeks:
The Child was dead, and she looked hand-somer
than ever. Mr. L—continued his Vi-sits;
and the Town to make Remarks of
them. All this time the Duchess never trou-bled
herself about the Conduct of this unfortu-nate

young Creature: And the People she was
with had not the Goodness to give her any Hint
of her Misconduct, and the Waste of her For-tune:
On the contrary, they almost turned her
Head with their Flatteries, preyed upon her
Fortune, and winked at her Irregularities.
               She was now a second time with Child: Her
Character was pretty severely handled by her
Enemies: Mr. L—began openly to slight her:
And she was now several thousand Pounds in
Debt. The Mother and Sisters of her Woman,
in whose House she still was, were base enough
to whisper the Fault she had been guilty of to
all their Acquaintances. Her Story became ge-nerally
known: She was shunned and neglected
by every body; and even Mr. L—, who had
been the Cause of her Ruin, intirely abandoned
her, and boasted openly of the Favours he had
received from her.
               Miss Groves protested to her Friends, That
he had promised her Marriage; but Mr. L—constantly
denied it, and never scrupled to say,
when he was questioned about it, That he found
Miss Groves too easy a Conquest to make any
Perjury necessary. Her Tenderness, however,
for this base Man, was so great, that she never
could bear to hear him railed at in her Presence;
but would quarrel with the only Friends she had
left, if they said any thing to his Disadvantage.
As she was now pretty far advanced with Child,
she would have retired into the Country; but
the bad Condition of her Affairs made her Re-moval
impossible: In this Extremity she had
Recourse to her Uncle, a rich Merchant in the
City, who, having taken all the necessary Pre-cautions

for his own Security, paid Miss Groves's
Debts, carrying on, in her Name, a Law-suit
with the Duchess, for some Lands, which were
to be put into her Hands, when she was of Age,
and which that great Lady detained. Miss
Groves, being reduced to live upon something
less than an Hundred a Year, quitted London,
and came into this Part of the Country, where
she was received by Mrs. Barnett, one of her
Woman's Sisters, who is married to a Country
Gentleman of some Fortune: In her House she
lay-in of a Girl, which Mr. L—sent to de-mand,
and will not be persuaded to inform her
how, or in what manner, he has disposed of the
Child.
               Her former Woman leaving her, I was re-ceived
in her Place, from whom I learnt all
these Particulars: And Miss Groves having
gained the Affections of Mr. Barnett's Brother,
her Beauty, and the large Fortune which she
has in Reversion, has induced him, notwith-standing
the Knowledge of her past unhappy Con-duct,
to marry her. But their Marriage is yet
a Secret, Miss Groves being apprehensive of her
Uncle's Displeasure for not consulting him in
her Choice.
               Her Husband is gone to London, with an
Intention to acquaint him with it; and, when
he returns, their Marriage will be publicly
owned.
            
            
               
CHAP. X. Wherein Sir George concludes his History; which
produces an unexpected Effect.
                  CHAP. XI. Containing only a few Inferences drawn from the
foregoing Chapters.
               
               
                  BOOK VII.
                  CHAP. I. For the Shortness of which the Length of the next
shall make some Amends.
                  CHAP. II. Not so long as was first intended: But contains,
however, a surprising Adventure on the Road.
                  CHAP. III. Which concludes with an authentic Piece of
History.
                  CHAP. IV. In which one of our Heroine's Whims is justified,
by some others full as whimsical.
                  CHAP. V. Containing some historical Anecdotes: The Truth
of which may, possibly, be doubted, as they are
not to be found in any of the Historians.
                  CHAP. VI. Which contains some excellent Rules for Raillery.
                  CHAP. VII. In which the Author condescends to be very mi-nute
in the Description of our Heroine's Dress.
                  CHAP. VIII. Some Reflections very fit, and others very unfit,
for an Assembly-Room.
                  CHAP. IX. Being a Chapter of the satirical kind.
                  
                     

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Containing what a judicious Reader will
hardly approve.
               
               MRS. Morris ending her Narration,
Arabella, who had not been able to
restrain her Tears at some Parts of it, thanked
her for the Trouble she had been at; and as-sured
her of her Secrecy: Your Lady's Case,
said she, is much to be lamented; and greatly
resembles the unfortunate Cleopatra's, whom
Julius Caesar privately marrying, with a Promise
to own her for his Wife, when he should be
peaceable Master of the Roman Empire, left
that great Queen big with Child, and, never in-tending
to perform his Promise, suffered her to
be exposed to the Censures the World has so
freely cast upon her; and which she so little
deserved.
               Mrs. Morris, seeing the favourable Light in
which Arabella viewed the Actions of her Lady,
did not think proper to say any thing to unde-ceive
her; but went out of the Closet, not a
little mortified at her Disappointment: For she
saw she was likely to receive nothing for betray-ing
her Lady's Secrets, from Arabella: Who
seemed so little sensible of the Pleasure of Scan-dal,
as to be wholly ignorant of its Nature; and
not to know it when it was told her.
               Miss Groves, who was just come to Lady
Bella's Chamber-door, to inquire for her, was
surprised to see her Woman come out of it;

and who, upon meeting her, expressed great
Confusion. As she was going to ask her some
Questions concerning her Business there, Ara-bella
came out of her Closet; and, seeing
Miss Groves in her Chamber, asked her Pardon
for staying so long from her.
               I have been listening to your History, said
she, with great Frankness, which your Woman
has been relating: And I assure you I am ex-tremely
sensible of your Misfortunes.
               Miss Groves, at these Words, blushed with
extreme Confusion; and Mrs. Morris turned
pale with Astonishment and Fear. Arabella,
not sensible that she had been guilty of any In-discretion,
proceeded to make Reflections upon
some Part of her Story; which, though they
were not at all disadvantageous to that young
Lady, she received as so many Insults: And
asked Lady Bella, If she was not ashamed to
tamper with a Servant to betray the Secrets of
her Mistress?
               
                  Arabella, a little surprised at so rude a Que-stion,
answered, however, with great Sweetness;
and protested to her, that she would make no
ill Use of what she had learned of her Affairs:
For, in fine, Madam, said she, do you think I
am less fit to be trusted with your Secrets, than
the Princess of the Leontines was with those of
Clelia; between whom there was no greater
Amity and Acquaintance, than with us? And
you must certainly know, that the Secrets which
that admirable Person entrusted with Lysimena,
were of a Nature to be more dangerous, if re-vealed,
than yours. The Happiness of Clelia
depended upon Lysimena's Fidelity: And the

Liberty, nay, haply, the Life, of Aronces, would
have been in Danger, if she had betrayed them.
Though I do not intend to arrogate to myself
the Possession of those admirable Qualities which
adorned the Princess of the Leontines, yet I will
not yield to her, or any one else, in Generosity
and Fidelity: And if you will be pleased to re-pose
as much Confidence in me, as those illustri-ous
Lovers did in her, you shall be convinced I
will 
                     •
                  abour as earnestly for your Interest, as that
fair Princess did for those of Aronces and Clelia.
               
               Miss Groves was so busied in reflecting upon
the Baseness of her Woman in exposing her,
that she heard not a Word of this fine Harangue
(at which Mrs. Morris, notwithstanding the
Cause she had for Uneasiness, could hardly help
laughing); but, assuming some of that Haughti-ness
in her Looks, for which she used to be re-markable,
she told Lady Bella, that she imputed
her impertinent Curiosity to her Country Igno-rance,
and ill Breeding: And she did not doubt
but she would be served in her own kind, and
meet with as bad Fortune as she had done; and,
perhaps, deserve it worse than she did: For
there are more false Men in the World besides
Mr. L—; and she was no handsomer than
other People.
               Saying this, she flung out of the Room, her
Woman following, leaving Arabella in such
Confusion at a Behaviour of which she had
never before had an Idea, that for some Mo-ments
she remained immoveable.
               Recollecting herself, at last, and conceiving,
that Civility required she should endeavour to
appease this incensed Lady, she went down

Stairs after her; and, stopping her just as she
was going out of the House, intreated her to be
calm, and suffer her to vindicate herself from
the Imputation of being impertinently curious
to know her Affairs.
               Miss Groves, quite transported with Shame
and Anger, refused absolutely to stay.
               At least, Madam, said Arabella, stay till
my Coach can be got ready; and don't think
of walking home, so slightly attended.
               This Offer was as sullenly answered as the
other: And Arabella, finding she was deter-mined
to venture home, with no other Guard
than her Woman, who silently followed her,
ordered two of her Footmen to attend her at
a small Distance; and to defend her, if there
should be Occasion.
               For who knows, said she to Lucy, what Ac-cident
may happen? Some one or other of her
insolent Lovers may take this Opportunity to
carry her away; and I should never forgive
myself for being the Cause of such a Misfortune
to her.
               Mrs. Morris having found it easy to recon-cile
herself to her Lady, by assuring her, that
Lady Bella was acquainted with great Part of
her Story before; and that what she told her,
tended only to justify her Conduct, as she might
have been convinced by what Lady Bella said;
they both went home with a Resolution to say
nothing of what had passed, with relation to the
Cause of the Disgust Miss Groves had received:
But only said, in general, that Lady Bella was
the most ridiculous Creature in the World; and

was so totally ignorant of good Breeding, that
it was impossible to converse with her.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Which treats of the Olympic Games.
               
               WHILE Arabella was ruminating on
the unaccountable Behaviour of her
new Acquaintance, she received a Letter from
her Uncle, informing her (for she had ex-presly
forbid Mr. Glanville to write to her), that
his Son and Daughter intended to set out for her
Seat in a few Days.
               This News was received with great Satis-faction
by Arabella, who hoped to find an
agreeable Companion in her Cousin; and was
not so insensible of Mr. Glanville's Merit, as
not to feel some kind of Pleasure at the Thought
of seeing him again.
               This Letter was soon followed, by the Arri-val
of Mr. Glanville, and his Sister; who, upon
the Sight of Arabella, discovered some Ap-pearance
of Astonishment and Chagrin; for,
notwithstanding all her Brother had told her of
her Accomplishments, she could not conceive
it possible for a young Lady, bred up in the
Country, to be so perfectly elegant and gen-teel
as she found her Cousin.
               As Miss Charlotte had a large Share of Co-quetry
in her Composition, and was fond of
Beauty in none of her own Sex but herself, she

was sorry to see Lady Bella possessed of so great
a Share; and, being in Hopes her Brother had
drawn a flattering Figure of her Cousin, she
was extremely disappointed at finding the Ori-ginal
so handsome.
               
                  Arabella, on the contrary, was highly pleased
with Miss Glanville; and, finding her Person
very agreeable, did not fail to commend her
Beauty: A sort of Complaisance mightily in
Use among the Heroines, who knew not what
Envy or Emulation meant.
               Miss Glanville received her Praises with
great Politeness, but could not find in her Heart
to return them: And, as soon as these Com-pliments
were over, Mr. Glanville told Lady
Bella, how tedious he had found the short Ab-sence
she had forced him to, and how great was
his Satisfaction at seeing her again.
               I shall not dispute the Truth of your last As-sertion,
replied Arabella, smiling, since I verily
believe, you are mighty well satisfied at pre-sent;
but I know not how you will make it ap-pear,
that an Absence, which you allow to be
short, has seemed so tedious to you; for this is
a manifest Contradiction: However, pursued
she, preventing his Reply, you look so well,
and so much at Ease, that I am apt to believe,
Absence has agreed very well with you.
               And yet I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glan-ville,
interrupting her, that I have suffered more
Uneasiness during this Absence, than I fear you
will permit me to tell you.
               Since, replied Arabella, that Uneasiness has
neither made you thinner, nor paler, I don't
think you ought to be pitied: For, to say the

Truth, in these Sort of Matters, a Person's bare
Testimony has but little Weight.
               Mr. Glanville was going to make her some
Answer; when Miss Glanville, who, while they
had been speaking, was adjusting her Dress at
the Glass, came up to them, and made the
Conversation more general.
               After Dinner, they adjourned to the Gardens,
where the gay Miss Glanville, running eagerly
from one Walk to another, gave her Brother
as many Opportunities of talking to Lady Bella
as he could wish: However, he stood in such
Awe of her, and dreaded so much another
Banishment, that he did not dare, otherwise
than by distant Hints, to mention his Passion;
and Arabella, well enough pleased with a Re-spect
that in some measure came up to her Ex-pectation,
discovered no Resentment at Insinu-ations
she was at Liberty to dissemble the Know-lege
of: And if he could not, by her Behaviour,
flatter himself with any great Hopes, yet he
found as little Reason, in Arabella's Language,
to despair.
               Miss Glanville, at the End of a few Weeks,
was so tired of the magnificent Solitude she
lived in, that she heartily repented her Journey;
and insinuated to her Brother, her Inclination
to return to Town.
               Mr. Glanville, knowing his Stay was regu-lated
by his Sister's, intreated her not to expose
him to the Mortification of leaving Arabella so
soon; and promised her he would contrive some
Amusements for her, which should make her
relish the Country better than she had yet done.
               
                  

Accordingly, he proposed to Arabella to go
to the Races, which were to be held at—a
few Miles from the Castle: She would have
excused herself, upon account of her Mourn-ing;
but Miss Glanville discovered so great an
Inclination to be present at this Diversion, that
Arabella could no longer refuse to accompany
her.
               Since, said she to Miss Glanville, you are
fond of public Diversions, it happens very
luckily, that these Races are to be held at the
Time you are here: I never heard of them before,
and I presume 'tis a good many Years since they
were last celebrated. Pray, Sir, pursued she,
turning to Glanville, do not these Races, in
some Degree, resemble the Olympic Games? Do
the Candidates ride in Chariots?
               No, Madam, replied Glanville; the Jockeys
are mounted upon the fleetest Coursers they can
procure; and he who first reaches the Goal ob-tains
the Prize.
               And who is the fair Lady that is to bestow it?
resumed Arabella: I dare engage one of her
Lovers will enter the Lists; she will, doubtless,
be in no less Anxiety than he; and the Shame
of being overcome, will hardly affect him with
more Concern, than herself; that is, provided
he be so happy as to have gained her Affections.
I cannot help thinking the fair Elismonda was
extremely happy in this Particular: For she had
the Satisfaction to see her secret Admirer Victor
in all the Exercises at the Olympic Games, and
carry away the Prize from many Princes, and
Persons of rare Quality, who were Candidates
with him; and he had also the Glory to receive

three Crowns in one Day, from the Hands of
his adored Princess; who, questionless, be-stowed
them upon him with an infinite deal of
Joy.
               What Sort of Races were those, Madam?
said Miss Glanville; whose Reading had been
very confined.
               The Olympic Games, Miss, said Arabella, so
called from Olympia, a City near which they
were performed, in the Plains of Elis, consisted
of Foot and Chariot-Races; Combats with the
Cestus; Wrestling, and other Sports. They
were instituted in Honour of the Gods and
Heroes; and were therefore termed sacred, and
were considered as a Part of Religion.
               They were a kind of School, or military Ap-prenticeship;
in which the Courage of the Youth
found constant Employment: And the Reason
why Victory in those Games was attended with
such extraordinary Applause, was, that their
Minds might be quickened with great and noble
Prospects, when, in this Image of War, they
arrived to a Pitch of Glory, approaching, in
some respects, to that of the most famous Con-querors.
They thought this Sort of Triumph
one of the greatest Parts of Happiness of which
Human Nature was capable: So that when
Diagoras had seen his Sons crowned in the
Olympic Games, one of his Friends made him
this Compliment, Now, Diagoras, you may die
satisfied; since you can't be a God. It would
tire you, perhaps, was I to describe all the Ex-ercises
performed there: But you may form a
general Notion of them, from what you have
doubtless read of Justs and Tournaments.
               
                  

Really, said Miss Glanville, I never read
about any such Things.
               No! replied Arabella, surprised: Well, then,
I must tell you, that they hold a middle Place,
between a Diversion and a Combat; but the
Olympic Games were attended with a much
greater Pomp and Variety: And not only all
Greece, but other neighbouring Nations, were
in a manner drained, to furnish out the Ap-pearance.
               Well, for my Part, said Miss Glanville, I
never before heard of these Sort of Races; those
I have been at were quite different. I know
the Prizes and Bets are sometimes very con-siderable.
               And, doubtless, interrupted Arabella, there
are a great many Heroes who signalize them-selves
at these Races; not for the sake of the
Prize, which would be unworthy of great Souls,
but to satisfy that burning Desire of Glory,
which spurs them on to every Occasion of gain-ing
it.
               As for the Heroes, or Jockeys, said Miss
Glanville, call them what you please, I believe
they have very little Share, either of the Profit
or Glory: For their Masters have the one, and
the Horses the other.
               Their Masters! interrupted Arabella: What,
I suppose, a great many foreign Princes send their
Favourites to Combat, in their Name? I re-member
to have read, that Alcibiades triumphed
three times successively at the Olympic Games,
by means of one of his Domestics, who, in his
Master's Name, entered the Lists.
               
                  
CHAP. X. In which our Heroine justifies her own Notions by
some very illustrious Examples.
                  CHAP. XI. In which our Heroine, being mistaken herself, gives
Occasion for a great many other Mistakes.
                  CHAP. XII. In which our Heroine reconciles herself to a morti-fying
Incident, by recollecting an Adventure in
a Romance, similar to her own.
                  CHAP. XIII. In which our Heroine's Extravagance will be
thought, perhaps, to be carried to an extrava-gant
Length.
                  CHAP. XIV. A Dialogue between Arabella and Lucy: In
which the latter seems to have the Advantage.
               
               
                  BOOK VIII.
                  CHAP. I. Contains the Conversation referred to in the last
Chapter of the preceding Book.
                  CHAP. II. In which our Heroine, as we presume, shews her-self
in two very different Lights.
                  CHAP. III. The Contrast continued.
                  CHAP. IV. In which Mr. Glanville makes an unsuccessful
Attempt upon Arabella.
                  
                  CHAP. V. In which is introduced a very singular Character.
                  
                     

Mr. Glanville, fearing his Sister would make
some absurd Answer, and thereby disoblige his
Cousin, took up the Discourse: And, turning
it upon the Grecian History, engrossed her Con-versation,
for two Hours, wholly to himself;
while Miss Glanville (to whom all they said was
quite unintelligible) diverted herself with hum-ming
a Tune, and tinkling her Cousin's Harp-sichord;
which proved no Interruption to the
more rational Entertainment of her Brother and
Arabella.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Which concludes with an excellent moral
Sentence.
               
               THE Day being come on which they de-signed
to be present at the Races (or, as
Arabella called them, the Games), Miss Glan-ville,
having spent four long Hours in dressing
herself to the greatest Advantage, in order, if
possible, to eclipse her lovely Cousin, whose
Mourning, being much deeper, was less capable
of Ornaments, came into her Chamber; and,
finding her still in her Morning Dress, For
Heaven's sake, Lady Bella, said she, when do
you purpose to be ready? Why it is almost
time to be gone, my Brother says, and here
you are not a bit dressed!
               
                  

Don't be uneasy, said Arabella, smiling; and,
going to her Toilet, I shan't make you wait
long.
               Miss Glanville, seating herself near the Table,
resolved to be present while her Cousin was
dressing, that she might have an Opportunity to
make some Remarks to her Disadvantage: But
she was extremely mortified, to observe the
Haste and Negligence she made her Women
use in this important Employment; and that,
notwithstanding her Indifference, nothing could
appear more lovely and genteel.
               Miss Glanville, however, pleased herself with
the Certainty of seeing her Cousin's Dress ex-tremely
ridiculed, for the peculiar Fashion of
her Gown: And the Veil, which, as becoming as
it was, would, by its Novelty, occasion great
Diversion among the Ladies, helped to comfort
her for the Superiority of her Charms; which,
partial as she was to her own, she could not help
secretly confessing.
               
                  Arabella being dressed in much less time
than her Cousin, Mr. Glanville was admitted,
who led her down Stairs to her Coach, which
was waiting: His Sister (secretly repin-ing
at the Advantage Arabella had over her,
in having so respectful an Adorer) followed:
And, being placed in the Coach, they set out
with great Appearance of Good-humour on all
Sides.
               They got to—but just time enough to
see the Beginning of the first Course: Arabella,
who fansied the Jockeys were Persons of great
Distinction, soon became interested in the Fate
of one of them, whose Appearance pleased her

more than the others. Accordingly, she made
Vows for his Success, and appeared so extremely
rejoiced at the Advantage he had gained, that
Miss Glanville maliciously told her, People
would make Remarks at the Joy she expressed,
and fansy she had a more than ordinary Interest
in that Jockey, who had first reached the Goal.
               Mr. Glanville, whom this impertinent Insinu-ation
of his Sister had filled with Confusion
and Spite, sat biting his Lips, trembling for
the Effect it would produce in Arabella: But
she, giving quite another Turn to her Cousin's
Words, I assure you, said she, with a Smile,
I am not any further interested in the Fate of
this Person, who has hitherto been successful,
than what the Handsomeness of his Garb, and
the Superiority of his Skill, may demand, from
an unprejudiced Spectator: And, though I per-ceive
you imagine he is some concealed Lover
of mine, yet I don't remember to have ever
seen him: And I am confident it is not for my
sake that he entered the Lists; nor is it my
Presence which animates him.
               Lord bless me, Madam! replied Miss Glan-ville,
Who would ever think of such strange
things as these you talk of? No-body will pre-tend
to deny that you are very handsome, to be
sure; but yet, thank Heaven, the Sight of you
is not so dangerous, but that such sort of Peo-ple,
as these are, may escape your Chains.
               
                  Arabella was so wholly taken up with the
Event of the Races, that she gave but very little
Heed to this sarcastic Answer of Miss Glanville;
whose Brother, taking Advantage of an Oppor-tunity
which Arabella gave him by putting her

Head quite out of the Coach, chid her very se-verely
for the Liberty she took with her Cousin.
Arabella, by looking earnestly out of the Win-dow,
had given so full a View of her fine Per-son
to a young Baronet, who was not many
Paces from the Coach, that, being struck with
Admiration at the Sight of so lovely a Creature,
he was going up to some of her Attendants to
ask who she was, when he perceived Mr. Glan-ville,
with whom he was intimately acquainted,
in the Coach with her: Immediately he made
himself known to his Friend, being excessively
rejoiced at having got an Opportunity of be-ginning
an Acquaintance with a Lady whose
Sight had so charmed him.
               Mr. Glanville, who had observed the pro-found
Bow he made to Arabella, accompanied
with a Glance that shewed an extreme Admi-ration
of her, was very little pleased at this
Meeting; yet he dissembled his Thoughts well
enough in his Reception of him. But Miss
Glanville was quite overjoyed, hoping she would
now have her Turn of Gallantry and Compli-ment:
Therefore, accosting him in her free Man-ner,
Dear Sir George, said she, you come in a
lucky Time to brighten up the Conversation:
Relations are such dull Company for one an-other,
'tis half a Minute since we have ex-changed
a Word.
               My Cousin, said Arabella smiling, has so
strange a Disposition for Mirth, that she thinks
all her Moments are lost, in which she finds
nothing to laugh at: For my Part, I do so
earnestly long to know, to which of these Pre-tenders
Fortune will give the Victory, that I

can suffer my Cares for them to receive no In-terruption
from my Cousin's agreeable Gaiety.
               Mr. Glanville, observing the Baronet gazed
upon Arabella earnestly while she was speaking
those few Words, resolved to hinder him from
making any Reply, by asking him several Que-stions
concerning the Racers, their Owners, and
the Bets which were laid; to which Arabella
added, And pray, Sir, said she, do me the Fa-vour
to tell me, if you know who that gallant
Man is, who has already won the first Course.
               I don't know really, Madam, said Sir George,
what his Name is, extremely surprised at her
Manner of asking.
               The Jockey had now gained the Goal a Se-cond
time; and Arabella could not conceal her
Satisfaction. Questionless, said she, he is a
very extraordinary Person; but I am afraid we
shall not have the Pleasure of knowing who he
is; for if he has any Reason for keeping himself
concealed, he will evade any Inquiries after him,
by slipping out of the Lists while this Hurry and
Tumult lasts, as Hortensius did at the Olympic
Games; yet, notwithstanding all his Care, he
was discovered by being obliged to fight a single
Combat with one of the Persons whom he had
worsted at those Games.
               Mr. Glanville, who saw his Sister, by her lit-tle
Coquetries with Sir George, had prevented
him from hearing great Part of this odd Speech,
proposed returning to the Castle; to which Ara-bella
agreed: But, conceiving Civility obliged
her to offer the Convenience of a Lodging to a
Stranger of Sir George's Appearance, and who
was an Acquaintance of her Cousins, You must

permit me, said she to Mr. Glanville, to in-treat
your noble Friend will accompany us to
the Castle, where he will meet with better Ac-commodations
than at any Inn he can find; for
I conceive, that, coming only to be a Spectator
of these Games, he is wholly unprovided with
a Lodging.
               The Baronet, surprised at so uncommon a
Civility, was at a Loss what Answer to make
her at first; but, recollecting himself, he told
her that he would, if she pleased, do himself the
Honour to attend her home; but, as his House
was at no great Distance from—, he would
be put to no Inconveniency for a Lodging.
               Miss Glanville, who was not willing to part
so soon with the Baronet, insisted, with her
Cousin's Leave, upon his coming into the
Coach; which he accordingly did, giving his
Horse to the Care of his Servant; and they pro-ceeded
together to the Castle; Arabella still
continuing to talk of the Games, as she called
them, while poor Glanville, who was excessively
confused, endeavoured to change the Discourse,
not without an Apprehension, that every Sub-iect
he could think of, would afford Arabella an
Occasion of shewing her Foible; which, not-withstanding
the Pain it gave him, could not
lessen the Love he felt for her.
               Sir George, whose Admiration of Lady Bella
increased the longer he saw her, was extremely
pleased with the Opportunity she had given him
of cultivating an Acquaintance with her: He
therefore lengthened out his Visit, in hopes of
being able to say some fine Things to her before
he went away; but Miss Glanville, who strove

by all the little Arts she was Mistress of, to en-gage
his Conversation wholly to herself, put it
absolutely out of his Power; so that he was
obliged to take his Leave without having the
Satisfaction of even pressing the fair Hand of
Arabella; so closely was he observed by her Cou-sin.
Happy was it for him, that he was pre-vented
by her Vigilance from attempting a Piece
of Gallantry, which would, undoubtedly, have
procured him a Banishment from her Presence;
but, ignorant, how kind Fortune was to him in
balking his Designs, he was ungrateful enough
to go away in a mighty ill Humour with this
fickle Goddess: So little capable are poor Mor-tals
of knowing what is best for them!
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Containing some curious Anecdotes.
               
               LADY Bella, from the Familiarity with
which Miss Glanville treated this gay Gen-tleman,
concluding him her Lover, and one
who was apparently well received by her, had a
strong Curiosity to know her Adventures; and
as they were walking the next Morning in the
Garden, she told her, that she thought it was
very strange they had hitherto observed such a Re-serve
to each other, as to banish mutual Trust and
Confidence from their Conversation: Whence
comes it, Cousin, added she, being so young and
lovely as you are, that you, questionless, have
been engaged in many Adventures, you have

never reposed Trust enough in me to savour me
with a Recital of them?
               Engaged in many Adventures, Madam! re-turned
Miss Glanville, not liking the Phrase:
I believe I have been engaged in as few as your
Ladyship.
               You are too obliging, returned Arabella,
who mistook what she said for a Compliment;
for since you have more Beauty than I, and
have also had more Opportunities of making
yourself beloved, questionless you have a
greater Number of Admirers.
               As for Admirers, said Miss Charlotte bridling,
I fansy I have had my Share! Thank God, I
never found myself neglected; but, I assure
you, Madam, I have had no Adventures, as
you call them, with any of them.
               No, really! interrutped Arabella, inno-cently.
               No, really, Madam, retorted Miss Glanville;
and I am surprised you should think so.
               Indeed, my Dear, said Arabella, you are
very happy in this respect, and also very singu-lar;
for I believe there are few young Ladies in
the World, who have any Pretensions to Beau-ty,
that have not given Rise to a great many
Adventures; and some of them haply very fa-tal.
               If you knew more of the World, Lady Bella,
said Miss Glanville pertly, you would not be so
apt to think, that young Ladies engage them-selves
in troublesome Adventures: Truly the
Ladies that are brought up in Town are not so
ready to run away with every Man they see.
               
                  

No, certainly, interrupted Arabella; they do
not give their Consent to such Proceedings; but
for all that, they are, doubtless, run away with
many times; for truly there are some Men,
whose Passions are so unbridled, that they will
have recourse to the most violent Methods to
possess themselves of the Objects they love.
Pray do you remember how often Mandana was
run away with?
               Not I indeed, Madam, replied Miss Glan-ville;
I know nothing about her; but I suppose
she is a Jew, by her outlandish Name.
               She was no Jew, said Arabella, tho' she fa-voured
that People very much; for she obtained
the Liberty of great Numbers of them from Cy-rus,
who had taken them Captives, and could
deny her nothing she asked.
               Well, said Miss Glanville; and I suppose she
denied him nothing he asked; and so they were
even.
               Indeed but she did tho', resumed Arabella;
for she refused to give him a glorious Scarf
which she wore, tho' he begged it on his Knees.
               And she was very much in the right, said
Miss Glanville; for I see no Reason why a Lo-ver
should expect a Gift of any Value from his
Mistress.
               Doubtless, said Arabella, such a Gift was
worth a Million of Services; and, had he ob-tained
it, it would have been a glorious Di-stinction
for him: However, Mandana refused it;
and, severely virtuous as you are, I am persuaded
you can't help thinking, she was a little too ri-gorous
in denying a Favour to a Lover like
him—
               
                  

Severely virtuous, Lady Bella! said Miss
Glanville, colouring with Anger: Pray what
do you mean by that? Have you any Reason
to imagine, I would grant any Favour to a
Lover?
               Why, if I did, Cousin, said Arabella, would
it derogate so much from your Glory, think you,
to bestow a Favour upon a Lover worthy your
Esteem, and from whom you had received a
thousand Marks of a most pure and faithful Pas-sion,
and also a great Number of very singular
Services?
               I hope, Madam, said Miss Glanville, it will
never be my Fate to be so much obliged to any
Lover, as to be under a Necessity of granting
him Favours in Requital.
               I vow, Cousin, interrupted Arabella, you
put me in mind of the fair and virtuous Antonia,
who was so rigid and austere, that she thought
all Expressions of Love were criminal; and was
so far from granting any Person Permission to
love her, that she thought it a mortal Offence
to be adored even in private.
               Miss Glanville, who could not imagine Ara-bella
spoke this seriously, but that it was de-signed
to sneer at her great Eagerness to make
Conquests, and the Liberties she allowed herself
in, which had probably come to her Knowlege,
was so extremely vexed at the malicious Jest, as
she thought it, that, not being able to revenge
herself, she burst into Tears.
               
                  Arabella's Good-nature made her be greatly
affected at this Sight; and, asking her Pardon
for having undesignedly occasioned her so much
Uneasiness, begged her to be composed, and
CHAP. VI. Containing something which, at first Sight, may,
possibly, puzzle the Reader.
                  CHAP. VII. In which, if the Reader has not anticipated it,
he will find an Explanation of some seeming In-consistences
in the foregoing Chapter.
                  CHAP. VIII. Which concludes Book the Eighth.
               
               
                  BOOK IX.
                  CHAP. I. In which is related an admirable Adventure.
                  CHAP. II. Which ends with a very unfavourable Prediction
for our Heroine.
                  CHAP. III. In which Arabella meets with another admirable
Adventure.
                  CHAP. IV. In which is related the History of the Princess of
Gaul.
                  
                  CHAP. V. A very mysterious Chapter.
                  CHAP. VI. Not much plainer than the former.
                  CHAP. VII. Containing indeed no great Matters, but is a Pre-lude
to greater.
                  CHAP. VIII. Which acquaints the Reader with two very extra-ordinary
Accidents.
                  
                     

tell her in what she had offended her, that she
might be able to justify herself in her Appre-hensions.
               You have made no Scruple to own, Madam,
said she, that you think me capable of granting
Favours to Lovers, when, Heaven knows, I ne-ver
granted a Kiss without a great deal of Con-fusion.
               And you had certainly much Reason for Con-fusion,
said Arabella, excessively surprised at such
a Confession: I assure you I never injured you
so much in my Thoughts, as to suppose you
ever granted a Favour of so criminal a Nature.
               Look you there now! said Miss Glanville,
weeping more violently than before: I knew
what all your round-about Speeches would come
to: All you have said in Vindication of grant-ing
Favours, was only to draw me into a Con-fession
of what I have done: How ungenerous
was that!
               The Favours I spoke of, Madam, said Ara-bella,
were quite of another Nature, than those
it seems you have so liberally granted: Such as
giving a Scarf, a Bracelet, or some such Thing,
to a Lover, who had haply sighed whole Years
in Silence, and did not presume to declare his
Passion, till he had lost best Part of his Blood in
Defence of the Fair one he loved: It was when
you maintained, that Mandana was in the right
to refuse her magnificent Scarf to the illustrious
Cyrus, that I took upon me to oppose your Ri-gidness;
and so much mistaken was I in your
Temper, that I foolishly compared you to the
fair and wise Antonia, whose Severity was so
remarkable; but really, by what I understand

from your own Confession, your Disposition re-sembles
that of the inconsiderate Julia, who
would receive a Declaration of Love without
Anger from any one; and was not over-shy,
any more than yourself, of granting Favours al-most
as considerable as that you have men-tioned.
               While Arabella was speaking, Miss Glanville,
having dried up her Tears, sat silently swell-ing
with Rage, not knowing whether she should
openly avow her Resentment for the injurious
Language her Cousin had used to her, by go-ing
away immediately, or, by making up the
Matter, appear still to be her Friend, that she
might have the more Opportunities of revenge-ing
herself. The Impetuosity of her Temper
made her most inclined to the former; but the
Knowlege that Sir George was to stay yet some
Months in the Country, made her unwilling to
leave a Place, where she might often see a Man
whose fine Person had made some Impression
upon her Heart; and, not enduring to leave such
a charming Conquest to Arabella, she resolved
to suppress her Resentment for the present; and
listened, without any Appearance of Discom-posure,
to a fine Harangue of her Cousin upon
the Necessity of Reserve, and distant Behaviour,
to Men who presumed to declare themselves
Lovers, enforcing her Precepts with Examples
drawn from all the Romances she had ever read;
at the End of which she embraced her, and
assured her, if she had said any thing harsh, it
proceeded from her great Regard to her Glory,
of which she ardently wished to see her as fond
as herself.
               
                  

Miss Glanville constrained herself to make a
Reply that might not appear disagreeable: And
they were upon these Terms, when Mr. Glan-ville
came up to them, and told Lady Bella, Sir
George had sent to intreat their Company at his
House that Day: But, added he, as I presume
you will not think proper to go, on account of
your Mourning, neither my Sister nor I will ac-cept
the Invitation.
               I dare say, interrupted Miss Glanville hastily,
Lady Bella will not expect such a needless Piece
of Ceremony from us; and, if she don't think
proper to go, she won't confine us.
               
               By no means, Cousin, said Arabella, smiling;
and, being persuaded Sir George makes the En-tertainment
purely for your Sake, it would not
be kind in me to deprive him of your Com-pany.
               Mr. Glanville, being pleased to find his Cou-sin
discovered no Inclination to go, would have
persuaded his Sister not to leave Lady Bella:
But Miss Glanville looked so much displeased at
his Request, that he was obliged to insist upon
it no more; and, both retiring to dress, Lady
Bella went up to her Apartment, and betook
herself to her Books, which supplied the Place
of all Company to her.
               Miss Glanville, having taken more than or-dinary
Pains in dressing herself, in order to ap-pear
charming in the Eyes of Sir George, came
in to pay her Compliments to Lady Bella before
she went, not doubting but she would be cha-grined
to see her look so well: But Lady Bella,
on the contrary, praised the Clearness of her
Complexion, and the Sparkling of her Eyes.
               
                  

I question not, said she, but you will give
Fetters to more Persons than one To-day; but
remember, I charge you, added she smiling,
while you are taking away the Liberty of others,
to have a special Care of your own.
               Miss Glanville, who could not think it pos-sible,
one Woman could praise another with
any Sincerity, cast a Glance at the Glass, fear-ing
it was rather because she looked but indif-ferently,
that her Cousin was so lavish in her
Praises; and, while she was setting her Fea-tures
in a Mirror which every Day represented
a Face infinitely more lovely than her own, Mr.
Glanville came in, who, after having very re-spectfully
taken Leave of Lady Bella, led his
Sister to the Coach.
               Sir George, who was extremely mortified to
find Lady Bella not in it, handed Miss Glan-ville
out with an Air so reserved, that she rail-lied
him upon it; and gave her Brother a very
unpleasing Emotion, by telling Sir George, she
hoped Lady Bella's not coming along with them,
would not make him bad Company.
               As he was too gallant to suffer an handsome
young Lady, who spread all her Attractions for
him, to believe he regretted the Absence of an-other
when she was present; he coquetted with
her so much, that Mr. Glanville was in hopes
his Sister would wholly engage him from Lady
Bella.
               
            
            
               

               CHAP. X.
               
                  In which our Heroine is engaged in a very
perilous Adventure.
               
               IN the mean time, that solitary Fair one was
alarmed by a Fear of a very unaccountable
Nature; for, being in the Evening in her Closet,
the Windows of which had a Prospect of the
Gardens, she saw her illustrious concealed Lo-ver,
who went by the Name of Edward, while
he was in her Father's Service, talking with
great Emotion to her House-Steward, who
seemed earnestly to listen to some Propositions
he was making to him. Her Surprize at this
Sight was so great, that she had not Power to
observe them any longer; but, seating herself in
her Chair, she had just Spirits enough to call
Lucy to her Assistance; who, extremely frighted
at the pale Looks of her Lady, gave her a
Smelling-bottle, and was preparing to cut her
Lace, when Arabella, preventing her, told her
in a low Voice, that she feared she should be
betrayed into the Hands of an insolent Lover,
who was come to steal her away. Yes, added
she with great Emotion, I have seen this pre-sumptuous
Man holding a Conversation with
one of my Servants; and tho' I could not pos-sibly,
at this Distance, hear their Discourse,
yet the Gestures they used in speaking, explained
it too well to me; and I have Reason to ex-pect,
I shall suffer the same Violence that many
illustrious Ladies have done before me; and be

carried away by Force from my own House, as
they were.
               Alas! Madam! said Lucy, terrified at this
Discourse, who is it that intends to carry your
Ladyship away? Sure no Robbers will attempt
any Mischief at such a time as this!
               Yes, Lucy, replied Arabella, with great Gra-vity,
the worst kind of Robbers; Robbers who
do not prey upon Gold and Jewels; but,
what is infinitely more precious, Liberty and
Honour. Do you know that Person who called
himself Edward, and worked in these Gardens
like a common Gardener, is now in the House,
corrupting my Servants; and, questionless, pre-paring
to force open my Chamber, and carry
me away? And Heaven knows when I shall be
delivered from his Chains.
               God forbid, said Lucy, sobbing, that ever
such a Lady should have such hard Hap! What
Crime, I wonder, can you be guilty of, to de-serve
to be in Chains?
               My Crime, resumed Arabella, is to have At-tractions
which expose me to these inevitable
Misfortunes, which even the greatest Princesses
have not escaped.—But, dear Lucy, can you
not think of some Methods by which I may
avoid the Evil which waits me? Who knows
but that he may, within these few Moments,
force a Passage into my Apartment? These
slight Locks can make but a poor Resistance to
the Violence he will be capable of using.
               Oh dear Madam! cried Lucy, trembling,
and pressing near her, what shall we do?
               I asked your Advice, said she; but I perceive
you are less able than myself to think of any

thing to save me.—Ah! Glanville, pursued she,
sighing, would to Heaven thou wert here now!
               Yes, Madam, said Lucy, Mr. Glanville,
I am sure, would not suffer any one to hurt
your Ladyship.
               As thou valuest my Friendship, said Arabella,
with great Earnestness, never acquaint him
with what has just now escaped my Lips: True,
I did call upon him in this Perplexity; I did
pronounce his Name; and that, haply, with a
Sigh, which involuntarily sorced its Way: And,
questionless, if he knew his good Fortune, even
amidst the Danger of losing me for ever, he
would resent some Emotions of Joy: But I
should die with Shame at having so indiscreetly
contributed to his Satisfaction: And, therefore,
again I charge you, conceal, with the utmost
Care, what I have said.
               Indeed, Madam, said Lucy, I shall tell him
nothing but what your Ladyship bids me; and
I am so frighted, that I can think of nothing
but that terrible Man, that wants to carry you
away. Mercy on us! added she, starting, I
think I hear somebody on the Stairs!
               Do not be alarmed, said Arabella, in a ma-jestic
Tone: It is I who have most Reason to
fear: Nevertheless, I hope the Grandeur of my
Courage will not sink under this Accident.
Hark, somebody knocks at the Door of my
Antechamber:—My own Virtue shall support
me:—Go, Lucy, and ask who it is.
               Indeed I can't, Madam, said she, clinging
to her: Pray pardon me: Indeed I am so afraid,
I cannot stir.
               
                  

Weak-souled Wench! said Arabella, How
unfit art thou for Accidents like these! Ah!
had Cylenia and Nartesia been like thee, the
fair Berenice, and the Divine Princess of Media,
had not so eagerly intreated their Ravishers to
afford them their Company in their Captivity:
But go, I order you, and ask who it is that
is at the Door of my Apartment: They
knock again: Offer at no Excuses; but do your
Duty.
               
                  Lucy, seeing her Lady was really angry, went
trembling out of the Closet; but would go no
farther than her Bedchamber, from whence she
called out to know who was at the Door.
               I have some Business with your Lady, said
the House-Steward (for it was he that knocked):
Can I speak with her at present?
               
                  Lucy, a little reassured by his Voice, made
no Answer; but, creeping softly to the Door of
the Antechamber, double-locked it; and then
cried out in a Transport, No, I will take Care
you shall not come to my Lady.
               And why, pray, Mrs. Lucy? said the Steward:
What have I done, that you are so much my
Enemy?
               You are a Rogue, said Lucy, growing very
courageous, because the Door was locked be-tween
them.
               A Rogue! said he, What Reason have you
for calling me a Rogue? I assure you I will ac-quaint
my Lady with your Insolence. I came
to speak to her Ladyship about Edward; who
prayed me to intercede for him, that he may
be taken again into her Service: For he says,
my Lady never believed any thing against him;

and that was my Business: But, when I see
her, I'll know whether you are allowed to abuse
me in this manner.
               
                  Arabella, by this time, was advanced as
far as the Bedchamber, longing to know what
sort of Conference Lucy was holding with her
intended Ravisher: When that faithful Confi-dante,
seeing her, came running to her, and
whispered her, that the House-Steward was at
the Door, and said he wanted to intercede for
Edward.
               
               Ah! the Traitor! said Arabella, retiring
again: Has he, then, really bargained with that
disloyal Man, to deliver up his Mistress? I am
undone, Lucy, said she, unless I can find a
Way to escape out of the House. They will,
questionless, soon force the Doors of my Apart-ment.
               Suppose, said Lucy, your Ladyship went
down the Stairs that lead from your Dressing-room
into the Garden; and you may hide your-self
in the Gardener's House till Mr. Glanville
come.
               I approve, said Arabella, of one Part of your
Proposal: But I shall not trust myself in the
Gardener's House; who, questionless, is in the
Plot with the rest of my perfidious Servants,
since none of them have endeavoured to adver-tise
me of my Danger. If we can gain the
Gardens undiscovered, we may get out by that
Door at the Foot of the Terrace, which leads
into the Fields; for you know I always keep
the Key of that private Door: So, Lucy, let us
commend ourselves to the Direction of Provi-dence,
and be gone immediately.
               
                  

But what shall we do, Madam, said Lucy,
when we are got out?
               Why, said Arabella, you shall conduct me
to your Brother's; and, probably, we may meet
with some generous Cavalier by the Way, who
will protect us till we get thither: However, as
I have as great a Danger to fear within Doors,
as without, I will venture to make my Escape,
though I should not be so fortunate as to meet
with any Knight who will undertake to pro-tect
me from the Danger which I may appre-hend
in the Fields.
               Saying this, she gave the Key of the Door to
Lucy, whose Heart beat violently with Fear;
and, covering herself with some black Cypress,
which she wore in the Nature of a Veil, went
softly down the little Staircase to the Terrace,
followed by Lucy (who looked eagerly about her
every Step that she went); and, having gained
the Garden-door, hastily unlocked it, and fled,
as fast as possible, cross the Fields, in order to
procure a Sanctuary at William's House: Ara-bella,
begging Heaven to throw some generous
Cavalier in her Way, whose Protection she
might implore, and, taking every Tree at a
Distance for a Horse and Knight, hastened her
Steps to meet her approaching Succour; which,
as soon as she came near, miserably balked her
Expectations.
               Though William's Farm was not more than
two Miles from the Castle; yet Arabella, un-used
to such a rude Way of Travelling, began
to be greatly fatigued: The Fear she was in of
being pursued by her apprehended Ravisher, had
so violent an Effect upon her Spirits, that she
CHAP. IX. Which will be found to contain Informations abso-lutely
necessary for the right Understanding of
this History.
                  CHAP. X. A short Chapter indeed, but filled with Matter.
                  CHAP. XI. Being, in the Author's Opinion, the best Chapter
in this History.
                  CHAP. XII. In which the History is concluded.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            

was hardly able to prosecute her Flight; and, to
complete her Misfortunes, happening to stumble
over a Stump of a Tree that lay in her Way,
she strained her Ancle; and the violent Anguish
she felt, threw her into a Swoon.
               
                  Lucy, upon whose Arm she leaned, perceiv-ing
her fainting, screamed out aloud, not know-ing
what to do with her in that Condition: She
placed her upon the Ground; and, supporting
her Head against that fatal Stump, began to rub
her Temples, weeping excessively all the time.
Her Swoon still continuing, the poor Girl was
in inconceivable Terror: Her Brother's House
was now but a little Way off; but it being im-possible
for her to carry her Lady thither with-out
some Help, she knew not what to resolve
upon.
               At length, thinking it better to leave her for
a few Moments, to run for Assistance, than to
sit by her and see her perish for want of it, she
left her, though not without extreme Agony;
and flew, with the utmost Eagerness, to her
Brother's. She was lucky enough to meet
him just coming out of his Door; and, telling
him the Condition in which she left her Lady,
he, without asking any Questions about the
Occasion of so strange an Accident, notwith-standing
his Amazement, ran with all Speed to
the Place where Lucy had left her: But, to their
Astonishment and Sorrow, she was not to be
found: They walked a long time in Search of
her; and Lucy, being almost distracted with
Fear lest she had been carried away, made
Complaints that so puzzled her Brother he
knew not what to say to her: But, finding their

Search fruitless, they agreed to go home to the
Castle, supposing, with some Appearance of
Reason, that they might hear of her there.
               Here they found nothing but Grief and Con-fusion.
Mr. Glanville and his Sister were just
returned, and had been at Lady Bella's Apart-ment;
but, not finding her there, they asked
her Women where she was, who, not know-ing
any thing of her Flight, concluded she was
in the Garden with Lucy. Mr. Glanville, sur-prised
at her being at that Hour in the Garden,
ran eagerly to engage her to come in, being ap-prehensive
she would take Cold, by staying so
late in the Air: But, not finding her in any of
her usual Walks, he ordered several of the
Servants to assist him in searching the whole
Garden, sending them to different Places: But
they all returned without Success; which filled
him with the utmost Consternation.
               He was returning, excessively uneasy, to the
House, when he saw Lucy; who had been just
told, in answer to her Inquiries about her Lady,
that they were gone to look for her in the
Garden; and running up to Mr. Glanville,
who hoped to hear News of Lady Bella from
her, Oh! Sir, said she, is my Lady found?
               What! Lucy, said Mr. Glanville (more
alarmed than before), do not you know where
she is? I thought you had been with her.
               Oh! dear, cried Lucy, wringing her Hands;
for certain my poor Lady was stolen away while
she was in that fainting Fit. Sir, said she to
Glanville, I know who the Person is that my
Lady said (and almost broke my Heart) would

keep her in Chains: He was in the House not
many Hours ago.
               Mr. Glanville, suspecting this was some new
Whim of Arabella's, would not suffer Lucy to
say any more before the Servants, who stood
gaping with Astonishment at the strange Things
she uttered; but bid her follow him to his
Apartment, and he would hear what she could
inform him concerning this Accident. He
would, if possible, have prevented his Sister
from being present at the Story; but, not being
able to form any Excuse for not suffering her to
hear every thing that related to her Cousin, they
all three went into his Chamber; where he de-sired
Lucy to tell him what she knew about her
Lady.
               You must know, Sir, said Lucy, sobbing,
that there came a Man here to take away my
Lady: A great Man he is, though he worked
in the Gardens; for he was in Love with her:
And so he would not own who he was.
               And pray, interrupted Miss Glanville, Who
told you he was a great Man, as you say?
               My Lady told me, said Lucy: But, how-somever,
he was turned away; for the Gar-dener
says he catched him stealing Carp.
               A very great Man, indeed, said Miss Glan-ville,
that would steal Carp!
               You must know, Madam, said she, that was
only a Pretence: For he went there, my Lady
says, to drown himself.
               Bless me! cried Miss Glanville, laughing;
the Girl's distracted, sure. Lord! Brother,
don't listen to her nonsensical Tales; we shall
never find my Cousin by her.
               
                  

Leave her to me, said Mr. Glanville, whis-pering:
Perhaps I may discover something by her
Discourse, that will give us some Light into this
Affair.
               Nay, I'll stay, I am resolved, answered she;
for I long to know where my Cousin is: Tho',
do you think what this Girl says is true, about
a great Man disguised in the Gardens? Sure my
Cousin could never tell her such Stuff: But,
now I think of it, added she, Lady Bella,
when we were speaking about the Jockey,
talked something about a Lover: I now believe
it is as the Girl says. Pray let's hear her out.
               Mr. Glanville was ready to die with Vexation,
at the Charmer of his Soul's being thus exposed;
but there was no Help for it.
               Pray, said he to Lucy, tell us no more about
this Man: But, if you can guess where your
Lady is, let me know.
               Indeed I can't, Sir, said she; for my Lady and
I both stole out of the House, for fear Edward
should break open the Doors of her Apartment;
and we were running as fast as possible to my
Brother's House (where she said she would hide
herself till you came); but my poor dear Lady
fell down and hurt herself so much, that she
fainted away: I tried what I could to fetch her
again; but she did not open her Eyes: So I ran
like Lightning to my Brother, to come and help
me to carry her to the Farm; but, when we
came back, she was gone.
               What do you say? cried Mr. Glanville, with
a distracted Look: Did you leave her in that
Condition in the Fields? And was she not to
be found when you came back?
               
                  

No, indeed, Sir, said Lucy, weeping, we
could not find her, though we wandered about
a long time.
               Oh! Heavens! said he, walking about the
Room in a violent Emotion, Where can she be?
What is become of her? Dear Sister, pursued
he, order somebody to saddle my Horse: I'll
traverse the Country all Night in quest of her.
               You had best inquire, Sir, said Lucy, if
Edward is in the House: He knows, may be,
where my Lady is.
               Who is he? cried Glanville.
               
               Why the great Man, Sir, said Lucy, whom
we thought to be a Gardener, who came to
carry my Lady away; which made her get out
of the House as fast as she could.
               This is the strangest Story, said Miss Glanville,
that ever I heard: Sure nobody would be so
mad to attempt such an Action; my Cousin has
the oddest Whims!
               Mr. Glanville, not able to listen any longer,
charged Lucy to say nothing of this Matter to
any one; and then ran eagerly out of the Room,
ordering two or three of the Servants to go in
Search of their Lady: He then mounted his
Horse in great Anguish of Mind, not knowing
whither to direct his Course.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XI.
               
                  In which the Lady is wonderfully de-livered.
               
               BUT to return to Arabella, whom we left
in a very melancholy Situation: Lucy
had not been gone long from her before she
opened her Eyes; and, beginning to come per-fectly
to herself, was surprised to find her
Woman not near her: The Moon shining very
bright, she looked round her, and called Lucy
as loud as she was able; but not seeing her, or
hearing any Answer, her Fears became so power-ful,
that she had like to have relapsed into her
Swoon.
               Alas! unfortunate Maid that I am! cried she,
weeping excessively, questionless I am betrayed
by her on whose Fidelity I relied, and who was
acquainted with my most secret Thoughts: She
is now with my Ravisher, directing his Pursuit,
and I have no Means of escaping from his
Hands! Cruel and ungrateful Wench, thy un-paralleled
Treachery grieves me no less than all
my other Misfortunes: But why do I say, Her
Treachery is unparalleled? Did not the wicked
Arianta betray her Mistress into the Power of
her insolent Lover? Ah! Arabella, thou art
not single in thy Misery, since the divine Man-dana
was, like thyself, the Dupe of a merce-nary
Servant.
               Having given a Moment or two to these sad
Reflections, she rose from the Ground with an

Intention to walk on▪ but her Ancle was so pain-ful,
that she could hardly move: Her Tears began
now to flow with greater Violence: She ex-pected
every Moment to see Edward approach
her; and was resigning herself up to Despair,
when a Chaise, driven by a young Gentleman,
passed by her. Arabella, thanking Heaven for
sending this Relief, called out a
                     •
                   loud as she
could, conjuring him to stay.
               The Gentleman, hearing a Woman's Voice,
stopped immediately, and asked what she
wanted.
               Generous Stranger, said Arabella, advancing as
well as was she able, do not refuse your Assistance
to save me from a most terrible Danger: I am
pursued by a Person whom, for very urgent
Reasons, I desire to avoid. I conjure you,
therefore, in the Name of her you love best, to
protect me; and may you be crowned with the
Enjoyment of all your Wishes, for so charitable
an Action!
               If the Gentleman was surprised at this Address,
he was much more astonished at the Beauty of
her who made it: Her Stature; her Shape, her
inimitable Complexion; the Lustre of her fine
Eyes, and the thousand Charms that adorned
her whole Person, kept him a Minute silently
gazing upon her, without having the Power to
make her an Answer.
               
                  Arabella, finding he did not speak, was ex-tremely
disappointed. Ah! Sir, said she,
What do you deliberate upon? Is it possible
you can deny so reasonable a Request, to a
Lady in my Circumstances?
               
                  

For God's sake, Madam, said the Gentle-man,
alighting, and approaching her, let me
know who you are, and how I can be of any
Service to you.
               As for my Quality, said Arabella, be assured
it is not mean; and let this Knowlege suffice at
present: The Service I desire of you is, to con-vey
me to some Place where I may be in Safety
for this Night: To-morrow I will intreat you
to let some Persons, whom I shall name to you,
know where I am; to the end they may take
proper Measures to secure me from the Attempts
of an insolent Man, who has driven me from
my own House, by the Designs he was going
to execute.
               The Gentleman saw there was some Mystery
in her Case, which she did not choose to ex-plain;
and, being extremely glad at having so
beautiful a Creature in his Power, told her she
might command him in all she pleased; and,
helping her into the Chaise, drove off as fast as
he could; Arabella suffering no Apprehensions
from being alone with a Stranger, since nothing
was more common to Heroines than such Ad-ventures;
all her Fears being of Edward, whom
she fansied every Moment she saw pursuing
them: And, being extremely anxious to be in
some Place of Safety, she urged her Protector to
drive as fast as possible; who, willing to have her
at his own House, complied with her Request;
but was so unlucky in his Haste, as to overturn
the Chaise. Though neither Arabella nor him-self
were hurt by the Fall, yet the Necessity
there was to stay some time to put the Chaise
in a Condition to carry them any farther, filled

her with a thousand Apprehensions, lest they
should be overtaken.
               In the mean time, the Servants of Arabella,
among whom Edward, not knowing how much
he was concerned in her Flight, was resolved
to distinguish himself by his Zeal in searching
for her, had dispersed themselves about in dif-ferent
Places: Chance conducted Edward to
the very Spot where she was: When Arabella,
perceiving him while he was two or three
Paces off, Oh! Sir, cried she, behold my
Persecutor! Can you resolve to defend me
against the Violence he comes to offer me?
               The Gentleman, looking up, and seeing a
Man in Livery approaching them, asked her, If
that was the Person she complained of; and
if he was her Servant?
               If he is my Servant, Sir, replied she, blush-ing,
he never had my Permission to be so: And,
indeed, no one else can boast of my having
granted them such a Liberty.
               Do you know whose Servant he is, then,
Madam? replied the Gentleman, a little sur-prised
at her Answer; which he could not well
understand.
               You throw me into a great Embarrassment,
Sir, resumed Arabella, blushing more than be-fore:
Questionless, he appears to be mine;
but, since, as I told you before, he never dis-covered
himself to me, and I never permitted
him to assume that Title, his Services, if ever I
received any from him, were not at all considered
by me, as Things for which I was obliged to
him.
               
                  

The Gentleman, still more amazed at An-swers
so little to the Purpose, was going to de-sire
her to explain herself upon this strange Af-fair;
when Edward, coming up close to Ara-bella,
cried out in a Transport, Oh! Madam!
thank God you are found.
               Hold, impious Man! said Arabella, and do
not give Thanks for that which, haply, may
prove thy Punishment. If I am found, thou
wilt be no better for it: And, if thou continuest
to persecute me, thou wilt probably meet with
thy Death, where thou thinkest thou hast found
thy Happiness.
               The poor Fellow, who understood not a
Word of this Discourse, stared upon her like
one that had lost his Wits; when the Protector
of Arabella, approaching him, asked him, with
a stern Look, What he had to say to that
Lady, and why he presumed to follow her?
               As the Man was going to answer him, Mr.
Glanville came galloping up; and Edward, see-ing
him, ran up to him, and informed him,
that he had met with Lady Bella, and a Gentle-man,
who seemed to have been overturned in a
Chaise, which he was endeavouring to refit;
and that her Ladyship was offended with him
for coming up to her; and also, that the Gen-tleman
had used some threatening Language to
him upon that Account.
               Mr. Glanville, excessively surprised at what
he heard, stopped; and, ordering a Servant who
came along with him, to run back to the
Castle, and bring a Chaise thither to carry Lady
Bella home, he asked Edward several more
Questions relating to what she and the Gentle-man

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK I.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Contains a Turn at Court, neither new
nor surprising—Some useless Additions
to a fine Lady's Education—The bad
Effects of a whimsical Study, which
some will say is borrowed from Cer-vantes.
               
               
                  THE Marquis of—for a long Se-ries
of Years, was the first and most
distinguished Favourite at Court:
He held the most honourable
Employments under the Crown,
disposed of all Places of Profit as he pleased,
presided at the Council, and in a manner
governed the whole Kingdom.
               
                  

had said to him: And, notwithstanding
his Knowlege of her ridiculous Humour, he
could not help being alarmed by her Behaviour,
nor concluding that there was something very
mysterious in the Affair.
               While he was thus conversing with Edward,
Arabella, who had spied him almost as soon,
was filled with Apprehension to see him hold so
quiet a Parly with her Ravisher: The more she
reflected upon this Accident, the more her Su-spicions
increased; and, persuading herself at
last, that Mr. Glanville was privy to his
Designs, this Belief, however improbable,
wrought so powerfully upon her Imagination,
that she could not restrain her Tears.
               Doubtless, said she, I am betrayed, and the
perjured Glanville is no longer either my Friend
or Lover: He is this Moment concerting Mea-sures
with my Ravisher, how to deliver me into
his Power; and, like Philidaspes, is glad of an
Opportunity, by this Treachery, to be rid of a
Woman whom his Parents and hers had destined
for his Wife.
               Mr. Glanville, having learned all he could
from Edward, alighted; and, giving him his
Horse to hold, came up to Arabella: And, after
expressing his Joy at meeting with her, begged
her to let him know what Accident had brought
her, unattended, from the Castle, at that time
of Night.
               If by this Question, said the incensed Ara-bella,
you would persuade me you are ignorant
of the Cause of my Flight, know, your Dissimu-lation
will not succeed; and that, having Reason
to believe you are equally guilty with him from

whose intended Violence I fled, I shall have re-course
to the Valour of this Knight you see with
me, to defend me, as well against you, as that
Ravisher, with whom I see you leagued.—Ah!
unworthy Cousin, pursued she, What dost thou
propose to thyself by so black a Treachery?
What is to be the Price of my Liberty, which
thou so freely disposest of? Has thy Friend
there, said she (pointing to Edward), a Sister,
or any Relation, for whom thou barterest, by
delivering me up to him? But, assure thyself,
this Stratagem shall be of no Use to thee: For,
if thou art base enough to oppress my valiant
Deliverer with Numbers, and thinkest, by Vio-lence,
to get me into thy Power, my Cries
shall arm Heaven and Earth in my Defence.
Providence may, haply, send some generous
Cavaliers to my Rescue; and, if Providence fails
me, my own Hand shall give me Freedom; for
that Moment thou offerest to seize me, that
Moment shall be the last of my Life.
               While Arabella was speaking, the young Gentle-man
and Edward, who listened to her, eagerly,
thought her Brain was disturbed: But Mr.
Glanville was in a terrible Consusion, and si-lently
cursed his ill Fate, to make him in
Love with a Woman so ridiculous.
               For Heaven's sake, Cousin, said he, striving
to repress some Part of his Disorder, Do not
give way to these extravagant Notions: There is
nobody intends to do you any Wrong.
               What! interrupted she, would you persuade
me, that that Impostor there, pointing to Ed-ward,
has not a Design to carry me away;

which you, by supporting him, are not equally
guilty of?
               Who? I! Madam! cried out Edward: Sure
your Ladyship does not suspect me of such a
strange Design! God knows I never thought of
such a Thing!
               Ah! Dissembler! interrupted Arabella, do
not make use of that sacred Name to mask thy
impious Falshoods: Confess with what Intent
you came into my Father's Service disguised.
               I never came disguised, Madam, returned
Edward.
               
               No! said Arabella: What means that Dress
in which I see you, then?
               'Tis the Marquis's Livery, Madam, said
Edward, which he did not order to be taken
from me when I left his Service.
               And with what Purpose didst thou wear it?
said she, Do not your Thoughts accuse you of
your Crime?
               I always hoped, Madam—said he.
               You hoped! interrupted Arabella: frowning,
Did I ever give you Reason to hope? I will not
deny but I had Compassion on you; but even
That you was ignorant of.
               I know, Madam, you had Compassion on
me, said Edward; for your Ladyship, I always
thought, did not believe me guilty.
               I was weak enough, said she, to have Com-passion
on you, though I did believe you guilty.
               Indeed, Madam, returned Edward, I al-ways
hoped, as I said before (but your Ladyship
would not hear me out), that you did not be-lieve
any malicious Reports; and therefore you
had Compassion on me.
               
                  

I had no Reports of you, said she, but what
my own Observation gave me; and that was
sufficient to convince me of your Fault.
               Why, Madam, said Edward, did your Lady-ship
see me steal the Carp then, which was the
Fault unjustly laid to my Charge?
               Mr. Glanville, as much Cause as he had for
Uneasiness, could with great Difficulty restrain
Laughter at this ludicrous Circumstance; for he
guessed what Crime Arabella was accusing him
of: As for the young Gentleman, he could not
conceive what she meant, and longed to hear
what would be the End of such a strange Con-ference.
But poor Arabella was prodigiously
confounded at his mentioning so low an Affair;
not being able to endure that Glanville and
her Protector should know a Lover of her's
could be suspected of so base a Theft.
               The Shame she conceived at it, kept her
silent for a Moment: But, recovering herself at
last, No, said she, I knew you better than to
give any Credit to such an idle Report: Persons
of your Condition do not commit such paltry
Crimes.
               Upon my Soul, Madam, said the young
Gentleman, Persons of his Condition often do
worse.
               I don't deny it, Sir, said Arabella; and the
Design he meditated of carrying me away was
infinitely worse.
               Really, Madam, returned the Gentleman,
if you are such a Person as I apprehend, I
don't see how he durst make such an At-tempt.
               
                  

It is very possible, Sir, said she, that I might
be carried away, though I was of greater Qua-lity
than I am: Were not Mandana, Candace,
Clelia, and many other Ladies who underwent
the same Fate, of a Quality more illustrious
than mine?
               Really, Madam, said he, I know none of
these Ladies.
               No, Sir! said Arabella; extremely mortified.
               Let me intreat you, Cousin, interrupted Glan-ville
(who feared this Dispute would be very
tedious), to expose yourself no longer to the
Air at this time of Night: Suffer me to conduct
you home.
               It concerns my Honour, said she, that this
generous Stranger should not think I am the
only one that was ever exposed to these insolent
Attempts. You say, Sir, pursued she, that
you don't know any of these Ladies I mention-ed
before: Let me ask you, then, If you are
acquainted with Parthenissa, or Cleopatra? who
were both, for some Months, in the Hands of
their Ravishers.
               As for Parthenissa, Madam, neither have I heard
of her; nor do I remember to have heard of
any more than one Cleopatra: But she was never
ravished, I am certain; for she was too willing.
               How! Sir, said Arabella: Was Cleopatra
ever willing to run away with her Ravisher?
               
                  Cleopatra was a Whore, was she not, Madam?
said he.
               Hold thy Peace, unworthy Man, said Ara-bella;
and profane not the Memory of that fair
and glorious Queen, by such injurious Lan-guage:
That Queen, I say, whose Courage was

equal to her Beauty; and her Virtue surpassed
by neither. Good Heavens! What a black
Defamer have I chosen for my Protector!
               Mr. Glanville, rejoicing to see Arabella in a
Disposition to be offended with her new Ac-quaintance,
resolved to sooth her a little, in
hopes of prevailing upon her to return home.
Sir, said he to the Gentleman, who could not
conceive why the Lady should so warmly de-fend
Cleopatra, you were in the Wrong to cast
such Reflections upon that great Queen (re-peating
what he had heard his Cousin say be-fore):
For all the World, pursued he, knows
she was married to Julius Caesar.
               
               Though I commend you, said Arabella, for
taking the Part of a Lady so basely vilified; yet
let not your Zeal for her Honour induce you
to say more than is true for its Justification;
for thereby you weaken, instead of strengthening,
what may be said in her Defence. One
Falshood always supposes another, and renders
all you can say suspected: Whereas pure, un-mixed
Truth, carries Conviction along with it,
and never fails to produce its desired Effect.
               Suffer me, Cousin, interrupted Glanville, to
represent to you, the Inconveniency you will
certainly feel, by staying so late in the Air:
Leave the Justification of Cleopatra to some
other Opportunity; and take care of your own
Preservation.
               What is it you require of me? said Arabella.
               
               Only, resumed Glanville, that you would be
pleased to return to the Castle, where my Sister,
and all your Servants, are inconsolable for your
Absence.
               
                  

But who can assure me, answered she, that
I shall not, by returning home, enter volunta-rily
into my Prison? For, to say the Truth,
I still more than suspect you abet the Designs
of this Man; since I behold you in his Party,
and ready, no doubt, to draw your Sword in
his Defence: How will you be able to clear
yourself of this Crime? Yet I will venture to
return to my House, provided you will swear
to me, you will offer me no Violence, with
regard to your Friend there: And also I insist,
that he, from this Moment, disclaim all Inten-tions
of persecuting me, and banish himself
from my Presence for ever. Upon this Con-dition
I pardon him, and will likewise pray to
Heaven to pardon him also. Speak, presump-tuous
Unknown, said she to Edward, Wilt
thou accept of my Pardon upon the Terms I
offer it thee? And wilt thou take thyself to some
Place where I may never behold thee again?
               Since your Ladyship, said Edward, is resolved
not to receive me into your Service, I shan't
trouble you any more: But I think it hard to
be punished for a Crime I was not guilty of.
               'Tis better, said Arabella, turning from him,
that thou shouldst complain of my Rigour, than
the World tax me with Lightness and Indiscre-tion.
And now, Sir, said she to Glanville, I
must trust myself to your Honour, which I con-fess
I do a little suspect: But, however, 'tis
possible you have repented, like the poor Prince
Thrasybulus, when he submitted to the Sug-gestions
of a wicked Friend, to carry away the
fair Alcionida, whom he afterwards restored.
Speak, Glanville, pursued she, are you desirous

of imitating that virtuous Prince, or do you
still retain your former Sentiments?
               Upon my Word, Madam, said Glanville,
you will make me quite mad, if you go on in
this manner: Pray let me see you safe home;
and then, if you please, you may forbid my
Entrance into the Castle, if you suspect me of
any bad Intentions towards you.
               'Tis enough, said she; I will trust you. As
for you, Sir, speaking to the young Gentleman,
you are so unworthy, in my Apprehensions, by
the Calumnies you have uttered against a Per-son
of that Sex which merits all your Admira-tion
and Reverence, that I hold you very unfit
to be a Protector of any of it: Therefore I
dispense with your Services upon this Occasion;
and think it better to trust myself to the Conduct
of a Person, who, like Thrasybulus, by his Re-pentance,
has restored himself to my Confi-dence,
than to one, who, though, indeed, he
has never betrayed me, yet seems very capable
of doing so, if he had the Power.
               Saying this, she gave her Hand to Glanville,
who helped her into the Chaise that was come
from the Castle; and the Servant, who brought
it, mounting his Horse, Mr. Glanville drove
her Home, leaving the Gentleman, who, by
this time, had refitted his Chaise, in the
greatest Astonishment imaginable at her un-accountable
Behaviour.
               END of the SECOND BOOK.
               
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK III.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Two Conversations, out of which the
Reader may pick up a great deal.
               
               
                  
                     ARABELLA, continuing to rumi-nate
upon her Adventure during
their little Journey, appeared so
low and reserved, that Mr. Glan-ville,
tho' he ardently wished to
know all the Particulars of her Flight, and
Meeting with that Gentleman, whose Com-pany
he found her in, was obliged to suppress
his Curiosity for the present, out of a Fear of
displeasing her. As soon as they alighted at the

Castle, her Servants ran to receive her at the
Gates, expressing their Joy to see her again, by
a thousand confused Exclamations.
               Miss Glanville, being at her Toilet when she
heard of her Arrival, ran down to welcome her,
in her Hurry forgetting, that as her Woman had
been curling her Hair, she had no Cap on.
               
                  Arabella received her Compliments with a
little Coolness; for, observing that her Grief
for her Absence had not made her neglect any
of her usual Solicitude about her Person, she
could not conceive it had been very great: There-fore,
when she had made some slight Answer
to the hundred Questions she asked in a Breath,
she went up to her Apartment; and, calling
Lucy, who was crying with Joy for her Return,
she questioned her strictly concerning her
leaving her in the Fields, acknowleging to
her, that she suspected her Fidelity, tho' she
wished, at the same time, she might be able to
clear herself.
               
                  Lucy, in her Justification, related, after her
punctual Way, all that had happened: By
which, Arabella was convinced she had not be-trayed
her; and was also in some Doubt, whe-ther
Mr. Glanville was guilty of any Design
against her.
               Since, said she to Lucy, thou art restored to
my good Opinion, I will, as I have always
done, unmask my Thoughts to thee. I con-fess
then, with Shame and Confusion, that I
cannot think of Mr. Glanville's assisting the Un-known
to carry me away, without resenting a
most poignant Grief: Questionless, my Weak-ness
will surprise thee; and could I conceal it

This extensive Authority could not fail of
making him many Enemies: He fell at last a
Sacrifice to the Plots they were continually
forming against him; and was not only re-moved
from all his Employments, but banished
the Court for ever.
               The Pain his undeserved Disgrace gave him,
he was enabled to conceal by the natural
Haughtiness of his Temper; and, behaving
rather like a Man who had resigned, than been
dismissed from his Posts, he imagined he
triumphed sufficiently over the Malice of his
Enemies, while he seemed to be wholly in-sensible
of the Effects it produced. His secret
Discontent, however, was so much augmented
by the Opportunity he now had of observing
the Baseness and Ingratitude of Mankind,
which in some Degree he experienced every
Day, that he resolved to quit all Society what-ever,
and devote the rest of his Life to Solitude
and Privacy. For the Place of his Retreat he
pitched upon a Castle he had in a very remote
Province of the Kingdom, in the Neighbour-hood
of a small Village, and several Miles distant
from any Town. The vast Extent of Ground
which surrounded this noble Building, he had
caused to be laid out in a Manner peculiar to
his Taste: The most laborious Endeavours of
Art had been used to make it appear like the
beautiful Product of wild, uncultivated Nature.
But if this Epitome of Arcadia could boast of
only artless and simple Beauties, the Inside of
the Castle was adorned with a Magnificence
suitable to the Dignity and immense Riches of
the Owner.
               
                  

from myself, I would from thee; but, alas! it is
certain, that I do not hate him; and I believe
I never shall, guilty as he may be in my Appre-hensions.
               Hate him! Madam, said Lucy: God forbid
you should ever hate Mr. Glanville, who, I am
sure, loves your Ladyship as well as he does his
own Sister!
               You are very confident, Lucy, said Arabella
blushing, to mention the Word Love to me:
If I thought my Cousin had bribed thee to it, I
should be greatly incensed: However, tho' I
forbid you to talk of his Passion, yet I permit
you to tell me the Violence of his Trans-ports
when I was missing; the Threats he ut-tered
against my Ravishers; the Complaints
he made against Fortune; the Vows he of-fered
for my Preservation; and, in fine,
whatever Extravagances the Excess of his Sor-row
forced him to commit.
               I assure you, Madam, said Lucy, I did not
hear him say any of all this.
               What! interrupted Arabella: And didst thou
not observe the Tears trickle from his Eyes,
which, haply, he strove to conceal? Did he
not strike his Bosom with the Vehemence of
his Grief; and cast his accusing and despairing
Eyes to Heaven, which had permitted such a
Misfortune to befal me?
               Indeed, Madam, I did not, resumed Lucy;
but he seemed to be very sorry; and said, He
would go and look for your Ladyship.
               Ah! the Traitor! interrupted Arabella in a
Rage: Fain would I have found out some Ex-cuse
for him, and justified him in my Appre-hensions;

but he is unworthy of these savourable
Thoughts: Speak of him no more, I command
you; he is guilty of assiisting my Ravisher to
carry me away; and therefore merits my eter-nal
Displeasure: But tho' I could find Reasons
to clear him even of that Crime, yet he is guilty
of Indifference and Insensibility for my Loss,
since he neither died with Grief at the News of
it; nor needed the Interposition of his Sister, or
the Desire of delivering me, to make him live.
               
                  Arabella, when she had said this, was silent;
but could not prevent some Tears stealing down
her fair Face: Therefore, to conceal her Un-easiness,
or to be at more Liberty to indulge it,
she ordered Lucy to make haste and undress
her; and, going To-bed, passed the small Re-mainder
of the Night, not in Rest, which she
very much needed, but, in Reflections on all
the Passages of the preceding Day: And, finding,
or imagining she found, new Reasons for con-demning
Mr. Glanville, her Mind was very
far from being at Ease.
               In the Morning, lying later than usual, she
received a Message from Mr. Glanville, in-quiring
after her Health; to which she an-swered,
That he was too little concerned in the
Preservation of it, to make it necessary to ac-quaint
him.
               Miss Glanville soon after sent to desire Per-mission
to drink her Chocolate by her Bedside;
which as she could not in Civility refuse, she
was very much perplexed how to hide her Mel-ancholy
from the Eyes of that discerning Lady,
who, she questioned not, would interpret it
in favour of her Brother.
               
                  

Upon Miss Glanville's Appearance, she forced
herself to assume a chearful Look, asking her
Pardon, for receiving her in Bed; and com-plaining
of bad Rest, which had occasioned her
lying late.
               Miss Glanville, after answering her Compli-ments
with almost equal Politeness, proceeded
to ask her an hundred Questions concerning
the Cause of her Absence from the Castle: Your
Woman, pursued she, laughing, told us a strange
Medley of Stuff about a great Man, who was a
Gardener; and wanted to carry you away:
Sure there was nothing in it! Was there?
               You must excuse me, Cousin, said Arabella,
if I do not answer your Questions precisely now:
'Tis sufficient that I tell you, Certain Reasons
obliged me to act in the Manner I did, for my
own Preservation; and that, another time, you
shall know my History; which will explain
many things you seem to be surprised at, at
present.
               Your History, said Miss Glanville! Why,
will you write your own History then?
               I shall not write it, said Arabella; tho', que-stionless,
it will be written after my Death.
               And must I wait till then for it, resumed
Miss Glanville, gaily?
               No, no, interrupted Arabella: I mean to
gratify your Curiosity sooner; but it will not be
yet a good time; and, haply, not till you have
acquainted me with yours.
               Mine! said Miss Glanville: It would not be
worth your hearing; for really I have nothing
to tell, that would make an History.
               
                  

You have, questionless, returned Arabella,
gained many Victories over Hearts; have oc-casioned
many Quarrels between your Servants,
by favouring some one, more than the others:
Probably, you have caused some Bloodshed;
and have not escaped being carried away once
or twice: You have also, I suppose, undergone
some Persecution, from those who have the
Disposal of you, in Favour of a Lover whom
you have an Aversion to; and lastly, there is
haply some one among your Admirers, who
is happy enough not to be hated by you.
               I assure you, interrupted Miss Glanville, I hate
none of my Admirers; and I can't help think-ing
you very unkind to use my Brother as you
do: I am sure, there is not one Man in an hun-dred,
that would take so much from your Hands
as he does.
               Then there is not one Man in an hundred,
resumed Arabella, whom I should think worthy
to serve me: But, pray, Madam, What ill
Usage is it your Brother complains of? I have
treated him with much less Severity than he had
Reason to expect; and, notwithstanding he had
the Presumption to talk to me of Love, I have
endured him in my Sight; an Indulgence, for
which I may haply be blamed in After-ages.
               Why, sure, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville,
it would be no such Crime for my Brother to
love you!
               But it was a mortal Crime to tell me so, in-terrupted
Arabella.
               
               And why was it such a mortal Crime to tell
you so, said Miss Glanville? Are you the first
Woman by Millions, that has been told so?
               
                  

Doubtless, returned Arabella, I am the first
Woman of my Quality, that ever was told so
by any Man, till after an infinite Number of
Services, and secret Sufferings: And truly, I
am of the illustrious Mandana's Mind; for she
said, That she should think it an unpardonable
Presumption, for the greatest King on Earth to
tell her he loved her, tho' after Ten Years of the
most faithful Services, and concealed Tor-ments.
               Ten Years! cried out Miss Glanville, in
Amazement; Did she consider what Altera-tions
ten Years would make in her Face, and
how much older she would be at the End of
Ten Years, than she was before?
               Truly, said Arabella, it is not usual to consi-der
such little Matters so nicely; one never has
the Idea of an Heroine older than Eighteen,
tho' her History begins at that Age; and the
Events, which compose it, contain the Space
of Twenty more.
               But, dear Cousin, resumed Miss Glanville,
do you resolve to be Ten Years a courting? Or
rather, will you be loved in Silence Ten Years,
and be courted the other Ten; and so marry
when you are an old Woman?
               Pardon me, Cousin, resumed Arabella; I
must really find Fault with the Coarseness of
your Language. Courting, and Old Woman!
What strange Terms! Let us, I beseech you,
end this Dispute: If you have any thing to say in
Justification of your Brother, which, I suppose,
was the chief Intention of your Visit, I shall not
be rude enough to restrain you; tho' I could
wish you would not lay me under the Neces-sity

of hearing what I cannot persuade myself
to believe.
               Since, returned Miss Glanville, I know of
no Crime my Brother has been guilty of, I have
nothing to say in his Justification: I only know,
that he is very much mortified at the Message
you sent him this Morning; for I was with him
when he received it: But pray, What has he
done to offend you?
               If Mr. Glanville, interrupted Arabella, hopes
for my Pardon, he must purchase it by his Re-pentance,
and a sincere Confession of his Fault;
which you may much better understand from
himself, than from me: And, for this Purpose,
I will condescend to grant him a private Au-dience,
at which I desire you would be present;
and also, I should take it well, if you will let
him know, that he owes this Favour wholly to
your Interposition.
               Miss Glanville, who knew her Brother was
extremely desirous of seeing Arabella, was glad
to accept of these strange Terms; and left her
Chamber, in order to acquaint him with that
Lady's Intentions.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  A solemn Interview.
               
               IN the mean time, that Fair-one, being risen,
and negligently dressed, as was her Custom,
went into her Closet, sending to give Miss

                  Glanville Notice, That she was ready to see her.
This Message immediately brought both the
Brother and the Sister to her Apartment: And
Miss Glanville, at her Brother's Request, stay-ing
in the Chamber, where she busied herself
in looking at her Cousin's Jewels, which lay
upon the Toilet, he came alone into the Clo-set,
in so much Confusion at the Thoughts of
the ridiculous Figure he made in complying
with Arabella's fantastical Humours, that his
Looks persuading her, there was some great
Agitation in his Mind, she expected to see him
fall at her Feet, and endeavour to deprecate
her Wrath by a Deluge of Tears.
               Mr. Glanville however disappointed her in
that respect; for, taking a Seat near her, he
began to intreat, her with a smiling Counte-nance,
to tell him in what he had offended her;
protesting, that he was not conscious of doing
or saying any thing to displease her.
               
                  Arabella was greatly confused at this Question,
which she thought she had no Reason to expect;
it not being possible for her to tell him she was
offended, that he was not in absolute Despair for
her Absence, without, at the same time, confessing
she looked upon him in the Light of a Lover,
whose Expressions of a violent Passion would not
have displeased her: Therefore, to disengage
herself from the Perplexity his Question threw
her into, she was obliged to offer some Violence
to her Ingenuousness; and, contrary to her real
Belief, tax him again with a Design of betray-ing
her into the Power of the Unknown.
               Mr. Glanville, tho' excessively vexed at her
persisting in so ridiculous an Error, could hardly

help smiling at the stern Manner in which she
spoke; but, knowing of what fatal Consequence
it would be to him, if he indulged any Gaiety
in so solemn a Conference, he composed his
Looks to a Gravity suitable to the Occasion;
and asked her, in a very submissive Tone, What
Motive she was pleased to assign for so extra-ordinary
a Piece of Villainy, as that she supposed
him guilty of?
               Truly, answered she, blushing, I do not pre-tend
to account for the Actions of wicked and
ungenerous Persons.
               But, Madam, resumed Glanville, if I must needs
be suspected of a Design to seize upon your Per-son,
methinks it would have been more rea-sonable
to suppose, I would rather use that Vio-lence
in Favour of my own Pretensions, than
those of any other whatever; for, tho' you have
expresly forbid me to tell you I love you, yet
I hope, you still continue to think I do.
               I assure you, returned Arabella, assuming a
severe Look, I never gave myself the Trouble to
examine your Behaviour with Care enough to
be sensible, if you still were guilty of the Weak-ness,
which displeased me; but, upon a Suppo-sition,
that you repented of your Fault, I was
willing to live with you upon Terms of Civi-lity
and Friendship, as became Persons in that
Degree of Relationship in which we are: There-fore,
if you are wise, you will not renew the Re-membrance
of those Follies I have long since
pardoned; nor seek Occasions of offending me
by new ones of the same kind, lest it produce a
more severe Sentence than that I formerly laid
upon you.
               
                  

However, Madam, returned Mr. Glanville,
you must suffer me to assure you, That my own
Interest, which was greatly concerned in your
Safety, and my Principles of Honour, would
never allow me to engage in so villainous an
Enterprize, as that of abetting any Person in
stealing you away: Nor can I conceive, how
you possibly could imagine a Fellow, who was
your menial Servant, could form so presump-tuous
and dangerous a Design.
               By your Manner of speaking, resumed Ara-bella,
one would imagine you were really igno-rant,
both of the Quality of that presumptuous
Man, as well as his designed Offence: But
yet, 'tis certain, I saw you in his Company;
and saw you ready to draw your Sword in his
Defence, against my Deliverer. Had I not the
Evidence of my own Senses, for your Guilt, I
must confess, I could not be persuaded of it by
any other Means: Therefore, since Appear-ances
are certainly against you, it is not strange, if
I cannot consent to acquit you in my Apprehen-ons,
till I have more certain Confirmation of
your Innocence, than your bare Testimony only;
which, at present, has not all the Weight with
me it had some time ago.
               I protest, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was strangely perplexed, I have Reason to think
my Case extremely hard, since I have brought
myself to be suspected by you, only through my
Eagerness to find you, and Solicitude for your
Welfare.
               Doubtless, interrupted Arabella, if you are
innocent, your Case is extremely hard; yet
it is not singular; and therefore you have

less Reason to complain: The valiant Corio-lanus,
who was the most passionate and faith-ful
Lover imaginable, having, by his admira-ble
Valour, assisted the Ravishers of his adored
Cleopatra, against those who came to rescue her;
and, by his Arm alone, opposed to great Num-bers
of their Enemies, facilitated the Execuion
of their Design, had the Mortification after-wards
to know, that he had, all that time,
been fighting against that Divine Princess, who
loaded him with the most cruel Reproaches for
the Injury he had done her: Yet Fortune was
so kind, as to give him the Means of repairing
his Fault, and restoring him to some Part of
her good Opinion; for, covered with Wounds
as he was, and fatigued with fighting, before,
yet he undertook, in that Condition, to pre-vent
her Ravishers from carrying her off; and,
for several Hours, continued fighting alone with
near Two hundred Men, who were not able to
overcome him, notwithstanding his extreme
Weariness, and the Multitude of Blows which
they aimed at him: Therefore, Glanville, con-sidering
you, as Cleopatra did that unfortunate
Prince, who was before suspected by her, as
neither guilty nor innocent, I can only, like her,
wish you may find some Occasion of justifying
yourself, from the Crime laid to your Charge:
Till then, I must be under a Necessity of banish-ing
you from my Presence, with the same con-solatory
Speech she used to that unfortunate
Prince:—Go, therefore, Glanville, go, and
endeavour your own Justification; I desire
you should effect it, no less than you do your-self;
and, if my Prayers can obtain from

While Things were preparing at the Castle
for his Reception, the Marquis, though now
advanced in Years, cast his Eyes on a young
Lady, greatly inferior to himself in Quality,
but whose Beauty and good Sense promised
him an agreeable Companion. After a very
short Courtship, he married her, and in a few
Weeks carried his new Bride into the Country,
from whence he absolutely resolved never to
Return.
               The Marquis, following the Plan of Life
he had laid down, divided his Time between
the Company of his Lady, his Library, which
was large and well furnished, and his Gardens.
Sometimes he took the Diversion of Hunting,
but never admitted any Company whatever;
and his Pride and extreme Reserve rendered
him so wholly inaccessible to the Country
Gentry about him, that none ever presumed
to solicit his Acquaintance.
               In the Second Year of his Retirement, the
Marchioness brought him a Daughter, and
died in Three Days after her Delivery. The
Marquis, who had tenderly loved her, was
extremely afflicted at her Death; but Time
having produced its usual Effects, his great
Fondness for the little Arabella intirely en-grossed
his Attention, and made up all the
Happiness of his Life. At Four Years of
Age he took her from under the Direction of
the Nurses and Women appointed to attend
her, and permitted her to receive no Part of her
Education from another, which he was capable
of giving her himself. He taught her to read
and write in a very few Months; and, as she

Heaven this Favour for you, I shall not
scruple to offer some in your behalf.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  In which the Interview is ended, not much
to the Lover's Satisfaction, but ex-actly
conformable to the Rules of Ro-mance.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, when she had pronounced
these Words, blushed excessively, think-ing
she had said too much: But, not seeing
any Signs of extreme Joy in the Face of Glan-ville,
who was silently cursing Cleopatra, and
the Authors of those Romances, that had ruined
so noble a Mind; and exposed him to perpe-tual
Vexations, by the unaccountable Whims
they had raised—Why are you not gone, said
she, while I am in an Humour not to repent of
the Favour I have shewn you?
               You must excuse me, Cousin, said Mr.
Glanville, peevishly, if I do not think so highly
as you do of the Favour. Pray how am I
obliged to you for depriving me of the Pleasure
of seeing you, and sending me on a Wild-goose
Chace, after Occasions to justify myself of a
Crime I am wholly innocent of, and would
scorn to commit?
               Though, resumed Arabella, with great Calm-ness,
I have Reason to be dissatisfied with the
cool and unthankful manner in which you re-ceive

my Indulgence, yet I shall not change the
favourable Disposition I am in towards you, un-less
you provoke me to it by new Acts of Dis-obedience:
Therefore, in the Language of
Cleopatra, I shall tell you.—
               Upon my Soul, Madam, interrupted Glan-ville,
I have no Patience with that rigorous
Gipsy, whose Example you follow so exactly,
to my Sorrow: Speak in your own Language,
I beseech you; for I am sure neither hers,
nor any one's upon Earth, can excel it.
               Yet, said Arabella, striving to repress some
Inclination to smile at this Sally, notwithstand-ing
your unjust Prohibitions, I shall make use
of the Language of that incomparable Lady, to
tell you my Thoughts; which are, That 'tis
possible you might be sufficiently justified in my
Apprehensions, by the Anxiety it now appears
you had for my Safety, by the Probability which
I find in your Discourse, and the good Opinion
I have of you, were it not requisite to make
your Innocence apparent to the World, that so
it might be lawful for Arabella to readmit you,
with Honour, into her former Esteem and
Friendship.
               Mr. Glanville, seeing it would be in vain to
attempt to make her alter her fantastical Deter-mination
at this time, went out of the Closet
without deigning to make any Reply to his
Sentence, though delivered in the Language of
the admirable Cleopatra: But his ill Humour
was so visible in his Face, that Arabella, who
mistook it for an Excess of Despair, could not
help feeling some kind of Pity for the Rigour
which the Laws of Honour and Romance

obliged her to use him with. And, while she
sat meditating upon the Scene which had
just passed, Mr. Glanville returned to his own
Room, glad that his Sister, not being in Ara-bella's
Chamber, where he had left her, had no
Opportunity of observing his Discontent, which
she would not fail to inquire the Cause of.
               Here he sat, ruminating upon the Follies of
Arabella, which he found grew more glaring
every Day: Every thing furnished Matter for
some new Extravagance; her Character was so
ridiculous, that he could propose nothing to
himself but eternal Shame and Disquiet, in the
Possession of a Woman, for whom he must
always blush, and be in Pain. But her Beauty
had made a deep Impression on his Heart: He
admired the Strength of her Understanding;
her lively Wit; the Sweetness of her Temper;
and a Thousand amiable Qualities which di-stinguished
her from the rest of her Sex: Her
Follies, when opposed to all those Charms of
Mind and Person, seemed inconsiderable and
weak; and, though they were capable of giving
him great Uneasiness, yet they could not lessen
a Passion which every Sight of her so much
the more confirmed.
               As he seared it was impossible to help loving
her, his Happiness depended upon curing her of
her romantic Notions; and, though he knew
not how to effect such a Change in her as was
necessary to complete it, yet he would not de-spair,
but comsorted himself with Hopes of
what he had not Courage to attempt. Some-times
he fansied Company, and an Acquaint-ance
with the World, would produce the Al-teration

he wished: Yet he dreaded to see her
exposed to Ridicule by her fantastical Behaviour,
and become the Jest of Persons who were not
possessed of half her Understanding.
               While he traversed his Chamber, wholly
engrossed by these Reflections, Miss Glanville
was entertaining Sir George, of whose coming
she was informed while she was in Arabella's
Chamber.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which our Heroine is greatly disap-pointed.
               
               MISS Glanville, supposing her Brother
would be glad not to be interrupted in
his Conference with Lady Bella, did not allow
any one to acquaint them with Sir George's
Visit; and, telling the Baronet her Cousin was
indisposed, had, by these means, all his Con-versation
to herself.
               Sir George, who ardently wished to see Lady
Bella, protracted his Visit, in hopes that he
should have that Satisfaction before he went
away. And that fair Lady, whose Thoughts
were a little discomposed by the Despair she ap-prehended
Mr. Glanville was in, and fearful of
the Consequences, when she had sat some time
after he left her, ruminating upon what had
happened, quitted her Closet, to go and inquire
of Miss Glanville, in what Condition his Mind

seemed to be when he went away; for she never
doubted but that he was gone, like Coriolanus,
to seek out for some Occasion to manifest his
Innocence.
               Hearing, therefore, the Voice of that Lady,
who was talking and laughing very loud in one
of the Summer-parlours, and being terrified
with the Apprehension, that it was her Brother
with whom she was thus diverting herself, she
opened the Door of the Room precipitately;
and, by her Entrance, filled Sir George with
extreme Pleasure; while her unexpected Sight
produced a quite contrary Effect on Miss Glan-ville.
               
               
                  Arabella, eased of her Fear, that it was Mr.
Glanville, who, instead of dying with Despair,
was giving Occasion for that noisy Laugh of his
Sister, saluted the Baronet with great Civility;
and, turning to Miss Glanville, I must needs
chide you, said she, for the Insensibility with
which it appears you have parted with your
Brother.
               Bless me, Madam, interrupted Miss Glan-ville,
what do you mean? Whither is my Brother
gone?
               That, indeed, I am quite ignorant of, re-sumed
Arabella; and I suppose he himself hard-ly
knows what Course he shall take: But he has
been with you, doubtless, to take his Leave.
               Take his Leave! repeated Miss Glanville:
Has he left the Castle so suddenly then, and
gone away without me?
               The Enterprize upon which he is gone, said
Arabella, would not admit of a Lady's Com-pany:
And, since he has left so considerable an

Hostage with me as yourself, I expect he will
not be long before he return; and, I hope, to
the Satisfaction of us both.
               Miss Glanville, who could not penetrate into
the Meaning of her Cousin's Words, began to
be strangely alarmed: But, presently, supposing
she had a mind to divert herself with her Fears,
she recovered herself, and told her she would go
up to her Brother's Chamber, and look for him.
               
                  Arabella did not offer to prevent her, being
very desirous of knowing, whether he had not
left a Letter for her upon his Table, as was the
Custom in those Cases: And, while she was
gone, Sir George seized the Opportunity of say-ing
an hundred gallant Things to her, which
she received with great Indifference; the most
extravagant Compliments being what she ex-pected
from all Men: And, provided they did
not directly presume to tell her they loved her,
no Sort of Flattery or Adulation could displease
her.
               In the mean time, Miss Glanville, having
found her Brother in his Chamber, repeated to
him what Lady Bella had said, as she supposed,
to fright her.
               Mr. Glanville, hearing this, and that Sir
George was with her, hastened to them as fast
as possible, that he might interrupt the foolish
Stories he did not doubt she was telling.
               Upon Miss Glanville's Appearance with her
Brother, Arabella was astonished.
               I apprehended, Sir, said she, that you were
some Miles from the Castle by this time: But
your Delay and Indifference convince me, you

neither expect nor wish to find the means of be-ing
justified in my Opinion.
               Pray, Cousin, interrupted Glanville (speaking
softly to her), let us leave this Dispute to some
other time.
               No, Sir, resumed she, aloud, my Honour is
concerned in your Justification: Nor is it fit I
should submit to have the Appearance of Amity
for a Person who has not yet sufficiently cleared
himself of a Crime, with too much Reason laid
to his Charge. Did Coriolanus, think you, act
in this manner? Ah! if he had, doubtless,
Cleopatra would never have pardoned him: Nor
will I any longer suffer you to give me repeated
Causes of Discontent.
               Sir George, seeing Confusion in Mr. Glanville's
Countenance, and Rage in Arabella's, began to
think, that what he had at first took for a Jest,
was a serious Quarrel between them, at which
it was not proper he should be present; and was
preparing to go: When Arabella, stopping him
with a graceful Action—
               If, noble Stranger, said she, you are so par-tial
to the Failings of a Friend, that you will
undertake to defend any unjustifiable Action he
may be guilty of, you are at Liberty to depart:
But, if you will promise to be an unprejudiced
Hearer of the Dispute between Mr. Glanville
and myself, you shall know the Adventure
which has given Rise to it; and will be Judge
of the Reasonableness of the Commands I have
laid on him.
               Though, Madam, said Sir George (bowing
very low to her), Mr. Glanville is my Friend,
yet there is no Likelihood I shall espouse his In-terest

against yours: And a very strong Prepos-session
I feel in Favour of you, already per-suades
me, that I shall give Sentence on your
Side, since you have honoured me so far, as to
constitute me Judge of this Difference.
               The solemn Manner in which Sir George
(who began to suspect Lady Bella's peculiar
Turn) spoke this, pleased her infinitely; while
Mr. Glanville, vexed as he was, could hardly
forbear laughing: When Arabella, after a Look
of Approbation to Sir George, replied;
               I find I have unwillingly engaged myself to
more than I first intended: For, to enable you
to judge clearly of the Matter in Dispute, 'tis
necessary you should know my whole History.
               Mr. Glanville, at this Word, not being able
to constrain himself, uttered a Groan, of the
same Nature with those which are often heard in
the Pit at the Representation of a new Play.
Sir George understood him perfectly well; yet
seemed surprised: And Arabella, starting up,
               Since, said she, I have given you no new
Cause of Complaint, pray, from whence pro-ceeds
this Increase of Affliction?
               I assure you, Cousin, answered he, my Af-fliction,
if you please to term it so, increases
every Day; and I believe it will make me mad
at last: For this unaccountable Humour of
yours is not to be borne.
               You do not seem, replied Arabella, to be far
from Madness already: And if your Friend
here, upon hearing the Passages between us,
should pronounce you guilty, I shall be at a
Loss, whether I ought to treat you as a Mad-man,
or a Criminal. Sir, added she, turning

to Sir George, you will excuse me, if, for cer-tain
Reasons, I can neither give you my History
myself, nor be present at the Relation of it: One
of my Women, who is most in my Confidence,
shall acquaint you with all the Particulars of
my Life: After which I expect Mr. Glanville
will abide by your Decision, as, I assure myself,
I shall be contented to do.
               Saying this, she went out of the Parlour, in
order to prepare Lucy for the Recital she was to
make.
               Mr. Glanville, resolving not to be present at
this new Absurdity, ran out after her; and
went into the Garden, with a strong Inclination
to hate the lovely Visionary who gave him such
perpetual Uneasiness; leaving his Sister alone
with the Baronet, who diverted herself extreme-ly
with the Thoughts of hearing her Cousin's
History; assuring the Baronet, that he might ex-pect
something very curious in it, and find Mat-ter
sufficient to laugh at; for she was the most
whimsical Woman in the World.
               Sir George, who resolved to profit by the
Knowlege of her Foible, made very little Re-ply
to Miss Glanville's Sneers; but waited pa-tiently
for the promised History, which was
much longer coming than he imagined.
            
            
               

               CHAP. V.
               
                  Some curious Instructions for relating an
History.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, as soon as she left them,
went up to her Apartment; and, calling
Lucy into her Closet, told her that she had
made Choice of her, since she was best ac-quainted
with her Thoughts, to relate her
History to her Cousins, and a Person of Quality
who was with them.
               Sure your Ladyship jests with me, said Lucy:
How can I make a History about your Lady-ship?
               There is no Occasion, replied Arabella, for
you to make a History: There are Accidents
enough in my Life to afford Matter for a long
one: All you have to do is to relate them as
exactly as possible. You have lived with me
from my Childhood, and are instructed in all
my Adventures; so that you must be certainly
very capable of executing the Task I have ho-noured
you with.
               Indeed, said Lucy, I must beg your Ladyship
will excuse me: I never could tell how to re-peat
a Story when I have read it; and I know
it is not such simple Girls as I can tell Histories:
It is only sit for Clerks, and such Sort of People,
that are very learned.
               You are learned enough for that Purpose, said
Arabella; and, if you make so much Difficulty
in performing this Part of your Duty, pray how

            THE
Female QUIXOTE;
OR, THE
ADVENTURES
OF
ARABELLA. In TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.
            
               LONDON:
Printed for A. MILLAR, over-against
Catharine-street in the Strand.
               M.DCC.LII.
            
         
         
            

grew older, finding in her an uncommon
Quickness of Apprehension, and an Under-standing
capable of great Improvements, he
resolved to cultivate so promising a Genius
with the utmost Care; and, as he frequently,
in the Rapture of paternal Fondness, expressed
himself, render her Mind as beautiful as her
Person was lovely.
               Nature had indeed given her a most charm-ing
Face, a Shape easy and delicate, a sweet and
insinuating Voice, and an Air so full of Dig-nity
and Grace, as drew the Admiration of all
that saw her. These native Charms were im-proved
with all the Heightenings of Art; her
Dress was perfectly magnificent; the best
Masters of Music and Dancing were sent for
from London to attend her. She soon became
a perfect Mistress of the French and Italian
Languages, under the Care of her Father;
and it is not to be doubted, but she would
have made a great Proficiency in all useful
Knowlege, had not her whole Time been
taken up by another Study.
               From her earliest Youth she had discovered
a Fondness for Reading, which extremely de-lighted
the Marquis; he permitted her there-fore
the Use of his Library, in which, unfor-tunately
for her, were great Store of Ro-mances,
and, what was still more unfortunate,
not in the original French, but very bad
Translations.
               The deceased Marchioness had purchased
these Books to soften a Solitude which she
found very disagreeable; and, after her Death,

came you to imagine you were fit for my Ser-vice,
and the Distinction I have favoured you
with? Did you ever hear of any Woman that
refused to relate her Lady's Story, when desired?
Therefore, if you hope to possess my Favour
and Confidence any longer, acquit yourself
handsomely of this Task, to which I have pre-ferred
you.
               
                  Lucy, terrified at the Displeasure she saw in
her Lady's Countenance, begged her to tell
her what she must say.
               Well! exclaimed Arabella: I am certainly
the most unfortunate Woman in the World!
Every thing happens to me in a contrary manner
from any other Person! Here, instead of my
desiring you to soften those Parts of my History
where you have greatest room to flatter; and
to conceal, if possible, some of those Disorders
my Beauty has occasioned; you ask me to tell
you what you must say; as if it was not neces-sary
you should know as well as myself, and be
able, not only to recount all my Words and
Actions, even the smallest and most inconsider-able,
but also all my Thoughts, however in-stantaneous;
relate exactly every Change of my
Countenance; number all my Smiles, Half-smiles,
Blushes, Turnings pale, Glances, Pauses,
Full-stops, Interruptions; the Rise and Falling
of my Voice; every Motion of my Eyes; and
every Gesture which I have used for these Ten
Years past; nor omit the smallest Circumstance
that relates to me.
               Lord bless me! Madam, said Lucy, exces-sively
astonished, I never, till this Moment,
it seems, knew the hundredth thousandth Part

of what was expected from me: I am sure, if I
had, I would never have gone to Service; for I
might well know I was not fit for such Slavery.
               There is no such great Slavery in doing all I
have mentioned to you, interrupted Arabella: It
requires, indeed, a good Memory, in which I
never thought you deficient; for you are
punctual to the greatest Degree of Exactness in
recounting every thing one desires to hear from
you.
               
                  Lucy, whom this Praise soothed into good
Humour, and flattered with a Belief, that she
was able, with a little Instruction, to perform
what her Lady required, told her, if she pleased
only to put her in a Way how to tell her
History, she would engage, after doing it once,
to tell it again whenever she was desired.
               
                  Arabella, being obliged to comply with the
odd Request, for which there was no Precedent
in all the Romances her Library was stuffed
with, began to inform her in this manner:
               First, said she, you must relate my Birth,
which you know is very illustrious; and, be-cause
I am willing to spare you the Trouble of
repeating Things, that are not absolutely neces-sary,
you must apologize to your Hearers for
slipping over what passed in my Infancy, and the
first Eight or Ten Years of my Life; not failing,
however, to remark, that, from some sprightly
Sallies of Imagination, at those early Years,
those about me conceived marvellous Hopes of
my future Understanding: From thence you
must proceed to an accurate Description of my
Person.
               
                  

What! Madam, interrupted Lucy, must I
tell what Sort of Person you have, to People
who have seen you but a Moment ago?
               Questionless you must, replied Arabella; and
herein you follow the Examples of all the 'Squires
and Maids who relate their Masters and Ladies
Histories: For, though it be to a Brother, or
near Relation, who has seen them a thousand
times, yet they never omit an exact Account of
their Persons.
               Very well, Madam, said Lucy: I shall be
sure not to forget that Part of my Story. I wish
I was as perfect in all the rest.
               Then, Lucy, you must repeat all the Con-versations
I have ever held with you upon the
Subjects of Love and Gallantry, that your Au-dience
may be so well acquainted with my
Humour, as to know exactly, before they are
told, how I shall behave, in whatever Adven-tures
befal me.—After that, you may proceed
to tell them, how a noble Unknown saw me at
Church; how prodigiously he was struck with
my Appearance; the tumultuous Thoughts
that this first View of me occasioned in his
Mind.—
               Indeed, Madam, interrupted Lucy again, I
can't pretend to tell his Thoughts: For how
should I know what they were? None but
himself can tell that.
               However that may be, said Arabella, I ex-pect
you should decypher all his Thoughts, as
plainly as he himself could do; otherwise my
History will be very imperfect: Well, I suppose
you are at no loss about that whole Adventure,
in which you yourself bore so great a Share; so

need not give you any further Instructions
concerning it: Only you must be sure, as I
said before, not to omit the least Circum-stance
in my Behaviour, but relate every
thing I did, said, and thought, upon that Oc-casion.
The disguised Gardener must appear
next in your Story: Here you will of necessity
be a little deficient, since you are not able to
acquaint your Hearers with his true Name and
Quality; which, questionless, is very illustrious.
However, above all, I must charge you not to
mention that egregious Mistake about the Carp;
for, you know how—
               Here Miss Glanville's Entrance put a Stop to
the Instructions Lucy was receiving: For she
told Arabella, that Sir George was gone.
               How! returned she, is he gone? Truly I
am not much obliged to him for the Indif-ference
he has shewed to hear my Story.
               Why, really, Madam, said Miss Glanville,
neither of us expected you would be as good
as your Word, you were so long in sending your
Woman down: And my Brother persuaded Sir
George you were only in Jest; and Sir George has
carried him home to Dinner.
               And is it at Sir George's, replied Arabella,
that your Brother hopes to meet with an Occa-sion
of clearing himself? He is either very in-sensible
of my Anger, or very conscious of his
own Innocence.
               Miss Glanville, having nothing to say in
Answer to an Accusation she did not under-stand,
changed the Discourse: And the two
Ladies passed the rest of the Day together, with
tolerable Good-humour on Miss Glanville's Side;

who was in great hopes of making a Conquest
of the Baronet, before whom Arabella had
made herself ridiculous enough: But that Lady
was far from being at Ease; she had laid herself
under a Necessity of banishing Mr. Glanville, if
he did not give some convincing Proof of his
Innocence; which, as Matters stood, she
thought would be very hard for him to procure;
and, as she could not absolutely believe him
guilty, she was concerned she had gone so far.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  A very Heroic Chapter.
               
               MR. Glanville, coming home in the Even-ing,
a little elevated with the Wine,
of which he had drank too freely at Sir George's,
being told the Ladies were together, entered the
Room where they were sitting; and, beholding
Arabella, whose Pensiveness had given an in-chanting
Softness to her Face, with a Look of
extreme Admiration—
               Upon my Soul, Cousin, said he, if you con-tinue
to treat me so cruelly, you'll drive me
mad. How I could adore you this Moment,
added he, gazing passionately at her, if I might
but hope you did not hate me!
               
                  Arabella, who did not perceive the Condition
he was in, was better pleased with this Address
than any he had ever used; and, therefore, instead

of chiding him, as she was wont, for the Free-dom
of his Expressions, she cast her bright Eyes
upon the Ground, with so charming a Confusion,
that Glanville, quite transported, threw himself on
his Knees before her; and, taking her Hand,
attempted to press it to his Lips: But she,
hastily withdrawing it—
               From whence is this new Boldness? said she:
And what is it you would implore by that pro-strate
Posture? I have told you already upon
what Conditions I will grant you my Pardon.
Clear yourself of being an Accomplice with my
designed Ravisher, and I am ready to restore
you to my Esteem.
               Let me perish, Madam, returned Glanville,
if I would not die to please you, this Moment!
               It is not your Death that I require, said she:
And, though you should never be able to justify
yourself in my Opinion, yet you might, haply,
expiate your Crime, by a less Punishment than
Death.
               What shall I do, then, my Angelic Cousin?
resumed he.
               Truly, said she, the Sense of your Offence
ought so mortally to afflict you, that you should
invent some strange kind of Penance for your-self,
severe enough to prove your Penitence sin-cere.—You
know, I suppose, what the unfor-tunate
Orontes did, when he found he had
wronged his adored Thalestris by an injurious
Suspicion.
               I wish he had hanged himself, said Mr. Glan-ville,
rising up in a Passion, at seeing her again
in her Altitudes.
               
                  

And why, pray, Sir, said Arabella, are you
so severe upon that poor Prince? who was,
haply, infinitely more innocent than yourself.
               Severe, Madam! said Glanville, fearing he
had offended her: Why, to be sure, he was a
sad Scoundrel, to use his adored Thalestris as he
did: And I think one cannot be too severe
upon him.
               But, returned Arabella, Appearances were
against her; and he had some Shadow of Reason
for his Jealousy and Rage: Then, you know,
amidst all his Transports, he could not be pre-vailed
upon to draw his Sword against her.
               What did that signify? said Glanville: I sup-pose
he scorned to draw his Sword upon a
Woman: That would have been a Shame in-deed.
               That Woman, Sir, resumed Arabella, was
not such a contemptible Antagonist as you think
her: And Men, as valiant, possibly, as Orontes
(though, questionless, he was one of the most
valiant Men in the World), have been cut in
Pieces by the Sword of that brave Amazon.
               
               Lord bless me! said Miss Glanville, I should
be afraid to look at such a terrible Woman: I
am sure she must be a very masculine Sort of
Creature.
               You are much mistaken, Miss, said Arabella:
For Thalestris, tho' the most stout and cou-rageous
of her Sex, was, nevertheless, a per-fect
Beauty; and had as much Harmony and
Softness in her Looks and Person, as she had
Courage in her Heart, and Strength in her Blows.
               Indeed, Madam, resumed Miss Glanville, you
can never persuade me, that a Woman who can

sight, and cut People to Pieces with her Blows,
can have any Softness in her Person: She must
needs have very masculine Hands, that could
give such terrible Blows: And I can have no
Notion of the Harmony of a Person's Looks,
who, by what you say, must have the Heart of
a Tyger. But, indeed, I don't think there ever
could be such a Woman.
               What! Miss, interrupted Arabella: Do you
pretend to doubt, that there ever was such a
Person as Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons?
Does not all the World know the Adventures
of that illustrious Princess; her Affection for the
unjust Orontes, who accused her of having a
scandalous Intrigue with Alexander, whom she
went to meet, with a very different Design, up-on
the Borders of her Kingdom? The injurious
Letter he wrote her, upon this Suspicion, made
her resolve to seek for him all over the World,
to give him that Death he had merited, by her
own Hand: And it was in those Rencounters
that he had with her, while she was thus in-censed,
that he forbore to defend himself against
her, though her Sword was often pointed to his
Breast.
               But, Madam, interrupted Mr. Glanville,
pray what became of this Queen of the Ama-zons?
Was she not killed at the Siege of Troy?
               
               She never was at the Siege of Troy, returned
Arabella: But she assisted the Princes who be-sieged
Babylon, to recover the Liberty of Sta-tira
and Parisatis: And it was in the opposite
Party that she met with her faithless Lover.
               If he was faithless, Madam, said Mr. Glan-ville,
he deserved to die: And I wish, with all

my Soul, she had cut him in Pieces with that
famous Sword of hers that had done such Won-ders.
               Yet this faithless Man, resumed Arabella,
whom you seem to have such an Aversion to, gave
so glorious a Proof of his Repentance and Sor-row,
that the fair Queen restored him to her
Favour, and held him in much dearer Affection
than ever: For, after he was convinced of her
Innocence, he was resolved to punish himself
with a Rigour equal to the Fault he had been
guilty of; and, retiring to the Woods, abandoned
for ever the Society of Men; dwelling in a
Cave, and living upon bitter Herbs, passing the
Days and Nights in continual Tears and Sor-row
for his Crime: And here he proposed to
end his Life, had not the fair Thalestris found
him out in this Solitude; and, struck with the
Sincerity of his Repentance, pardoned him;
and, as I have said before, restored him to her
Favour.
               And, to shew you, said Glanville, that I am
capable of doing as much for you; I will, if
you insist upon it, seek out for some Cave, and
do Penance in it, like that Orontes, provided
you will come and fetch me out of it, as that
same fair Queen did him.
               I do not require so much of you, said Ara-bella;
for I told you before, that, haply, you are
justified already in my Opinion; but yet it is
necessary, you should find out some Method of
convincing the World of your Innocence; other-wise
it is not fit I should live with you upon
Terms of Friendship and Civility.
               
                  

Well, well, Madam, said Glanville, I'll
convince you of my Innocence, by bringing that
Rascal's Head to you, whom you suspect I
was inclined to assist in stealing you away.
               If you do that, resumed Arabella, doubtless
you will be iustified in my Opinion, and the
World's also; and I shall have no Scruple to
treat you with as much Friendship as I did be-fore.
               My Brother is much obliged to you, Ma-dam,
interrupted Miss Glanville, for putting
him upon an Action, that would cost him his
Life!
               I have so good an Opinion of your Brother's
Valour, said Arabella, that I am persuaded he
will find no Difficulty in performing his Pro-mise;
and I make no question but I shall see him
covered with the Spoils of that Impostor, who
would have betrayed me; and I flatter myself,
he will be in a Condition to bring me his Head,
as he bravely promises, without endangering his
own Life.
               Does your Ladyship consider, said Miss Glan-ville,
that my Brother can take away no Per-son's
Life whatever, without endangering his
own?
               I consider, Madam, said Arabella, your Bro-ther
as a Man possessed of Virtue and Courage
enough to undertake to kill all my Enemies
and Persecutors, though I had ever so many;
and I presume, he would be able to perform
as many glorious Actions for my Service, as
either Juba, Caesario, Artamenes, or Artaban,
who, though not a Prince, was greater than any
of them.
               
                  

the Marquis removed them from her Closer
into his Library, where Arabella found them.
               The surprising Adventures with which
they were filled, proved a most pleasing Enter-tainment
to a young Lady, who was wholly
secluded from the World; who had no other
Diversion, but ranging like a Nymph through
Gardens, or, to say better, the Woods and
Lawns in which she was inclosed; and who
had no other Conversation but that of a grave
and melancholy Father, or her own Attend-ants.
               Her Ideas, from the Manner of her Life,
and the Objects around her, had taken a
romantic Turn; and, supposing Romances
were real Pictures of Life, from them she
drew all her Notions and Expectations. By
them she was taught to believe, that Love was
the ruling Principle of the World; that every
other Passion was subordinate to this; and
that it caused all the Happiness and Miseries of
Life. Her Glass, which she often consulted,
always shewed her a Form so extremely lovely,
that, not finding herself engaged in such Ad-ventures
as were common to the Heroines in
the Romances she read, she often complained
of the Insensibility of Mankind, upon whom
her Charms seemed to have so little Influence.
               The perfect Retirement she lived in, af-forded
indeed no Opportunities of making the
Conquests she desired; but she could not
comprehend, how any Solitude could be ob-scure
enough to conceal a Beauty like hers
from Notice; and thought the Reputation of
her Charms sufficient to bring a Croud of

If those Persons you have named, said Miss
Glanville, were Murderers, and made a Practice
of killing People, I hope my Brother will be
too wise to follow their Examples: A strange
kind of Virtue and Courage indeed, to take
away the Lives of one's Fellow-Creatures! How
did such Wretches escape the Gallows, I won-der?
               I perceive, interrupted Arabella, what kind
of Apprehensions you have: I suppose you
think, if your Brother was to kill my Enemy,
the Law would punish him for it: But pray
undeceive yourself, Miss: The Law has no
Power over Heroes; they may kill as many
Men as they please, without being called to any
Account for it; and the more Lives they take
away, the greater is their Reputation for Virtue
and Glory. The illustrious Artaban, from the
Condition of a private Man, raised himself to
the sublimest Pitch of Glory by his Valour; for
he not only would win half a dozen Battles in
a Day; but, to shew that Victory followed him
where-ever he went, he would change Parties,
and immediately the Vanquished became Con-querors;
then, returning to the Side he had
quitted, changed the Laurels of his former
Friends into Chains. He made nothing of
tumbling Kings from their Thrones, and giving
away half a dozen Crowns in a Morning; for
his Generosity was equal to his Courage; and
to this Height of Power did he raise himself
by his Sword. Beginning at first with petty
Conquests, and not disdaining to oppose his
glorious Arm to sometimes less than a Score of
his Enemies; so, by degrees, enuring himself

to conquer inconsiderable Numbers, he came
at last to be the Terror of whole Armies, who
would fly at the Sight of his single Sword.
               This is all very astonishing indeed, said Miss
Glanville: However, I must intreat you, not to
insist upon my Brother's quarrelling and fight-
                  
                     •
                  ng
with People, since it will be neither for
your Honour, nor his Safety; for I am afraid,
if he was to commit Murder to please you, the
Laws would make him suffer for it; and the
World would be very free with its Censures on
your Ladyship's Reputation, for putting him
upon such shocking Crimes.
               By your Discourse, Miss, replied Arabella,
one would imagine, you knew as little in what
the good Reputation of a Lady consists, as the
Safety of a Man; for certainly the one depends
intirely upon his Sword, and the other
upon the Noise and Bustle she makes in the
World. The Blood that is shed for a Lady,
enhances the Value of her Charms; and the
more Men a Hero kills, the greater his Glory,
and, by Consequence, the more secure he is.
If to be the Cause of a great many Deaths, can
make a Lady infamous; certainly none were
ever more so, than Mandana, Cleopatra, and
Statira, the most illustrious Names in Anti-quity;
for each of whom, haply, an hundred
thousand Men were killed: Yet none were ever
so unjust, as to profane the Virtue of those Di-vine
Beauties, by casting any Censures upon
them for these glorious Effects of their Charms,
and the heroic Valour of their Admirers.
               I must confess, interrupted Miss Glanville,
I should not be sorry to have a Duel or Two

fought for me in Hyde-park; but then I would
not have any Blood shed for the World.
               
                  Glanville here interrupting his Sister with a
Laugh, Arabella also could not forbear smiling
at the harmless Kind of Combats her Cousin
was fond of.
               But to put an End to the Conversation, and
the Dispute which gave Rise to it, she obliged
Mr. Glanville to promise to fight with the Im-postor
Edward, whenever he found him; and
either take away his Life, or force him to con-fess,
he had no Part in the Design he had me-ditated
against her.
               This being agreed upon, Arabella, conduct-ing
Miss Glanville to her Chamber, retired to
her own; and passed the Night with much
greater Tranquillity, than she had done the
preceding; being satisfied with the Care she
had taken of her own Glory, and persuaded
that Glanville was not unfaithful; a Circum-stance,
that was of more Consequence to her
Happiness, than she was yet aware of.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which our Heroine is suspected of Insen-sibility.
               
               WHILE these things passed at the
Castle, Sir George was meditating on
the Means he should use to acquire the Esteem
of Lady Bella, of whose Person he was a little

enamoured, but of her Fortune a great deal
more.
               By the Observations he had made on her Be-haviour,
he discovered her peculiar Turn: He
was well read in Romances himself, and had
actually employed himself some Weeks in giv-ing
a new Version of the Grand Cyrus; but
the prodigious Length of the Task he had under-taken,
terrified him so much, that he gave it
over: Nevertheless, he was perfectly well ac-quainted
with the chief Characters in most of
the French Romances; could tell every thing
that was borrowed from them, in all the new
Novels that came out; and, being a very accu-rate
Critic, and a mortal Hater of Dryden, ri-diculed
him for want of Invention, as it appeared
by his having recourse to these Books for the
most shining Characters and Incidents in his
Plays. Almanzor, he would say, was the Copy
of the famous Artaban in Cleopatra, whose Ex-ploits
Arabella had expatiated upon to Miss
Glanville, and her Brother: His admired Cha-racter
of Melantha in Marriage à-la-mode, was
drawn from Berissa in the Grand Cyrus; and
the Story of Osmyn and Bensayda, in his Con-quest
of Granada, taken from Sesostris and Time-rilla
in that Romance.
               Fraught therefore with the Knowlege of all
the Extravagances and Peculiarities in those
Books, he resolved to make his Addresses to
Arabella in the Form they prescribed; and,
not having Delicacy enough to be disgusted with
the Ridicule in her Character, served himself
with her Foible, to effect his Designs.
               
                  

It being necessary, in order to his better Ac-quaintance
with Arabella, to be upon very
friendly Terms with Miss Glanville and her
Brother, he said a thousand gallant Things to
one, and seemed so little offended with the
Gloom he observed upon the Countenance of
the other, who positively assured him, that
Arabella meant only to laugh at him, when she
promised him her History, that he intreated
him, with the most obliging Earnestness, to fa-vour
him with his Company at his House, where
he omitted no sort of Civility, to confirm their
Friendship and Intimacy; and persuaded him,
by several little and seemingly unguarded Ex-pressions,
that he was not so great an Admirer
of Lady Bella, as her agreeable Cousin Miss
Glanville.
               
               Having thus secured a Footing in the Castle,
he furnished his Memory with all the necessary
Rules of making Love in Arabella's Taste, and
deferred his next Visit no longer than till the
following Day; but Mr. Glanville being in-disposed,
and not able to see Company, he knew
it would be in vain to expect to see Arabella,
since it was not to be imagined, Miss Glan-ville
could admit of a Visit, her Brother being
ill; and Lady Bella must be also necessarily en-gaged
with her.
               Contenting himself, therefore, with having
inquired after the Health of the Two Ladies,
he returned home, not a little vexed at his Dis-appointment.
               Mr. Glanville's Indisposition, increasing every
Day, grew at last dangerous enough to fill his
Sister with extreme Apprehensions. Arabella,
                  

keeping up to her Forms, sent regularly every
Day, to inquire after his Health; but did not
offer to go into his Chamber, though Miss
Glanville was almost always there.
               As she conceived his Sickness to be occasioned
by the Violence of his Passion for her, she ex-pected
some Overture should be made her by
his Sister, to engage her to make him a Visit;
such a Favour being never granted by any Lady
to a sick Lover, till she was previously informed,
her Presence was necessary to hinder the In-crease
of his Distemper.
               Miss Glanville would not have failed to re-present
to her Cousin the Incivility and Care-lesness
of her Behaviour, in not deigning to
come and see her Brother in his Indisposition,
had not Mr. Glanville, imputing this Neglect
to the Nicety of her Notions, which he had
upon other Occasions experienced, absolutely
forbid her to say any thing to her Cousin upon
this Subject.
               Miss Glanville being thus forced to Silence,
by the Fear of giving her Brother Uneasiness,
Arabella was extremely disappointed to find,
that, in Five Days Illness, no Application had
been made to her, either by the sick Lover, or
his Sister, who she thought interested herself
too little in his Recovery; so that her Glory
obliging her to lay some Constraint upon her-self,
she behaved with a Coolness and Insensi-bility,
that increased Miss Glanville's Aversion
to her, while, in Reality, she was extremely
concerned for her Cousin's Illness; but not
supposing it dangerous, since they had not re-course
to the usual Remedy, of beseeching a

Visit from the Person whose Presence was
alone able to work a Cure, she resolved to wait
patiently the Event.
               However, she never failed in her Respect to
Miss Glanville, whom she visited every Morn-ing,
before she went to her Brother; and also
constantly dined with her in her own Apart-ment,
inquiring always, with great Sweetness,
concerning her Brother's Health; when per-ceiving
her in Tears one Day, as she came in,
as usual, to dine with her, she was extremely
alarmed; and asked with great Precipitation,
If Mr. Glanville was worse?
               He is so bad, Madam, returned Miss Glan-ville,
that I believe it will be necessary to send
for my Papa, for fear he should die, and he
not see him.
               Die, Miss! interrupted Arabella eagerly:
No, he must not die; and shall not, if the Pity
of Arabella is powerful enough to make him
live. Let us go then, Cousin, said she, her
Eyes streaming with Tears; let us go and visit
this dear Brother, whom you lament: Haply
my Sight may repair the Evils my Rigour
has caused him; and since, as I imagine, he has
forborn, through the profound Respect he has
for me, to request the Favour of a Visit, I
will voluntarily bestow it on him, as well for
the Affection I bear you, as because I do not
wish his Death.
               You do not wish his Death, Madam! said
Miss Glanville, excessively angry at a Speech,
in her Opinion, extremely insolent: Is it such
a mighty Favour, pray, not to wish the Death
of my Brother, who never injured you? I am

sure, your Behaviour has been so extremely in-human,
that I have repented a thousand
times, we ever came to the Castle.
               Let us not waste the time in idle Reproaches,
said Arabella: If my Rigour has brought your
Brother into this Condition, my Compassion
can draw him out of it: It is no more than
what all do suffer, who are possessed of a vio-lent
Passion; and few Lovers ever arrive to the
Possession of their Mistresses, without being se-veral
times brought almost to their Graves,
either by their Severity, or some other Cause:
But nothing is more easy, than to work a Cure,
in these Cases; for the very Sight of the Person
beloved sometimes does it, as it happened to
Artamenes, when the Divine Mandana con-descended
to visit him: A few kind Words,
spoken by the fair Princess of Persia to Oroon-dates,
recalled him from the Gates of Death;
and one Line from Parisatis's Hand, which
brought a Command to Lysimachus to live, made
him not only resolve, but even able, to obey
her.—
               Miss Glanville, quite out of Patience at this
tedious Harangue, without any Regard to Cere-mony,
flounced out of the Room; and ran to
her Brother's Chamber, followed by Arabella,
who imputed her rude Haste to a Suspicion,
that her Brother was worse.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  By which we hope the Reader will be dif-ferently
affected.
               
               AT their Entrance into the Room, Miss
Glanville inquired of the Physician, just
going out, How he found her Brother? Who
replied, that his Fever was increased since last
Night; and that it would not (seeing Arabella
preparing to go to his Bedside) be proper to
disturb him.
               Saying this, he bow'd, and went out; and
Miss Glanville, repeating what the Physician had
said, begged her to defer speaking to him till
another time.
               I know, said she, that he apprehends, the
Sight of me will cause so many tumultuous
Motions in the Soul of his Patient, as may prove
prejudicial to him: Nevertheless, since his
Disorder is, questionless, more in his Mind than
Body, I may prove, haply, a better Physician
than he; since I am more likely, than he, to
cure an Illness I have caused—
               Saying this, she walked up to Mr. Glanville's
Bedside, who, seeing her, thanked her, with a
weak Voice, for coming to see him; assuring
her, he was very sensible of the Favour she did
him—
               You must not, said she, blushing, thank me
too much, lest I think the Favour I have done
you, is really of more Consequence than I
imagined, since it merits so many Acknowlege-ments:

Your Physician tells us, pursued she,
that your Life is in Danger; but I persuade
myself, you will value it so much from this
Moment, that you will not protract your Cure
any longer.
               Are you mad, Madam, whispered Miss Glan-ville,
who stood behind her, to tell my Bro-ther,
that the Physician says he is in Danger?
I suppose you really wish he may die, or you
would not talk so.
               If, answered she, whispering again to Miss
Glanville, you are not satisfied with what I have
already done for your Brother, I will go as far
as Modesty will permit me: And gently pulling
open the Curtains;
               
                  Glanville, said she, with a Voice too much
raised for a sick Person's Ear, I grant to your
Sister's Solicitations, what the fair Statira did
to an Interest yet more powerful, since, as you
know, it was her own Brother, who pleaded
in Favour of the dying Orontes: Therefore,
considering you in a Condition haply no less
dangerous, than that of that passionate Prince,
I condescend, like her, to tell you, that I do not
wish your Death; that I intreat you to live;
and, lastly, by all the Power I have over you,
I command you to recover.
               Ending these Words, she closed the Curtain,
that her transported Lover might not see her
Blushes and Confusion, which were so great,
that, to conceal them, even from Miss Glan-ville,
she hurried out of the Room, and retired
to her own Apartment, expecting, in a little
time, to receive a Billet, under the sick Man's
Hand, importing, that, in Obedience to her

Adorers to demand her of her Father. Her
Mind being wholly filled with the most extra-vagant
Expectations, she was alarmed by every
trifling Incident; and kept in a continual An-xiety
by a Vicissitude of Hopes, Fears, Wishes,
and Disappointments.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Contains a Description of a Lady's Dress
in Fashion not much above Two thousand
Years ago.—The Beginning of an Ad-venture
which seems to promise a great
deal.
               
               
                  ARABELLA had now entered into her
Seventeenth Year with the Regret of see-ing
herself the Object of Admiration to a few
Rustics only, who happened to see her; when,
one Sunday, making use of the Permission the
Marquis sometimes allowed her, to attend. Di-vine
Service at the Church belonging to the
Village near which they lived, her Vanity was
flattered with an Adorer not altogether unwor-thy
of her Notice.
               This Gentleman was young, gay, hand-some,
and very elegantly dressed; he was just
come from London with an Intention to pass
some Weeks with a Friend in that Part of the
Country; and at the time Arabella entered
the Church, his Eyes, which had wandered
from one rural Fair to another, were in an In-stant
fixed upon her Face. She blushed with
a very becoming Modesty; and, pleased with

Commands, he was recovered, and ready to
throw himself at her Feet, to thank her for that
Life she had bestowed upon him, and to de-dicate
the Remains of it to her Service.
               Miss Glanville, who stayed behind her, in a
strange Surprize at her ridiculous Behaviour;
though she longed to know what her Brother
thought of it, finding he continued silent,
would not disturb him. The Shame he con-ceived
at hearing so absurd a Speech from a
Woman he passionately loved; and the Desire
he had, not to hear his Sister's Sentiments up-on
it; made him counterfeit Sleep, to avoid
any Discourse with her upon so disagreeable a
Subject.
               That Day his Fever increased; and the next,
the Physician pronouncing him in great Dan-ger,
a Messenger was dispatched to Town, to
hasten the Coming of Sir Charles; and poor
Miss Glanville was quite inconsoleable, under
the Apprehensions of losing him.
               
                  Arabella, not to derogate from her Character,
affected great Firmness of Mind upon this Oc-casion;
she used the most persuasive Eloquence
to moderate her Cousin's Affliction, and caused
all imaginable Care to be taken of Mr. Glan-ville:
While any one was present, her Looks
discovered only a calm and decent Sorrow;
yet when she was alone, or had only her dear
Lucy with her, she gave free Vent to her Tears;
and discovered a Grief for Mr. Glanville's Ill-ness,
little different from that she had felt for her
Father's.
               As she now visited him constantly every Day,
she took an Opportunity, when she was alone

by his Bedside, to chide him for his Disobedi-ence,
in not recovering, as she had command-ed
him.
               Dear Cousin, answered he faintly, Can you
imagine, Health is not my Choice? And do
you think, I would suffer these Pains, if I could
possibly ease myself of them?
               Those Pains, replied Arabella, mistaking his
Complaint, ought to have ceased, when the
Cause of them did; and when I was no longer
rigorous, you ought no longer to have suffer-ed:
But tell me, since you are, questionless,
one of the strangest Men in the World, and
the hardest to be comforted; nay, and I may
add, the most disobedient of all, that ever
wore the Fetters of Love; Tell me, I say,
what must I do to content you?
               If I live, Cousin, said Glanville—
               Nay, interrupted Arabella, since my Empire
over you is not so absolute as I thought; and
since you think fit to reserve to yourself the
Liberty of dying, contrary to my Desire; I
think I had better resolve, not to make any
Treaty with you: However, as I have gone
thus far, I will do something more; and tell
you, since I have commanded you to live, I
will also permit you to love me, in order to
make the Life I have bestowed on you, worthy
your Acceptance. Make me no Reply, said
she, putting her Hand on his Mouth; but be-gin
from this Moment to obey me.
               Saying this, she went out of the Room—
               A few Hours after, his Fever being come to
a Height, he grew delirious, and talked very
wildly; but a favourable Crisis ensuing, he fell

into a sound and quiet Sleep, and continued in
it for several Hours: Upon his waking, the
Physician declared, his Fever was greatly aba-ted;
and the next Morning, pronounced him
out of Danger—
               Miss Glanville, transported with Joy, ran to
Lady Bella, and informed her of this good News;
but as she did not make her the Acknowledge-ments
she expected, for being the Cause of his
Recovery, she behaved with more Reserve
than Miss Glanville thought was necessary:
Which renewed her former Disgusts; yet, dread-ing
to displease her Brother, she concealed it
from the Observation of her Cousin—
               
                  Arabella, being desirous of completing her
Lover's Cure by some more favourable Ex-pressions,
went to his Chamber, accompanied
by Miss Glanville.
               
               I see, said she, approaching to his Bedside,
with an inchanting Smile, that you know how
to be obedient, when you please; and I begin
to know, by the Price you set upon your Obe-dience,
that small Favours will not content you.
               Indeed, my dearest Cousin, said Glanville,
who had found her more interested in his Re-covery
than he expected, you have been very
obliging, and I will always most gratefully own
it.
               I am glad, interrupted Arabella, that Gra-titude
is not banished from all your Family; and
that that Person in it, for whom I have the most
Sensibility, is not intirely divested of it—
               I hope, said Mr. Glanville, my Sister has
given you no Cause to complain of her.
               
                  

Indeed but she has, replied Arabella; for,
notwithstanding she is obliged to me for the
Life of a Brother, whom questionless she loves
very well; nevertheless, she did not deign to
make me the least Acknowledgement for what I
have done in your Favour: However, Glan-ville,
provided you continue to observe that
Respect and Fidelity towards me, which I have
Reason to hope for from you; your Condition
shall be never the worse for Miss Glanville's un-acknowleging
Temper; and I now confirm
the Grant I Yesterday made you, and repeat
it again; That I permit you to love me, and
promise you not to be displeased at any Testi-monies
you will give me of your Passion, pro-vided
you serve me with an inviolable Fidelity.
               But, Madam, returned Mr. Glanville, to
make my Happiness complete, you must also
promise to love me; or else what signifies the
Permission you give me to love you?
               You are almost as unacknowleging as your
Sister, resumed Arabella, blushing; and if your
Health was perfectly re-established, questionless,
I should chide you for your Presumption; but
since something must be allowed to sick Per-sons,
whose Reason, one may suppose, is weak-ened
by their Indisposition, I will pardon your
Indiscretion at this time, and counsel you to
wait patiently for what Heaven will determine
in your Favour: Therefore endeavour to merit
my Affection by your Respect, Fidelity, and
Services; and hope from my Justice, what-ever
it ought to bestow—
               Ending this Speech, with a Solemnity of Ac-cent,
that gave Mr. Glanville to understand,

any Reply would offend her, he silently kissed
her fair Hand, which she held out to him; a
Favour, the Terms upon which they now were,
and his Sickness, gave him a Right to expect—
And, finishing her Visit for that time, left him
to his Repose; being extremely pleased at the
Prospect of his Recovery, and very well satisfied
at having so gracefully got over so great a Diffi-culty,
as that of giving him Permission to love
her: For by the Laws of Romance, when a Lady
has once given her Lover that Permission, she
may lawfully allow him to talk to her upon the
Subject of his Passion, accept all his Gallan-tries,
and claim an absolute Empire over all his
Actions; reserving to herself the Right of fix-ing
the Time when she may own her Affection:
And when that important Step is taken, and his
Constancy put to a few Years more Trial; when
he has killed all his Rivals, and rescued her from
a thousand Dangers; she at last condescends to
reward him with her Hand; and all her Ad-ventures
are at an End for the future.
               END of the THIRD BOOK.
               
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK IV.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  In which our Heroine discovers her Know-lege
in Astronomy.
               
               
                  SIR George, who had never missed
a Day, during Mr. Glanville's
Illness, in sending to the Castle,
now he was able to see Company,
visited him very frequently; and
sometimes had the Happiness to
meet with Arabella in his Chamber: But,
knowing the Conditions of her Father's Will,
and Mr. Glanville's Pretensions, he was obliged
to lay so much Constraint upon himself, in the
Presence of Miss Glanville, and her Brother, that

he hardly durst trust his Eyes, to express his Ad-miration
of her, for Fear of alarming them with
any Suspicion of his Designs: However, he
did not fail to recommend himself to her
Esteem, by a Behaviour to her full of the most
perfect Respect; and very often, ere he was
aware, uttered some of the extravagant Com-pliments,
that the Gallants in the French Ro-mances
use to their Mistresses.
               If he walked with her in the Gardens, he
would observe, that the Flowers, which were
before languishing and pale, bloomed with fresh
Beauty at her Approach; that the Sun shined
out with double Brightness, to exceed, if possible,
the Lustre of her Eyes; and that the Wind,
fond of kissing her celestial Countenance, played
with her fair Hair; and, by gentle Murmurs,
declared its Happiness—
               If Miss Glanville happened to be present,
when he talked to her in this Strain, she would
suppose he was ridiculing her Cousin's fan-tastical
Turn; and when she had an Opportu-nity
of speaking to him alone, would chide him,
with a great deal of good Humour, for giving
hrr so much Diversion at her Cousin's Ex-pence.
               Sir George, improving this Hint, persuaded
Miss Glanville by his Answers, that he really
laughed at Arabella; and, being now less fear-ful
of giving any Suspicion to the gay Coquet,
since she assisted him to deceive her, he applied
himself, with more Assiduity than ever, to insi-nuate
himself into Arabella's Flavour.
               However, the Necessity he was under of be-ing
always of Arabella's Opinion, sometimes

drew him into little Difficulties with Miss Glan-ville.
Knowing that young Lady was extremely
fond of Scandal, he told her, as a most agree-able
Piece of News, one Afternoon when he
was there, that he had seen Miss Groves, who,
he supposed, had come into the Country upon
the same Account as she had done a Twelve-month
before: Her Marriage being yet a
Secret, the complaisant Baronet threw out an
Hint or two, concerning the Familiarity and
Correspondence there was between her and the
Gentleman to whom she was really secretly
married.
               Miss Glanville, making the most of this Intel-ligence,
said a thousand severe Things against
the unfortunate Miss Groves; which Arabella,
always benevolent and kind, could not bear.
               I persuade myself, said she to her Cousin,
that you have been misinformed concerning this
Beauty, whose Misfortunes you aggravate by
your cruel Censures; and whoever has given
you the History of her Life, has, haply, done it
with great Injustice—
               Why, Madam, interrupted Miss Glanville,
do you think you are better acquainted with her
History, as you call it, who have never been in
Town, where her Follies made her so remark-able,
than Persons who were Eye-witnesses of
all her ridiculous Actions?
               I apprehend, said Arabella, that I, who have
had a Relation made to me of all the Passages
of her Life, and have been told all her most
secret Thoughts, may know as much, if not
more, than Persons who have lived in the same
Place with her, and have not had that Advan-tage;

and I think, I know enough to vindi-cate
her from many cruel Aspersions.
               Pray, Madam, returned Miss Glanville, will
your Ladyship pretend to defend her scandalous
Commerce with Mr. L—?
               I know not, Miss, said Arabella, why you
call her Intercourse with that perjured Man by
so unjust an Epithet. If Miss Groves be unchaste,
so was the renowned Cleopatra, whose Marriage
with Julius Caesar is controverted to this Day.
               And what Reasons, Madam, said Miss Glan-ville,
have you for supposing, Miss Groves was
married to Mr. L—, since all the World
knows to the contrary?
               Very sufficient ones, said Arabella; since it is
hardly possible to suppose, a young Lady of Miss
Groves's Quality would stain the Lustre of her
Descent by so shameful an Intrigue; and also,
since there are Examples enough to be found of
Persons, who suffered under the same unhappy
Circumstances as herself; yet were perfectly
innocent, as was that great Queen I have men-tioned;
who questionless, you, Sir, are suffi-ciently
convinced, was married to that illustrious
Conqueror; who, by betraying so great and so
fair a Queen, in great measure tarnished the
Glory of his Laurels—
               Married, Madam! replied Sir George: Who
presumes to say, that fair Queen was not mar-ried
to that illustrious Conqueror?
               Nay, you know, Sir, interrupted Arabella,
many People did say, even while she was living,
that she was not married; and have branded her
Memory with infamous Calumnies, upon Ac-count
of the Son she had by Caesar, the brave

                  Caesario, who, under the Name of Cleomedon,
performed such Miracles of Valour in Ethiopia.
               
               I assure you, Madam, said Sir George, I was
always a great Admirer of the famous Cleome-don,
who was certainly the greatest Hero in the
World.
               Pardon me, Sir, said Arabella; Cleomedon
was, questionless, a very valiant Man; but he,
and all the Heroes that ever were, must give
place to the unequalled Prince of Mauritania;
that illustrious, and for a long time unfortunate,
Lover of the Divine Cleopatra, who was Daugh-ter,
as you questionless know, of the great
Queen we have been speaking of—
               Dear Heart! said Miss Glanville, What is
all this to the Purpose? I would fain know,
whether Sir George believes, Miss Groves was
ever married to Mr. L—.
               Doubtless, I do, said he; for, as Lady Bella
says, she is in the same unhappy Circumstance
with the great Cleopatra; and if Julius Caesar
could be guilty of denying his Marriage with
that Queen, I see no Reason to suppose, why
Mr. L—might not be guilty of the same
kind of Injustice.
               So then, interrupted Miss Glanville, blushing
with Spite, you will really offer to maintain,
that Miss Groves was married? Ridiculous!
How such a Report would be laughed at in Lon-don!
               
               I assure you, replied Arabella, if ever I go to
London, I shall not scruple to maintain that
Opinion to every one, who will mention that
Fair-one to me; and use all my Endeavours to
confirm them in it.
               
                  

the unusual Appearance of so fine a Gentleman,
and the particular Notice he took of her, passed
on to her Seat thro' a double Row of Country
People, who, with a Profusion of aukward Bows
and Courtesies, expressed their Respect.
               Mr. Hervey, for that was the Stranger's
Name, was no less surprised at her Beauty,
than the Singularity of her Dress; and the odd
Whim of being followed into the Church by
three Women-Attendants, who, as soon as she
was seated, took their Places behind her.
               Her Dress, tho' singular, was far from be-ing
unbecoming. All the Beauties of her Neck
and Shape were set off to the greatest Advan-tage
by the Fashion of her Gown, which, in the
Manner of a Robe, was made to sit tight to
her Body; and fastened on the Breast with a
Knot of Diamonds. Her fine black Hair, hung
upon her Neck in Curls, which had so much
the Appearance of being artless, that all but
her Maid, whose Employment it was to give
them that Form, imagined they were so. Her
Head-dress was only a few Knots advantage-ously
disposed, over which she wore a white
Sarsenet Hood, somewhat in the Form of a
Veil, with which she sometimes wholly cover-ed
her fair Face, when she saw herself beheld
with too much Attention.
               This Veil had never appeared to her so ne-cessary
before. Mr. Hervey's eager Glances
threw her into so much Confusion, that, pulling
it over her Face as much as she was able, she
remained invisible to him all the time they af-terwards
stayed in the Church. This Action,
by which she would have had him understand

Your Ladyship would do well, said Miss
Glanville, to persuade People, that Miss Groves,
at Fifteen, did not want to run away with her
Writing-master.
               As I am persuaded myself, said Arabella, that
Writing master was some noble Stranger in
Disguise, who was passionately in Love with her,
I shall not suffer any body, in my Hearing, to
propagate such an unlikely Story; but since he
was a Person worthy of her Affection, if she had
run away with him, her Fault was not without
Example, and even Excuse: You know what
the fair Artemisa did for Alexander, Sir, pur-sued
she, turning to Sir George: I would fain
know your Sentiments upon the Action of that
Princess, which some have not scrupled to con-demn—
               Whoever they are, Madam, said Sir George,
who condemn the fair Artemisa for what she
did for Alexander, are Miscreants and Slan-derers;
and though that beautiful Princess has
been dead more than Two thousand Years, I
would draw my Sword in Defence of her Cha-racter,
against all who should presume, in my
Presence, to cast any Censures upon it.
               Since you are so courageous, said Miss Glan-ville,
laughing excessively at this Sally, which,
she thought, was to ridicule her Cousin; it is
to be hoped, you will defend a living Lady's
Character, who may thank you for it; and
make the World believe, that her Correspond-ence
with Mr. L—was intirely innocent;
and that she never had any Design to run away
with her Writing-master.
               
                  

Are you resolved, Cousin, said Lady Bella,
to persist in that ridiculous Mistake, and take
a Nobleman for a Writing-master only be-cause
his Love put him upon such a Stratagem
to obtain his Mistress?
               Indeed, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville, smile-ing,
you may as well persuade me, the Moon
is made of a Cream Cheese, as that any Noble-man
turned himself into a Writing-master, to
obtain Miss Groves—
               Is it possible, Miss, said Arabella, that you
can offer such an Affront to my Understanding,
as to suppose, I would argue upon such a ridi-culous
System; and compare the Second glo-rious
Luminary of the Heavens to so unwor-thy
a Resemblance? I have taken some Pains
to contemplate the Heavenly Bodies; and, by
Reading and Observation, am able to compre-hend
some Part of their Excellence: Therefore
it is not probable, I should descend to such
trivial Comparisons; and liken a Planet, which,
haply, is not much less than our Earth, to a
thing so inconsiderable, as that you name—
               Pardon me, dear Cousin, interrupted Miss
Glanville, laughing louder than before, if I di-vert
myself a little with the Extravagance of
your Notions. Really I think, you have no
Reason to be angry, if I supposed you might
make a Comparison between the Moon and
a Cream Cheese; since you say, that same
Moon, which don't appear broader than your
Gardener's Face, is not much less than the
whole World: Why, certainly, I have more
Reason to trust my own Eyes, than such whim-sical
Notions as these.
               
                  

                  Arabella, unwilling to expose her Cousin's Ig-norance,
by a longer Dispute upon this Sub-ject,
begged her to let it drop for the present;
and, turning to Sir George, I am very glad, said
she, that having always had some Inclination to
excuse, and even defend, the Flight of Arte-misa
with Alexander, my Opinion is warranted
by that of a Person so generous as yourself: In-deed,
when we consider, that this Princess for-sook
her Brother's Dominions, and fled away
with a Lover whom she did not hate; question-less,
her Enemies accuse her, with some Ap-pearance
of Reason, of too great Imbecillity.
               But, Madam, replied Sir George, her Ene-mies
will not take the Pains to examine her
Reasons for this Conduct—
               True, Sir, resumed Arabella; for she was in
Danger of seeing a Prince, who loved her, put to
a cruel and infamous Death upon a public Scaf-fold;
and she did not resolve to fly with him,
till all her Tears and Prayers were found in-effectual
to move the King her Brother to
Mercy.
               Tho', replied Sir George, I am extremely
angry with the indiscreet Cepio, who discovered
Alexander to the Armenian King; yet what does
your Ladyship think of that gallant Action of
his, when he saw him upon the Scaffold, and
the Executioner ready to cut off his Head? How
brave it was of him, to pass undauntedly thro'
the prodigious Number of Guards that environ-ed
the Scaffold; and, with his drawn Sword, run
the Executioner through-the Body, in the Sight
of them all! Then giving the Prince another

Sword, engage more than Two thousand Men
in his Defence!
               Questionless, replied Arabella, it was a glo-rious
Action; and when I think, how the King
of Armenia was enraged to see such a Multi-tude
of Soldiers fly from the Swords of Two
Men, I cannot choose but divert myself with
the Consternation he was in: Yet that was no-thing
to the horrible Despair, which tormented
him afterwards, when he found, that Alexander,
after being again taken and imprisoned, had
broken his Chains, and carried away with him
the Princess Artimesa his Sister.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  In which a very pleasing Conversation is
left unfinished.
               
               AS Arabella was in this Part of her Dis-course,
a Servant came to inform her, that
Sir Charles Glanville was just alighted. Upon
which, Miss Glanville flew to receive her Father;
and Arabella, walking a little slower after her,
gave Sir George an Opportunity of holding a little
longer Conversation with her.
               I dare believe, Madam, said he, when you
read the Story of the unfortunate Alexander,
your fair Eyes did not refuse to shed some
Tears at the barbarous and shameful Death
he was going to suffer: Yet I assure you▪ melancholy as his Situation was, it was also very

glorious for him, since he had the sublime
Satisfaction of dying for the Person he adored;
and had the ravishing Pleasure to know, that his
Fate would draw Tears from that lovely Prin-cess,
for whom he sacrificed his Life: Such a
Condition, Madam, ought to be envied rather
than pitied; for, next to the Happiness of pos-sessing
the Person one adores, certainly the
Glory of dying for her is most to be coveted.
               
                  Arabella, pleasingly surprised to hear Lan-guage
so conformable to her own Ideas, looked
for a Moment upon the Baronet, with a most
inchanting Complaisancy in her Eyes—
               It must be confessed, Sir, said she, that you
speak very rationally upon these Matters; and
by the Tenderness and Generosity of your Sen-timents,
you give me Cause to believe, that
your Heart is prepossessed with some▪ Object
worthy of inspiring them.
               Sir George seeming, as if he struggled to sup-press
a Sigh; You are in the right, Madam,
said he, to suppose, that if my Heart be
prepossessed with any Object, it is with one,
who is capable of inspiring a very sublime Pas-sion;
and I assure you, if ever it submits to any
Fetters, they shall be imposed on me by the
fairest Person in the World—
               Since Love is not voluntary, replied Ara-bella,
smiling, it may happen, that your Heart
may be surprised by a meaner Beauty, than
such a one as you describe: However, as a
Lover has always an extraordinary Partiality
for the beloved Object, 'tis probable, what
you say may come to pass; and you may be

in Love with the fairest Person in the World,
in your own Opinion.
               They were now so near the House, that Sir
George could reply no other ways, than by a very
passionate Glance, which Arabella did not ob-serve,
being in haste to pay her Respects to her
Uncle, whom she met just going to Mr. Glan-ville.
Her Looks were directed to him. Sir
Charles saluting her with great Affection, they
all went into Mr. Glanville's Chamber, who
received his Father with the utmost Respect and
Tenderness; extremely regretting the Trouble
he had been at in taking a Journey to the
Castle upon his Account; and gently blaming
his Sister for her Precipitancy in alarming him
so soon.
               Sir Charles, extremely overjoyed to find him
so well recovered, would not allow him to
blame Miss Glanville for what she had done:
but, addressing himself to his Niece, he thanked
her for the Care she had taken of Mr. Glan-ville,
in very obliging Terms.
               
                  Arabella could not help blushing at her
Uncle's Compliment, supposing he thanked her
for having restored her Cousin to his Health.
               I assure you, Sir, said she, Mr. Glanville is
less obliged to my Commands, than to the
Goodness of his Constitution, for his Recovery;
and herein he was not so obedient, as many
Persons I could name to him.
               Mr. Glanville, willing to prevent the Com-pany's
Observation upon this Speech, began to
acquaint his Father with the Rise and Pro-gress
of his Distemper: But though the old
Gentleman listened with great Attention to his

Son, while he was speaking; yet not having lost
a Word of what Arabella had said, as soon as he
was done, he turned to his Niece, and asked
her, how she could be so unjust, to accuse his
Son of Disobedience, because he did not reco-ver,
when she commanded him? Why, Ma-dam,
added he, you want to carry your Power
farther then ever any Beauty did before you;
since you pretend to make People sick and well,
whenever you please.
               Really, Sir, replied Arabella, I pretend to
no more Power, than what I presume all others
of my Sex have upon the like Occasions; and
since nothing is more common, than for a
Gentleman, though ever so sick, to recover in
Obedience to the Commands of that Person,
who has an absolute Power over his Life, I
conceive, I have a Right to think myself in-jured,
if Mr. Glanville, contrary to mine, had
thought proper to die—
               Since, said the old Gentlemen, smiling, my
Son has so well obeyed your Commands in re-covering
his Health, I shall tremble, lest, in
Obedience to a contrary Command of yours, he
should die, and deprive me of an Heir; a Mis-fortune,
which, if it should happen, I should
place to your Account.
               I assure you, Sir, said Arabella, very gravely,
I have too great an Esteem for Mr. Glanville,
to condemn him to so severe a Punishment as
Death for light Offences: And since it is not
very probable, that he will ever commit such
Crimes against me, as can be only expiated by
his Death; such as Infidelity, Disobedience,

and the like; you have no Reason to fear such
a Misfortune by my means—
               Alas! replied Sir George, you Beauties make
very nice Distinctions in these Cases; and
think, if you do not directly command your
Lovers to die, you are no-ways accountable for
their Death: And when a Lover, as it often
happens, dies through Despair of ever being able
to make himself beloved; or, being doomed to
Banishment or Silence, falls into a Fever, from
which nothing but Kindness can recover him▪
and, that being denied, he patiently expires; 
                     •
                  
say, when these Things happen, as they cer-tainly
do every Day; How can you hold your selves
guiltless of their Deaths, which are ap-parently
occasioned, either by your Scorn or
Insensibility?
               Sir Charles and Miss Glanville were extremely
diverted at this Speech of Sir George's;
and Mr. Glanville, though he would have wish-ed
he had been raillying any other Person's Follies
than his Cousin's, yet could not help smiling at
the solemn Accent, in which he delivered him-self—
               
                  Arabella, mightily pleased with his Manner of
talking, was resolved to furnish him with more
Occasions of diverting the Company at her Ex-pence.
               I see, answered she, you are one of those
Persons, who call a just Decorum, which all
Ladies, who love Glory as they ought to do,
are obliged to preserve, by the Name of Seve-rity:
But pray, what would you have a Lady
do, whom an importunate Lover presumes to
declare his Passion to? You know it is not per-mitted

us to listen to such Discourses; and
you know also, whoever is guilty of such an
Offence, merits a most rigorous Punishment:
Moreover, you find, that when a Sentence of
Banishment or Silence is pronounced upon them,
these unhappy Criminals are so conscious of the
of Justice their Doom, that they never murmur
against their Judge who condemns them; and
therefore, whatever are their Fates, in Conse-quence
of that Anger they have incurred, the
Ladies, thus offended, ought not to be charged
with it, as any cruel Exertion of their Power.
               Such Eloquence as yours, Madam, replied
Sir George, might defend Things yet more un-justifiable:
However, you must give me Leave,
as being interested in the Safety of my Sex,
still to be of Opinion, that no Man ought to
be hated, because he adores a beautiful Object,
and consecrates all his Moments to her Ser-vice.
               Questionless, resumed Arabella, he will not
be hated, while, out of the Respect and Reverence
he bears her, he carefully conceals his Passion
from her Knowlege; but as soon as ever he
breaks through the Bounds, which that Re-spect
prescribes him, and lets her understand
his true Sentiments, he has Reason to expect
a most rigorous Sentence, since he certainly, by
that Presumption, has greatly deserved it.
               If the Ladies, replied Sir George, were more
equitable, and would make some Distinction
between those who really love them in a pas-sionate
and respectful Silence, and others who
do not feel the Power of their Charms, they
might spare themselves the Trouble of hearing

what so mortally offends them: But when a
Lady sees a Man every Day, who by his Looks,
Sighs, and Solicitude to please her, by his num-berless
Services and constant Attendance of her,
makes it evident, that his Soul is possessed with
a violent Passion for her; I say, when a Lady
sees, and yet will not see, all this, and persists
in using a passionate Adorer with all the Indif-ference
due to a Man wholly insensible of the
Power of her Charms; what must he do in
such a mortifying Situation, but make known
his Torments to her that occasions them, in
order to prevail upon her to have some Sense
of what he does and feels hourly for her sake?
               But since he gains nothing by the Discovery
of his Passion, resumed Arabella; but, on the
contrary, loses the Advantages he was before
possessed of, which were very great, since he
might see and discourse with his Mistress every
Day; and, haply, have the Honour to do her a great
many petty Services, and receive some of her
Commands; all these Advantages he loses, when
he declares he loves: And truly, I think, a Man
who is so unwise as to hazard a certain Happiness
for a very improbable Hope, deserves to be
punished, as well for his Folly as Presumption;
and, upon both these Accounts, Banishment is
not too rigorous a Sentence.
            
            
               

that she was displeased at his gazing on her
with so little Respect, only increased his Curi-osity
to know who she was.
               When the Congregation was dismissed, he
hastened to the Door, with an Intention to of-fer
her his Hand to help her to her Coach; but
seeing the magnificent Equipage that waited
for her, and the Number of Servants that at-tended
it, he conceived a much higher Idea of
her Quality than he had at first; and, changing
his Design, contented himself with only bowing
to her as she passed; and as soon as her Coach
drove away, inquired of some Persons nearest
him, who she was?
               These Rustics, highly delighted with the
Opportunity of talking to the gay Londoner,
whom they looked upon as a very extraordinary
Person, gave him all the Intelligence they were
able, concerning the Lady he inquired after;
and filled him with an inconceivable Surprize at
the strange Humour of the Marquis, who bu-ried
so beautiful a Creature in Obscurity.
               At his Return home he expressed his Admi-ration
of her in Terms that persuaded his Friend,
she had made some Impression on his Heart;
and, after raillying him a little upon this Suspi-cion,
he assumed a more serious Air, and told
him, If he really liked Lady Bella; he thought
it not impossible but he might obtain her. The
poor Girl, added he, has been kept in Confine-ment
so long, that I believe it would not be dif-ficult
to persuade her to free herself by Marriage.
She never had a Lover in her Life; and there-fore
the first Person who addresses her has the
fairest Chance for succeeding.
               
                  

               CHAP. III.
               
                  Definition of Love and Beauty.—The
necessary Qualities of a Hero and
Heroine.
               
               THOUGH, replied Mr. Glanville, you
are very severe in the Treatment you think
it necessary our Sex should receive from yours;
yet I wish some of our Town Beauties were,
if not altogether of your Opinion, yet suffi-ciently
so, as to make it not a Slavery for a
Man to be in their Company; for unless one
talks of Love to these fair Conquets the whole
time one is with them, they are quite dis-pleased,
and look upon a Man who can think
any thing, but themselves, worthy his Thoughts
or Observation, with the utmost Contempt.
How often have you and I, Sir George, pursued
he, pitied the Condition of the few Men of
Sense, who are sometimes among the Croud of
Beaux, who attend the Two Sister Beauties
to all Places of polite Diversion in Town? For
those Ladies think it a mortal Injury done to
their Charms, if the Men about them have
Eyes or Ears for any Object but their Faces,
or any Sound but that of their Voices: So that
the Connoisseurs in Music, who attend them to
Ranelagh, must stop their Ears, like Ulysses,
when the Siren Frasi sings; and the Wits, who
gallant them to the Side box, must lay a much
greater Constraint upon themselves, in order to

resist the Soul-moving Garrick; and appear in-sensible,
while he is upon the Stage.
               Upon my Soul, added Sir George (forgetting
the Character he assumed) when I have seen
some Persons of my Acquaintance talking to
the eldest of these Ladies, while one of Con-greve's
Comedies has been acting; his Face
quite turned from the Stage, and hers over-spread
with an eternal Smile; her fine Eyes
sometimes lifted up in a beautiful Surprize, and
a little inchanting Giggle half-hid with her Fan▪
in spite of their Inattention, I have been ready
to imagine, he was entertaining her with Re-marks
upon the Play, which she was judi-cious
enough to understand; and yet I have
afterwards been informed by himself, that
nothing was less in their Thoughts; and
all that Variety in her Face, and that extreme
seeming Earnestness in his Discourse, was oc-casioned
by the most trifling Subjects imagin-able:
He perhaps had been telling her, how
the Sight of her Squirrel, which peeped out of
her Pocket, surprised some Ladies she was
visiting; and what they said upon her Pondness
for it, when she was gone; blaming them at the
same time for their want of Delicacy, in not
knowing how to set a right Value upon such
pleasing Animals: Hence proceeded her Smiles,
the lifting up of her Eyes, the half-stifled
Laugh, and all the pretty Gestures that appeared
so wonderfully charming to all those who did
not hear their Discourse: And it is upon such
Trifies as these, or else on the inexhaustible
Subject of their Charms, that all who are am-bitious

of being near these Miracles, are under
a Necessity of talking.
               And pray, interrupted Arabella, What Sub-jects
afford Matter for a more pleasing Variety
of Conversation, than those of Beauty and
Love? Can we speak of any Object so capable
of delighting as Beauty, or of any Passion of the
Mind more sublime and pleasing than Love?
               With Submission, Madam, said Glanville, I
conceive, all that can be said, either of Beauty,
or of Love, may be comprised in a very few
Words: All who have Eyes, and behold true
Beauty, will be ready to confess it is a very
pleasing Object; and all that can be said of it,
may be said in very few Words; for when we
have run over the Catalogue of Charms, and
mentioned fine Eyes, fine Hair, delicate Com-plexion,
regular Features, and an elegant Shape,
we can only add a few Epithets more, such as
Lovely, Dangerous, Inchanting, Inresistible,
and the like; and every thing that can be said
of Beauty is exhausted. And so likewise it is
with Love; we know that Admiration pre-cedes
it, that Beauty kindles it, Hope keeps it
alive, and Despair puts an End to it; and that
Subject may be as soon discussed as the other,
by the judicious Use of proper Words; such as
Wounds, Darts, Fires, Languishings, Dyings,
Torture, Rack, Jealousy, and a few more of
no Signification, but upon th
                     •
                  s Subject.
               Certainly, Sir, said Arabella, you have not
well considered what you say, since you main-tain,
that Love and Beauty are Subjects easily
and quickly discussed: Take the Pains, I beseech
you, to reflect a little upon those numerous and

long Conversations, which these Subjects have
given Rise to in Clelia, and the Grand Cyrus,
where the most illustrious and greatest Personages
in the World manage the Disputes; and the
agreeable Diversity of their Sentiments on those
Heads affords a most pleasing and rational En-tertainment:
You will there find, that the
greatest Conquerors, and Heroes of invincible
Valour, reason with the most exact and scru-pulous
Nicety upon Love and Beauty; the Su-periority
of fair and brown Hair controverted
by Warriors, with as much Eagerness as they
dispute for Victory in the Field; and the dif-ferent
Effects of that Passion upon different
Hearts defined with the utmost Accuracy and
Eloquence.
               I must own, interrupted Sir Charles, I
should have but a mean Opinion of those
Warriors, as you call them, who could busy
themselves in talking of such Trifles; and be
apt to imagine such insignificant Fellows, who
could wrangle about the Colour of their Mi-stresses
Hair, would be the first to turn their
Backs upon the Enemy in Battle.
               Is it possible, Sir, resumed Arabella, glow-ing
with Indignation, that you can entertain
such unworthy Thoughts of Heroes, who merit
the Admiration and Praise of all Ages for
their inestimable Valour, whom the Spears of
a whole Army opposed to each of their single
Swords would not oblige to fly? What think
you, Sir, pursued she, looking at Sir George, of
the injurious Words my Uncle has uttered
against those heroic Princes, whose Courage, I
believe, you are as well acquainted with as my-self?

The great Oroondates, the invincible Ar-taban,
the valiant and fortunate Artamenes, the
irresistible Juba, the incomparable Cleomedon,
and an hundred other Heroes I could name, are
all injured by this unjust Assertion of my Uncle;
since certainly they were not more famous for
their noble and wonderful Actions in War, than
for the Sublimity and Constancy of their Af-fections
in Love.
               Some of these Heroes you have named, re-plied
Sir George, had the Misfortune, even in
their Lives, to be very cruelly vilified: The
great Oroondates was a long time accused of
Treachery to his Divine Princess; the valiant
and unfortunate Artamenes was suspected of
Inconstancy; and the irresistible Juba re-proached
with Infidelity and Baseness, by both
his Mistress and Friend.
               I never knew you was so well acquainted
with these Persons, interrupted Mr. Glanville;
and I fansy it is but very lately that you have
given yourself the Trouble to read Romances.
               I am not of your Opinion, said Arabella.
Sir George, questionless, has appropriated great
Part of his Time to the Perusal of those Books,
so capable of improving him in all useful Know-lege;
the Sublimity of Love, and the Quintes-sence
of Valour; which Two Qualities, if pos-sessed
in a superlative Degree, form a true and
perfect Hero, as the Perfection of Beauty, Wit,
and Virtue, make a Heroine worthy to be served
by such an illustrious Personage; and I dare
say, Sir George has profited so much by the
great Examples of Fidelity and Courage he has
placed before his Eyes, that no Consideration

whatever could make him for one Moment
fail in his Constancy to the Divine Beauty he
adores; and, inspired by her Charms, he would
scorn to turn his Back, as my Uncle phrases it,
upon an Army of an hundred thousand Men.
               I am extremely obliged to you, Madam, said
Sir George, bowing his Head to the Ground,
to hide a Smile he could not possibly restrain,
for the good Opinion you have of my Courage
and Fidelity.
               As for Sir George's Courage, Cousin, said
Mr. Glanville laughing, I never disputed it:
And though it be indeed a very extraordinary
Exertion of it, to fight singly against an Army
of an hundred thousand Men; yet since you are
pleased to think it probable, I am as willing to
believe Sir George may do it as any other Man;
but, as for his Fidelity in Matters of Love, I
greatly suspect it, since he has been charged
with some very flagrant Crimes of that Na-ture.
               How, Sir! resumed Arabella, Have you ever
been faithless then? and, after having sworn,
haply, to devote your whole Life to the Service
of some Beauty, have you ever violated your
Oaths, and been base enough to forsake her?
               I have too much Complaisance, Madam,
said Sir George, to contradict Mr. Glanville,
who has been pleased positively to assert, that
I have been faithless, as you most unkindly
phrase it.
               Nay, Sir, replied Arabella, this Accusation
is not of a Nature to be neglected; and though
a King should say it, I conceive, if you are
innocent, you have a Right to contradict him,

and clear yourself: Do you consider how deeply
this Assertion wounds your Honour and Happi-ness
for the future? What Lady, think you,
will receive your Services, loaded as you are
with the terrible Imputation of Inconstancy?
               Oh! as for that, Madam, said Miss Glan-ville,
I believe no Lady will think the worse
of Sir George for being faithless: For my
Part, I declare, nothing pleases me so much,
as gaining a Lover from another Lady; which
is a greater Compliment to one's Beauty, then
the Addresses of a Man that never was in Love
before—
               You may remember, Cousin, replied Ara-bella,
that I said once before, your Spirit and
Humour resembled a certain great Princess very
much; and I repeat it again, never was there
a greater Conformity in Tempers and Inclina-tions.
               My Daughter, said Sir Charles, is mightily
obliged to you, Lady Bella, for comparing her
to a great Princess: Undoubtedly you mean it
as a Compliment.
               If you think, said Arabella, that barely com-paring
her to a Princess be a Compliment, I
must take the Liberty to differ from you: My
Cousin is not so many Degrees below a Princess,
as that such a Comparison should be thought
extraordinary; for if her Ancestors did not
wear a Crown, they might, haply, have deserved
it; and her Beauty may one Day procure her
a Servant, whose Sword, like that of the great
Artaban, may win her a Sceptre; who, with a
noble Confidence, told his Princess, when the
Want of a Crown was objected to him, I wear

a Sword, Madam, than can perform things
more difficult, that what you require; and if
a Crown be all that I want to make me worthy
of you, tell me what Kingdom in the World
you choose to reign in, and I will lay it at your
Feet.
               That was a Promise, replied Sir George, fit
only for the great Artaban to make: But, Ma-dam,
if you will permit me to make any Com-parison
between that renowned Warrior and
myself, I would venture to tell you, that even
the great Artaban was not exempted from the
Character of Inconstancy any more than my-self,
since, as you certainly know, he was in
Love with Three great Princesses successively.
               I grant you, replied Arabella, that Artaban
did wear the Chains of Three Princesses succes-sively:
But it must also be remembred in his
Justification, that the Two First of these Beau-ties
refused his Adorations, and treated him with
Contempt, because he was not a Prince: There-fore,
recovering his Liberty, by those Disdains
they cast on him, he preserved that illustrious
Heart from Despair, to tender it with more
passionate Fidelity to the Divine Princess of the
Parthians; who, though greatly their Superior
in Quality and Beauty, did permit him to love
her. However, I must confess, I find some-thing
like Levity in the Facility he found in
breaking his Fetters so often; and when I con-sider,
that among all those great Heroes, whose
Histories I have read, none but himself ever
bore, without dying, the Cruelties he experi-enced
from those Princesses, I am sometimes
tempted to accuse him myself of Inconstancy:

But indeed every thing we read of that Prodigy
of Valour is wholly miraculous; and since the
Performance of Impossibilities was reserved for
him, I conclude this Miracle also, among many
others, was possible to him, whom nothing was
ever able to resist upon Earth. However, pur-sued
she, rising, I shall not absolutely condemn
you, till I have heard your Adventures from
your own Mouth, at a convenient Time, when
I shall be able to judge how far you merit the
odious Appellation of Inconstancy.
               Saying this, she saluted her Uncle, who had
for some time been conversing in a low Voice
with his Son, with a Grace wholly charming,
and retired to her Apartment. Miss Glanville
following her a few Moments after (the Com-pliment,
extravagant as it was, which she had
paid her, having procured her some Good-will
from the vain and interested Miss Glanville),
they conversed together with a great deal of
good Humour till Dinner-time, which, be-cause
Mr. Glanville was not absolutely reco-vered,
was served in his Chamber.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which our Heroine is engaged in a new
Adventure.
               
               AS Mr. Glanville took a great deal of Pains
to turn the Discourse upon Subjects, on
which the charming Arabella could expatiate,

without any Mixture of that Absurdity, which
mingled itself in a great many others; the rest
of that Day and several others, were passed
very agreeably: At the End of which, Mr.
Glanville being perfectly recovered, and able to
go abroad; the Baronet proposed to take the
Diversion of Hunting; which Arabella, who
was used to it, consented to partake of; but
being informed, that Miss Glanville could not
ride, and chose to stay at home, she would
have kept her Company, had not Sir Charles
insisted upon the contrary.
               As Sir George, and some other Gentlemen,
had invited themselves to be of the Party; Ara-bella,
on her coming down to mount her Horse,
found a great many young Gallants, ready to
offer her their Assistance upon this Occasion:
Accepting therefore, with great Politeness, this
Help from a Stranger, who was nearest her, she
mounted her Horse, giving Occasion to every
one that was present, to admire the Grace with
which she sat and managed him. Her Shape
being as perfect as any Shape could possibly be,
her Riding-habit discovered all its Beauties:
Her Hat, and the white Feather waving over
Part of her fine black Hair, gave a peculiar
Charm to her lovely Face: And she appeared
with so many Advantages in this Dress and
Posture, that Mr. Glanville, forgetting all her
Absurdities, was wholly lost in the Contempla-tion
of so many Charms, as her whole Person
was adorned with.
               Sir George, though he really admired Arabella,
was not so passionately in Love as Mr. Glan-ville;
and, being a keen Sportsman, eagerly pur-sued

Mr. Hervey, tho' he could not persuade him-self
his Cousin was in Earnest when he advised
him to court the only Daughter of a Man of
the Marquis's Quality, and Heiress to his vast
Estates; yet relished the Scheme, and resolved
to make some Attempt upon her before he left
the Country. However, he concealed his De-sign
from his Cousin, not being willing to ex-pose
himself to be ridiculed, if he did not suc-ceed;
and, turning the Advice he had given
him into a Jest, left him in the Opinion, that
he thought no more of it.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  In which the Adventure goes on after the
accustomed Manner.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, in the mean time, was
wholly taken up with the Adventure, as
she called it, at Church: The Person and
Dress of the Gentleman who had so particu-larly
gazed on her there, was so different from
what she had been accustomed to see, that she
immediately concluded, he was of some distin-guished
Rank. It was past a Doubt, she
thought, that he was excessively in Love with
her; and as she soon expected to have some
very extraordinary Proofs of his Passion, her
Thoughts were wholly employed on the Man-ner
in which she should receive them.
               As soon as she came home, and had paid
her Duty to the Marquis, she hurried to her
Chamber, to be at Liberty to indulge her agree-able

the Game, with the rest of the Hunters;
but Mr. Glanville minded nothing but his Cou-sin,
and kept close by her.
               After having rode a long time, Arabella, con-ceiving
it a Piece of Cruelty, not to give her
Lover an Opportunity of talking to her, as, by
his extreme Solicitude, he seemed ardently to
desire, coming to a delightful Valley, she stop-ped;
and told Mr. Glanville, that, being weary
of the Chace, she should alight, and repose
herself a little under the Shade of those Trees.
               Mr. Glanville, extremely pleased at this
Proposition, dismounted; and, having helped
her to alight, seated himself by her on the
Grass.
               
                  Arabella, expecting he would begin to talk to
her of his Passion, could not help blushing at the
Thoughts of having given him such an Oppor-tunity;
and Mr. Glanville, endeavouring to ac-commodate
himself to her Ideas of a Lover,
expressed himself in Terms extravagant enough
to have made a reasonable Woman think he
was making a Jest of her: All which, how-ever,
Arabella was extremely pleased with; and
she observed such a just Decorum in her An-swers,
that, as the Writers of Romance phrase
it, if she did not give him any absolute Hopes
of being beloved, yet she said enough to make
him conclude she did not hate him.
               They had conversed in this manner near a
Quarter of an Hour, when Arabella, perceiving
a Man at a little Distance, walking very com-posedly,
shrieked out aloud; and, rising with the
utmost Precipitation, flew from Mr. Glanville,
and went to untie her Horse; while his Asto-nishment

being so great at her Behaviour, that
he could not, for a Moment or two, ask her
the Cause of her Fear—
               Do you not see, said she, out of Breath with
the Violence of her Apprehensions, the Person
who is coming towards us? It is the same,
who, some Months ago, attempted to carry me
away, when I was riding out with only Two
Attendants: I escaped, for that time, the Dan-ger
that threatened me; but, questionless, he
comes now to renew his Attempts: Therefore
can you wonder at my Fear?
               If it should be as you say, Madam, inter-rupted
Glanville, What Reason have you to
fear? Do you not think I am able to defend
you?
               Ah! without Doubt, you are able to de-fend
me, answered she; and though, if you
offer to resist the Violence he comes to use
against me, he will, haply, call Two or Three
Dozen armed Men to his Assistance, who are,
I suppose, concealed hereabouts, yet I am
not apprehensive, that you will be worsted
by them: But as it happened to the brave Juba,
and Cleomedon, while they were fighting with
some hundred Men, who wanted to carry away
their Princesses before their Faces; and were
giving Death at every Blow, in order to pre-serve
them; the Commander of these Ravish-ers,
seeing the Two Princesses sitting, as I
was, under a Tree, ordered them to be
seized by Two of his Men, and carried away,
while the Two Princes were losing best Part of
of their Blood in their Defence; therefore,
to prevent such an Accident happening, while

you are fighting for my Rescue, I think it will
be the safest Way for me to get on Horse-back,
that I may be in a Condition to escape;
and that you may not employ your Valour to
no Purpose.
               Saying this, having, with Mr. Glanville's
Assistance, loosed her Horse from the Tree, he
helped her to mount, and then remounted his
own.
               Your Antagonist, said Arabella, is on Foot;
and therefore, though I prize your Life ex-tremely,
yet I cannot dispense with myself
from telling you, that 'tis against the Laws of
Knighthood to take any Advantage of that
kind over your Enemy; nor will I permit your
Concern for my Safety to make you forget
what you owe to your own Reputation.
               Mr. Glanville, fretting excessively at her
Folly, begged her not to make herself uneasy
about things that were never likely to hap-pen.
               The Gentleman yonder, added he, seems to
have no Designs to make any Attempt against
you: If he should, I shall know how to deal
with him: But, since he neither offers to assault
me, nor affront you, I think we ought not to
give him any Reason to imagine we suspect him,
by gazing on him thus; and letting him under-stand
by your Manner, that he is the Subject of
our Conversation: If you please, Madam, we
will endeavour to join our Company.
               
                  Arabella, while he was speaking, kept her
Eyes fixed upon his Face, with Looks which
expressed her Thoughts were labouring upon
some very important Point: And, after a Pause

of some Moments, Is it possible, said she, with
a Tone of extreme Surprize, that I should be
so mistaken in you? Do you really want Cou-rage
enough to defend me against that Ra-visher?
               Oh Heavens! Madam, interrupted Glan-ville,
try not my Temper thus: Courage
enough to defend you! 'Sdeath! you will make
me mad! Who, in the Name of Wonder, is
going to molest you?
               He whom you see there, replied Arabella,
pointing to him with her Finger: For know,
cold and insensible as thou art to the Danger
which threatens me, yonder Knight is thy Ri-val,
and a Rival, haply, who deserves my Esteem
better than thou dost; since, if he has Courage
enough to get me by Violence into his Power,
that same Courage would make him defend
me against any Injuries I might be offered from
another: And since nothing is so contempti-ble
in the Eyes of a Woman, as a Lover who
wants Spirit to die in her Defence; know, I
can sooner pardon him, whom thou would
cowardly fly from, for the Violence which he
meditates against me, than thyself for the
Pusillanimity thou hast betrayed in my Sight.
               With these Words, she galloped away from
her astonished Lover; who, not daring to follow
her, for fear of increasing her Suspicions of his
Cowardice, flung himself off his Horse in a vio-lent
Rage; and, forgetting that the Stranger was
observing, and now within Hearing, he fell ac-cusing
and exclaiming against the Books, that
had turned his Cousin's Brain; and railing at
his own ill Fate, that condemned him to the

Punishment of loving her. Mr. Harvey (for it
really was he, whom an Affair of Consequence
had brought again into the Country), hearing
some of Mr. Glanville's last Words, and ob-serving
the Gestures he used, concluded he
had been treated like himself by Arabella, whom
he knew again at a Distance: Therefore coming
up to Mr. Glanville, laughing—
               Though I have not the Honour of knowing
you, Sir, said he, I must beg the Favour you
will inform me, if you are not disturbed at the
ridiculous Folly of the Lady I saw with you
just now? She is the most fantastical Creature
that ever lived, and, in my Opinion, fit for a
Mad-house: Pray, are you acquainted with
her?
               Mr. Glanville, being in a very ill Humour,
could not brook the Freedom of this Language
against his Cousin, whose Follies he could not
bear any one should rail at but himself; and, be-ing
provoked at his Sneers, and the Interruption
he had given to their Conversation, he looked
upon him with a disdainful Frown, and told him
in an haughty Tone, That he was very imper-tinent
to speak of a Lady of her Quality and
Merit so rudely.
               Oh! Sir, I beg your Pardon, replied Mr.
Harvey, laughing more than before; What, I
suppose, you are the Champion of this fair Lady!
But, I assure myself, if you intend to quar-rel
with every one that will laugh at her, you
will have more Business upon your Hands than
you can well manage.
               Mr. Glanville, transported with Rage at this
Insolence, hit him such a Blow with the But-End

of his Whip, that it stunned him for a
Moment; but recovering himself, he drew his
Sword, and, mad with the Affront he had re-ceived,
made a Push at Glanville; who, avoiding
it with great Dexterity, had recourse to his
Hanger for his Defence.
               
                  Arabella, in the mean time, who had not rid
far, concealing herself behind some Trees, saw
all the Actions of her Lover, and intended
Ravisher; and, being possessed with an Opinion
of her Cousin's Cowardice, was extremely re-joiced
to see him fall upon his Enemy first, and
that with so much Fury, that she had no longer
any Reason to doubt his Courage: Her Suspi-cions,
therefore, being removed, her Tender-ness
for him returned; and when she saw
them engaged with their Swords (for, at that
Distance, she did not plainly perceive the Dif-ference
of their Weapons), her Apprehensions
for her Cousin were so strong, that, though she
did not doubt his Valour, she could not bear
to see him expose his Life for her: And, with-out
making any Reflections upon the Singularity
of her Design, she was going to ride up to them,
and endeavour to part them; when she saw se-veral
Men come towards them, whom she took
to be the Assistants of her Ravisher, though
they were, in reality, Haymakers; who, at a
Distance, having seen the Beginning of their
Quarrel, had hastened to part them.
               Terrified, therefore, at this Reinforcement,
which she thought would expose her Cousin to
great Danger, she galloped, with all Speed,
after the Hunters, being directed by the Sound
of the Horn. Her Anxiety for her Cousin made

her regardless of her own Danger, so that she
rode with a surprising Swiftness; and, overtaking
the Company, she would have spoken, to tell
them of her Cousin's Situation; when her
Spirits failing her, she could only make a Sign
with her Hand, and sunk down in a Swoon, in
the Arms of Sir George, who eagerly galloped
up to her; and, supporting her as well as he
was able till some others came to her Relief,
they took her off her Horse, and placed her
upon the Ground; when, by the Help of some
Water they brought from a Spring near them,
in a little time she came to herself.
               Sir Charles, who, seeing her come up to them
without his Son, and by her fainting, concluded
some Misfortune had happened to him, the
Moment she opened her Eyes, asked her eagerly,
Where he was?
               Your Son, said Arabella, sighing, is, with a
Valour equal to that of the brave Cleomedon,
this Moment fighting in my Defence against a
Croud of Enemies; and is, haply, shedding
the last Drop of his Blood in my Quarrel.
               Shedding the last Drop of his Blood, haply!
interrupted Sir Charles, excessively grieved; and,
not a little enraged at Arabella, supposing she
had introduced him into some Quarrel, It may
be happy for you, Madam; but I am sure it
will make me very miserable, if my Son comes
to any Harm.
               If it be the Will of Heaven he should fall in
this Combat, resumed Arabella, he can never
have a more glorious Destiny: And as that
Consideration will, doubtless, sweeten his last
Moments, so it ought to be your Consolation:

However, I beg you'll lose no time, but haste
to his Assistance; for since he has a considerable
Number of Enemies to deal with, 'tis not im-probable
but he may be overpowered at last.
               Where did you leave my Son, Madam? cried
Sir Charles, eagerly.
               He is not far off, replied Arabella: And you
will, doubtless, be directed to the Place, by the
Sight of the Blood of his Enemies, which he
has spilt. Go that way, pursued she, pointing
with her Finger towards the Place where she
had left her Cousin: There you will meet with
him, amidst a Croud of Foes, which he is sa-crisicing
to my Safety, and his just Resentment.
               Sir Charles, not knowing what to think, gal-loped
away, followed by most Part of the Com-pany;
Sir George telling Lady Bella, that he
would stay to defend her against any Attempts
that might be made on her Liberty, by any of
her Ravisher's Servants, who were, probably,
straggling about. Arabella, however, being
perfectly recovered, insisted upon following her
Uncle.
               There is no Question, said she, but Mr.
Glanville is victorious: I am only apprehensive
for the dangerous Wounds he may have re-ceived
in the Combat, which will require all
our Care and Assistance.
               Sir George, who wanted to engross her Com-pany
a little to himself, in vain represented to
her, that, amidst the Horrors of a Fight so
bloody as that must certainly be, in which Mr.
Glanville and his Friends would be now en-gaged,
it would be dangerous for her to venture
her Person: Yet she would not be persuaded;

but, having mounted her Horse, with his As-sistance,
she rode as fast as she was able after
the rest of the Company.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Being a Chapter of Mistakes.
               
               SIR Charles, who, by this Time, had got
to the Place she directed him to, but saw
no Appearance of fighting, and only a few
Haymakers in Discourse together, inquired, If
there had been any Quarrel between two Gentle-men
in that Place?
               One of them, at this Question, advancing,
told Sir Charles, that two Gentlemen had quar-relled
there, and were fighting with Swords;
but that they had parted them; and that one of
them, having an Horse tied to a Tree, mounted
him, and rode away: That the other, they be-lieved,
was not far off; and that there had
been no Bloodshed, they having come time
enough to prevent it.
               Sir Charles was extremely satisfied with this
Account; and, giving the Haymakers some
Money for the good Office they did in parting
the two Combatants, rode up to meet Lady
Bella; and informed her, that his Son was safe.
               I cannot imagine he is safe, replied she, when
I see some of his Enemies (pointing to the Hay-makers)
still alive: It is not customary, in those
Cases, to suffer any to escape: And, question-less,

my Cousin is either dead, or a Prisoner,
since all his Adversaries are not vanquished.
               Why, you dream, Madam, replied Sir Charles:
Those Fellows yonder are Haymakers: What
should make them Enemies to my Son? They
were lucky enough to come in time to prevent
him and another Gentleman from doing each
other a Mischief. I cannot imagine for what
Reason my Son quarrelled with that Person they
speak of: Perhaps you can inform me.
               Certainly, Sir, said Arabella, I can inform you,
since I was the Cause of their Quarrel. The
Story is too long to tell you now; and, besides,
it is so connected with the other Accidents of
my Life, that 'tis necessary you should be ac-quainted
with my whole History, in order to
comprehend it: But, if those Persons are what
you say, and did really part my Cousin and his
Antagonist, truly I believe they have done him
a very ill Office: For, I am persuaded, my
Cousin will never be at Rest, till, by his Rival's
Death, he has freed himself from one, capable of
the most daring Enterprizes to get me into his
Power: And, since I cannot be in Security
while he lives, and persists in the Resolution he
has taken to persecute me, it had been better if
he had suffered all the Effects of my Cousin's
Resentment at that time, than to give him the
Trouble to hunt him through the World, in
order to sacrifice him to the Interest of his Love
and Vengeance.
               Sir Charles, no less astonished than alarmed
at this Discovery of his Niece's sanguinary Sen-timents,
told her, he was sorry to see a Lady so
far forget the Gentleness of her Sex, as to en-courage

Reflections; and, after the Example of
her Heroines, when any thing extraordinary
happened to them, called her favourite Wo-man;
or, to use her own Language, her,
in whom she confided her most secret
Thoughts.
               
               Well, Lucy, said she, did you observe that
Stranger who ey'd us
                  The Heroines always speak of themselves in the Plural Number. so heedfully To-day at
Church?
               This Girl, notwithstanding her Country-Simplicity,
knew a Compliment was expected
from her on this Occasion; and therefore re-plied,
That she did not wonder at the Gen-tleman's
staring at her; for she was sure he
had never seen any body so handsome as her
Ladyship before.
               
               I have not all the Beauty you attribute to me,
said Arabella, smiling a little: And, with a very
moderate Share of it, I might well fix the At-tention
of a Person who seemed to be not over-much
pleased with the Objects about him:
However, pursued she, assuming a more seri-ous
Air, if this Stranger be weak enough to en-tertain
any Sentiments more than indifferent
for me; I charge you, upon Pain of my Dis-pleasure,
do not be accessary to the Conveying
his presumptuous Thoughts to me either by
Letters or Messages; nor suffer him to corrupt
your Fidelity with the Presents he will very
probably offer you.
               
                  Lucy, to whom this Speech first gave a Hint
of what she ought to expect from her Lady's
Lovers, finding herself of more Importance

and incite Men to such Extremities,
upon her Account. And, for the future, added
he, I must intreat you, Niece, to spare me the
Affliction of seeing my Son exposed to these
dangerous Quarrels: For, though his Life is so
little regarded by you, yet it is of the utmost
Consequence to me.
               
                  Arabella, who found Matter sufficient in the
Beginning of this Speech, to be offended with
her Uncle, yet, mistaking the latter Part of it
for a pathetic Complaint of her Cruelty, re-plied
very gravely, That her Cousin's Safety
was not so indifferent to her as he imagined:
And that she did not hate him so much, but
that his Death would affect her very sensibly.
               
                  Arabella, in speaking these Words, blushed
with Shame, as thinking they were rather too
tender: And Sir Charles, who coloured like-wise,
from a very different Motive, was open-ing
his Mouth, to tell her, that he did not
think his Son was much obliged to her for not
hating him; when Arabella, supposing he de-signed
to press her to a further Explanation of
the favourable Sentiments she felt for Mr.
Glanville, stopped him with Precipitation: Press
me no more, said she, upon this Subject: And,
as I have already spoken too much, haply, be-fore
so many Witnesses, seek not to enhance
my Confusion, by prolonging to Discourse that
at present must needs be disagreeable to me.
               I shall readily agree with you, Madam, re-plied
Sir Charles, that you have spoken too
much: And, if I had thought you capable of
speaking in the manner you have done, I

would have been more cautious in giving you
an Occasion for it.
               I should imagine, Sir, said Arabella, blush-ing
with Anger, as she before did with Shame,
that you would be the last Person in the World
who could think I had spoken too much upon
this Occasion: And, since you are pleased to
tell me so, I think it fit to let you know, that I
have not, in my Opinion, transgressed the
Laws of Decency and Decorum, in what I
have said in my Cousin's Favour: And I can
produce many Examples of greater Freedom of
Speech, in Princesses, and Ladies of the highest
Quality: However, I shall learn such a Lesson
of Moderation in this respect, from your Re-proof,
that I promise you, neither yourself, or
Mr. Glanville, shall have any Cause, for the
future, to complain of my want of Discretion.
               Sir Charles, who was very polite and good-natured,
was half angry with himself, for hav-ing
obliged his Niece to such a Submission, as
he thought it; and, apologizing for the Rude-ness
of his Reprehension, assured her, that he
was perfectly convinced of her Discretion in all
things; and did not doubt but her Conduct
would be always agreeable to him.
               
                  Arabella, who, from what her Uncle had
said, began to entertain Suspicions, that would
never have entered any Imagination but hers,
looked earnestly upon him for half a Moment,
as if she wished to penetrate into the most
secret Recesses of his Heart: But, fans
                     •
                  ing she
saw something in his Looks that confirmed her
Apprehensions, she removed her Eyes from his
Face, and, fastening them on the Ground, re-mained

for some Moments in Confusion.—Sir
Charles, whom her apparent Disturbance made
very uneasy, proposed returning to the Castle;
telling Lady Bella he expected to find his Son
already there.
               'Tis more than probable, said she, turning to
Sir George, that my Cousin is gone in Pursuit
of my Ravisher; and the Interruption that has
been given to his designed Vengeance, making
him more furious than before, 'tis not likely he
will return till he has punished his Insolence by
that Death he so justly merits.
               Mr. Glanville is already so happy in your
Opinion, said Sir George, with a very profound
Sigh, that there is no need of his rendering you
this small Service, to increase your Esteem:
But, if my Prayers are heard, the Punishment
of your Ravisher will be reserved for a Person
less fortunate, indeed, than Mr. Glanville, tho'
not less devoted to your Interest, and concerned
in your Preservation.
               Sir George counterfeiting a Look of extreme
Confusion and Fear, as he ended these Words;
               
                  Arabella, who perfectly comprehended the
Meaning they were designed to convey, thought
herself obliged to take no Notice of them: And,
therefore, without making any Reply to the
young Baronet, who ventured slowly to lift his
Eyes to her Face, in order to discover if there
were any Signs of Anger in it, she told Sir
Charles she inclined to go home: And Sir
George, with the rest of the Company, attended
them to the Castle; where, as soon as they ar-rived,
they took their Leave.
               
                  

Sir George, notwithstanding Arabella's Care
to deprive him of an Opportunity of speaking
to her, told her, in a Whisper, having eagerly
alighted to help her off her Horse,
               I am going, Madam, to find out that inso-lent
Man, who has dared to offer Violence to
the fairest Person in the World: And, if I am
so happy as to meet with him, he shall either take
my Life, or I will put him into a Condition never
to commit any more Offences of that Nature.
               Saying this, he made a low Bow; and, be-ing
desirous to prevent her Answer, remounted
his Horse, and went away with the rest of the
Company.
               
                  Arabella, who, upon this Occasion, was to
be all Confusion, mixed with some little Re-sentment,
discovered so much Emotion in her
Looks, while Sir George was whispering to her,
that her Uncle, as he was handing her into the
House, asked her, If she was offended at any
thing Sir George had said to her?
               
                  Arabella, construing this Question as she had
done some other things her Uncle had said to
her, replied, in a reserved manner, Since my
Looks, contrary to my Intention, have betrayed
my Thoughts to you, I will not scruple to con-fess,
that I have some Cause to be offended
with Sir George; and that, in two Instances
To-day, he has seemed to forget the Respect
he owes me.
               Sir Charles was fired at this Account: Is it
possible, said he, that Sir George has had the
Assurance to say any thing to offend you, and
that before my Face too? This Affront is not
to be borne.
               
                  

I am sorry, replied Arabella, eying him heed-fully,
to see you so much concerned at it.
               Don't be uneasy, interrupted Sir Charles:
There will be no bad Consequences happen from
it: But he shall hear of it, added he, raising
his Voice with Passion: I'll force him this Night
to explain himself.
               You must pardon me, Sir, said Arabella,
more and more confirmed in her Notions, if I
tell you, that I am extremely offended at your
uncommon Zeal upon this Occasion: And also
I must assure you, that a little more Calmness
would be less liable to Suspicion.
               Miss Glanville coming to meet them, Sir
Charles, who did not take much Notice of
what Arabella said, eagerly inquired for his
Son; and, hearing he was not come home, was
apprehensive of his meeting again with the Per-son
he had quarrelled with: But his Fears did
not last long; for Mr. Glanville came in, hav-ing
purposely avoided the Company, to hide the
Uneasiness Lady Bella's tormenting Folly had
given him.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In which the Mistakes are continued.
               
               AS soon as Mr. Glanville appeared, the two
Ladies retired; Miss Glanville asking
Arabella a hundred Questions concerning their
Diversion, the Drift of which was, to know
how Sir George behaved to her: But that fair

Lady, whose Thoughts were wholly employed
on the strange Accidents which had happened to
her that Day, longed to be at Liberty to indulge
her Reflections; and, complaining of extreme
Weariness, under Pretence of reposing herself
till Dinner, got quit of Miss Glanville's Com-pany,
which, at that time, she thought very
tedious.
               As soon as she was left to herself, her Imagi-nation
running over all that had happened, she
could not help confessing, that few Women ever
met with such a Variety of Adventures in one
Day: In Danger of being carried off by Vio-lence,
by one Lover; delivered by another;
Insinuations of Love from a Third, who, she
thought, was enamoured of her Cousin; and,
what was still more surprising a Discovery, that
her Uncle was not insensible of her Charms,
but was become the Rival of his own Son.
               As extravagant as this Notion was, Arabella
found Precedents in her Romances of Passions
full as strange and unjustifiable; and confirmed
herself in that Opinion, by recollecting several
Examples of unlawful Love. Why should I
not believe, said she, that my Charms can
work as powerful Effects as those of Olympia,
Princess of Thrace, whose Brother was passion-ately
enamoured of her?
               Did not the Divine Clelia inspire Maherbal
with a violent Passion for her, who, though
discovered to be her Brother, did not, never-theless,
cease to adore her? And, to bring an
Instance still nearer to my own Case, was not
the Uncle of the fair Alcyone in Love with her?

And did he not endeavour to win her Heart by
all the Methods in his Power?
               Ah! then, pursued she, let us doubt no
more of our Misfortune: And, since our fatal
Beauty has raised this impious Flame, let us
stifle it with our Rigour, and not allow an ill-timed
Pity, or Respect, to encourage a Passion
which may, one Day, cast a Blemish upon our
Glory.
               
                  Arabella, having settled this Point, proceed-ed
to reflect on the Conquest she had made of
Sir George: She examined his Words over and
over, and found them so exactly conformable to
the Language of an Oroondates or Oronces, that
she could not choose but be pleased: But, recol-lecting
that it behoved her, like all other He-roines,
to be extremely troubled and perplexed
at an Insinuation of Love, she began to lament
the cruel Necessity of parting with an agreeable
Friend; who, if he persisted in making her
acquainted with his Thoughts, would expofe
himself to the Treatment Persons so indiscreet
always meet with; nor was she less concerned,
lest, if Mr. Glanville had not already dispatched
her Ravisher, Sir George, by wandering in
Search of him, and, haply, sacrificing him to
his eager Desire of serving her, should, by that
means, lay her under an Obligation to him,
which, considering him as a Lover, would be a
great Mortification.
               Sir George, however, was gone home to his
own House, with no Thoughts of pursuing
Arabella's Ravisher: And Mr. Glanville, being
questioned by his Father concerning his Quar-rel,
invented some trifling Excuse for it; which

not agreeing with the Account the Baronet had
received from Arabella, he told his Son, that
he had concealed the Truth from him; and that
there was more in that Affair than he had
owned. You quarrelled, added he, upon Ara-bella's
Account; and she did not scruple to af-firm
it before all the Company.
               Mr. Glanville, who had vainly flattered him-self
with an Hope, that his Cousin had not ac-quainted
the Company with her whimsical Ap-prehensions,
was extremely vexed when he
found she had exposed herself to their Ridicule,
and that it was probable even he had not escaped:
But, willing to know from her own Mouth how
far she had carried her Folly, he went up to
her Chamber; and, being immediately admit-ted,
she began to congratulate him upon the
Conquest he had gained, as she supposed, over
his Enemy; and thanked him very solemnly for
the Security he had procured for her.
               Mr. Glanville, after assuring her, that she was
in no Danger of ever being carried away by that
Person whom she feared, proceeded to inquire
into all that had passed between her and the
Company whom she had joined, when she left
him; and Arabella, relating every Particular,
gave him the Mortification to know, that her
Folly had been sufficiently exposed: But she
touched upon her Fears for him with so much
Delicacy, and mentioned her Fainting in such
a manner, as insinuated a much greater Tender-ness
than he before had Reason to hope for;
and this Knowlege destroying all his Intentions
to quarrel with her for what she had said, he
appeared so easy and satisfied, that Arabella,
                  

reflecting upon the Misfortune his Father's new-born
Passion would probably be the Occasion of
to him, could not help sighing at the Appre-hension;
looking on him, at the same time,
with a kind of pitying Complacency; which
did not escape Mr. Glanville's Notice.
               I must know the Reason of that Sigh, Cousin,
said he, smiling, and taking her Hand.
               If you are wise, replied Arabella, gravely,
you will be contented to remain in the pleasing
Ignorance you are at present; and not seek to
know a thing which will, haply, afford you but
little Satisfaction.
               You have increased my Curosity so much
by this Advice, resumed he, accommodating
his Looks to Arabella's, that I shall not be at
Rest till I know what it is you conceal from
me: And, since I am so much concerned in it,
even by your own Confession, I have a Right
to press you to explain yourself.
               Since you are so importunate, replied Ara-bella,
I mnst tell you, that I will not do you
so great a Diskindness, as to explain myself;
nor will I be the first who shall acquaint you
with your Misfortune, since you will, haply,
too soon arrive at the Knowlege of it, by other
means.
               
                  Glanville, who imagined this was some new
Whim that had got into her Head, was but
little perplexed at an Insinuation, which, had
he been ignorant of her Foible, would have
given him great Uneasiness: But, being sensible
that she expected he would press her to disclose
herself, and appear extremely concerned at her
refusing him that Satisfaction, he counterfeited

so well, that she was at a loss how to evade the
Arguments he used to make her unfold the
terrible Mystery; when the Dinner-bell ringing,
and relieving her sor the present, Mr. Glanville
led her down to the Parlour; where Sir Charles
and his Daughter attended their coming.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which the Mistakes are not yet cleared up.
               
               THE Baronet, who had been put into a
bad Humour by Arabella's Insinuations,
that Sir George had affronted her, appeared re-served
and uneasy; and, being resolved to
question her about it, was willing first to know
exactly what it was his Niece had been offended
at: But as he feared, if it came to his Son's
Knowlege, it would produce a Quarrel between
the young Gentlemen, that might have dan-gerous
Consequences, he was desirous of speak-ing
to her alone; and, as soon as Dinner was
over, asked her to take a Walk with him upon
the Terrace, telling her he had something to
say to her in private. Arabella, whose Fears
had been considerably increased by the Pensive-ness
which appeared in her Uncle's Looks du-ring
Dinner, and supposing he wanted a pri-vate
Conversation, only to explain himself more
clearly to her, than he had yet done, was ex-cessively
alarmed at this Request; and, casting
her Eyes down to the Ground, blushed in such

than she imagined, was so pleased at the
Prospect which opened to her, that it was with
some Hesitation she promised to obey her Or-ders.
               
                  Arabella, however, was satisfied with her As-surances
of observing her Directions; and dis-missed
her from her Presence, not without an
Apprehension of being too well obeyed.
               A whole Week being elapsed without meet-ing
with the Importunities she expected, she
could hardly conceal her Surprize at so morti-fying
a Disappointment; and frequently inter-rogated
Lucy, concerning any Attempts the
Stranger had made on her Fidelity; but the
Answers she received, only increased her Dis-content,
as they convinced her, her Charms
had not had the Effect she imagined.
               Mr. Hervey, however, had been all this
time employed in thinking of some Means to
get acquainted with the Marquis; for, being
possessed with an extraordinary Opinion of his
Wit, and personal Accomplishments, he did
not fear making some Impression on the Heart
of the young Lady; provided he could have an
Opportunity of conversing with her.
               His Cousin's Advice was continually in his
Mind, and flattered his Vanity with the most
agreeable Hopes: But the Marquis's Fondness
for Solitude, and that Haughtiness which was
natural to him, rendered him so difficult of Ac-cess,
that Hervey, from the Intelligence he re-ceived
of his Humour, despaired of being able
to prosecute his Scheme; when, meeting with
a young Farmer in one of his Evening-Walks,
and entering into Conversation with him upon

a manner as betrayed her Confusion; and made
Miss Glanville and her Brother believe, that she
suspected her Uncle had a Design to press her
soon to give her Hand to Mr. Glanville, which
occasioned her apparent Disorder.
               Sir Charles, however, who had not so heed-fully
observed her Behaviour, repeated his Re-quest;
adding, with a Smile, upon her giving
him no Answer, Sure, Lady Bella, you are
not afraid to be alone with your Uncle.
               No, Sir, replied Arabella, giving him a
piercing Look; I am not afraid of being alone
with my Uncle; and, as long as he pretends to
be no more than my Uncle, I shall not scruple to
hear what he has to say to me.
               Sir Charles, a little vexed at an Answer which
insinuated, as he thought, a Complaint of his
having pretended to more Authority over her
than he ought, told her, he hoped she had no
Cause to believe he would displease her, by any
improper Exertion of that Power over her, with
which her Father had intrusted him: For I assure
you, added he, I would rather you should follow
my Advice as an Uncle, than obey me as a Guar-dian;
and, since my Affection for you is, pre-haps,
greater than what many People have for
a Niece, my Solicitude ought to be imputed to
that Motive.
               I have all the Sense I ought to have of that
Affection you honour me with, replied Ara-bella;
and since I hope it will be always what
it should be, without wishing for its Increase, I
am contented with those Testimonies I have
already received of it; and do not desire any
other.
               
                  

Sir Charles, a little puzzled to understand the
Meaning of these Words, which the grave
Looks of Arabella made yet more mysterious,
rose from his Seat with an Air of Discontent: I
should have been glad to have spoken a Word in
private to you, Niece, said she; but, since you
think proper to make so much Ceremony in such
a Trifle, I'll defer it till you are in a better Hu-mour.
               Miss Glanville, seeing her Father going out
of the Room, stepped before him: Nay, Papa,
said she, if you want to speak with my Cousin,
my Brother and I will go out, and leave you to
yourselves.
               You will do me a very great Displeasure, said
Arabella; for, I am sure, my Uncle has not
any thing of Consequence to say to me: How-exer,
added she, seeing Miss Glanville go away,
I am resolved, I will not be left alone; and
therefore, Mr. Glanville, since I can pretend to
some Power over you, I command you to stay.
               You may remember, Madam, said Mr. Glan-ville,
with a Smile, you refused to gratify my
Curiosity, with regard to something you hinted
to me some time ago; and, to punish you, added
he, going out of the Room, I am resolved you
shall listen to what my Father has to say to you;
for, by your Unwillingness to hear it, I ima-gine
you suspect already what it is.
               
                  Arabella, finding she had no way to avoid
hearing what she dreaded so much, and observ-ing
her Uncle had resumed his Chair, pre-pared
to give him Audience; but, in order to
deprive him of all Hope, that she would receive
his Discourse favourably, she assumed the se-verest

Look she was capable of; and, casting
her Eyes on the Ground, with a Mixture of
Anger and Shame, waited with a kind of Fear
and Impatience for what he had to say.
               I see, Madam, said the Baronet, observing
her Confusion, that you apprehend what I am
going to say to you; but, I beseech you, do not
fear I have any Intentions, but such as you'll
approve.
               You are certainly in the right, Sir, said Ara-bella,
in the Interpretation you have put on my
Looks: I am really in Pain about the Purport
of your Discourse: And you would particu-larly
oblige me, if you would dispense with me
from hearing it.
               I see, replied Sir Charles, that, out of a mis-taken
Fear, you are unwilling to hear me, in
order to avoid coming to the Explanation I de-sire:
But I tell you, once again, you have no-thing
to apprehend.
               I have every thing to apprehend, Sir, resumed
Arabella, tartly, while you persist in your De-sign
of disobliging me; and you cannot give me
a greater Proof of the Badness of your Inten-tions,
than by thus forcing me to listen to Dis-courses
I ought to avoid.
               Since my Word has no Weight with you,
replied Sir Charles, I'll condescend to assure you,
by the most sacred Oath, That I do not mean
to come to any Extremities with Sir George,
concerning what you already told me: All I
desire to know is, If you think you had any Rea-son
to be offended with him for any thing he
said? And, in that Case, I cannot dispense with
myself from expostulating with him about it.
               
                  

You would do me a Favour, Sir, resumed
Arabella, if you would interest yourself a little
less in what Sir George said to me: The Of-fence
was committed against me only; and none
but myself has any Right to resent it.
               'Tis enough, Niece, said Sir Charles, rising:
You acknowlege sufficient to make me resolve
to oblige him to ask Pardon for the Affront you
have received: However, I beg you may make
yourself easy; no ill Consequences will happen
from this Affair, provided my Son does not
know it: And I know you have too much Dis-cretion
to acquaint him with it.
               Saying this, he went out of the Room, leav-ing
Arabella in great Consusion at what he had
said; which, in her Opinion, had amounted
almost to a plain Declaration of his Passion; and
his Design of putting an End to Sir George's
Pretensions, whom, it was probable, he looked
upon as a more dangerous Rival than his Son,
confirmed her in the Opinion of his Resolution
to persecute her.
               Full of the Reflections this Accident had oc-casioned,
she went to walk in the Garden,
where Mr. Glanville, his Sister having just left
him, joined her.
               As he imagined, his Father's Design, in
speaking to her alone, was to prevail upon her
to consent to marry him before she left the Coun-try,
which was what he most earnestly wished,
he drew a bad Omen from the Discontent which
appeared in her Eyes.
               Is it with me, Cousin, said he, or with what
my Father has been saying to you, that you are
angry?
               
                  

With both, replied Arabella, hastily; for if
you had staid in the Room, as I commanded you,
I should not have been exposed to the Pain of
hearing Things so disagreeable.
               Since I knew what would be the Purport of
my Father's Discourse, said Mr. Glanville, you
ought not to be surprised I could not resolve to
give any Interruption to it, by my Presence:
And, being so much interested in the Success
of his Solicitations, I could not choose but give
him an Opportunity of speaking to you alone,
as he desired.
               It seems then, resumed Arabella, you know
what was the Subject of his Conversation.
               I believe I can guess, interrupted Mr. Glan-ville,
smiling.
               Is it possible, cried Arabella, starting back in
great Surprize, that, knowing, as you say you
do, your Father's Intentions, you would re-solve
to furnish him with an Opportunity of
disclosing them?
               Can you blame me, said Mr. Glanville, for
suffering him to undertake what I durst not my-self?
I know your Delicacy, or rather your Se-verity,
so well, that I am sensible, if I had
taken the Liberty to say what my Father has
said, you would have been extremely offended;
and punished me, as you have often done, with
a Banishment from your Presence: Nay, pur-sued
he, seeing Astonishment and Anger in her
Countenance, I perceive you are, at this Mo-ment,
going to pronounce some terrible Sen-tence
against me.
               You are deceived, said Arabella, with a
forced Calmness; I am so far from being of-fended

with you, that I am ready to acknow-lege,
you merit very extraordinary Praises for
the perfect Resignation you shew to the Will,
and, for your Credit, I will suppose, the Com-mands,
of your Father: But I would advise you
to be contented with the Reputation of being a
dutiful Son; and, for the future, never aspire
to that of being a faithful Lover.
               Speaking these Words, which were wholly
unintelligible to her amazed Admirer, she left
him, and went to her own Apartment, strangely
surprised at the Indifference of Mr. Glanville;
who, as she understood what he had said, was
not only willing to resign her to his Father,
but also took upon him to mediate in his be-half.
               As she was unwilling to acknowlege, even to
herself, that the Grief she felt at this Discovery,
proceeded from any Affection for her Cousin,
she imputed it to the Shame of seeing herself so
basely forsaken and neglected; and, not being
able to find a Precedent for such an Indignity
offered to the Charms of any Lady in her Ro-mances,
the Singularity of her Fate, in this
respect, seemed to demand all her Uneasi-ness.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Which contains some necessary Consequences
of the foregoing Mistakes.—A Soliloquy
on a Love-Letter.
               
               WHILE Arabella passed her Time in
her Closet, in the most disagreeable
Reflections, Glanville was racking his Brain to
find out the Meaning of those mysterious Words
she had uttered at leaving him: He examined
them twenty times over, but could not possi-bly
penetrate into their Sense: But, supposing
at last, that they really meant nothing at all,
or were occasioned by some new Flight of her
Imagination, he went to find out his Father,
in order to know what had passed between
him and Arabella.
               
               Sir Charles, however, was not to be found; he
had ordered his Horse to be made ready, under
Pretence of taking a little Ride after Dinner;
and, passing by Sir George's House, alighted to
pay him a Visit.
               The young Baronet, being at home, received
him with great Politeness: And Sir Charles,
whose peculiar Disposition was, to be nicely te-nacious
of every thing which, he imagined,
had any Relation to the Honour of his Family,
took the first Opportunity to question him, con-cerning
the Confusion his Whisper had occa-sioned
in Lady Bella; adding, That she had
confessed, he had given her Reason to take ill
what he had said to her.
               
                  

Sir George, who was by no means willing to
quarrel with the Uncle of Arabella, received the
old Gentleman's Remonstrances with a great
deal of Calmness; and, finding Arabella had
not discovered the Purport of that Whisper
which had offended her, he told Sir Charles,
That the Confusion he saw in her Countenance,
was occasioned by his raillying her upon the
Fright she had been in upon Mr. Glanville's
Account: He added some Particulars to this
Account, that intirely taking away all Incli-nation
in Sir Charles to pursue the Matter any
farther, they parted upon very good Terms;
Sir George promising, very soon, to return his
Visit at the Castle.
               Mr. Glanville, upon his Father's Return, be-ing
impatient to know what he had said to Ara-bella,
inquired with so much Precipitation, con-cerning
the Conversation they had had together,
that Sir Charles, unwilling to tell him the Truth,
and not having time to consider of an Answer,
evaded his Question in such a manner, that Mr.
Glanville could not help making some Obser-vation
upon it; and, comparing this Circum-stance
with what Arabella had said, tho' he
could not comprehend the Meaning that seemed
to be concealed under their Behaviour, he im-mediately
concluded, there was some Mystery,
which it concerned him to find out.
               Possessed with this Opinion, he longed for
an Opportunity to talk with Arabella alone;
but he was not so happy to obtain one; for,
tho' that Fair-one presided at the Tea-table, as
usual, and also appeared at Supper, yet she so
industriously avoided all Occasions of being alone

with him, tho' but for a Moment, and ap-peared
so reserved and uneasy, that it was im-possible
for him to speak to her upon that Sub-ject.
               As soon as it was time to retire, having re-solved
to request the Favour of a few Moments
Conversation with her, in her own Apartment;
and when he had, as was his Custom, handed
her up Stairs; instead of wishing her a good
Night, at her Chamber-door, he was going
to desire Permission to enter it with her; when
Lucy, coming to meet her Lady, whispered her
in the Ear; upon which, Arabella, turning
towards him, gave him an hasty Salute, and
hurried into her Apartment.
               
                  Glanville, no less vexed at this Disappoint-ment,
than perplexed at that Whisper, which
had caused such a visible Emotion in Arabella,
retired to his own Room, tormented with a thou-sand
uneasy Suspicions, for which he could not
exactly assign a Cause; and wishing impatiently
for the next Day, in which he hoped to pro-cure
some Explanation of what at present greatly
perplexed him.
               In the mean time, Arabella, who had been
informed by Lucy, in that Whisper, who was
eager to let her know it, that a Messenger had
brought a Letter from Sir George, and, late as
it was at Night, waited for an Answer, was de-bating
with herself, whether she should open
this Billet or not: She had a strong Inclination
to see what it contained; but, fearful of trans-gressing
the Laws of Romance, by indulging a
Curiosity not justifiable by Example, she re-solved
to return this Letter unopened.
               
                  

Here, said she to Lucy, give this Letter to the
Messenger that brought it, and tell him, I was
excessively offended with you, for receiving it
from his Hands.
               
                  Lucy, taking the Letter, was going to obey
her Orders; when, recollecting herself, she bid
her stay.
               Since Sir George, said she to herself, is no
declared Lover of mine, I may, without any
Offence to Decorum, see what this Letter con-tains:
To refuse receiving it, will be to acknow-lege,
that his Sentiments are not unknown to
me; and, by consequence, to lay myself under a
Necessity of banishing him: Nor is it fit, that I
should allow him to believe, I am so ready to
apprehend the Meaning of every gallant Speech,
which is used to me; and to construe such In-sinuations,
as he took the Liberty to make me,
into Declarations of Love.
               Allowing, therefore, the Justice of these Rea-sons,
she took the Letter out of Lucy's Hand;
and, being upon the Point of opening it, a sud-den
Thought controuled her Designs: She threw
it suddenly upon her Toilet; and, looking very
earnestly upon it,
               Presumptuous Paper! said she, speaking with
great Emotion to the Letter: Bold Repository
of thy Master's daring Thoughts! Shall I not
be blamed by all, who hereafter will hear, or
read, my History, if, contrary to the Appre-hensions
I have, that thou containest a Confes-sion
that will displease me, I open thy Seal,
and become accessary to thy Writer's Guilt,
by deigning to make myself acquainted with it?
And thou, too indiscreet and unwary Friend,

several Country Subjects, the Discourse at last
turned upon the Marquis of—whose fine
House and Gardens were within their View;
upon which the young Fellow informed him,
he was Brother to a young Woman that at-tended
the Lady Arabella; and, being fond of
lengthening out the Conversation with so fine a
Gentleman, gave him, without being desired,
the domestic History of the whole Family, as
he had received it from Lucy, who was the
Sister he mentioned.
               
                  Hervey, excessively delighted at this acci-dental
Meeting with a Person so capable of
serving his Defign, affected a great Desire of
being better acquainted with him; and, under
Pretence of acquiring some Knowlege in rural
Affairs, accustomed himself to call so often at
William's Farm, that at last he met with the
Person whom the Hopes of seeing had so often
carried him thither.
               
                  Lucy, the Moment she saw him enter, know-ing
him again, blushed at the Remembrance
of the Discourse which had passed between her
Lady and herself concerning him; and was not
at all surprised at the Endeavours he used to
speak to her apart: But, as soon as he began a
Conversation concerning Arabella, she inter-rupted
him by saying, I know, Sir, that you
are distractedly in Love with my Lady; but she
has forbid me to receive any Letters or Messages
from you; and therefore I beg you will not
offer to bribe me; for I dare not disobey her.
               Mr. Hervey was at first so astonished at her
Speech, that he knew not what to think of it;
but, after a little Reflection, attributing to an

whose Folds contain the Acknowlegement of
his Crime! What will it advantage thee or
him, if, torn by my resenting Hand, I make
thee suffer, for the Part thou bearest in thy
Master's Fault; and teach him, by thy Fate,
how little Kindness he has to expect from me!
Yet, to spare myself the Trouble of reading
what will, questionless, greatly displease me, I
will return thee, uninjured, into thy Master's
Hands; and, by that Moderation, make him
repent the Presumption he has been guilty of!
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Containing a Love-Letter in the Heroic
Stile; with some occasional Reasonings
by Lucy, full of Wit and Simplicity.
               
               OUR fair Heroine, having ended the fore-going
Soliloquy, took up the Letter, and
gave it to Lucy, who had, all the time she was
speaking, observed a profound Silence, mixed
with a most eager Attention.
               Here, pursued she, carry it to the Person who
brought it; and bid him tell his Master, that,
lest I should find any thing in it, which may
offend me, I have chosen not to read it: And,
if he is wise, he will profit by my Concern for
him, and take care how he hazards displeasing
me a Second time by an Importunity of this
kind, which I shall not so easily pardon him.
               
                  Lucy, who had taken particular Notice of
this Speech, in order to remember every Word

of it, when she repeated it again, went conning
her Lesson to the Place where she had desired
the Servant to wait her coming: But he was
gone; such being indeed his Master's Orders;
for he was apprehensive, that, following the
Custom of the Ladies in Romances, Arabella
would return his Letter; and therefore, to de-prive
her of an Opportunity of sending it back
that Night, he ordered his Man to say, he
waited for an Answer; but, as soon as he con-veniently
could, to come away without one.
               
                  Lucy, in a great Surprize at the Servant's go-ing
away, returned to her Lady with the Letter
in her Hand, telling her she must needs read it
now, since the Person, who brought it, was
gone.
               It must be confessed, said Arabella, taking
the Letter from her, with a Smile, he has fallen
upon an ingenious Device, to make me keep it
for this Night; and, since, haply, I may be
mistaken in the Contents, I have a mind to
open it.
               
                  Lucy did not fail to confirm her Lady in this
Design: And Arabella, making as if she yielded
to the Importunities of her Confidante, opened
the Letter; which she found as follows:
               
                  
                     The unfortunate and despairing Bellmour, to
the Divine Arabella.
                     
                        Madam,
                     
                     SINCE it is, doubtless, not only with your
Permission, but even by your Commands,
that your Uncle, Sir Charles Glanville, comes
to pronounce the Sentence of my Death, in the

Denunciation of your Anger, I submit, Madam,
without repining at the Rigour of that Doom
you have inflicted on me. Yes, Madam, this
Criminal, who has dared to adore you, with
the most sublime and perfect Passion that ever
was, acknowleges the Justice of his Punishment;
and, since it is impossible to cease loving you,
or to live without telling you he does so, he is
going, voluntarily, to run upon that Death your
Severity makes him wish for, and the Great-ness
of his Crime demands. Let my Death
then, O Divine Arabella, expiate the Offence
I have been guilty of! And let me hope those
fair Eyes, that have beheld me with Scorn
when alive, will not refuse to shed some Tears
upon my Tomb! And that, when you remem-ber
my Crime of loving you, you will also be
pleased to remember, that I died for that Crime;
and wish for no other Comfort in Death, but
the Hope of your not hating, when he is no
more,
                     
                        The unhappy Bellmour.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Arabella, who had read this Letter aloud,
sighed gently at the Conclusion of it; but poor
Lucy, who was greatly affected at so dolorous
an Epistle, could not restrain her Tears; but
sobbed so often, and with so much Violence,
as, at length, recalled her Lady from the Re-verie,
into which she was plunged.
               What ails you? said she to her Confidante,
greatly surprised: What is the Cause of this un-seemly
Sorrow?
               Oh! Madam! cried Lucy, her Sobs making
a frequent and unpleasing Interruption in her

Words; I shall break my Heart to be sure: Ne-ver
was such a sad mournful Letter in the
World: I could cry my Eyes out for the poor
Gentleman. Pray excuse me, Madam; but,
indeed, I can't help saying, You are the most
hard-heartedest Lady I ever knew in my born
Days: Why, to be sure, you don't care, if
an hundred fine Gentlemen should die for you,
tho' their Spirits were to haunt you every Night!
Well! I would not have what your Ladyship
has to answer for, for all the World!
               You are a foolish Wench! replied Arabella,
smiling at her Simplicity: Do you think I have
any Cause to accuse myself, tho' Five thousand
Men were to die for me? 'Tis very certain, my
Beauty has produced very deplorable Effects:
The unhappy Hervey has expiated, by his
Death, the Violence his too desperate Passion
forced him to meditate against me: The no less
guilty, the noble Unknown, Edward, is wander-ing
about the World, in a tormenting Despair;
and stands exposed to the Vengeance of my
Cousin, who has vowed his Death. My Charms
have made another Person, whose Character
ought to be sacred to me, forget all the Ties
of Consanguinity; and become the Rival of his
Son, whose Interest he once endeavoured to
support: And, lastly, the unfortunate Bell-mour
consumes away in an hopeless Passion;
and, conscious of his Crime, dooms himself,
haply, with more Severity than I desire, to a
voluntary Death; in hopes, thereby, of pro-curing
my Pardon and Compassion, when he is
no more. All these, Lucy, as I said before,
are very deplorable Effects of my Beauty; but

you must observe, that my Will has no Part
in the Miseries, that unfortunate Beauty occa-sions;
and that, tho' I could even wish myself
less fair, in order to avoid giving so much Un-happiness
to others, yet these Wishes would
not avail; and since, by a fatal Necessity, all
these Things will happen, whether I would or
no, I must comfort myself under the Uneasi-ness,
which the Sensibility of my Temper
makes me feel, by the Reflection, that, with my
own Consent, I contribute nothing to the Mis-fortune
of those who love me.
               Will your Ladyship then let poor Sir George
die? said Lucy, who had listened very atten-tively
to this fine Harangue, without under-standing
what it meant.
               Questionless, he must die, replied Arabella,
if he persists in his Design of loving me.
               But, pray, Madam, resumed Lucy, cannot
your Ladyship command him to live, as you
did Mr. Hervey, and Mr. Glanville, who both
did as you bid them?
               I may command him to live, said Ara-bella;
and there is no Question but he would
obey me, if I likewise permit him to love me;
but, this last not being fit for me to do, I see
no way to prevent the sad Resolution he has
taken.
               To be sure, Madam, returned Lucy, your
Ladyship knows what you ought to do bet-ter
than I can advise your Ladyship, being that
you are more learned than me: But, for all
that I 
                     
                   it's better to save Life than to kill,
as the Bible-Book says; and, since I am sure
your Ladyship is a good Christian, if the Gen-tleman

dies for the Want of a few kind Words,
or so, I am sure you will be troubled in Mind
about it.
               It must be confessed, said Arabella, smiling,
that, tho' your Solicitations are not very elo-quent,
they are very earnest and affecting; and
I promise you, I will think about it; and, if I
can persuade myself, I am doing no wrong
Thing, by concerning myself about his Preser-vation,
I will dispatch you To-morrow Morn-ing,
with my Orders to him, to live, or, at
least, to proceed no further in his Design of dy-ing,
till he has further Cause.
               
                  Lucy, being extremely glad she had gained
her Point, called in her Lady's other Women,
who, having assisted her to undress, left her in
her Closet, to which she always retired for an
Hour, before she went to Bed.
               
                  END of the FIRST VOLUME
            
         
      
   


Excess of aukward Cunning what, in Reality,
was an Effect of her Simplicity, he resolved to
make use of the Hint she had given him; and,
presenting her with a Couple of Guineas, in-treated
her to venture displeasing her Lady, by
bearing a Letter from him; promising to re-ward
her better, if she succeeded.
               
                  Lucy made some Difficulty to comply; but,
not being able absolutely to refuse the first Bribe
that ever was offered to her, she, after some
Intreaties, consented to take the Letter; and,
receiving the Money he presented her, left him
at Liberty to write, after she had got her Bro-ther
to furnish him with Materials for that Pur-pose.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  A Mistake, which produces no great Conse-quences
—An extraordinary Comment
upon a Behaviour natural enough—An
Instance of a Lady's Compassion for her
Lover, which the Reader may possibly
think not very compassionate.
               
               
                  HERVEY, who was Master of no great
Elegance in Letter-writing, was at first
at some Loss, how to address a Lady of her
Quality, to whom he was an absolute Stranger,
upon the Subject of Love; but, conceiving
there was no great Occasion for much Cere-mony
in declaring himself to one who had been
educated in the Country, and who, he believ-ed,
could not be displeased with a Lover of his

            TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE
THE
Earl of MIDDLESEX.
            
               
                  My LORD,
            
            SUCH is the Power of In-terest
over almost every
Mind, that no one is long with-out
Arguments to prove any
Position which is ardently
wished to be true, or to justify
any Measures which are dictated
by Inclination.
            
               

Figure, he therefore, in plain Terms, told
her, how deeply he was enamoured of her; and
conjured her to afford him some Opportunity
of paying his Respects to her.
               
                  Lucy received this Letter from him with a
worse Grace than she did the Gold; and, tho'
she promised him to deliver it to her Lady im-mediately,
yet she kept it a Day or two before
she had the Courage to attempt it: At last,
drawing it out of her Pocket, with a bashful
Air, she presented it to her Lady, telling her it
came from the fine Gentleman whom she saw
at Church.
               
                  Arabella blushed at the Sight of the Letter;
and tho', in Reality, she was not displeased,
yet, being a strict Observer of romantic Forms,
she chid her Woman severely for taking it.
Carry it back, added she, to the presumptuous
Writer of it; and let him know how greatly
his Insolence has offended me.
               
                  Lucy, however, suffered the Letter to re-main
on the Toilet, expecting some Change
in her Lady's Mind; for she traversed the
Chamber in great seeming Irresolution, often
stealing a Glance to the Letter, which she had
a strong Inclination to open; but, searching
the Records of her Memory for a Precedent,
and not finding, that any Lady ever opened a
Letter from an unknown Lover, she reiterated
her Commands to Lucy to carry it back, with
a Look and Accent so very severe, that the Girl,
extremely apprehensive of having offended her,
put the Letter again in her Pocket, resolving
to return it the first Opportunity.
               
                  

Mr. Hervey, who had his Thoughts wholly
taken up with the flattering Prospect of Suc-cess,
no sooner saw Lucy, who gave him his
Letter without speaking a Word, than, sup-posing
it had been the Answer he expected, he
eagerly snatched it out of her Hand, and,
kissing it first in a Rapture of Joy, broke it
open; but his Surprize and Confusion, when
he saw it was his own Letter returned, was
inexpressible. For some Moments he kept
his Eyes fastened upon the tender Billet, as if
he was really reading it. His Disappointment,
and the ridiculous Figure he knew he must
make in the Eyes of his Messenger, filled him
with so much Confusion, that he did not dare
to look up; but, recovering himself at last,
he affected to turn it into a Jest; and, laugh-ing
first himself, gave Lucy the Liberty of
laughing also, who had with much Difficulty
been able to prevent doing it before.
               The Curiosity he felt to hear how she had
acquitted herself of the Trust he had reposed
in her, made him oblige her to give a Truce
to her Mirth, in order to satisfy him; and
Lucy, who was extremely exact in her Re-lations,
told him all that had passed, without
omitting the smallest Circumstance.
               Though it was impossible to draw any
favourable Omen from what he heard, yet he
determined to make another Effort, before he
set out for London; and, taking Leave of his
Confident, after he had appointed her to meet
him again the next Day, at her Brother's, he
went home to consider upon Means to effect

his Designs, which the ill Success of his first
Attempt had not forced him to abandon.
               
                  Arabella, who expected to hear, that the
Return of his Letter would make her Lover
commit some very extravagant Actions; and
having impatiently waited for an Account of
them from Lucy; finding she seemed to
have no Intention to begin a Discourse con-cerning
him; asked her, at last, If she had
executed her Commission, and returned the
Letter to the insolent Unknown?
               The Girl answered, Yes.
               Which not being all that her Lady expected,
And how did he receive it? resumed she,
peevishly.
               Why Madam, replied Lucy, I believe he
thought your Ladyship had sent him an An-swer;
for he kissed the Letter several times.
               Foolish Wench! replied Arabella, How can
you imagine he had the Temerity to think I
should answer his Letter? A Favour, which,
though he had spent Years in my Service,
would have been infinitely greater than he
could have expected. No, Lucy, he kissed
the Letter, either because he thought it had been
touched at least by my Hands, or to shew the
perfect Submission with which he received my
Commands; and it is not to be doubted, but
his Despair will force him to commit some
desperate Outrage against himself, which I do
not hate him enough to wish, though he has
mortally offended me.
               
                  Arabella was possessed of great Sensibility
and Softness; and, being really persuaded, that
her Lover would entertain some fatal Design,

seemed so much affected with the Thoughts of
what might happen, that Lucy, who tenderly
loved her, begged her not to be so much con-cerned
for the Gentleman: There is no Fear,
added she, that he will do himself a Mischief;
for when he discovered his Mistake, he laughed
heartily, as well as myself.
               How! replied Arabella, extremely surprised,
Did he laugh?
               Which Lucy confirming, Doubtless, re-sumed
she, having taken a little Time to con-sider
of so strange a Phaenomenon, he laughed,
because his Reason was disturbed at the sudden
Shock he received: Unhappy Man! his Pre-sumption
will be severely enough punished,
though I do not add Anger to the Scorn which
I have expressed for him: Therefore, Lucy,
you may tell him, if you please, that, not-withstanding
the Offence he has been guilty
of, I am not cruel enough to wish his Death;
and that I command him to live, if he can
live without Hope.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  In which one would imagine the Ad-venture
concluded, but for a Promise,
that something else is to come.
               
               
                  LUCY now began to think there was some-thing
more, than she imagined, in this
Affair. Mr. Hervey indeed, in her Opinion,
had seemed to be very far from having any
Design to attempt his own Life; but her

Lady, she thought, could not possibly be mis-taken;
and therefore she resolved to carry her
Message to him immediately, though it was
then late in the Evening.
               Accordingly she went to her Brother's,
where she had some Hope of meeting with
him; but not finding him there, she obliged
him to go to the House where he lived, and tell
him she desired to speak with him.
               
                  William, being let into the Secret of his
Sister's frequent Meetings with Mr. Hervey,
imagined she had some agreeable News to ac-quaint
him with; and therefore ran imme-diately
to his Relation's House, which was but
at a small Distance; but he was told Mr.
Hervey was in Bed, very much indisposed, and
could not be seen.
               This News put Lucy in a terrible Fright:
She told her Apprehensions to her Brother;
which being such as her Lady had put into her
Head, and were now confirmed by Mr. Her-vey's
Illness, the young Farmer stood amazed,
not being able to comprehend her Meaning;
and she, without staying to explain herself any
further, went home to the Castle, and told
her Lady, That what she feared was come to
pass; the Gentleman would certainly die; for
he was very ill in Bed.
               This being no more than what Arabella ex-pected,
she discovered no Surprize; but only
asked Lucy, If she had delivered her Message
to him?
               Would you have me, Madam, replied she,
go to his House? I am afraid the Marquis
will hear of it.
               
                  

My Father, replied Arabella, can never be
offended with me for doing a charitable
Action.
               Ah! Madam, interrupted Lucy, let me go
then immediately, for fear the poor Gentle-man
should grow worse.
               If he be sick almost to Death, resumed Ara-bella,
he will recover, if I command him to do
so: When did you hear of a Lover dying
through Despair, when his Mistress let him
know it was her Pleasure he should live? But
as it will not be altogether so proper for you to
go to his House, as it may be suspected you
come from me; I'll write a few Lines, which
you shall copy, and your Brother may carry
them to him To-morrow, and I'll engage he
shall be well in a few Hours.
               Saying this, she went into her Closet, and,
having written a short Note, made Lucy write
it over again. It was as follows:
               
                  
                     Lucy, To the Unfortunate Lover of her Lady.
                     MY Lady, who is the most generous Per-son
in the World, has commanded me
to tell you, that, presumptuous as you are, she
does not desire your Death; nay more, she
commands you to live, and permits you, in
case you obey her, to hope for her Pardon,
provided you keep within the Bounds she pre-scribes
to you.
                     
                        Adieu.
                     
                  
               
               This Letter Lucy copied, and Arabella, ex-amining
it again, thought it rather too kind;

and, seeming desirous of making some Alteration
in it, Lucy, who was extremely anxious for Mr.
Hervey's Life, fearing lest she should alter it
in such a manner, that the Gentleman might
be at Liberty to die, if he chose it, conjured
her Lady in such pressing Terms to let it re-main
as it was, that Arabella suffered herself
to be prevailed upon by her Intreaties; and,
remembring that it was not uncommon for
the Ladies in Romances to relax a little in
their Severity through the Remonstrances of
their Women, told her, with an inchanting
Smile, that she would grant her Desire; and
went to Bed with that pleasing Satisfaction,
which every generous Mind experiences at
the Consciousness of having done some very
benevolent Action.
               In the Morning, this life-restoring Billet
was dispatched by Lucy to her Brother, in-closed
in one to him, charging him to carry it
to the sick Gentleman immediately.
               
                  William, having a strong Curiosity to see
what his Sister had written, ventured to open it;
and, not being able to imagine Lady Bella had
really given her Orders to write what appeared
to him the most unintelligible Stuff in the
World, resolved to suppress this Letter till he
had questioned her a little concerning it.
               A few Hours after, Mr. Hervey, who ex-pected
to meet Lucy at her Brother's, came in.
His Illness having been only a violent Head-ach,
to which he was subject, being now quite
off, he remembred the Appointment he had
made; but, having waited some time, and
she not coming, he returned again to his

Cousin's, leaving word for her, that he would
see her the next Day.
               Scarce was he gone out, when Lucy, who
longed to know what Effect her Letter had
produced in his Health, came in; and eagerly
inquiring of her Brother how Mr. Hervey was,
received for Answer, that he had been there
a Moment before she came.
               Well, cried she, clasping her Hands to-gether,
with Surprize, my Lady said, her Letter
would cure him, if he was ever so sick; but I
did not imagine he would have been well
enough to come abroad so soon.
               Your Lady! interrupted William, why was
it not yourself that wrote that Letter you gave
to me?
               No, truly, Brother, resumed she: How
was it possible I should write so fine a Letter?
My Lady made every Word of it, and I only
wrote it after her.
               
                  William, hearing this, would not own the
Indiscretion he now thought he had been
guilty of, in keeping the Letter; but suffered his
Sister to return to her Lady, in the Belief that
he had delivered it, resolving, when he saw
her next, to say he had lost it; for he knew
not what Excuse to make to Mr. Hervey for
not giving it him when he saw him.
               
                  Arabella received the Account of her Lover's
Recovery as a Thing she was absolutely sure
of before; and thinking she had now done all
that could be expected from her Compassion,
resumed her usual Severity, and commanded
Lucy to mention him no more. If he loves
me with that Purity he ought to do, pursued

she, he will cease to importune me any further:
And though his Passion be ever so violent, his
Respect and Submission to my Commands will
oblige him to Silence. The Obedience he
has already shewn, in recovering at the first
Intimation I gave, that it was my Will he
should do so, convinces me, I need not ap-prehend
he will renew his Follies to displease
me.
               
                  Lucy, who found by this Discourse of her
Lady's, that her Commission was at an End
with regard to Mr. Hervey, followed her Di-rections
so exactly, that she not only spoke no
more of him to her, but also, in order to avoid
him, neglected to go to her Brother's.
               His Impatience at not seeing her made him
prevail upon her Brother to go the Castle, and
intreat her to give him another Interview: But
Lucy positively refused; and, to make a Merit
with her Lady of her Obedience, informed
her what he had requested.
               
                  Arabella, resenting a Boldness which argued
so little Respect to her Commands, began
now to repent of the Compassion she had
shewn him; and, commending Lucy for what
she had done, bid her tell the insolent Un-known,
if he ever sent to her again, that she
was resolved never to pardon the Contempt
he had shewn for her Orders.
               Mr. Hervey, finding himself deserted by
Lucy, resolved to give over his Attempts, con-gratulating
himself for his Discretion in not
acquainting his Cousin with what he had al-ready
done: His Heart not being very much
engaged, he found no great Difficulty in con-soling

himself for his bad Success. In a few
Days he thought of Lady Bella no more, than
if he had never seen her; but an Accident
bringing her again in his Way, he could not
resist the Inclination he felt to speak to her;
and by that means drew upon himself a very
sensible Mortification.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In which the Adventure is really concluded;
tho', possibly, not as the Reader expected.
               
               THE Marquis sometimes permitting his
Daughter to ride out, and this being
the only Diversion she was allowed, or ever ex-perienced,
she did not fail to take it as often as
she could.
               She was returning from one of these Airings
one Day, attended by two Servants, when
Mr. Hervey, who happened to be at some Di-stance,
observing a Lady on Horseback, who
made a very graceful Figure, he rode up to
her, in order to have a nearer View; and,
knowing Lady Bella again, resolved to speak
to her: But while he was considering how he
should accost her, Arabella suddenly seeing him,
and observing he was making up to her, her
Imagination immediately suggested to her, that
this insolent Lover had a Design to seize her
Person; and this Thought terrifying her ex-tremely,
she gave a loud Shriek; which Mr.
Hervey hearing, rode eagerly up to her to in-quire

By this subtil Sophistry of
Desire, I have been persuaded
to hope, that this Book may,
without Impropriety, be in-scribed
to Your Lordship; but
am not certain, that my Rea-sons
will have the same Force
upon other Understandings.
            The Dread which a Writer
feels of the public Censure; the
still greater Dread of Neglect;
and the eager Wish for Support
and Protection, which is im-pressed
by the Consciousness of
Imbecillity; are unknown to
those who have never adventured
into the World; and I am afraid,
my Lord, equally unknown to
those, who have always found
the World ready to applaud
them.
            
               

the Reason of it, at the same time that
her two Attendants, as much amazed as him-self,
came galloping up also.
               
                  Arabella, upon his coming close to her, re-doubled
her Cries. If you have any Valour,
said she to her Servants, defend your unfortu-nate
Mistress, and rescue her from this unwor-thy
Man.
               The Servants, believing him to be a High-wayman,
by this Exclamation, and dreading
lest he should present his Pistol at their Heads,
if they offered to make any Resistance, recoiled
a few Paces back, expecting he would demand
their Purses when he had robbed their Lady:
But the extreme Surprize he was in, keeping
him motionless, the Fellows not seeing any
Pistols in his Hand, and animated by Arabella's
Cries, who, calling them Cowards and Trai-tors,
urged them to deliver her; they both, in
a Moment, laid hold of Mr. Hervey, and forced
him to alight; which they did also themselves,
still keeping fast hold of him, whom Surprize,
Shame, and Rage, had hitherto kept silent.
               Rascals! cried he, when he was able to
speak, what do you mean by using me in this
manner? Do you suppose I had any Intention
to hurt the Lady?—What do you take me
for?
               For a Villain, for a Ravisher, interrupted
Arabella, who, contrary to all Laws both hu-man
and divine, endeavour to possess yourself
by Force of a Person whom your are not worthy
to serve; and whose Charity and Compassion
you have returned with the utmost Ingratitude.
               
                  

Upon my Word, Madam, said Mr. Hervey,
I don't understand one Word you say: You
either mistake me for some other Person, or are
pleased to divert yourself with the Surprize I am
in: But I beseech you carry the Jest no farther,
and order your Servants to let me go; or, by
Heaven—cried he struggling to get loose, if I
can but free one of my Hands, I'll stab the
Scoundrels before your Face.
               It is not with Threats like these, resumed
Arabella with great Calmness, that I can be
moved. A little more Submission and Respect
would become you better; you are now wholly
in my Power; I may, if I please, carry you to
my Father, and have you severely punished for
your Attempt: But to shew you, that I am as
generous as you are base and designing, I'll give
you Freedom, provided you promise me never
to appear before me again: But, in order to se-cure
my own Safety, you must deliver up your
Arms to my Servants, that I may be assured you
will not have it in your Power to make a second
Attempt upon my Liberty.
               Mr. Hervey, whose Astonishment was in-creased
by every Word she spoke, began now to
be apprehensive, that this might prove a very
serious Affair, since she seemed resolved to be-lieve
he had a Design to carry her off; and,
knowing that an Attempt of that Nature upon
an Heiress might have dangerous Consequences,
he resolved to accept the Conditions she offered
him: But while he delivered his Hanger to the
Servant, he assured her in the strongest Terms,
that he had no other Design in riding up to her,
but to have a nearer View of her Person.
               
                  

Add not Falshood, said Arabella sternly, to a
Crime already black enough; for tho', by an
Effect of my Generosity, I have resolved not to
deliver you up to the Resentment of my Father,
yet nothing shall ever be able to make me par-don
this Outrage. Go then, pursued she, go,
base Man, unworthy of the Care I took of thy
Safety; go to some distant Country, where I
may never hear of thee more; and suffer me, if
possible, to lose the Remembrance of thy
Crimes,
               Saying this, she ordered her Servants, who
had got the Hanger in their Possession, to set
him at Liberty, and mount their Horses; which
they did immediately, and followed their Lady,
who rode with all imaginable Speed to the
Castle.
               Mr. Hervey, not yet recovered from his Sur-prize,
stood some Moments considering the
strange Scene he had been Witness to; and in
which he had, much against his Will, appeared
the principal Character. As he was not ac-quainted
with Lady Bella's Foible, he concluded
her Fears of him were occasioned by her Sim-plicity,
and some Misrepresentations that had
been made her by Lucy, who, he thought, had
betrayed him; and, fearing this ridiculous
Adventure would be soon made public, and him-self
exposed to the Sneers of his Country Ac-quaintance,
he resolved to go back to London as
soon as possible.
               The next Day, pretending he had received a
Letter which obliged him to set out immedi-ately,
he took Leave of his Cousin, heartily
glad at the Escape he should make from his Rail-lery;

for he did not doubt but the Story would
very soon be known, and told greatly to his Dis-advantage.
               But Arabella, in order to be completely ge-nerous,
a Quality for which all the Heroines
are famous, laid a Command upon her two At-tendants
not to mention what had passed, giv-ing
them, at the same time, Money to secure
their Secrecy; and threatening them with her
Displeasure, if they disobeyed.
               
                  Arabella, as soon as she had an Opportunity,
did not fail to acquaint her faithful Lucy with
the Danger from which she had so happily
escaped, thanking Heaven at the same time
with great Devotion, for having preserved her
from the Hands of the Ravisher.
               Two or three Months rolled away, after this
Accident, without offering any new Adventure
to our fair Visionary; when her Imagination,
always prepossessed with the same fantastic Ideas,
made her stumble upon another Mistake, equally
absurd and ridiculous.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which some Contradictions are very hap-pily
reconciled.
               
               THE Marquis's head Gardener had received
a young Fellow into his Master's Service,
who had lived in several Families of Distinction.
He had a good Face; was tolerably genteel;
and, having an Understanding something above
his Condition, join'd to a great deal of second-hand
                  

Politeness, which he had contracted while
he lived at London, he appeared a very extraor-dinary
Person among the Rustics who were his
Fellow-Servants.
               
                  Arabella, when she walked in the Garden,
had frequent Opportunities of seeing this young
Man, whom she observed with a very particular
Attention. His Person and Air had something,
she thought, very distinguishing. When she
condescended to speak to him about any Busi-ness
he was employed in, she took Notice, that
his Answers were framed in a Language vastly
superior to his Condition; and the Respect he
paid her had quite another Air from that of
the aukward Civility of the other Servants.
               Having discerned so many Marks of a Birth
far from being mean, she easily passed from an
Opinion that he was a Gentleman, to a Belief
that he was something more; and every new
Sight of him adding Strength to her Suspicions,
she remained, in a little time, perfectly con-vinced
that he was some Person of Quality, who,
disguised in the Habit of a Gardener, had intro-duced
himself into her Father's Service, in or-der
to have an Opportunity of declaring a Pas-sion
to her, which must certainly be very great,
since it had forced him to assume an Appearance
so unworthy of his noble Extraction.
               Wholly possessed with this Thought, she set
herself to observe him more narrowly; and soon
found out, that he went very aukwardly about
his Work; that he sought Opportunities of be-ing
alone; that he threw himself in her Way
as often as he could, and gazed on her very at-tentively:
She sometimes fansied she saw him

endeavour to smother a Sigh when he answered
her any Question about his Work; once saw
him leaning against a Tree with his Hands
crossed upon his Breast; and, having lost a
String of small Pearls, which she remembered
he had seen her threading as she sat in one of the
Arbours, was persuaded he had taken it up,
and kept it for the Object of his secret Adora-tion.
               She often wondered, indeed, that she did not
find her Name carved on the Trees, with some
mysterious Expressions of Love; that he was
never discovered lying along the Side of one of
the little Rivulets, increasing the Stream with his
Tears; nor, for three Months that he had lived
there, had ever been sick of a Fever caused by
his Grief, and the Constraint he put upon himself
in not declaring his Passion: But she considered
again, that his Fear of being discovered kept
him from amusing himself with making the
Trees bear the Records of his secret Thoughts,
or of indulging his Melancholy in any Manner
expressive of the Condition of his Soul; and, as
for his not being sick, his Youth, and the
Strength of his Constitution, might, even for a
longer time, bear him up against the Assaults of
a Fever: But he appeared much thinner and
paler than he used to be; and she concluded,
therefore, that he must in time sink under the
Violence of his Passion, or else be forced to de-clare
it to her; which she considered as a very
great Misfortune; for, not finding in herself
any Disposition to approve his Love, she must ne-cessarily
banish him from her Presence, for fear
he should have the Presumption to hope, that

Time might do any thing in his Favour: And
it was possible also, that the Sentence she would
be obliged to pronounce, might either cause his
Death, or force him to commit some extrava-gant
Action, which would discover him to her
Father, who would, perhaps, think her guilty
of holding a secret Correspondence with him.
               These Thoughts perplexed her so much, that,
hoping to find some Relief by unburdening her
Mind to Lucy, she told her all her Uneasiness.
Ah! said she to her, looking upon Edward,
who had just passed them, how unfortunate do
I think myself in being the Cause of that Passion
which makes this illustrious Unknown wear
away his Days in so shameful an Obscurity!
Yes, Lucy, pursued she, that Edward, whom
you regard as one of my Father's menial Ser-vants,
is a Person of sublime Quality, who sub-mits
to this Disguise only to have an Opportu-nity
of seeing me every Day. But why do you
seem so surprised? Is it possible, that you have
not suspected him to be what he is? Has he ne-ver
unwittingly made any Discovery of himself?
Have you not surprised him in Discourse with
his faithful 'Squire, who, certainly, lurks here-abouts
to receive his Commands, and is haply
the Confident of his Passion? Has he never en-tertained
you with any Conversation about me?
Or have you never seen any valuable Jewels
in his Possession by which you suspected him to
be not what he appears?
               Truly, Madam, replied Lucy, I never took
him for any body else but a simple Gardener;
but now you open my Eyes, methinks I can
find I have been strangely mistaken; for he does

not look like a Man of low Degree; and he
talks quite in another Manner from our Ser-vants.
I never heard him indeed speak of your
Ladyship, but once; and that was, when he
first saw you walking in the Garden, he asked
our John, If you was not the Marquis's Daugh-ter?
And he said, You was as beautiful as an
Angel. As for sine Jewels, I never saw any;
and I believe he has none; but he has a Watch,
and that looks as if he was something, Madam:
Nor do I remember to have seen him talk with
any Stranger that looked like a 'Squire.
               
                  Lucy, having thus, with her usual Punctuality,
answered every Question her Lady put to her,
proceeded to ask her, What she should say, if
he should beg her to give her a Letter, as the
other Gentleman had done?
               You must by no means take it, replied Ara-bella:
My Compassion had before like to have
been fatal to me. If he discovers his Quality to
me, I shall know in what manner to treat him.
               They were in this Part of their Discourse,
when a Noise they heard at some Distance,
made Arabella bend her Steps to the Place from
whence it proceeded; and, to her infinite Amaze-ment,
saw the head Gardener, with a Stick he
had in his Hand, give several Blows to the con-cealed
Hero, who suffered the Indignity with
admirable Patience.
               Shocked at seeing a Person of Quality treated
so unworthily, she called out to the Gardener
to hold his Hand; who immediately obeyed;
and Edward, seeing the young Lady advance,
sneaked off, with an Air very different from an
Oroondates.
               
               
                  

For what Crime, pray, said Arabella, with
a stern Aspect, did you treat the Person I saw
with you so cruelly? He whom you take such
unbecoming Liberties with, may possibly—But
again I ask you, What has he done? You
should make some Allowance for his want of
Skill in the abject Employment he is in at
present.
               It is not for his want of Skill, Madam, said the
Gardener, that I corrected him; he knows his
Business very well, if he would mind it; but,
Madam, I have discovered him—
               Discovered him, do you say? interrupted
Arabella: And has the Knowledge of his Con-dition
not been able to prevent such Usage? or
rather, Has it been the Occasion of his receiv-ing
it?
               His Conditions are very bad, Madam, re-turned
the Gardener; and I am afraid are such
as will one Day prove the Ruin of Body and
Soul too. I have for some time suspected he
had bad Designs in his Head; and just now
watched him to the Fish-pond, and prevented
him from—
               O dear! interrupted Lucy, looking pitifully
on her Lady, whose fair Bosom heaved with
Compassion, I warrant he was going to make
away with himself.
               No, resumed the Gardener, smiling at the
Mistake, he was only going to make away with
some of the Carp, which the Rogue had
caught, and intended, I suppose, to sell; but
I threw them into the Water again; and if
your Ladyship had not forbid me, I would have
drubbed him soundly for his Pains.
               
                  

Fye! fye! interrupted Arabella, out of Breath
with Shame and Vexation, tell me no more of
these idle Tales.
               Then, hastily walking on to hide the Blushes
which this strange Accusation of her illustrious
Lover had raised in her Face, she continued for
some time in the greatest Perplexity ima-ginable.
               
                  Lucy, who followed her, and could not
possibly reconcile what her Lady had been telling
her concerning Edward, with the Circumstance
of his stealing the Carp, ardently wished to hear
her Opinion of this Matter; but, seeing her
deeply engaged with her own Thoughts, she
would not venture to disturb her.
               
                  Arabella indeed, had been in such a terrible
Consternation, that it was some Time before
she even reconciled Appearances to herself; but,
as she had a most happy Faculty in accommo-dating
every Incident to her own Wishes and
Conceptions, she examined this Matter so many
different Ways, drew so many Conclusions, and
fansied so many Mysteries in the most indif-ferent
Actions of the supposed noble Unknown,
that she remained, at last, more than ever
confirmed in the Opinion, that he was some
great Personage, whom her Beauty had forced
to assume an Appearance unworthy of himself:
When Lucy, no longer able to keep Silence,
drew off her Attention from those pleasing
Images, by speaking of the Carp-stealing Affair
again.
               
                  Arabella, whose Confusion returned at that
disagreeable Sound, charged her, in an angry
Tone, never to mention so injurious a Suspi-cion

'Tis, therefore, not unlikely,
that the Design of this Address
may be mistaken, and the Ef-fects
of my Fear imputed to
my Vanity: They who see Your
Lordship's Name prefixed to
my Performance, will rather
condemn my Presumption, than
compassionate my Anxiety.
            But, whatever be supposed
my Motive, the Praise of Judg-ment
cannot be denied me; for,
to whom can Timidity so pro-perly
fly for Shelter, as to
him who has been so long di-stinguished
for Candour and
Humanity? How can Vanity be
so completely gratified, as by the
allowed Patronage of him whose
Judgment has so long given a

any more: For, in fine, said she to her,
do you imagine a Person of his Rank could be
guilty of stealing Carp? Alas! pursued she,
sighing, he had, indeed, some fatal Design;
and, doubtless, would have executed it, had not
this Fellow so luckily prevented him.
               But Mr. Woodbind, Madam, said Lucy, saw
the Carp in his Hand: I wonder what he was
going to do with them.
               Still, resumed Arabella, extremely chagrined,
still will you wound my Ears with that horrid
Sound? I tell you, obstinate and foolish Wench,
that this unhappy Man went thither to die; and
if he really caught the Fish, it was to conceal
his Design from Woodbind: His great Mind
could not suggest to him, that it was possible he
might be suspected of a Baseness like that this
ignorant Fellow accused him of; therefore he
took no Care about it, being wholly possessed
by his despairing Thoughts.
               However, Madam, said Lucy, your Lady-ship
may prevent his going to the Fishpond again,
by laying your Commands upon him to live.
               I shall do all that I ought, answered Arabella;
but my Care for the Safety of other Persons must
not make me forget what I owe to my own.
               As she had always imputed Mr. Hervey's fan-sied
Attempt to carry her away, to the Letter
she had written to him, upon which he had pro-bably
founded his Hopes of being pardoned for
it, she resolved to be more cautious for the fu-ture
in giving such Instances of her Compassion;
and was at a great Loss in what manner to com-fort
her despairing Lover, without raising Ex-pectations
she had no Inclination to confirm:

But she was delivered from her Perplexity by
the News of his having left the Marquis's Ser-vice;
which she attributed to some new Design
he had formed to obtain her; and Lucy, who
always thought as her Lady did, was of the
same Opinion; tho' it was talked among the
Servants, that Edward feared a Discovery of
more Tricks, and resolved not to stay till he
was disgracefully dismissed.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  In which a Mistake, in point of Ceremony,
is rectified.
               
               
                  ARABELLA had scarce done thinking of
this last Adventure, when the Marquis
communicated a Piece of Intelligence to her,
which opened a Prospect of an infinite Number
of new ones.
               His Nephew, having just returned from his
Travels, was preparing to come and pay him a
Visit in his Retreat; and, as he always designed
to marry Arabella to this Youth, of whom he
was extremely fond, he told his Daughter of
the intended Visit of her Cousin, whom she had
not seen since she was eight Years old; and,
for the first time, insinuated his Design of giving
him to her for an Husband.
               
                  Arabella, whose Delicacy was extremely
shocked at this abrupt Declaration of her 
                     •
                  a-ther,
could hardly hide her Chagrin; for,

tho' she always intended to marry some time or
other, as all the Heroines had done, yet she
thought such an Event ought to be brought about
with an infinite deal of Trouble; and that it
was necessary she should pass to this State thro'
a great Number of Cares, Disappointments, and
Distresses of various Kinds, like them; that her
Lover should purchase her with his Sword from
a Croud of Rivals; and arrive to the Possession
of her Heart by many Years of Services and Fi-delity.
               The Impropriety of receiving a Lover of a
Father's recommending appeared in its strongest
Light. What Lady in Romance ever married
the Man that was chose for her? In those Cases
the Remonstrances of a Parent are called Perse-cutions;
obstinate Resistance, Constancy and
Courage; and an Aptitude to dislike the Per-son
proposed to them, a noble Freedom of Mind
which disdains to love or hate by the Caprice of
others.
               
                  Arabella, strengthening her own Resolutions
by those Examples of heroic Disobedience, told
her Father, with great Solemnity of Accent,
that she would always obey him in all just and
reasonable Things; and, being persuaded that
he would never attempt to lay any Force upon
her Inclinations, she would endeavour to make
them conformable to his, and receive her Cou-sin
with that Civility and Friendship due to so
near a Relation, and a Person whom he honoured
with his Esteem.
               The Marquis, having had frequent Occasions
of admiring his Daughter's Eloquence, did not
draw any unpleasing Conclusion from the nice

Distinctions she made; and, being perfectly as-sured
of her Consent whenever he demanded it,
expected the Arrival of his Nephew with great
Impatience.
               
                  Arabella, whose Thoughts had been fully
employed since this Conversation with her Fa-ther,
was indulging her Meditations in one of
the most retired Walks in the Garden; when
she was informed by Lucy, that her Cousin was
come, and that the Marquis had brought him
into the Garden to look for her.
               That Instant they both entered the Walk,
when Arabella, prepossessed, as she was, against
any favourable Thoughts of the young Glan-ville,
could not help betraying some Surprize at
the Gracefulness of his Figure.
               It must be confessed, said she to her Attendant,
with a Smile, that this Lover my Father has
brought us, is no contemptible Person: Never-theless
I feel an invincible Repugnance in myself
against receiving him in that Character.
               As she finished these Words, the Marquis
came up, and presented Mr. Glanville to her;
who, saluting her with the Freedom of a Rela-tion,
gave her a Disgust that shewed itself imme-diately
in her fair Face, which was overspread
with such a Gloom, that the Marquis was quite
astonished at it. Indeed Arabella, who expected
he would hardly have presumed to kiss her Hand,
was so surprised at his Freedom, in attempting
her Lips, that she not only expressed her Indig-nation
by Frowns, but gave him to understand
he had mortally offended her.
               Mr. Glanville, however, was neither surprised
nor angry at her Resentment; but, imputing it

to her Country Education, endeavoured to railly
her out of her ill Humour; and the Marquis, be-ing
glad to find a Behaviour, which he thought
proceeded from her Dislike of her Cousin, was
only an Effect of an over-scrupulous Modesty,
told her that Mr. Glanville had committed no
Offence by saluting her, since that was a Civi-lity
which was granted to all Strangers at the
first Interview, and therefore could not be re-fused
to a Relation.
               Since the World is so degenerate in it's Cus-toms
from what it was formerly, said Arabella,
with a Smile full of Contempt upon her Cousin,
I am extremely happy in having lived in a Soli-tude
which has not yet exposed me to the Mor-tification
of being a Witness to Manners I can-not
approve; for if every Person I shall meet
with for the future be so deficient in their Re-spects
to Ladies, as my Cousin is, I shall not care
how much I am secluded from Society.
               But, dear Lady Bella, interrupted Mr. Glan-ville
gaily, tell me, I beseech you, how I must
behave to please you; for I should be extremely
glad to be honoured with your good Opinion.
               The Person, resumed she, whom I must
teach how to acquire my good Opinion, will,
I am afraid, hardly recompense me by his Do-cility
in learning, for the Pains I should be at in
instructing him.
               But, resumed Glanville, that I may avoid any
more Occasions of offending you, only let me
know how you would be approached for the fu-ture.
               Since, answered she, there is no Necessity to
renew the Ceremony of introducing you again

to me, I have not a second Affront of that Kind
to apprehend; but I pray tell me, If all Cavaliers
are as presuming as yourself; and if a Relation
of your Sex does not think a modest Embrace
from a Lady a Welcome sufficiently tenderThe Heroines, tho' they think a' Kiss of the Hand a great Condescention to a Lover, and never grant it without Blushes and Confusion; yet make no Scruple to embrace him upon every short Absence.?
               Nay, Cousin, cried Glanville eagerly, I am
now persuaded you are in the Right; an Em-brace
is certainly to be preferred to a cold Sa-lute.
What would I give, that the Marquis
would introduce me a second time, that I might
be received with so delightful a Welcome?
               The Vivacity with which he spoke this was so
extremely disagreeable to Arabella, that she turned
from him abruptly, and, striking into another
Walk, ordered Lucy to tell him she commanded
him not to follow her.
               Mr. Glanville, however, who had no No-tion
of the exact Obedience which was expected
from him, would have gone after her, notwith-standing
this Prohibition, which Lucy delivered
in a most peremptory Manner, after her Lady's
Example: But the Marquis, who had left the
two young People at Liberty to discourse, and
had walked on, that he might not interrupt them,
turning about, and seeing Glanville alone, called
him to have some private Discourse with him;
and, for that time, spared Arabella the Morti-fication
of seeing her Commands disobeyed.
            
            
               

               CHAP. IX.
               
                  In which a Lover is severely punished for
Faults which the Reader never would
have discovered, if he had not been told.
               
               THE Marquis, tho' he had resolved to give
Arabella to his Nephew, was desirous he
should first receive some impressions of Tender-ness
for her, before he absolutely declared his
Resolution; and ardently wished he might be
able to overcome that Reluctance which she
seemed to have for Marriage: But, tho' Glanville
in a very few Days became passionately in Love
with his charming Cousin, yet she discovered so
strong a Dislike to him, that the Marquis feared it
would be difficult to make her receive him for an
Husband: He observed she took all Opportu-nities
of avoiding his Conversation; and seemed
always out of Temper when he addressed any
thing to her; but was well enough pleased,
when he discoursed with him; and would listen
to the long Conversations they had together with
great Attention.
               The Truth is, she had too much Discernment
not to see Mr. Glanville had a great deal of
Merit; his Person was perfectly handsome; he
possessed a great Share of Understanding, an
easy Temper, and a Vivacity which charmed
every one, but the insensible Arabella.
               
               She often wondered, that a Man, who, as
she told her Confident, was Master of so many
fine Qualities, should have a Disposition so little
capable of feeling the Passion of Love, with the

Delicacy and Fervour she expected to inspire;
or, that he, whose Conversation was so pleasing
on every other Subject, should make so poor a
Figure when he entertained her with Matters
of Gallantry. However, added she, I should
be to blame to desire to be beloved by Mr. Glan-ville;
for I am persuaded that Passion would
cause no Reformation in the Coarseness of his
Manners to Ladies, which makes him so disagree-able
to me, and might possibly increase my
Aversion.
               The Marquis, having studied his Nephew's
Looks for several Days, thought he saw Incli-nation
enough in them for Arabella, to make
him receive the Knowlege of his Intention with
Joy: He, therefore, called him into his Closet,
and told him in few Words, that, if his Heart
was not pre-engaged, and his Daughter capable
of making him happy, he resolved to bestow
her upon him, together with all his Estates.
               Mr. Glanville received this agreeable News
with the strongest Expressions of Gratitude; as-suring
his Uncle, that Lady Bella, of all the
Women he had ever seen, was most agreeable
to his Taste; and that he felt for her all the
Tenderness and Affection his Soul was capable
of.
               I am glad of it, my dear Nephew, said the
Marquis, embracing him: I will allow you,
added he smiling, but a few Weeks to court her:
Gain her Heart as soon as you can, and when
you bring me her Consent, your Marriage shall
be solemnized immediately.
               Mr. Glanville needed not a Repetition of so
agreeable a Command: He left his Uncle's Clo-set,

with his Heart filled with the Expectation of
his approaching Happiness; and, understanding
Arabella was in the Garden, he went to her
with a Resolution to acquaint her with the Per-mission
her Father had given him to make his
Addresses to her.
               He found his fair Cousin, as usual, accompa-nied
with her Women; and, seeing that, not-withstanding
his Approach, they still continued
to walk with her, and impatient of the Re-straint
they laid him under, I beseech you, Cou-sin,
said he, let me have the Pleasure of walk-ing
with you alone: What Necessity is there for
always having so many Witnesses of our Con-versation?
You may retire, said he, speaking
to Lucy, and the other Woman; I have some-thing
to say to your Lady in private.
               Stay, I command you, said Arabella, blushing
at an Insolence so uncommon, and take Orders
from no one but myself.—I pray you, Sir, pur-sued
she frowning, What Intercourse of Secrets
is there between you and me, that you expect
I should favour you with a private Conversation?
An Advantage which none of your Sex ever
boasted to have gained from me; and which,
haply, you should be the last upon whom I
should bestow it.
               You have the strangest Notions, answered
Glanville, smiling at the pretty Anger she disco-vered:
Certainly you may hold a private Con-versation
with any Gentleman, without giving
Offence to Decorum; and I may plead a Right
to this Happiness, above any other, since I have
the Honour to be your Relation.
               
                  

It is not at all surprising, resumed Arabella
gravely, that you and I should differ in Opinion
upon this Occasion: I don't remember that ever
we agreed in any thing; and, I am apt to be-lieve,
we never shall.
               Ah! don't say so, Lady Bella, interrupted
lie: What a Prospect of Misery you lay before
me! For, if we are always to be opposite to each
other, it is necessary you must hate me as much
as I admire and love you.
               These Words, which he accompanied with
a gentle Pressure of her Hand, threw the asto-nished
Arabella into such an Excess of Anger
and Shame, that, for a few Moments, she was
unable to utter a Word.
               What a horrid Violation this, of all the
Laws of Gallantry and Respect, which decree
a Lover to suffer whole Years in Silence before
he declares his Flame to the divine Object that
causes it; and then with awful Tremblings, and
submissive Prostrations at the Feet of the of-fended
Fair!
               
                  Arabella could hardly believe her Senses when
she heard a Declaration, not only made with-out
the usual Forms, but also, that the presum-tuous
Criminal waited for her Answer, without
seeming to have any Apprehension of the Pu-nishment
to which he was to be doomed; and
that, instead of deprecating her Wrath, he
looked with a smiling Wonder upon her Eyes,
as if he did not fear their Lightenings would
strike him dead.
               Indeed, it was scarce possible for him to help smi-ling,
and wondering too, at the extraordinary
Notion of Arabella; for, as soon as he had pro-nounced

Standard to the National Taste?
Or by what other means could
I so powerfully suppress all Op-position,
but that of Envy, as
by declaring myself,
            
               My LORD,
                
               Your LORDSHIP'S
Obliged and most Obedient
Humble Servant,
The AUTHOR?
            
         
         
            

those fatal Words, she started back two
or three Steps; cast a Look at him full of the
highest Indignation; and, lifting up her fine
Eyes to Heaven, seemed, in the Language of
Romance, to accuse the Gods for subjecting
her to so cruel an Indignity.
               The Tumult of her Thoughts being a little
settled, she turned again towards Glanville; whose
Countenance expressing nothing of that Confu-sion
and Anxiety common to an Adorer in so
critical a Circumstance, her Rage returned with
greater Violence than ever.
               If I do not express all the Resentment your In-solence
has filled me with, said she to him, af-fecting
more Scorn than Anger, 'tis because I
hold you too mean for my Resentment; but ne-ver
hope for my Pardon for your presumptuous
Confession of a Passion I could almost despise my-self
for inspiring. If it be true that you love me,
go and find your Punishment in that Absence to
which I doom you; and never hope I will suffer
a Person in my Presence, who has affronted me
in the manner you have done.
               Saying this, she walked away, making a Sign
to him not to follow her.
               Mr. Glanville, who was at first disposed to
laugh at the strange Manner in which she re-ceived
his Expressions of Esteem for her, found
something, so extremely haughty and contemp-tuous
in the Speech she had made, that he was
almost mad with Vexation.
               As he had no Notion of his Cousin's heroic
Sentiments, and had never read Romances, he
was quite ignorant of the Nature of his Offence;
and, supposing the Scorn she had expressed for

him was founded upon the Difference of their
Rank and Fortune, his Pride was so sensibly
mortified at that Thought, and at her so inso-lently
forbiding him her Presence, that he was
once inclined to shew his Resentment of such un-genteel
Usage, by quitting the Castle without
taking Leave even of the Marquis, who, he
thought, could not be ignorant of the Recep-tion
he was likely to meet with from his Daugh-ter;
and ought to have guarded him against it,
if he really meant him so well as he seemed to
do.
               As he was extremely violent and hasty in his
Resolutions, and nicely sensible of the least Af-front,
he was not in a Condition to reason justly
upon the Marquis's Conduct in this Affair; and
while he was fluctuating with a thousand differ-ent
Resolutions, Lucy came to him with a Bil-let
from her Lady, which she delivered without
staying till he opened it; and was superscribed
in this Manner:
               
                  
                     Arabella, To the most presumptuous Man in
the World—
                     YOU seem to acknowlege so little Respect
and Deference for the Commands of a
Lady, that I am afraid it will be but too neces-sary
to reiterate that, which, at parting, I laid
upon you: Know then, that I absolutely insist
upon your repairing, in the only manner you
are able, the Affront you have put upon me;
which is, by never appearing before me again.
If you think proper to confine me to my Cham-ber,
by continuing here any longer, you will

add Disobedience to the Crime by which you
have already mortally offended
                     
                        Arabella.
                     
                  
               
               The Superscription of this Letter, and the un-common
Style of it, persuaded Mr. Glanville,
that what he had been foolish enough to resent
as an Affront, was designed as a Jest, and
meant to divert him as well as herself: He exa-mined
her Behaviour again, and wondered at
his Stupidity in not discovering it before. His
Resentment vanishing immediately, he returned
to the House; and went, without Ceremony,
to Arabella's Apartment, which he entered be-fore
she perceived him, being in a profound
Musing at one of the Windows: The Noise he
made, in approaching her, obliged her at last
to look up; when, starting, as if she had seen a
Basilisk, she flew to her Closet, and, shutting the
Door with great Violence, commanded him to
leave her Chamber immediately.
               Mr. Glanville, still supposing her in Jest, in-treated
her to open the Door; but, finding she
continued obstinate, Well, said he, going away,
I shall be revenged on you some time hence,
and make you repent the Tricks you play me
now.
               
                  Arabella not being able to imagine any thing,
by these Words he spoke in Raillery, but that
he really, in the Spite and Anguish of his Heart,
threatened her with executing some terrible En-terprize;
she did not doubt, but he either in-tended
to carry her away; or, thinking her
Aversion to him proceeded from his having a
Rival happy enough to be esteemed by her, those

mysterious Words he had uttered related to his
Design of killing him; so that as she knew, he
could discover no Rival to wreak his Revenge
upon, she feared, that, at once to satisfy that
Passion as well as his Love, he would make him-self
Master of her Liberty: For, in fine, said she
to Lucy, to whom she communicated all her
Thoughts, have I not every thing to apprehend
from a Man, who knows so little how to treat
my Sex with the Respect which is our Due;
and who, after having, contrary to the timorous
Nature of that Passion, insulted me with a free
Declaration of Love, treated my Commands
with the utmost Contempt by appearing before
me again; and even threatens me with the Re-venge
he is meditating at this Moment?
               Had Mr. Glanville been present, and heard
the terrible Misfortunes which she presaged from
the few Words he had jestingly spoke, he would
certainly have made her quite furious, by the
Diversion her Mistake would have afforded him.
But the more she reflected on his Words, the
more she was persuaded of the terrible Purpose
of them.
               'Twas in vain to acquaint her Father with
the Reasons she had for disliking his Choice: His
Resolution was fixed, and if she did not volun-tarily
conform to it, she exposed herself to the
Attempts of a violent and unjust Lover, who
would either prevail upon the Marquis to lay
a Force upon her Inclinations, or make himself
Master of her Person, and never cease perse-cuting
her, till he had obliged her to give him
her Hand.
               
                  

Having reasoned herself into a perfect Con-viction
that all these things must necessarily hap-pen,
she thought it both just and reasonable to
provide for her own Security, by a speedy Flight.
The Want of a Precedent, indeed, for an Action
of this Nature, held her a few Moments in Sus-pense;
for she did not remember to have read
of any Heroine that voluntarily left her Father's
House, however persecuted she might be; but she
considered, that there was not any of the Ladies
in Romances, in the same Circumstances with
herself who was without a favoured Lover, for
whose sake it might have been believed she had
made an Elopement, which would have been
highly prejudicial to her Glory; and, as there
was no Foundation for any Suspicion of that
Kind in her Case, she thought there was no-thing
to hinder her from withdrawing from a ty-rannical
Exertion of parental Authority, and the
secret Machinations of a Lover, whose Aim was
to take away her Liberty, either by obliging her
to marry him, or by making her a Prisoner.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Contains several Incidents, in which the
Reader is expected to be extremely inte-rested.
               
               
                  ARABELLA had spent some Hours in her
Closet, revolving a thousand different
Stratagems to escape from the Misfortune that

threatened her, when she was interrupted by
Lucy, who, after desiring Admittance, informed
her, that the Marquis, having rode out to take
the Air that Evening, had fallen from his Horse
and received some Hurt; that he was gone to
Bed, and desired to see her.
               
                  Arabella, hearing her Father was indisposed,
ran to him, excessively alarmed; and reflecting
on the Resolution she had just before taken, of
leaving him, which aggravated her Concern,
she came to his Bedside with her Eyes swiming in
Tears. Mr. Glanville was sitting near him; but,
rising at her Appearance to give her his Chair,
which she accepted without taking any Notice
of him, he stood at some Distance contem-plating
her Face, to which Sorrow had given
so many Charms, that he gazed on her with an
Eagerness and Delight that could not escape her
Observation.
               She blushed excessively at the passionate Looks
he gave her; and, finding the Marquis's Indis-position
not considerable enough to oblige her
to a constant Attendance at his Bed-side, she took
the first Opportunity of returning to her Cham-ber;
but, as she was going out, Glanville pre-sented
his Hand to lead her up Stairs: Which
she scornfully refusing;
               Sure, Cousin, said he, a little piqued, you
are not disposed to carry on your ill-natured Jest
any further?
               If you imagined I jested with you, said Ara-bella,
I am rather to accuse the Slowness of your
Understanding, for your persisting in treating
me thus freely, than the Insolence I first im-puted
it to: But, whatever is the Cause of it,

I now tell you again, that you have extremely
offended me; and, if my Father's Illness did
not set Bounds to my Resentment at present, I
would make you know, that I would not suffer
the Injury you do me, so patiently.
               Since you would have me to believe you are se-rious,
replied Glanville, be pleased to let me
know what Offence it is you complain of; for
I protest I am quite at a Loss to understand
you.
               Was it not enough, resumed Arabella, to af-front
me with an insolent Declaration of your
Passion, but you must also, in Contempt of my
Commands to the contrary, appear before me
again, pursue me to my Chamber, and use the
most brutal Menaces to me?
               Hold, pray, Madam, interrupted Glanville,
and suffer me to ask you, If it is my Presump-tion,
in declaring myself your Admirer, that
you are so extremely offended at?
               Doubtless it is, Sir, answered Arabella; and
such a Presumption, as, without the aggravating
Circumstances you have since added to it, is suf-ficient
to make me always your Enemy.
               I beg Pardon, returned Mr. Glanville gravely,
for that Offence; and also, for staying any
longer in a House, which you have, so gen-teelly,
turned me out of.
               My Pardon, Mr. Glanville, resumed she, is
not so easily gained: Time, and your Repent-ance,
may, indeed, do much towards obtaining
it.
               Saying this, she made a Sign to him to retire;
for he had walked up with her to her Chamber:
But, finding he did not obey her, for really he

was quite unacquainted with these Sorts of dumb
Commands, she hastily retired to her Closet, lest
he should attempt to move her Pity, by any Ex-pressions
of Despair for the cruel Banishment she
had doomed him to.
               Mr. Glanville, seeing she had shut herself up
in her Closet, left her Chamber, and retired to
his own, more confounded than ever at the Be-haviour
of his Cousin.
               Her bidding him so peremptorily to leave the
House, would have equally persuaded him of
her Ignorance and Ill-breeding, had not the Ele-gance
of her Manners, in every other respect,
proved the contrary: Nor was it possible to doubt
she had a great Share of Understanding; since
her Conversation, singular as some of her Sen-timents
seemed to him, was far superior to most
other Ladies. Therefore, he concluded, the
Affront he had received, proceeded from her
Disdain to admit the Addresses of any Person,
whose Quality was inferior to hers; which,
probably, was increased to some particular Dis-like
she had to his Person.
               His Honour would not permit him to make
Use of that Advantage her Father's Authority
could give him; and, wholly engrossed by his
Resentment of the Usage he had received from
her, he resolved to set out for London the next
Day without seeing the Marquis, from whom
he was apprehensive of some Endeavours to de-tain
him.
               Having taken this Resolution, he ordered his
Servant to have the Horses ready early in the
Morning; and, without taking any Notice of
his Intention, he left the Castle, riding, as fast

as possible, to the next Stage, from whence he
wrote to his Uncle; and, dispatching a Messen-ger
with his Letter, held on his Way to Lon-don.
               
               The Marquis, being pretty well recovered
from his Indisposition by a good Night's Rest,
sent for Mr. Glanville in the Morning, to walk
with him, as was his Custom, in the Garden;
but, hearing he had rode out, tho' he imagined
it was only to take the Air, yet he could not
help accusing him, in his own Thoughts, of a
little Neglect; for which he resolved to chide
him, when he returned: But his long Stay fill-ing
him with some Surprize, he was beginning
to express his Fears that something had befallen
him, to Arabella, who was then with him; when
a Servant presented him the Letter, which Mr.
Glanville's Messenger had that Moment brought.
               The Marquis casting his Eyes on the Di-rection,
and knowing his Nephew's Hand, Bless
me, cried he, extremely surprised, What can
this mean? Bella, added he, here's a Letter
from your Cousin.
               
                  Arabella, at these Words, started up; and,
preventing her Father, with a respectful Action,
from opening it, I beseech you, my Lord, said
she, before you read this Letter, suffer me to
assure you, that, if it contains any thing fatal,
I am not at all accessary to it: 'Tis true I have
banished my Cousin, as a Punishment for the
Offence he was guilty of towards me; but, Hea-ven
is my Witness, I did not design his Death;
and if he has taken any violent Resolution against
himself, he has greatly exceeded my Com-mands.
               
                  

The Marquis, whose Surprize was considera-bly
increased by these Words, hastily broke
open the Letter, which she perceiving, hurried
out of the Room; and, locking herself up in
her Closet, began to bewail the Effect of her
Charms, as if she was perfectly assured of her
Cousin's Death.
               The Marquis, however, who, from Lady
Bella's Exclamation, had prepared himself for the
Knowlege of some very extraordinary Accident,
was less surprised, than he would otherwise have
been, at the Contents; which were as follow:
               
                  
                     
                        My Lord,
                     
                     AS my leaving your House so abruptly will
certainly make me appear guilty of a most
unpardonable Rudeness, I cannot dispense with
myself from acquainting your Lordship with the
Cause; though, to spare the Reproaches Lady
Bella will probably cast on me for doing so, I
could wish you knew it by any other Means.
                     But, my Lord, I value your Esteem too much
to hazard the Loss of it by suffering you to ima-gine,
that I am capable of doing any thing to
displease you. Lady Bella was pleased to order
me to stay no longer in the House; and menaced
me with some very terrible Usage, if I disobeyed
her: She used so many other contemptuous Ex-pressions
to me, that, I am persuaded, I shall
never be so happy as to possess the Honour you
designed for,
                     
                        My Lord, 
                        Your most obedient, &amp;c.
Charles Glanville.
                     
                  
               
               
                  

            CONTENTS.
            
               VOL. I.
               
                  BOOK I.
                  CHAP. I. CONTAINS a Turn at Court, neither new
nor surprising—Some useless Additions to a
fine Lady's Education—The bad Effects of a
whimsical Study; which, some will say, is bor-rowed
from Cervantes.
                  
                  CHAP. II. Contains a Description of a Lady's Dress, in
Fashion not much above Two thousand Years
ago—The Beginning of an Adventure, which
seems to promise a great deal.
                  CHAP. III. In which the Adventure goes on after the accu-stomed
Manner.
                  CHAP. IV. A Mistake which produces no great Consequences—
An extraordinary Comment upon a Behaviour
natural enough—An Instance of a Lady's Com-passion
for her Lover, which the Reader may
possibly think not very compassionate.
                  
                     

When the Marquis had read this Letter, he
went to his Daughter's Apartment with an In-tention
to chide her severely for her Usage of his
Nephew; but, seeing her come to meet him
with her Eyes bathed in Tears, he insensibly
lost some Part of his Resentment.
               Alas! my Lord, said she, I know you come
prepared to load me with Reproaches, upon my
Cousin's Account; but, I beseech your Lord-ship,
do not aggravate my Sorrows: Tho' I ba-nished
Mr. Glanville, I did not desire his Death;
and, questionless, if he knew how I resent it,
his Ghost would be satisfied with the Sacrifice
I make him.
               The Marquis, not being able to help smiling
at this Conceit, which he saw had so strongly
possessed her Imagination, that she had no sort
of Doubt but that her Cousin was dead, asked
her, If she really believed Mr. Glanville loved
her well enough to die with Grief at her ill Usage
of him?
               If, said she, he loves me not well enough to
die for me, he certainly loves me but little; and
I am the less obliged to him.
               But I desire to know, interrupted the Mar-quis,
For what Crime it was you took the Li-berty
to banish him from my House?
               I banished him, my Lord, resumed she, for
his Presumption in telling me he loved me.
               That Presumption, as you call it, tho' I
know not for what Reason, said the Marquis,
was authorized by me: Therefore, know, Bella,
that I not only permit him to love you, but I
also expect you should endeavour to return his
Affection; and look upon him as the Man

whom I design for your Husband: There's his
Letter, pursued he, putting it into her Hand.
I blush for the Rudeness you have been guilty
of; but endeavour to repair it, by a more ob-liging
Behaviour for the future: I am going to
send after him immediately to prevail upon to
return: Therefore, write him an Apology, I
charge you; and have it done by the Time my
Messenger is ready to set out.
               Saying this, he went out of the Room; and
Arabella eagerly opened the Letter; and, finding
it in a Style so different from what she expected,
her Dislike of him returned with more Violence
than ever.
               Ah! the Traitor! said she aloud, Is it thus
that he endeavours to move my Compassion?
How greatly did I over-rate his Affection, when
I imagined his Despair was capable of killing
him? Disloyal Man! pursued she, walking
about, Is it by Complaints to my Father that
thou expectest to succeed? And dost thou ima-gine
the Heart of Arabella is to be won by Vio-lence
and Injustice?
               In this manner she wasted the Time allotted
for her to write; and, when the Marquis sent
for her Letter, having no Intention to comply,
she went to his Chamber, conjuring him not to
oblige her to a Condescension so unworthy of
her.
               The Marquis, being now excessively angry
with her, rose up in a Fury, and, leading her
to his Writing-Desk, ordered her, instantly, to
write to her Cousin.
               If I must write, my Lord, said she, sobbing,
pray be so good as to dictate what I must say.
               
                  

Apologize for your rude Behaviour, said the
Marquis; and desire him, in the most obliging
manner you can, to return.
               
                  Arabella, seeing there was a necessity for obey-ing,
took up the Pen, and wrote the following
Billet:
               
                  
                     The unfortunate Arabella, to the most ungenerous
Glanville.
                     IT is not by the Power I have over you, that
I command you to return, for I disclaim any
Empire over so unworthy a Subject; but, since
it is my Father's Pleasure I should invite you
back, I must let you know, that I repeal your
Banishment, and expect you will immediately
return with the Messenger who brings this; how-ever,
to spare your Acknowlegements, know,
that it is in Obedience to my Father's absolute
Commands, that you receive this Mandate
from
                     
                        Arabella.
                     
                  
               
               Having finished this Billet, she gave it to the
Marquis to read; who, finding a great deal of
his own Haughtiness of Temper in it, could not
resolve to check her for a Disposition so like his
own: Yet he told her, her Stile was very uncom-mon:
And pray, added he, smiling, who taught
you to superscribe your Letters thus, The un-fortunate
Arabella, to the most ungenerous
Glanville?
                   Why, Bella, this Superscription is
wholly calculated for the Bearer's Information:
But come, alter it immediately; for I don't
choose my Messenger should know, that you

are unfortunate, or that my Nephew is unge-nerous.
               Pray, my Lord, replied Arabella, content
yourself with what I have already done in Obe-dience
to your Commands, and suffer my Letter
to remain as it is: Methinks it is but reasonable
I should express some little Resentment at the
Complaint my Cousin has been pleased to make
to you against me; nor can I possibly make my
Letter more obliging, without being guilty of
an unpardonable Meanness.
               You are a strange Girl, replied the Marquis,
taking the Letter, and inclosing it in one from
himself; in which he earnestly intreated his
Nephew to return, threatening him with his
Displeasure, if he disobeyed; and assuring him,
that his Daughter would receive him as well as
he could possibly desire.
               The Messenger being dispatched, with Orders
to ride Post, and overtake the young Gentle-man,
he obeyed his Orders so well, that he came
up with him at—, where he intended to lodge
that Night.
               Mr. Glanville, who expected his Uncle would
make use of some Methods to recal him, opened
his Letter without any great Emotion; but see-ing
another inclosed, his Heart leaped to his
Mouth, not doubting but it was a Letter from
Arabella; but the Contents surprised him so
much, that he hardly knew whether he ought to
look upon them as an Invitation to return, or
a new Affront, her Words were so distant and
haughty. The Superscription being much the
same with a Billet he had received from her in
the Garden, which had made him conclude her

in Jest, he knew not what to think of it: One
would swear this dear Girl's Head is turned,
said he to himself, if she had not more Wit than
her whole Sex besides.
               After reading Arabella's Letter several times,
he at last opened his Uncle's; and, seeing the
pressing Instances he made him to return, he
resolved to obey; and the next Morning set out
for the Castle.
               
                  Arabella, during the time her Cousin was
expected, appeared so melancholy and reserved,
that the Marquis was extremely uneasy: You
have never, said he to her, disobeyed me in any
one Action of your Life; and I may with reason
expect you will conform to my Will in the Choice
I have made of a Husband for you, since it is
impossible to make any Objection either to his
Person or Mind; and, being the Son of my
Sister, he is certainly not unworthy of you, tho'
he has not a Title.
               My first Wish, my Lord, replied Arabella, is
to live single, not being desirous of entering into
any Engagement which may hinder my Solici-tude
and Cares, and lessen my Attendance, upon
the best of Fathers, who, till now, has always
most tenderly complied with my Inclinations
in every thing: But if it is your absolute Com-mand,
that I should marry, give me not to one
who, tho' he has the Honour to be allied to you,
has neither merited your Esteem, or my Favour,
by any Action worthy of his Birth, or the Pas-sion
he pretends to have for me; for, in fine,
my Lord, by what Services has he deserved the
Distinction with which you honour him? Has
he ever delivered you from any considerable

Danger? Has he saved your Life, and hazarded
his own, for you, upon any Occasion whatever?
Has he merited my Esteem, by his Sufferings,
Fidelity, and Respect; or, by any great and
generous Action, given me a Testimony of his
Love, which should oblige me to reward him
with my Affection? Ah! my Lord, I beseech
you, think not so unworthily of your Daughter,
as to bestow her upon one who has done so
little to deserve her: If my Happiness be dear
to you, do not precipitate me into a State from
whence you cannot recal me, with a Person
whom I can never affect.
               She would have gone on, but the Marquis in-terrupted
her sternly: I'll hear no more, said
he, of your foolish and ridiculous Objections;
What Stuff is this you talk of? What Service
am I to expect from my Nephew? And by
what Sufferings is he to merit your Esteem?
Assure yourself, Arabella, continued he, that
I will never pardon you, if you presume to treat
my Nephew in the Manner you have done: I
perceive you have no real Objection to make to
him; therefore I expect you will endeavour to
obey me without Reluctance; for, since you
seem to be so little acquainted with what will
most conduce to your own Happiness, you must
not think it strange, if I insist upon directing
your Choice in the most important Business of
your Life.
               
                  Arabella was going to reply; but the Marquis
ordered her to be silent; and she went to her
own Apartment in so much Affliction, that she
thought her Misfortunes were not exceeded by
any she had ever read.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XI.
               
                  In which a logical Argument is unseason-ably
interrupted.
               
               THE Marquis was also extremely uneasy
at her Obstinacy: He desired nothing more
ardently than to marry her to his Nephew; but
he could not resolve to force her Consent; and,
however determined he appeared to her, yet,
in Reality, he intended only to use Persuasions
to effect what he desired; and, from the natural
Sweetness of her Temper, he was sometimes
not without Hopes, that she might, at last, be
prevailed upon to comply.
               His Nephew's Return restored him to Part of
his usual Tranquillity: After he had gently chid
him for suffering himself to be so far transported
with his Resentment at the little Humours of a
Lady, as to leave his House, without acquaint-ing
him, he bid him go to Arabella, and en-deavour
to make his Peace with her.
               Mr. Glanville accordingly went to her Apart-ment,
resolving to oblige her to come to some
Explanation with him concerning the Offence
she complained of; but that fair incensed Lady,
who had taken Shelter in her Closet, ordered
Lucy to tell him she was indisposed, and could
not see him.
               
                  Glanville, however, comforted himself for
this Disappointment by the Hopes of seeing her
at Supper; and accordingly she came, when the
Supper-Bell rung, and, making a very cool Com-pliment
to her Cousin, placed herself at Table:

The soft Languor that appeared in her Eyes,
gave such an additional Charm to one of the
loveliest Faces in the World, that Glanville,
who sat opposite to her, could not help gazing
on her with a very particular Attention; he
often spoke to her, and asked her trifling Ques-tions,
for the sake of hearing the Sound of her
Voice, which Sorrow had made inchantingly
sweet.
               When Supper was over, she would have re-tired;
but the Marquis desired her to stay and
entertain her Cousin, while he went to look over
some Dispatches he had received from London.
               
               
                  Arabella blushed with Anger at this Com-mand;
but, not daring to disobey, she kept her
Eyes fixed on the Ground, as if she dreaded to
hear something that would displease her.
               Well, Cousin, said Glanville, tho' you desire
to have no Empire over so unworthy a Subject
as myself, yet I hope you are not displeased at
my returning, in Obedience to your Commands.
               Since I am not allowed any Will of my own,
said she, sighing, it matters not whether I am
pleased, or displeased; nor is it of any Conse-quence
to you to know.
               Indeed but it is, Lady Bella, interrupted he;
for if I knew how to please you, I would never,
if I could help it, offend: Therefore, I beg you,
tell me how I have disobliged you; for, certainly,
you have treated me as harshly as if I had been
guilty of some very terrible Offence.
               You had the Boldness, said she, to talk to
me of Love; and you well know that Persons
of my Sex and Quality are not permitted to

listen to such Discourses; and if, for that Of-fence,
I banished you my Presence, I did no
more than Decency required of me; and which
I would yet do, were I Mistress of my own
Actions.
               But is it possible, Cousin, said Glanville, that
you can be angry with any one for loving you?
Is that a Crime of so high a Nature as to merit
an eternal Banishment from your Presence?
               Without telling you, said Arabella, blushing,
whether I am angry at being loved, 'tis sufficient
you know, that I will not pardon the Man who
shall have the Presumption to tell me he loves me.
               But, Madam, interrupted Glanville, if the
Person who tells you he loves you, be of a
Rank not beneath you, I conceive you are not
at all injured by the favourable Sentiments he
feels for you; and, tho' you are not disposed to
make any Returns to his Passion, yet you are cer-tainly
obliged to him for his good Opinion.
               Since Love is not voluntary, replied Arabella,
I am not obliged to any Person for loving me;
for, questionless, if he could help it, he would.
               If it is not a voluntary Favour, interrupted
Glanville, it is not a voluntary Offence; and, if
you do not think yourself obliged by the one,
neither are you at Liberty to be offended with
the other.
               The Question, said Arabella, is not whether
I ought to be offended at being loved, but
whether it is not an Offence to be told I am so.
               If there is nothing criminal in the Passion it-self,
Madam, resumed Glanville, certainly there
can be no Crime in declaring it.
               
                  

However specious your Arguments may appear,
interrupted Arabella, I am persuaded it is an
unpardonable Crime to tell a Lady you love
her; and, tho' I had nothing else to plead, yet
the Authority of Custom is sufficient to prove it.
               Custom, Lady Bella, said Glanville, smiling▪
is wholly on my Side; for the Ladies are so far
from being displeased at the Addresses of their
Lovers, that their chiefest Care is to gain them,
and their greatest Triumph to hear them talk of
their Passion: So, Madam, I hope you'll allow
that Argument has no Force.
               I don't know, answered Arabella, what Sort
of Ladies there are who allow such unbe-coming
Liberties, but I am certain, that Statira,
Parisatis, Clelia, Mandana, and all the illustri-ous
Heroines of Antiquity, whom it is a Glory
to resemble, would never admit of such Dis-courses.
               Ah for Heaven's sake, Cousin, interrupted
Glanville, endeavouring to stifle a Laugh, do not
suffer yourself to be governed by such antiquated
Maxims! The World is quite different to what
it was in those Days; and the Ladies in this
Age would as soon follow the Fashions of the
Greek and Roman Ladies, as mimick their
Manners; and I believe they would become one
as ill as the other.
               I am sure, replied Arabella, the World is not
more virtuous now than it was in their Days,
and there is good Reason to believe it is not
much wiser; and I don't see why the Manners
of this Age are to be preferred to those of for-mer
ones, unless they are wiser and better:
However, I cannot be persuaded, that Things
CHAP. V. In which one would imagine the Adventure con-cluded,
but for a Promise that something else is
to come.
                  CHAP. VI. In which the Adventure is really concluded, tho'
possibly not as the Reader expected.
                  CHAP. VII. In which some Contradictions are very happily re-conciled.
                  CHAP. VIII. In which a Mistake, in point of Ceremony, is
rectified.
                  CHAP. IX. In which a Lover is severely punished for Faults
the Reader never would have discovered, if he
had not been told what they were.
                  CHAP. X. Contains several Incidents, in which the Reader is
expected to be extremely interested.
                  CHAP. XI. In which a logical Argument is unseasonably inter-rupted.
                  CHAP. XII. In which the Reader will find a Specimen of the
true Pathetic, in a Speeech of Oroondates—
The Adventure of the Books.
                  CHAP. XIII. The Adventure of the Books continued.
               
               
                  BOOK II.
                  CHAP. I. In which the Adventure of the Books is happily
concluded.
                  
                     

are as you say, and that when I am a little better
acquainted with the World, I shall find as many
Persons who resemble Oroondates, Artaxerxes,
and the illustrious Lovers of Clelia, as those
who are like Tiribases, Artaxes, and the pre-suming
and insolent Glanville.
               
               By the Epithets you give me Madam, said
Glanville, I find you have placed me in very
bad Company: But pray, Madam, if the
illustrious Lover of Clelia had never discovered
his Passion, how would the World have come
to the Knowledge of it?
               He did not discover his Passion, Sir, resumed
Arabella, till, by the Services he did the noble
Clelius, and his incomparable Daughter, he
could plead some Title to their Esteem: He se-veral
times preserved the Life of that renowned
Roman; delivered the beautiful Clelia when
she was a Captive; and, in fine, conferred so
many Obligations upon them, and all their
Friends, as he might well expect to be par-doned
by the divine Clelia for daring to love
her. Nevertheless, she used him very harshly,
when he first declared his Passion, and banished
him also from her Presence; and it was a long
time before she could prevail upon herself to
compassionate his Sufferings.
               The Marquis coming in interrupted Ara-bella;
upon which she took Occasion to retire;
leaving Glanville more captivated with her than
ever.
               He found her Usage of him was grounded
upon Examples she thought it her Duty to fol-low;
and, strange as her Notions of Life ap-peared,
yet they were supported with so much

Wit and Delicacy, that he could not help ad-miring
her, while he foresaw, the Oddity of her
Humour would throw innumerable Difficulties
in his Way, before he should be able to obtain
her.
               However, as he was really passionately in
Love with her, he resolved to accommodate
himself, as much as possible, to her Taste, and
endeavour to gain her Heart by a Behaviour
most agreeable to her: He therefore assumed an
Air of great Distance and Respect; never men-tioned
his Affection, nor the Intentions of her
Father in his Favour; and the Marquis, ob-serving
his Daughter conversed with him with
less Reluctance than usual, leaving to Time,
and the Merit of his Nephew, to dispose her to
comply with his Desires, resolved not to inter-pose
his Authority in an Affair upon which her
own Happiness so much depended.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  In which the Reader will find a Specimen
of the true Pathetic, in a Speech of
Oroondates.—The Adventure of the
Books.
               
               
                  ARABELLA saw the Change in her
Cousin's Behaviour with a great deal of
Satisfaction; for she did not doubt but his Passion
was as strong as ever; but that he forbore,
thro' Respect, from entertaining her with any

Expressions of it: Therefore she now conversed
with him with the greatest Sweetness and Com-plaisance:
She would walk with him for several
Hours in the Garden, leaning upon his Arm;
and charmed him to the last Degree of Admira-tion
by the agreeable Sallies of her Wit, and
her fine Reasoning upon every Subject he pro-posed.
               It was with the greatest Difficulty he restrain-ed
himself from telling her a Thousand times a
Day that he loved her to Excess, and conjuring
her to give her Consent to her Father's Designs
in his Favour: But, tho' he could get over
his Fears of offending her, yet it was impossible
to express any Sentiments of this Nature to her,
without having her Women Witnesses of his
Discourse; for, when he walked with her in
the Garden, Lucy, and another Attendant, al-ways
followed her: If he sat with her in her
own Chamber, her Women were always at one
End of it: And, when they were both in the
Marquis's Apartment, where her Women did
not follow her, poor Glanville found himself
embarrassed by his Presence; for, conceiving
his Nephew had Opportunities enough of talk-ing
to his Daughter in private, he always partook
of their Conversation.
               He passed some Weeks in this Manner, ex-tremely
chagrined at the little Progress he made;
and was beginning to be heartily weary of the
Constraint he laid upon himself, when Arabella,
one Day, furnished him, without designing it,
with an Opportunity of talking to her on the
Subject he wished for.
               
                  

When I reflect, said she, laughing, upon the
Difference there was between us some Days
ago, and the Familiarity in which we live at
present, I cannot imagine by what means you
have arrived to a good Fortune you had so little
Reason to expect; for, in fine, you have given
me no Signs of Repentance for the Fault you
committed, which moved me to banish you;
and I am not certain whether, in conversing
with you in the manner I do, I give you not as
much Reason to find Fault with my too great
Easiness, as you did me to be displeased with
your Presumption.
               Since, returned Glanville, I have not persisted
in the Commission of those Faults which dis-pleased
you, what greater Signs of Repentance
can you desire, than this Reformation in my Be-haviour?
               But Repentance ought to precede Reforma-tion,
replied Arabella; otherwise, there is great
room to suspect it is only feigned: And a sincere
Repentance shews itself in such visible Marks,
that one can hardly be deceived in that which is
genuine. I have read of many indiscreet Lovers,
who not succeeding in their Addresses, have
pretended to repent, and acted as you do; that
is, without giving any Signs of Contrition for
the Fault they had committed, have eat and
slept well, never lost their Colour, or grew one
bit thinner, by their Sorrow; but contented
themselves with saying they repented; and,
without changing thetr Disposition to renew
their Fault, only concealed their Intention, for
fear of losing any favourable Opportunity of
committing it again: But true Repentance, as

I was saying, not only produces Reformation,
but the Person who is possessed of it voluntarily
punishes himself for the Faults he has been
guilty of. Thus Mazares, deeply repenting of
the Crime his Passion for the divine Manda
                        •
                     a
had forced him to commit; as a Punishment,
obliged himself to follow the Fortune of his
glorious Rival; obey all his Commands; and,
fighting under his Banners, assist him to gain
the Possession of his adored Mistress. Such a
glorious Instance of Self-denial was, indeed, a
sufficient Proof of his Repentance; and infi-nitely
more convincing than the Silence he im-posed
upon himself with respect to his Passion.
               
                  Oroondates, to punish himself for his Pre-sumption,
in daring to tell the admirable Statira,
that he loved her, resolved to die, to expiate
his Crime; and, doubtless, would have done so,
if his fair Mistress, at the Intreaty of her Bro-ther,
had not commanded him to live.
               But pray, Lady Bella, interrupted Glanville,
were not these Gentlemen happy at last in the
Possession of their Mistresses?
               Doubtless they were, Sir, resumed she; but
it was not till after numberless Misfortunes, in-finite
Services, and many dangerous Adventures,
in which their Fidelity was put to the strongest
Trials imaginable.
               I am glad, however, said Glanville, that the
Ladies were not insensible; for, since you do
not disapprove of their Compassion for their
Lovers, it is to be hoped you will not be always
as inexorable as you are now.
               When I shall be so fortunate, interrupted she,
to meet with a Lover who shall have as pure

and perfect a Passion for me, as Oroondates had
for Statira; and give me as many glorious
Proofs of his Constancy and Affection, doubt-less
I shall not be ungrateful: But, since I have
not the Merits of Statira, I ought not to pre-tend
to her good Fortune; and shall be very
well contented if I escape the Persecutions which
Persons of my Sex, who are not frightfully ugly,
are always exposed to, without hoping to inspire
such a Passion as that of Oroondates.
               
               I should be glad to be better acquainted with
the Actions of this happy Lover, Madam, said
Glanville; that, forming myself upon his Ex-ample,
I may hope to please a Lady as worthy
of my Regard as Statira was of his.
               For Heaven's sake, Cousin, resumed Arabella,
laughing, how have you spent your Time;
and to what Studies have you devoted all your
Hours, that you could find none to spare for
the Perusal of Books from which all useful
Knowledge may be drawn; which give us the
most shining Examples of Generosity, Courage,
Virtue, and Love; which regulate our Actions,
form our Manners, and inspire us with a noble
Desire of emulating those great, heroic, and
virtuous Actions, which made those Persons so
glorious in their Age, and so worthy Imitation
in ours? However, as it is never too late to
improve, suffer me to recommend to you the
reading of these Books, which will soon make
you discover the Improprieties you have been
guilty of; and will, probably, induce you to
avoid them for the future.
               I shall certainly read them, if you desire it,
said Glanville; and I have so great an Inclina-tion

to be agreeable to you, that I shall em-brace
every Opportunity of becoming so; and
will therefore take my Instructions from these
Books, if you think proper, or from yourself▪
which, indeed, will be the quickest Method of
teaching me.
               
                  Arabella having ordered one of her Women
to bring Cleopatra, Cassandra, Clelia, and the
Grand Cyrus, from her Library, Glanville no
sooner saw the Girl return, sinking under the
Weight of those voluminous Romances, but he
began to tremble at the Apprehension of his
Cousin laying her Commands upon him to read
them; and repented of his Complaisance, which
exposed him to the cruel Necessity of performing
what to him appeared an Herculean Labour, or
else incurring her Anger by his Refusal.
               
                  Arabella, making her Women place the Books
upon a Table before her, opened them, one
after another, with Eyes sparkling with Delight;
while Glanville sat rapt in Admiration at the
Sight of so many huge Folio's, written, as he
conceived, upon the most trifling Subjects
imaginable.
               I have chosen out these few, said Arabella
(not observing his Consternation) from a great
many others, which compose the most valuable
Part of my Library; and, by that time you
have gone thro' these, I imagine you will be
considerably improved.
               Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, turn-ing
over the Leaves in great Confusion, one
may, as you say, be greatly improved; for these
Books contain a great deal: And, looking over
a Page of Cassandra, without any Design, read

these Words, which were Part of Oroondates's
Soliloquy when he received a cruel Sentence
from Statira:
               
               
                  Ah cruel! says this miserable Lover, and
what have I done to merit it? Examine the
Nature of my Offence, and you will see I am
not so guilty, but that my Death may free me
from Part of that Severity: Shall your Hatred
last longer than my Life? And can you detest
a Soul that forsakes its Body only to obey
you? No, no, you are not so hard-hearted;
that Satisfaction will, doubtless, content you:
And, when I shall cease to be, doubtless I
shall cease to be odious to you.
               
               Upon my Soul, said Glanville, stifling a
Laugh with great Difficulty, I cannot help
blaming the Lady this sorrowful Lover com-plains
of, for her great Cruelty; for here he
gives one Reason to suspect, that she will not
even be contented with his dying in Obedience
to her Commands, but will hate him after
Death; an Impiety quite inexcusable in a
Christian!
               You condemn this illustrious Princess with
very little Reason, interrupted Arabella, smiling
at his Mistake; for, besides that she was not a
Christian, and ignorant of those Divine Maxims
of Charity and Forgiveness, which Christians,
by their Profession, are obliged to practise, she
was very far from desiring the Death of Oroon-dates;
for, if you will take the Pains to read
the succeeding Passages, you will find that she
expresses herself in the most obliging Manner in
the World; for when Oroondates tells her he
would live, if she would consent he should, the

Princess most sweetly replies, I not only con-sent,
but also intreat it; and, if I have any
Power, command it. However, lest you
should fall into the other Extreme, and blame
this great Princess for her Easiness (as you be-fore
condemned her for her Cruelty), 'tis neces-sary
you should know how she was induced to
this favourable Behaviour to her Lover: There-fore
pray read the whole Transaction. Stay!
here it begins, continued she; turning over a
good many Pages, and marking where he should
begin to read.
               
                  Glanville, having no great Stomach to the
Task, endeavoured to evade it, by intreating
his Cousin to relate the Passages she desired he
should be acquainted with: But she declining it,
he was obliged to obey; and began to read
where she directed him: And, to leave him at
Liberty to read with the greater Attention, she
left him, and went to a Window at another
End of the Chamber.
               Mr. Glanville, who was not willing to dis-please
her, examined the Task she had set him,
resolving, if it was not a very hard one, to
comply; but, counting the Pages, he was quite
terrified at the Number, and could not prevail
upon himself to read them: Therefore, glancing
them over, he pretended to be deeply engaged
in reading, when, in Reality, he was contem-plating
the surprising Effect these Books had
produced in the Mind of his Cousin; who,
had she been untainted with the ridiculous
Whims they created in her Imagination, was,
in his Opinion, one of the most accomplished
Ladies in the World.
               
                  

When he had sat long enough to make her
believe he had read what she had desired, he
rose up, and, joining her at the Window, began
to talk of the Pleasantness of the Evening, in-stead
of the Rigour of Statira.
               
               
                  Arabella coloured with Vexation at his ex-treme
Indifference in a Matter which was of
such prodigious Consequence, in her Opinion;
but disdaining to put him in mind of his Rude-ness,
in quitting a Subject they had not
thoroughly discussed, and which she had taken
so much Pains to make him comprehend, she
continued silent; and would not condescend to
afford him an Answer to any thing he said.
               
                  Glanville, by her Silence and Frowns, was
made sensible of his Fault; and, to repair it,
began to talk of the inexorable Statira, though,
indeed, he did not well know what to say.
               
                  Arabella, clearing up a little, did not disdain
to answer him upon her favourite Topic: I
knew, said she, you would be ready to blame
this Princess equally for her Rigour and her
Kindness; but it must be remembred that,
what she did in Favour of Oroondates, was
wholly owing to the Generosity of Artaxerxes.
               
               Here she stopped, expecting Glanville to give
his Opinion; who, strangely puzzled, replied
at random, To be sure, Madam, he was a very
generous Rival.
               Rival! cried Arabella; Artaxerxes the Rival
of Oroondates! Why certainly you have lost your
Wits: He was Statira's Brother; and it was to
his Mediation that Oroondates, or Orontes, owed
his Happiness.
               
                  
CHAP. II. Which contains a very natural Incident.
                  CHAP. III. Which treats of a consolatory Visit, and other
grave Matters.
                  CHAP. IV. Which contains some common Occurrences, but
placed in a new Light.
                  CHAP. V. The History of Miss Groves, interspersed with
some very curious Observations.
                  CHAP. VI. Containing what a judicious Reader will hardly
approve.
                  CHAP. VII. Which treats of the Olympic Games.
                  CHAP. VIII. Which concludes with an excellent moral Sentence.
                  CHAP. IX. Containing some curious Anecdotes.
                  CHAP. X. In which our Heroine is engaged in a very perilous
Adventure.
                  CHAP. XI. In which the Lady is wonderfully delivered.
               
               
                  BOOK III.
                  CHAP. I. Two Conversations, out of which the Reader may
pick up a great deal.
                  CHAP. II. A solemn Interview.
                  
                     

Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, it was
very generous in Artaxerxes, as he was Brother
to Statira, to interpose in the Behalf of an un-fortunate
Lover; and both Oroondates, and
Orontes, were extremely obliged to him.
               
                  Orontes, replied Arabella, was more obliged
to him than Oroondates; since the Quality of
Orontes was infinitely below that of Oroondates.
               
               But, Madam, interrupted Glanville (extreme-ly
pleased at his having so well got over the Dif-ficulty
he had been in), which of these two
Lovers did Statira make happy?
               This unlucky Question immediately informed
Arabella, that she had been all this time the
Dupe of her Cousin; who, if he had read a
single Page, would have known that Orontes
and Oroondates was the same Person; the Name
of Orontes being assumed by Oroondates, to con-ceal
his real Name and Quality.
               The Shame and Rage she conceived at so
glaring a Proof of his Disrespect, and the Ridi-cule
to which she had exposed herself, were so
great, that she could not find Words severe
enough to express her Resentment; but, pro-testing
that no Consideration whatever should
oblige her to converse with him again, she or-dered
him instantly to quit her Chamber;
and assured him, if he ever attempted to ap-proach
her again, she would submit to the most
terrible Effects of her Father's Resentment, ra-ther
than be obliged to see a Person who had,
by his unworthy Behaviour, made himself her
Scorn and Aversion.
               
                  Glanville, who saw himself going to be dis-carded
a second time, attempted, with great

Submission, to move her to recal her cruel
Sentence; but Arabella, bursting into Tears,
complained so pathetically of the Cruelty of her
Destiny, in exposing her to the hated Impor-tunities
of a Man she despised, and whose Pre-sence
was so insupportable, that Glanville, think-ing
it best to let her Rage evaporate before he
attempted to pacify her, quitted her Chamber;
cursing Statira and Orontes a thousand times,
and loading the Authors of those Books with all
the Imprecations his Rage could suggest.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The Adventure of the Books continued.
               
               IN this Temper he went to the Gardens to
pass over the Chagrin this unfortunate Ac-cident
had given him; when, meeting the Mar-quis,
who insisted upon knowing the Cause of
that ill Humour, so visible in his Countenance,
Glanville related all that had passed; but, in
Spite of his Anger, it was impossible for him
to repeat the Circumstances of his Disgrace
without laughing, as well as the Marquis; who
thought the Story so extremely diverting, that
he would needs hear it over again.
               However, Charles, said he, though I shall do
what I can to gain your Pardon from Bella, yet
I shall not scruple to own you acted extremely
wrong, in not reading what she desired you;
for, besides losing an Opportunity of obliging
her, you drew yourself into a terrible Dilemma;

for how was it possible for you to evade a Dis-covery
of the Cheat you put upon her, when
she began to talk with you upon those Passages
she had desired you to read?
               I acknowledge my Error, my Lord, answered
Glanville; but if you restore me to my Cousin's
Favour again, I promise you to repair it by a
different Behaviour for the future.
               I'll see what I can do for you, said the Mar-quis;
leaving him, to go to Arabella's Apart-ment,
who had retired to her Closet, extremely
afflicted at this new Insult she had received
from her Cousin: Her Grief was the more
poignant, as she was beginning to imagine, by
the Alteration in his Behaviour, that he would
prove such a Lover as she wished; for Mr.
Glanville's Person and Qualifications had at-tracted
her particular Notice: And, to speak
in the Language of Romance, she did not hate
him; but, on the contrary, was very much
disposed to wish him well: Therefore, it was no
Wonder she extremely resented the Affront she
had received from him.
               The Marquis, not finding her in her Chamber,
proceeded to her Closet, where her Women
informed him she was retired; and, knocking
gently at the Door, was admitted by Arabella,
whom he immediately discerned to have been
weeping very much; for her fine Eyes were red
and swelled, and the Traces of her Tears might
still be observed on her fair Face; which, at the
Sight of the Marquis, was overspread with a
Blush, as if she was conscious of her Weak-ness
in lamenting the Crime her Cousin had been
guilty of.
               
                  

The Marquis drew a favourable Omen for his
Nephew from her Tears and Confusion; but,
not willing to increase it, by acknowleging he
had observed it, he told her he was come, at
Mr. Glanville's Request, to make up the Quar-rel
between them.
               Ah! my Lord, interrupted Arabella, speak
no more to me of that unworthy Man, who
has so grosly abused my Favour, and the Pri-vilege
I allowed him: His Baseness and Ingrati-tude
are but too manifest; and there is nothing
I so much regret as my Weakness in restoring
him to Part of my good Opinion, after he had
once forfeited it, by an Insolence not to be pa-ralleled.
               Indeed, Bella, said the Marquis, smiling, you
resent too deeply these slight Matters: I can't
think my Nephew so guilty as you would have
me believe he is; and you ought neither to be
angry or surprised, that he preferred your Con-versation
before reading in a foolish old-fashioned
Book that you put in his Hands.
               If your Lordship had ever read these Books,
replied Arabella, reddening with Vexation, 'tis
probable you would have another Opinion of
them; but, however that may be, my Cousin is
not to be excused for the Contempt he shewed
to my Commands; and for daring, by the Cheat
he put on me, to expose me to the Shame of
seeing myself so ridiculously imposed upon.
               However, you must forgive him, said the
Marquis; and I insist upon it, before I quit your
Apartment, that you receive him into Favour.
               Pardon me, my Lord, replied Arabella; this
is what I neither can, nor ought to do; and I

hope you will not wrong me so much as to
continue to desire it.
               Nay, Bella, said he, this is carrying Things
too far, and making trifling Disputes of too
great Consequence: I am surprised at your
Treatment of a Man whom, after all, if ever
you intend to obey me, you must consent to
marry.
               There is no Question, my Lord, replied she,
but it would be my Glory to obey you in what-ever
is possible; but this you command me now
to do, not being so, I conceive you will rather
impute my Refusal to Necessity, than Choice.
               How! returned the Marquis, will you en-deavour
to persuade me, that it is not possible
Mr. Glanville should be your Husband?
               'Tis impossible he should be so with my Con-sent,
resumed Arabella; and I cannot give it
without wounding my own Quiet in a most
sensible manner.
               Come, come, Bella, said the Marquis (fret-ting
at her extreme Obstinacy), this is too much:
I am to blame to indulge your Foibles in this
Manner: Your Cousin is worthy of your Af-fection,
and you cannot refuse it to him with-out
incurring my Displeasure.
               Since my Affection is not in my own Power
to bestow, said Arabella, weeping, I know not
how to remove your Displeasure; but, question-less,
I know how to die, to avoid the Effects
of what would be to me the most terrible Mis-fortune
in the World.
               Foolish Girl! interrupted the Marquis, how
strangely do you talk? Are the Thoughts of

Death become so familiar to you, that you speak
of dying with so little Concern?
               Since, my Lord, resumed she, in an exalted
Tone, I do not yield, either in Virtue or Courage,
to many others of my Sex, who, when perse-cuted
like me, have fled to Death for Relief, I
know not why I should be thought less capable
of it than they; and if Artimisa, Candace, and
the beautiful Daughter of Cleopatra, could brave
the Terrors of Death for the sake of the Men
they loved, there is no Question but I also could
imitate their Courage, to avoid the Man I have
so much Reason to hate.
               The Girl is certainly distracted, interrupted
the Marquis, excessively enraged at the strange
Speech she had uttered: These foolish Books my
Nephew talks of have turned her Brain! Where
are they? pursued he, going into her Chamber:
I'll burn all I can lay my Hands upon.
               
                  Arabella, trembling for the Fate of her Books,
followed her Father into the Room; who seeing
the Books which had caused this woful Ad-venture
lying upon the Table, he ordered one
of her Women to carry them into his Apart-ment,
vowing he would commit them all to the
Flames.
               
                  Arabella not daring, in the Fury he was in,
to interpose, he went out of the Room, leaving
her to bewail the Fate of so many illustrious
Heroes and Heroines, who, by an Effect of a
more cruel Tyranny than any they had ever ex-perienced
before, were going to be cast into the
merciless Flames; which would, doubtless, pay
very little Regard to the divine Beauties of the
admirable Clelia, or the heroic Valour of the

brave Orontes; and the rest of those great
Princes and Princesses, whose Actions Arabella
proposed for the Model of hers.
               Fortune, however, which never wholly for-sook
these illustrious Personages, rescued them
from so unworthy a Fate, and brought Mr.
Glanville into the Marquis's Chamber just as he
was giving Orders to have them destroyed.
               END of the FIRST BOOK.
               
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK II.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  In which the Adventure of the Books is
happily concluded.
               
               THE Marquis, as soon as he saw
Mr. Glanville, told him he was
resolved to cure Arabella of her
Whims, by burning the Books
that had put them into her Head:
I have seized upon some of them, pursued he,
smiling; and you may, if you please, wreak
your Spite upon these Authors of your Disgrace,
by burning them yourself.
               
                  

Though I have all the Reason in the World
to be enraged with that Incendiary Statira, said
Glanville laughing, for the Mischief she has
done me; yet I cannot consent to put such an
Affront upon my Cousin, as to burn her fa-vourite
Books: And now I think of it, my Lord,
pursued he, I'll endeavour to make a Merit with
Lady Bella by saving them: Therefore spare
them, at my Request, and let me carry them
to her. I shall be quite unhappy till we are
Friends again.
               You may do as you will, said the Marquis;
but I think it encouraging her in her Follies to
give them to her again.
               
                  Glanville, without replying, eagerly took up
the Books, for fear the Marquis should change
his Mind; and, highly delighted with the Op-portunity
he had got of making his Peace with
Lady Bella, ran to her Apartment, loaded with
these kind Intercessors; and, making his Way by
Lucy, who would have opposed him, penetrated
even into the Closet of the melancholy Fair-one,
who was making bitter Reflections on the Cru-elty
of her Destiny, and bewailing her Loss
with a Deluge of Tears.
               As ridiculous as the Occasion of these Tears
was, yet Glanville could not behold them with-out
being affected: Assuming, therefore, a Coun-tenance
as sad as he was able, he laid the Books
before her; and told her, he hoped she would
excuse his coming into her Presence without
her Permission, since it was only to restore her
those Books, whose Loss she seemed so greatly
to lament; and added, that it was with much
Difficulty he prevailed upon the Marquis not to

burn them immediately; and his Fears, that he
might really do as he threatened, made him
snatch them up, and bring them, with so little
Ceremony, into her Closet.
               
                  Arabella, whose Countenance brightened into
a Smile of pleasing Surprize at the Sight of her
recovered Treasure, turned her bright Eyes upon
Glanville with a Look of Complacency that went
to his Heart.
               I well perceive, said she, that, in exaggera-ting
the Merit of this little Service you have done
me, you expect I should suffer it to cancel your
past Offences: I am not ungrateful enough to
be insensible of any Kindness that is shewn me;
and, tho' I might be excused for suspecting it
was rather Policy than Friendship, that induced
you to seek my Satisfaction, by saving these in-nocent
Victims of my Father's Displeasure, ne-vertheless
I pardon you upon the Supposition,
that you will, for the future, avoid all Occa-sion
of offending me.
               At these Words, she made a Sign to him to
be gone, fearing the Extravagance of his Joy
would make him throw himself at her Feet to
thank her for the infinite Favour she had con-ferred
upon him; but, finding he seemed dis-posed
to stay longer, she called one of her Wo-men
into the Closet; and, by some very signi-ficant
Frowns, gave Glanville to understand his
Stay was displeasing; so that he left her, with a
very low Bow, highly pleased at her having
repealed his Banishment; and, assured the Mar-quis,
that nothing could have happened more
fortunate for him, than his intended Disposal of

does not become you so well as her, since
all her Conduct was conformable to it, no Marr
in the World being bold enough to talk to her
of Love; but you, Cousin, are ready, even by
your own Confession, to listen to such Dis-courses
from any body; and therefore this Be-haviour,
in you, may be with more Justice
termed Levity, than Indifference.
               I perceive, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, I
have always the worst of those Comparisons
you are pleased to make between me and other
People; but, I assure you, as free and indis-creet
as you think me, I should very much
scruple to visit a Man, upon any Occasion
whatever.
               I am quite astonished, Miss Glanville, re-sumed
Arabella, to hear you assume a Cha-racter
of so much Severity; you, who have
granted Favours of a Kind in a very great De-gree
criminal.
               Favours! interrupted Miss Glanville, crimi-nal
Favours! Pray explain yourself, Madam.
               Yes, Cousin, said Arabella, I repeat it again;
criminal Favours, such as allowing Persons to
talk to you of Love; not forbidding them to
write to you; giving them Opportunities of
being alone with you for several Moments to-gether;
and several other Civilities of the like
Nature, which no Man can possibly merit, un-der
many Years Services, Fidelity, and Pains:
All these are criminal Favours, and highly blame-able
in a Lady, who has any Regard for her
Reputation.
               All these, replied Miss Glanville, are no-thing
in Comparison of making them Visits; and

I lived in this manner, Madam, for Ten
Months, without feeling the least Desire to
change my Habitation; and, during all that
time, no Mortal approached my Solitude, so
that I lived perfectly secure and undiscovered.
               Sir George pausing here to take Breath, the
old Baronet said what will be found in the
following Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  A single Combat fought with prodigious
Valour, and described with amazing
Accuracy.
               
               GIVE me Leave, Sir, said Sir Charles, to
ask, If you eat in all this Time?
               Alas! Sir, replied Sir George, Sighs and Tears
were all my Sustenance.
               Sir Charles, Mr. Glanville, and Miss, laugh-ing
at this Answer, Arabella seemed greatly con-fused:
               It is not to be imagined, said she, that Sir
George; or, to say better, Prince Viridmore, lived
Ten Months without eating any thing to support
Nature; but such trifling Circumstances are
always left out, in the Relations of Histories;
and truly an Audience must be very dull and
unapprehensive, that cannot conceive, without
being told, that a Man must necessarily eat in
the Space of Ten Months.
               But the Food Sir George lived on, replied
the Baronet, was very unsubstantial, and would
not afford him much Nourishment.
               
                  

I suppose, resumed Arabella, he lived upon
such Provisions as the Forest afforded him; such as
wild Fruits, Herbs, bitter Sallads, and the
like; which, considering the Melancholy that
possessed him, would appear a voluptuous Re-past;
and which the unfortunate Orontes,
when he was in the same Situation, thought
infinitely too good for him.
               Sir Charles, finding Arabella took no Notice
of the Historian's Hyperbole of living upon his
Sighs and Tears, passed it over, for fear of of-fending
her; and Sir George, who had been in
some Anxiety how to bring himself off, when
he perceived Arabella was reasonable enough
to suppose he must have eat during his Abode
in the Forest, went on with his Relation in
this Manner.
               I lived, as I before observed to you, Ma-dam,
in this Cave for Ten Months; and truly
I was so reconciled to that solitary way of Life,
and found so much Sweetness in it, that I be-lieve,
I should have remained there till this
Day, but for the Adventure which I am going
to recount.
               It being my Custom to walk out every Even-ing
in the Forest; returning to my Cave,
something later then usual, I heard the Cries
of a Woman at some Distance, who seemed to
be in Distress: I stopped to listen from what
Side those Cries proceeded; and perceiving
they seemed to approach nearer to me, I took
down my Armour from the Tree where I had
hung it; and hastily arming myself, shaped my
Course towards the Place from whence those

Complaints seemed to come, resolving to assist
that unknown Person with all the Strength
that was left me.
               Having gone some Paces, I spied through
the Branches of the Trees a Man on Horse-back
with a Lady, who struggled to get loose,
and at times calling aloud for Succour.
               This Sight inflaming me with Rage against
that impious Ravisher; I flew towards him:
And when I came within hearing;
               Hold, Wretch! cried I, and cease to offer
Violence to that Lady, whom thou bearest
away by Force; or prepare to defend thyself
against one, who will die, before he will suffer
thee to prosecute thy unjust Designs.
               The Man, without answering me, clapped
Spurs to his Horse; and it would have been
impossible to have overtaken him, had not my
own Horse, which had never quitted the Forest,
appeared in my View: I quickly mounted him,
and followed the Track the Ravisher had taken,
with such Speed, that I came up with him in a
Moment.
               Caitiff! said I, release the Lady, and de-fend
thyself. These Words, which I accom-panied
with a thundering Blow upon his
Head-piece, obliged him to set down the Lady,
who implored Heaven, with the utmost Ar-dour,
to grant me the Victory: And, recoiling
back a few Paces, to take a View of me,
               I know not, said he, for what Reason thou
settest thyself to oppose my Designs; but I
well know, that thou shalt dearly repent of thy
Temerity.
               Saying this, he advanced furiously towards

me, and aimed so heavy a Blow at my Head,
that, had I not received it on my Shield, I
might haply have no longer been in a Condi-tion
to defend the distressed Lady: But, hav-ing,
with the greatest Dexterity imaginable,
avoided this Blow, I made at him with so
much Fierceness, and directed my Aims so
well, that in a few Moments I wounded him
in several Places; and his Arms were all dyed
with his Blood.
               This good Success redoubled my Vigour;
and having, by a lucky Stroke with my Sword,
cut the Strings of his Head-piece, it fell off:
And his Head being bare, I was going to let
fall a dreadful Blow upon it, which doubtles
                     •
                  
would have shivered it in a thousand Pieces,
when he cried out for Quarter, and, letting fall
his Sword, by that Action assured me my Vi-ctory
was intire.
               Live Wretch, cried I, since thou art base
enough to value Life after being vanquished;
but swear upon my Sword, that thou wilt ne-ver
more attempt the Liberty of that Lady.
               While I was speaking, I perceived he was
no longer able to sit his Horse: But, staggering
a Moment, he fell off, and lay extended with-out
Motion upon the Ground. Touched with
Compassion at this Sight, I alighted, and, sup-posing
him to be in a Swoon, was preparing to
give him some Assistance; but, upon my nearer
Approach, I found he was quite dead.
               Leaving therefore this mournful Object, I
I turned about, with an Intention to go and
offer the distressed Lady my further Help; but
I perceived her already at my Feet.
               
                  

Valiant Knight, said she, with a Tone of
Voice so bewitching, that all my Faculties
were suspended, as by Inchantment, suffer
me, on my Knees, to thank you, for the De-liverance
you have procured me from that base
Man; since to your admirable Valour I owe
not only the Preservation of my Life; but,
what is infinitely dearer to me, my Honour.
               The Astonishment, wherewith I beheld the
miraculous Beauty that appeared before me,
kept me a Moment in such an attentive Gaze,
that I forgot she was at my Feet: Recollecting
myself, however, with some Confusion at my
Neglect,
               Oh! rise, Madam, cried I, helping her up
with infinite Respect, and debase not such Per-fection
to a Posture, in which all the Mon-archs
on the Earth might glory to appear be-fore
it.
               That you may the better conceive the Al-teration
which the Sight of this fair Unknown
produced in my Soul, I will endeavour, to
give you a Description of her Beauty, which
was altogether miraculous.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  In which the Reader will find a Description
of a Beauty, in a Style truly sublime.
               
               THE new-fallen Snow, pursued Sir George,
was tanned, in Comparison of the refin-ed
Purity of that White which made up the

Ground of her Complexion; and, though Fear
had a little gathered the Carnations of her
Cheeks, yet her Joy at being delivered
seemed to plant them there with such fresh
Advantages, that my Eye might shrink at the
Brightness of that mingled Lustre: Her Mouth,
as well for Shape as Colour, might shame the
Imitation of the best Pencils, and the liveliest
Tints; and though through some petty Inter-vals
of Joy, it wanted the Smiles, which Grief
and Terror sequestred, yet she never opened it,
but like the East, at the Birth of a beautiful
Day, and then discovered Treasures, whose ex-celling
Whiteness made the Price inestimable:
All the Features of her Face had so near a
Kindred to Proportion and Symmetry, as the
several Masters of Apelles's Art might have
called it his Glory to have copied Beauties from
her, as the best of Models: The Circumfe-rence
of her Visage shewed the Extremes of
an imperfect Circle, and almost formed it to a
perfect Oval: And this Abridgment of Mar-vels
was tapered by a Pair of the brightest
Stars, that ever were lighted up by the Hand
of Nature: As their Colour was the same with
the Heavens, there was a spherical Harmony
in their Motion; and that mingled with a Vi-vacity
so penetrating, as neither the firmest
Eye, nor the strongest Soul, could arm them-selves
with a Resistance of Proof against those
pointed Glories: Her Head was crowned with
a prodigious Quantity of fair long Hair, which
Colour as fitly suited the Beauty of her Eyes,
as Imagination could make it: To these Mar-vels
of Face were joined the rest of her Neck,

Hands, and Shape; and there seemed a Contest
between the Form and Whiteness of the two
former, which had the largest Commission from
Nature to work Wonders.
               In fine, her Beauty was miraculous, and
could not fail of producing a sudden Effect
upon a Heart like mine.
               Having passed in an Instant from the ex-tremest
Admiration, to something yet more
tender, I reiterated my Offers of Service to
the fair Unknown; who told me, she feared her
Father had Occasion for some Assistance, her
Ravisher having left his Men to engage him, and
keep off his Pursuit, while he rode off with
his Prize: Hereupon I begg'd her to direct me
to the Place where she left her Father, assuring
her I would gladly venture my Life a Second
time, to preserve his; and she desiring to go
with me, I placed her before me on my Horse,
and had the exquisite Pleasure of supporting
with my Arms the fairest and most admirable
Creature in the World.
               In less than half an Hour, which had ap-peared
to me but a Moment, we got to the
Place where she had been torn from her Father;
whom we beheld with three of his Servants,
maintaining a Fight against twice as many of
their Enemies.
               Having gently set down the beauteous Un-known
upon the Grass, I flew to the Relief
of her Father; and, throwing myself furiously
amongst his Assailants, dispatched two of them
with so many Blows: The others, seeing so un-expected
an Assistance, gave back a little; and

I took Advantage of their Consternation, to
redouble my Blows, and brought Two more
of them at my Feet.
               There remained now but Four to overcome;
and my Arrival having given new Vigour to
those whose Part I had taken, they seconded
me so well, that we soon had nothing more left
to do; for the rest, seeing their Comrades slain,
sought their Safety in Flight: We were too
generous to pursue them, the Blood of such
Wretches being unworthy to be shed by our
Swords.
               The fair Unknown, seeing us Conquerors,
flew to embrace her Father; who, holding her
pressed between his Arms, turned his Eyes upon
me; then quitting her, came towards me, and,
in the most obliging Terms imaginable, re-turned
me Thanks for the Assistance I had
brought him; and being informed by his
Daughter, of what I had done for her Preser-vation,
this old Gentleman renewed his Ac-knowlegements,
calling me the Preserver of
his Life, the valiant Defender of his Daugh-ter's
Honour, his tutelary Angel, and the
Guardian of his House.
               In fine, he loaded me with so many Thanks
and Praises, that I could not choose but be in
some Confusion; and, to put an End to them, I
begged he would inform me, by what means
he came into that Misfortune.
               He told me, that, residing in a Castle at the
Extremity of this Forest, the Charms of his
Daughter had captivated a neighbouring Lord,
whose Character and Person being disagreeable

both to her and himself, he had absolutely re-fused
to give her to him: Thereupon he had set
upon them as they were going to visit a Rela-tion
at some Distance, and, dragging Philonice
out of the Coach, put her before him on his
Horse, and carried her away, leaving Eight of
his Men to engage him, and his Servants; who,
being but Four in Number, must inevitably
have perished, had I not come to his Relief,
and, by my miraculous Valour, vanquished all
his Enemies.
               Saying this, he desired me to go home with
him to the Castle; and having led his Daugh-ter
to the Coach, insisted upon my placing my-self
next her; and, getting in himself, ordered
them to return home.
               This Accident having altered his Design of
making the Visit which had been the Occasion
of his Journey;
               The Baron, for that I found was his Title,
entertained me, all the Way, with repeated Ex-pressions
of Acknowledgements and Tenderness;
and the incomparable Philonice condescended
also to assure me of her Gratitude for the Ser-vice
I had done her.
               At our Arrival at the Castle, I perceived it
was very large and magnificent: The Baron con-ducted
me to one of the best Apartments, and
would stay in the Room till my Armour was
taken off, that he might be assured I had re-ceived
no Hurts: Having rendered him the like
Civility in his own Chamber, and satisfied
myself he was not wounded, we returned to
the beautiful Philonice; and this second Sight

having finished my Defeat, I remained so ab-solutely
her Slave, that neither Dorothea nor
Sydimiris were more passionately beloved.
               At the earnest Intreaty of the Baron, I staid
some Weeks in the Castle; during which, the
daily Sight of Philonice so augmented my
Flames, that I was no longer in a Condition to
conceal them; but, fearing to displease that Di-vine
Beauty by a Confession of my Passion, I
languished in secret; and the Constraint I laid
upon myself, gave me such Torments, that I
fell into a profound Melancholy, and looked
so pale and dejected, that the Baron was sensi-ble
of the Alteration, and conjured me in the
most pressing Terms, to acquaint him with the
Cause of my Uneasiness: But though I conti-nued
obstinately silent with my Tongue, yet
my Eyes spoke intelligibly enough; and the
Blushes which appeared in the fair Cheeks
of Philonice, whenever she spoke to me on the
Subject of my Grief, convinced me she was
not ignorant of my Passion.
               At length the Agitation of my Mind throw-ing
me into a Fever, the Baron, who was firmly
persuaded, that my Illness proceeded from some
concealed Vexation, pressed me continually to
declare myself; and, finding all his Intreaties
ineffectual, he commanded his Daughter to en-deavour
to find out the Cause of that Grief
which had put me into such a Condition.
               For that Purpose therefore, having brought
the fair Philonice into my Chamber, he staid a
few Minutes, and, leaving the Room, under
Pretence of Business, Philonice remained alone

no Woman, who has any Reputation at all,
will be guilty of taking such Liberties.
               What! Miss, replied, Arabella, will you
dare, by this Insinuation, to cast any Censures
upon the Virtue of the divine Mandana, the
haughty Amalazontha, the fair Statira, the cold
and rigid Parisatis, and many other illustrious
Ladies, who did not scruple to visit their Lo-vers,
when confined to their Beds, either by
the Wounds they received in Battle, or the
more cruel and dangerous ones they suffered
from their Eyes? These chaste Ladies, who ne-ver
granted a Kiss of their Hand to a Lover,
till he was upon the Point of being their Hus-band,
would nevertheless most charitably con-descend
to approach their Bed-side, and speak
some compassionate Words to them, in order
to promote their Cure, and make them submit
to live; nay, these divine Beauties would not
refuse to grant the same Favour to Persons
whom they did not love, to prevent the fatal
Consequences of their Despair.
               Lord, Madam! interrupted Miss Glanville,
I wonder you can talk so blasphemously, to call
a Parcel of confident Creatures divine, and
such terrible Words.
               Do you know, Miss, said Arabella, with a
stern Look, that 'tis of the greatest Princesses
that ever were, whom you speak in this irre-verent
Manner? Is it possible, that you can be
ignorant of the sublime Quality of Mandana,
who was the Heiress of Two powerful King-doms?
Are you not sensible, that Amalazontha
was Queen of Turringia? And will you pre-tend

by my Bedside, her Women, out of Respect,
staying at the other End of the Chamber.
               This Divine Person, seeing herself alone with
me, and remembring her Father's Command,
blushed, and cast down her Eyes in such appa-rent
Confusion, that I could not help observing
it: And, interpreting it to the Displeasure she
took in being so near me,
               Whatever Joy I take in the Honour your
Visit does me, Madam, said I, in a weak Voice;
yet since nothing is so dear to me, as your Sa-tisfaction,
I would rather dispense with this
Mark of your Goodness to an unfortunate
Wretch, then see you in the least Constraint.
               And why, replied she, with a Tone full of
Sweetness, do you suppose that I am here by
Constraint, when it would be more just to be-lieve,
that in visiting the valiant Defender of
my Honour, and the Life of my Father, I only
follow my own Inclinations?
               Ah! Madam, said I, transported with Joy
at so favourable a Speech, the little Service I
had the Happiness to do you, does not merit
so infinite a Favour; and tho' I had lost the best
Part of my Blood in your Defence, I should
have been well rewarded with your Safety.
               Since you do not repent of what you have
done, replied she, I am willing to be obliged
to you for another Favour; and ask it with the
greater Hope of obtaining it, as I must acquaint
you, it is by my Father's Command I take
that Liberty, who is much interested in my
Success.
               
                  

There is no Occasion, Madam, returned I,
to make use of any Interest but your own, to
engage me to obey you, since that is, and ever
will be, all-powerful with me: Speak then,
Madam, and let me know what it is you desire
of me, that I may, once in my Life, have the
Glory of obeying you.
               It is, said she, blushing still more than before,
that you will acquaint us with the Cause of that
Melancholy, which has, as we imagine, occa-sioned
your present Illness.
               At these Words I trembled, turned pale; and,
not daring to discover the true Cause of my
Affliction, I remained in a profound Silence.
               I see, said the beautiful Philonice, that you
have no Inclination to obey me; and since my
Request has, as I perceive, given you some
Disturbance, I will prevail upon my Father to
press you no farther upon this Subject.
               No, Madam, said I, eagerly; the Baron shall
be satisfied, and you shall be obeyed; though,
after the Knowlege of my Crime, you doom
me to that Death I so justly merit.
               Yes Madam, this unfortunate Man, who has
had the Glory to acquire your Esteem by the
little Service he did you, has cancelled the Me-rit
of that Service by daring to adore you.
               I love you, divine Philonice; and, not being
able either to repent, or cease to be guilty of
loving you, I am resolved to die, and spare
you the Trouble of pronouncing my Sentence.
I beseech you therefore to believe, that I would
have died in Silence, but for your Command
to declare myself, and you should never have

known the Excess of my Love and Despair,
had not my Obedience to your Will obliged
me to confess it.
               I finished these Words with so much Fear
and Confusion, that I durst not lift my Eyes
up to the fair Face of Philonice, to observe how
she received this Discourse: I waited therefore,
trembling, for her Answer; but finding that in
several Minutes she spoke not a Word, I ven-tured
at last, to cast a languishing Glance upon
the Visage I adored, and saw so many Marks
of Disorder upon it, that I was almost dead
with the Apprehensions of having offended her
beyond even the Hope of procuring her Pardon
by my Death.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Wherein Sir George concludes his History;
which produces an unexpected Effect.
               
               THE Silence of Philonice, continued Sir
George, pierced me to the Heart; and
when I saw her rise from her Seat, and prepare
to go away without speaking, Grief took such
Possession of my Spirits, that, uttering a Cry, I
fell into a Swoon, which, as I afterwards was
informed, greatly alarmed the beautiful Philo-nice;
who, resuming her Seat, had the Good-ness
to assist her Women in bringing me to
myself; and, when I opened my Eyes, I had

the Satisfaction to behold her still by me, and
all the Signs of Compassion in her Face.
               This Sight a little re-assuring me; I ask your
Pardon, Madam, said I, for the Condition in
which I have appeared before you, and also for
that I am not yet dead, as is doubtless your
Wish: But I will make Haste, pursued I,
sighing, to fulfil your Desires; and you shall
soon be freed from the Sight of a miserable
Wretch, who, to his last Moment, will not
cease to adore you.
               It is not your Death that I desire, said the
fair Philonice; and, after having preserved both
my Father and me from Death, it is not rea-sonable,
that we should suffer you to die, if we
can help it.
               Live therefore, Bellmour, pursued she, blush-ing;
and live, if possible, without continuing in
that Weakness I cannot choose but condemn:
Yet whatever are your Thoughts for the future,
remember that your Death will be a Fault I
cannot resolve to pardon.
               Speaking these Words, without giving me
time to answer, she left my Chamber; and I
found something so sweet and favourable in
them, that I resolved to obey her, and forward
my Cure as much as I was able: However, the
Agitation of Spirits increased my Fever so
much, that my Life was despaired of.
               The Baron hardly ever left my Bedside.
Philonice came every Day to see me, and seemed
extremely moved at the Danger I was in. One
Day, when I was worse than usual, she came

close to the Bedside; and, opening the Cour-tain,
               What Bellmour, said she, do you pay so
little Obedience to my Commands, that you
resolve to die?
               Heaven is my Witness, Madam, said I,
faintly, that nothing is so dear and sacred to
me as your Commands; and since, out of your
superlative Goodness, you are pleased to have
some Care for my Life, I would preserve it to
obey you, were it in my Power; but, alas!
Madam, I strive in vain to repel the Violence
of my Distemper.
               In a few Days more, I was reduced to the
last Extremity: It was then that the fair Phi-lonice
discovered, that she did not hate me; for
she made no Scruple to weep before me; and
those Tears she so liberally shed, had so pow-erful
an Effect upon my Mind, that the Con-tentment
I felt, communicated itself to my
Body, and gave such a Turn to my Distemper,
that my Recovery was not only hoped, but ex-pected.
               The Baron expressed his Satisfaction at this
Alteration, by the most affectionate Expres-sions;
and though the fair Philonice said very
little, yet I perceived by the Joy that appeared
in her fair Eyes, that she was not less interested
in my Recovery, than her Father.
               The Physicians having declared me out of
Danger, the Baron, who had taken his Re-solutions
long before, came one Day into my
Chamber; and ordering those who attended me,
to leave us alone,
               
                  

Prince, said he, for in recounting my History
to him, I had disclosed my true Quality, I am
not ignorant of that Affection you bear my
Daughter; and am sensible it has occasioned
the Extremity to which we have seen you re-duced:
Had you been pleased to acquaint me
with your Sentiments, you would have avoided
those Displeasures you have suffered; for though
your Birth were not so illustrious as it is, yet,
preferring Virtue to all other Advantages, I
should have esteemed my Daughter honou-red
by your Love, and have freely bestowed
her on you: But since to those rare Qualities
wherewith Heaven has so liberally endowed
you, you add also that of a Birth so noble,
doubt not but I shall think myself highly fa-voured
by your Alliance: If therefore your
Thoughts of my Daughter be not changed,
and you esteem her worthy to be your Bride, I
here solemnly promise you to bestow her upon
you, as soon as you are perfectly recovered.
               I leave you to guess, Madam, the Joy which
I felt at this Discourse: It was so great, that
it would not permit me to thank him, as I
should have done, for the inestimable Blessing
he bestowed on me.
               I saw Philonice a few Minutes after; and, being
commanded by her Father to give me her Hand,
she did so, without any Marks of Reluctance,
and, having respectfully kissed it, I vowed to be
her Slave for ever.
               Who would have imagined, continued Sir
George, with a profound Sigh, that Fortune,
while she thus seemed to flatter me, was pre-paring
to make me suffer the severest Tor-ments?

I began now to leave my Bed, and was
able to walk about my Chamber. The Baron
was making great Preparations for our Nuptials;
when one Night I was alarmed with the Cries
of Philonice's Women; and, a few Moments
after, the Baron came into my Chamber, with
a distracted Air.
               O! Son, cried he, for so he always called
me, now Philonice is lost both to you and me:
She is carried off by Force, and I am preparing
to follow and rescue her, if possible; but I fear
my Endeavours will be fruitless, since I know
not which Way her Ravishers have taken.
               Oh! Sir, cried I, transported both with Grief
and Rage, you shall not go alone: Her Rescue
belongs to me; and I will effect it, or perish in
the Attempt.
               The Baron, having earnestly conjured me
not to expose myself to the Danger of a Re-lapse,
by so imprudent a Resolution, was ob-liged
to quit me, Word being brought him, that
his Horse was ready: And as soon as he was
gone out of the Room, in spite of all that could
be said to prevent me, by my Attendants, I
made them put on my Armour; and, mounting
a Horse I had caused to be made ready, fallied
furiously out of the Castle, breathing out Vows
of Vengeance against the Wretch who had
robbed me of Philonice.
               
               I rode the whole Night without stopping.
Day appeared, when I found myself near a
small Village. I entered it, and made strict
Enquiry after the Ravisher of Philonice, de-scribing
the fair Creature, and offering vast Re-wards
to any who could bring me the least In-telligence

of her: But all was in vain; I could
make no Discovery.
               After travelling several Days, to no Purpose,
I returned to the Castle, in order to know if
the Baron had been more successful in his Pur-suit
then myself; but I found him oppressed
with Grief: He had heard no Tidings of his
Daughter, and had suffered no small Appre-hensions
upon my Account. Having assured
him I found myself very able to travel, I took
an affectionate Leave of him, promising him
never to give over my Search, till I had found
the Divine Philonice: But Heaven has not per-mitted
me that Happiness; and though I have
spent several Years in searching for her, I have
never been able to discover where she is: Time
has not cured me of my Grief for her Loss;
and, though by an Effect of my Destiny,
another Object possesses my Soul, yet I do
not cease to deplore her Misfortune, and to of-fer
up Vows for her Happiness.
               And is this all you have to say? said Ara-bella,
whom the latter Part of his History had
extremely surprised; or are we to expect a
Continuance of your Adventures?
               I have faithfully related all my Adventures,
that are worthy your Hearing, Madam, re-turned
Sir George; and I flatter myself, you
will do me the Justice to own, that I have
been rather unfortunate than faithless; and that
Mr. Glanville had little Reason to tax me with
Inconstancy.
               In my Opinion, resumed Arabella, Mr.
Glanville spoke too favourably of you, when he
called you only inconstant; and if he had add-ed

the Epithet of Ungrateful and Unjust, he
would have marked your Character better.
               For, in fine, Sir, pursued she, you will ne-ver
persuade any reasonable Person, that your
being able to lose the Remembrance of the fair
and generous Sydimiris, in your new Passion for
Philonice, was not an Excess of Levity: But
your suffering so tamely the Loss of this last
Beauty, and allowing her to remain in the
Hands of her Ravisher, while you permit an-other
Affection to take Possession of your Soul,
is such an Outrage to all Truth and Constancy,
that you deserve to be ranked among the falsest
of Mankind.
               Alas! Madam, replied Sir George, who had
not foreseen the Influence Arabella would draw
from this last Adventure, What would you
have an unfortunate Man, whose Hopes have
been so often, and so cruelly, disappointed, do?
I have bewailed the Loss of Philonice, with a
Deluge of Tears; I have taken infinite Pains to
find her, but to no Purpose; and when Hea-ven
compassionating my Sufferings, presented
to my Eyes, an Object, to whom the whole
World ought to pay Adoration, how could I
resist that powerful Impulse, which forced me to
love what appeared so worthy of my Affection?
               Call not, interrupted Arabella, that an ir-resistible
Impulse, which was only the Effect
of thy own changing Humour: The same Ex-cuse
might be pleaded for all the Faults we see
committed in the World; and Men would no
longer be answerable for their own Crimes.
Had you imitated the illustrious Heroes of An-tiquity,
as well in the Constancy of their Af-fections,

as, it must be confessed, you have done
in their admirable Valour; you would now be
either sighing in your Cave for the Loss of the
generous Sydimiris, or wandering through the
World in Search of the beautiful Philonice.
Had you persevered in your Affection, and con-tinued
your Pursuit of that Fair-one; you
would, perhaps, ere this, have found her sleep-ing
under the Shade of a Tree in some lone Fo-rest,
as Philodaspes did his admirable Delia, or
disguised in a Slave's Habit, as Ariobarsanes saw
his Divine Olympia; or bound haply in a Cha-riot,
and have had the Glory of freeing her, as
Ambriomer did the beauteous Agione; or in a
Ship in the Hands of Pirates, like the incom-parable
Eliza; or—
               Enough, dear Niece, interrupted Sir Charles;
you have quoted Examples sufficient, if this in-constant
Man would have the Grace to follow
them.
               True, Sir, replied Arabella; and I would
recommend to his Consideration the Conduct
of those illustrious Persons I have named, to the
end that, pursuing their Steps, he may arrive
at their Glory and Happiness, that is the Repu-tation
of being perfectly constant, and the Pos-session
of his Mistress: And be assured, Sir, pur-sued
Arabella, looking at Sir George, that Hea-ven
will never restore you the Crown of your
Ancestors, and place you upon the Throne to
which you pretend, while you make yourself
unworthy of its Protection, by so shameful an
Inconstancy.
               I perhaps speak with too much Freedom to a
great Prince; whom though Fortune has de-spoiled

to deny the glorious Extraction of Statira
and Parisatis, Princesses of Persia?
               
               I shall not trouble myself to deny any thing
about them, Madam, said Miss Glanville; for
I never heard of them before; and really I do
not choose to be always talking of Queens and
Princesses, as if I thought none but such great
People were worthy my Notice: It looks so
affected, I shuld imagine every one laughed
at me, that heard me.
               Since you are so very scrupulous, returned
Arabella, that you dare not imitate the Sublimest
among Mortals, I can furnish you with many
Examples, from the Conduct of Persons, whose
Quality was not much superior to yours, which
may reconcile you to an Action, you at present,
with so little Reason, condemn: And, to name
but One among some Thousands, the fair Cleo-nice,
the most rigid and austere Beauty in all Sar-dis,
paid several Visits to the passionate Ligda-mis,
when his Melancholy, at the ill Success of
his Passion, threw him into a Fever, that con-fined
him to his Bed.
               And pray, Madam, who was that Cleonice?
said Miss Glanville; and where did she live?
               In Sardis, I tell you, said Arabella, in the
Kingdom of Lydia.
               
               Oh! then it is not in our Kingdom, said
Miss Glanville: What signifies what Foreigners
do? I shall never form my Conduct, upon the
Example of Outlandish People; what is com-mon
enough in their Countries, would be very
particular here; and you can never persuade me,
that it is seemly for Ladies to pay Visits to
Men in their Beds.
               
                  

of his Dominions, is intitled to a certain
Degree of Respect: But I conceive, it belongs
to me, in a particular manner, to resent the
Baseness of that Crime, to which you are pleas-ed
to make me the Excuse; and, looking upon
myself, as dishonoured by those often prostituted
Vows you have offered me, I am to tell you,
that I am highly disobliged; and forbid you to
appear in my Presence again, till you have re-sumed
those Thoughts, which are worthy your
noble Extraction; and are capable of treating
me with that Respect, that is my Due.
               Saying this, she rose from he Seat, and walk-ed
very majestically out of the Room, leaving
Sir George overwhelmed with Shame and Vexa-tion
at having conducted the latter Part of his
Narration so ill, and drawn upon himself a
Sentence, which deprived him of all his Hopes.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Containing only a few Inferences, drawn
from the foregoing Chapters.
               
               MR. Glanville, excessively delighted with
this Event, could not help laughing at
the unfortunate Baronet; who seemed, by his
Silence, and down-cast Looks, to expect it.
               Who would have imagined, said he, that so
renowned a Hero would have tarnished the
Glory of his Laurels, as my Cousin says, by so
base an Ingratitude? Indeed, Prince, pursued
he, laughing, you must resolve to recover your

Reputation, either by retiring again to your
Cave, and living upon bitter Herbs, for the
generous Sydimiris; or else wander through the
World, in search of the Divine Philonice.
               
               Don't triumph, dear Charles, replied Sir
George, laughing in his Turn; have a little
Compassion upon me, and confess, that no-thing
could be more unfortunate, than that
damn'd Slip I made at the latter End of my
History: But for that, my Reputation for
Courage and Constancy had been as high as
the great Oroondates, or Juba.
               
               Since you have so fertile an Invention, said
Sir Charles, you may easily repair this Mistake.
Ods-heart! It is pity you are not poor enough
to be an Author; you would occupy a Garret
in Grub-street, with great Fame to yourself,
and Diversion to the Public.
               Oh! Sir, cried Sir George, I have Stock
enough by me, to set up for an Author To-morrow,
if I please: I have no less than Five
Tragedies, some quite, others almost finished;
Three or Four Essays on Virtue, Happiness, &amp;c.
Three thousand Lines of an Epic Poem; half a
Dozen Epitaphs; a few Acrostics; and a long
String of Puns, that would serve to embellish a
Daily Paper, if I was disposed to write one.
               Nay, then, interrupted Mr. Glanville, you
are qualified for a Critic at the Bedford Coffee-house;
where, with the rest of your Brothers,
Demy-wits, you may sit in Judgment upon the
Productions of a Young, a R—, or a John-son.
Rail with premeditated Malice at the
Rambler; and, for the want of Faults, turn
even its inimitable Beauties into Ridicule: The

Language, because it reaches to Perfection,
may be called stiff, laboured, and pedantic; the
Criticisms, when they let in more Light than
your weak Judgment can bear, superficial and
ostentatious Glitter; and because those Papers
contain the finest System of Ethics yet extant,
damn the queer Fellow, for over-propping Vir-tue;
an excellent new Phrase! which those who
can find no Meaning in, may accommodate
with one of their own; then give shrewd Hints,
that some Persons, though they do not publish
their Performances, may have more Merit,
than those that do.
               Upon my Soul, Charles, said Sir George,
thou art such an ill-natured Fellow, that I am
afraid, thou wilt be sneering at me when I am
gone; and wilt endeavour, to persuade Lady
Bella, that not a Syllable of my Story is true.
Speak, pursued he, Wilt thou have the Cruelty
to deprive me of my lawful Claim to the great
Kingdom of Kent; and rob me of the Glory
of fighting singly against Five hundred Men?
               I do not know, said Sir Charles, whether
my Niece be really imposed upon, by the Gra-vity
with which you told your surprising Hi-story;
but I protest, I thought you were in ear-nest
at first; and that you meant to make us
believe it all to be Fact.
               You are so fitly punished, said Mr. Glan-ville,
for that ill-judged Adventure you related
last, by the bad Opinion Lady Bella entertains
of you, that I need not add to your Misfortune:
And therefore, you shall be Prince Veridomer, if
you please; since, under that Character, you

are obliged not to pretend to any Lady, but
the incomparable Philonice.
               
               Sir George, who understood his Meaning,
went home, to think of some Means, by which
he might draw himself out of the Embarrass-ment
he was in; and Mr. Glanville, as he had
promised, did not endeavour to undeceive Lady
Bella, with regard to the History he had feign-ed;
being very well satisfied with his having
put it out of his Power to make his Addresses
to her, since she now looked upon him as the
Lover of Philonice.
               
               As for Sir Charles, he did not penetrate into
the Meaning of Sir George's Story; and only
imagined, that by relating such a Heap of Ad-ventures,
he had a Design to entertain the
Company, and give a Proof of the Felicity of
his Invention; and Miss Glanville, who sup-posed,
he had been ridiculing her Cousin's
strange Notions, was better pleased with him
than ever.
               
                  Arabella, however, was less satisfied than
any of them: She could not endure to see so
brave a Knight, who drew his Birth from a
Race of Kings, tarnish the Glory of his gallant
Actions by so base a Perfidy.
               Alas! said she to herself, How much Rea-son
has the beautiful Philonice to accuse me for
all the Anguish she suffers? since I am the
Cause, that the ungrateful Prince, on whom
she bestows her Affections, suffers her to re-main
quietly, in the Hands of her Ravisher,
without endeavouring to rescue her: But, Oh!
too lovely, and unfortunate Fair-one, said she,
as if she had been present, and listening to her,

distinguish, I beseech you, between those Faults,
which the Will, and those which Necessity, makes
us commit. I am the Cause, 'tis true, of thy
Lover's Infidelity; but I am the innocent
Cause; and would repair the Evils, my fatal
Beauty gives Rise to, by any Sacrifice in my
Power to make.
               While Arabella, by her romantic Genero-sity,
bewails the imaginary Afflictions of the
full as imaginary Philonice; Mr. Glanville, who
thought the Solitude she lived in, confirmed
her in her absurd and ridiculous Notions, de-sired
his Father to press her to go to London.
               
               Sir Charles complied with his Request, and
earnestly intreated her to leave the Castle, and
spend a few Months in Town. Her Year of
Mourning being now expired, she consented to
go; but Sir Charles, who did not think his
Son's Health absolutely confirmed, proposed to
spend a few Weeks at Bath; which was readi-ly
complied with by Arabella.
               
               The End of BOOK VI.
               
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK VII.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  For the Shortness of which the Length
of the next shall make some Amends.
               
               
                  SIR George, to gratify Arabella's
Humour, had not presumed to
come to the Castle for several
Days; but, hearing that they were
preparing to leave the Country,
he wrote a short Billet to her; and in the Style
of Romance, most humbly intreated her to
grant him a Moment's Audience.
               
                  Arabella being informed by Lucy, to whom Sir
George's Gentleman had addressed himself, that
he had brought a Letter from his Master, she

ordered her to bring him to her Apartment, and
as soon as he appeared,
               How comes it, said she, that the Prince your
Master, has had the Presumption to impor-tune
me again, after my absolute Commands to
the contrary?
               The Prince, my Master, Madam, said the
Man, excessively surprised.
               Ay! said Arabella, Are you not Sir George's
'Squire? And does he not trust you with his
most secret Thoughts?
               I belong to Sir George Bellmour, Madam,
replied the Man, who did not understand what
She meant: I have not the Honour to be a
'Squire.
               No! interrupted Arabella; 'tis strange then,
that he should have honoured you with his Com-mission;
Pray, what is it you come to request
for him?
               My Master, Madam, said he, ordered me
to get this Letter delivered to your Ladyship,
and to stay for your Commands.
               You would persuade me, said she, sternly,
being provoked that he did not deliver the
Letter upon his Knees, as was the Custom in
Romances, that you are not acquainted with
the Purport of this audacious Billet, since you
express so little Fear of my Displeasure; but
know, presumptuous, that I am mortally
offended with your Master, for his daring to
suppose I would read this Proof at once of
his Insolence and Infidelity; and was you worth
my Resentment, I would haply make you suffer
for your Want of Respect to me.
               The poor Man, surprised and confounded at

her Anger, and puzzled extremely; to under-stand
what she meant, was opening his Mouth
to say something, 'tis probable in his own De-fence,
when Arabella, preventing him,
               I know what thou wouldst say, said she:
Thou wouldst abuse my Patience by a false
Detail of thy Master's Sighs, Tears, Excla-mations,
and Despair.
               Indeed, Madam, I don't intend to say any
such Thing, replied the Man.
               No! repeated Arabella, a little disap-pointed,
Bear back his presumptuous Billet,
which, I suppose, contains the melancholy Ac-count;
and tell him, He that could so soon
forget the generous Sydimiris for Philonice, and
could afterwards be false to that incomparable
Beauty, is not a Person worthy to adore Arabella.
               
               The Man, who could not tell what to make
of this Message, and feared he should forget
these two hard Names, humbly intreated her
to be pleased to acquaint his Master, by a Line,
with her Intentions. Arabella, supposing he
meant to importune her still more, made a
Sign with her Hand, very majestically, for
him to be gone; but he, not able to compre-hend
her Meaning, stood still, with an Air of
Perplexity, not daring to beg her to explain
herself; supposing, she, by that Sign, required
something of him.
               Why dost thou not obey my Commands?
said Arabella, finding he did not go.
               I will, to be sure, Madam, replied he;
wishing at the same time secretly, she would
let him know what they were.
               And yet, said she hastily, thou art disobey-ing

me this Moment: Did I not bid you get
out of my Presence, and to speak no more
of your inconstant Master, whose Crimes have
rendered him the Detestation of all generous
Persons whatever?
               Sir George's Messenger, extremely surprised
at so harsh a Character of his Master, and the
Rage with which the Lady seemed to be actu-ated,
made haste to get out of her Apartment;
and, at his Return, informed his Master, very
exactly, of the Reception he had met with,
repeating all Lady Bella's Words; which, not-withstanding
the Blunders he made in the Names
of Sydimiris and Philonice, Sir George under-stood
well enough; and found new Occasion of
wondering at the Excess of Arabella's Extrava-gance,
who he never imagined would have ex-plained
herself in that Manner to his Servant.
               Without endeavouring therefore to see Ara-bella,
he went to pay his Compliments to Sir
Charles, Mr. Glanville, and Miss Glanville; to
the last of which he said some soft things, that
them her extremely regret his staying behind
made in the Country.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Not so long as was first intended; but con-tains,
however, a surprising Adventure
on the Road.
               
               THE Day of their Departure being come,
they set out in a Coach and Six, attended
by several Servants on Horseback. The First

Day's Journey passed off, without any Acci-dent
worthy relating; but, towards the Close of
the Second, they were alarmed by the Ap-pearance
of three Highwaymen, well mounted,
at a small Distance.
               One of the Servants, who had first spied
them, immediately rode up to the Coach; and,
for fear of alarming the Ladies, whispered Mr.
Glanville in the Ear.
               Sir Charles, who was sitting next his Son, and
had heard it, cried out with too little Caution,
How's this? Are we in any Danger of being at-tacked,
say you?
               Mr. Glanville, without replying, jumped
out of the Coach; at which Miss Glanville
screamed out; and, lest her Father should fol-low,
whipped into her Brother's Sear, and held
him fast by the Coat.
               
                  Arabella, being in a strange Consternation at
all this, put her Head out of the Coach, to see
what was the Matter; and, observing Three or
Four Men of a genteel Appearance, on Horse-back,
who seemed to halt, and gaze on them▪
without offering to advance;
               Sir, said she to her Uncle, are they yonder
Knights whom you suppose will attack us?
               Ay, ay, said Sir Charles, they are Knights
of the Road indeed: I suppose we shall have a
Bout with them; for it will be scandalous to
deliver, since we have the Odds of our Side,
and are more than a Match for them.
               
                  Arabella, interpreting these Words in her
own Way, looked out again; and, seeing the
Robbers, who had by this time taken their
Resolution, galloping towards them, her Cou-sin

A Lady, said Arabella, extremely angry at
her Cousin's Obstinacy, who will suffer Men
to press her Hand, write to her, and talk to
her of Love, ought to be ashamed of such an
affected Niceness, as that you pretend to.
               I insist upon it, Madam, said Miss Glan-ville,
that all those innocent Liberties you rail
at, may be taken by any Woman, without
giving the World room to censure her: but,
without being very bold and impudent, she
cannot go to see Men in their Beds; a Free-dom
that only becomes a Sister, or near Re-lation.
               So then, replied Arabella, reddening with
Vexation, you will persist in affirming the di-vine
Mandana was impudent?
               If she paid such indiscreet Visits as those, she
was, said Miss Glanville.
               
               Oh Heavens! cried Arabella, have I lived
to hear the most illustrious Princess, that ever
was in the World, so shamefully reflected
on?
               Bless me, Madam! said Miss Glanville, what
Reason have you to defend the Character of
this Princess so much? She will hardly thank
you for your Pains, I fansy.
               Were you acquainted with the Character of
that most generous Princess, said Arabella, you
would be convinced, that she was sensible of
the smallest Benefits; but it is not with a View
of acquiring her Favour, that I defend her
against your inhuman Aspersions, since it is
more than Two thousand Years since she died;
yet common Justice obliges me to vindicate a
Person so illustrious for her Birth and Virtue;

and the Servants ranging themselves of each
Side of the Coach, as if to defend them,
               Hold, hold, valiant Men, said she, as loud
as she could speak, addressing herself to the
Highwaymen; do not, by a mistaken Genero-sity,
hazard your Lives in a Combat, to which
the Laws of Honour do not oblige you: We
are not violently carried away, as you falsly
suppose; we go willingly along with these Per-sons,
who are our Friends and Relations.
               Hey-day! cried Sir Charles, starting at her
with great Surprize; what's the Meaning of all
this? Do you think these Fellows will mind your
fine Speeches, Niece?
               I hope they will, Sir, said she: Then, pulling
her Cousin, shew yourself, for Heaven's Sake,
Miss, pursued she, and second my Assurances,
that we are not forced away: These generous
Men come to fight for our Deliverance.
               The Highwaymen, who were near enough
to hear Arabella's Voice, though they could
not distinguish her Words, gazed on her with
great Surprize; and, finding they would be very
well received, thought fit to abandon their En-terprize,
and galloped away as fast as they were
able. Some of the Servants made a Motion to
pursue them; but Mr. Glanville forbad it; and,
entering again into the Coach, congratulated
the Ladies upon the Escape they had.
               Since these Men, said Arabella, did not come
to deliver us, out of a mistaken Notion, that
we were carried away by Force, it must ne-cessarily
follow, they had some bad Design; and
I protest I know not who to suspect is the Au-thor
of it, unless the Person you vanquished,

said she to Mr. Glanville, the other Day in a
single Combat; for the disguised Edward, you
assured me, was dead: But perhaps, continued
she, it was some Lover of Miss Glanville's,
who designed to make an Attempt to carry her
away: Methinks he was too slenderly attended
for such an hazardous Undertaking.
               I'll assure you Madam, said Miss Glanville,
I have no Lovers among Highwaymen.
               Highwaymen! repeated Arabella.
               
               Why, ay, to be sure, Madam, rejoined Sir
Charles: What do you take them for?
               For Persons of Quality, Sir, resumed Ara-bella;
and though they came questionless, either
upon a good or bad Design, yet it cannot be
doubted, but that their Birth is illustrious;
otherwise they would never pretend either to
fight in our Defence, or to carry us away.
               I vow, Niece, said Sir Charles, I can't possi-bly
understand you.
               My Cousin, Sir, interrupted Mr. Glanville,
has been mistaken in these Persons; and has not
yet, possibly, believed them to be Highwaymen,
who came to rob us.
               There is no Question, Sir, said Arabella,
smiling, that if they did not come to defend
us, they came to rob you: But it is hard to
guess, which of us it was of whom they de-signed
to deprive you; for it may very possibly
be for my Cousin's fake, as well as mine, that
this Enterprize was undertaken.
               Pardon me, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was willing to prevent his Father from an-swering
her Absurdities; these Men had no
other Design, than to rob us of our Money.
               
                  

How! said Arabella: Were these Cavaliers▪
who appeared to be in so handsome a Garb,
that I took them for Persons of prime Quality,
were they Robbers? I have been strangely mis-taken,
it seems: However, I apprehend there is
no Certainty, that your Suspicions are true; and
it may still be as I say, that they either came to
rescue or carry us away.
               Mr. Glanville, to avoid a longer Dispute,
changed the Discourse; having observed with
Confusion, that Sir Charles, and his Sister, seem-ed
to look upon his beloved Cousin as one that
was out of her Senss.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Which concludes with an authentic Piece
of History.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, during the rest of this Jour-ney,
was so wholly taken up in contem-plating
upon the last Adventure, that she mixed
but little in the Conversation. Upon their
drawing near Bath, the Situation of that City
afforded her the Means of making a Com-parison
between the Valley in which it was
placed (with the Amphitheatrical View of the
Hills around it) and the Valley of Tempe.
               
               'Twas in such a Place as this, said she, pur-suing
her Comparison, that the fair Andronice
delivered the valiant Hortensius: And really I
could wish, our Entrance into that City might

be preceded by an Act of equal Humanity
with that of that fair Princess.
               For the Gratification of that Wish, Madam,
sid Mr. Glanville, it is necessary some Person
should meet with a Misfortune, out of which
you might be able to relieve him; but I suppose
the Benevolence of your Disposition may be
equally satisfied with not finding any Occasion,
as of exercising it, when it is found.
               Though it be not my Fortune to meet with
those Occasions, replied Arabella, there is no
Reason to doubt but others do, who possibly
have less Inclination to afford their Assistance
than myself: And it is possible, if any other
than the Princess of Messina had happened to
pass by, when Hortensius was in the Hands of
the Thessalians, he would not have been res-cued
from the ignominious Death he was de-stined
to, merely for killing a Stork.
               How! interrupted Sir Charles, put a Man to
Death for killing a Stork! Ridiculous! Pray, in
what Part of the World did that happen?
Among the Indians of America, I suppose.
               No, Sir, said Arabella, in Thessaly; the fairest
Part in all Macedonia, famous for the beautiful
Valley of Tempe, which excited the Curiosity
of all Travellers whatever.
               No, not all, Madam, returned Sir Charles▪
                  
for I am acquainted with several Travellers,
who never saw it, nor even mentioned it; and
if it is so famous as you say, I am surprised I
never heard of it before.
               I don't know, said Arabélla, what those Tra-vellers
thought worthy of their Notice; but I
am certain, that if any Chance should conduct

me into Macedonia, I would not leave it till I
saw the Valley of Tempe, so celebrated by all
the Poets and Historians.
               Dear Cousin, cried Glanville, who could
hardly forbear smiling, what Chance, in the
Name of Wonder, should take you into Ma-cedonia,
at so great a Distance from your own
Country?
               And so, said Sir Charles, this famous Valley
of Tempe is in Turky. Why you must be
very fond of travelling, indeed, Lady Bella,
if you would go into the Great Mogul's Country,
where the People are all Pagans, they say,
and worship the Devil.
               The Country my Cousin speaks of, said Mr.
Glanville, is in the Grand Signor's Domi-nions:
The Great Mogul, you know, Sir—
               Well, interrupted Sir Charles, the Great
Mogul, or the Grand Signor, I know not
what you call him: But I hope my Niece does
not propose to go thither.
               Not unless I am forcibly carried thither, said
Arabella; but I do determine, if that Misfor-tune
should ever happen to me, that I would,
if possible, visit the Vale of Tempe, which is
in that Part of Greece they call Macedonia.
               
               Then I am persuaded, replied Sir Charles,
you'll never see that famous Valley you talk of;
for it is not very likely you should be forcibly
carried away into Turky.
               
               And why do you think it unlikely, that I
should be carried thither? interrupted Arabella.
Do not the same Things happen now, that
did formerly? And is any thing more common,
then Ladies being carried, by their Ravishers,

into Countries far distant from their own? May
not the same Accidents happen to me, that have
happened to so many illustrious Ladies before
me? And may I not be carried into Macedonia
by a Similitude of Destiny with that of a great
many beautiful Princesses, who, though born in
the most distant Quarters of the World, chanced
to meet at one time in the City of Alexandria,
and related their miraculous Adventures to each
other?
               And it was for that very Purpose they met,
Madam, said Mr. Glanville, smiling.
               Why, truly, said Arabella, it happened very
luckily for each of them, that they were
brought into a Place where they found so many
illustrious Companions in Misfortune, to whom
they might freely communicate their Adven-tures,
which otherwise might, haply, have been
concealed, or, at least, have been imperfectly
delivered down to us: However, added she,
smiling, if I am carried into Macedonia, and
by that means have an Opportunity of visit-ing
the famous Vale of Tempe, I shall take care
not to draw the Resentment of the Thessalians
upon me, by an Indiscretion like that of Hor-tensius.
               
               For be pleased to know, Sir, said she, ad-dressing
herself to her Uncle, that his killing a
Stork, however inconsiderable a Matter it may
appear to us, was yet looked upon as a Crime
of a very atrocious Nature among the Thes-salians;
for they have a Law, which forbids,
upon Pain of Death, the killing of Storks;
the Reason for which is, that Thessaly being sub-ject
to be infested with a prodigious Multitude

of Serpents, which are a delightful Food to
these Sorts of Fowls, they look upon them as
sacred Birds, sent by the Gods to deliver them
from these Serpents and Vipers: And though
Hortensius, being a Stranger, was pardoned
through the Intercession of the Princess Andro-nice,
they made him promise to send another
Stork into Thessaly, to the end that he might
be reputed innocent.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which one of our Heroine's Whims is
justified, by some others full as whim-sical.
               
               THIS Piece of History, with Sir Charles's
Remarks upon it, brought them into
Bath. Their Lodgings being provided before-hand,
the Ladies retired to their different Cham-bers,
to repose themselves after the Fatigue
of their Journey, and did not meet again till
Supper was on Table; when Miss Glan-ville,
who had eagerly enquired what Company
was then in the Place, and heard there were a
great many Persons of Fashion just arrived,
prest Arabella to go to the Pump-Room the
next Morning, assuring her she would find a
very agreeable Amusement.
               
                  Arabella accordingly consented to accompany
her; and, being told the Ladies went in an Un-dress
of a Morning, she accommodated herself
to the Custom, and went in a negligent Dress;
but instead of a Capuchin, she were something

like a Veil, of black Gauze, which covered
almost all her Face, and Part of her Waist, and
gave her a very singular Appearance.
               Miss Glanville was too envious of her Cou-sin's
Superiority in point of Beauty, to inform
her of any Oddity in her Dress, which she
thought might expose her to the Ridicule of
those that saw her; and Mr. Glanville was too
little a Critic in Ladies Apparel, to be sensible
that Arabella was not in the Fashion; and since
every thing she wore became her extremely,
he could not choose but think she drest ad-mirably
well: He handed her therefore, with a
great deal of Satisfaction, into the Pump-Room,
which happened to be greatly crouded
that Morning.
               The Attention of most Part of the Compa-ny
was immediately engaged by the Appear-ance
Lady Bella made. Strangers are here most
strictly criticized, and every new Object affords
a delicious Feast of Raillery and Scandal.
               The Ladies, alarmed at the Singularity of
her Dress, crouded together in Parties; and
the Words, Who can she be? Strange Crea-ture!
Ridiculous! and other Exclamations of
the same Kind, were whispered very intelli-gibly.
               The Men were struck with her Figure,
veiled as she was: Her fine Stature, the beauti-ful
Turn of her Person, the Grace and Ele-gance
of her Motion, attracted all their No-tice:
The Phaenomena of the Veil, however,
gave them great Disturbance. So lovely a Per-son
seemed to promise the Owner had a Face
not unworthy of it; but that was totally hid

from their View: For Arabella, at her En-trance
into the Room, had pulled the Gauze
quite over her Face, following therein the Cus-tom
of the Ladies in Clelia, and the Grand Cy-rus,
who, in mixed Companies, always hid their
Faces with great Care.
               The Wits, and Pretty-Fellows, railed at the
envious Covering, and compared her to the
Sun obscured by a Cloud; while the Beaux
dem'd the horrid Innovation, and expressed a
Fear, lest it should grow into a Fashion.
               Some of the wiser Sort took her for a Fo-reigner;
others, of still more Sagacity, supposed
her a Scots Lady, covered with her Plaid; and
a third Sort, infinitely wiser than either, con-cluded
she was a Spanish Nun, that had escaped
from a Convent, and had not yet quitted her
Veil.
               
                  Arabella, ignorant of the Diversity of Opi-nions,
to which her Appearance gave Rise, was
taken up in discoursing with Mr. Glanville
upon the medicinal Virtue of the Springs, the
Oeconomy of the Baths, the Nature of the
Diversions, and such other Topics, as the
Objects around them furnished her with.
               In the mean time, Miss Glanville was got
amidst a Croud of her Acquaintance, who had
hardly paid the Civilities of a first Meeting, be-fore
they eagerly inquired, who that Lady she
brought with her was.
               Miss Glanville informed them, that she was
her Cousin, and Daughter to the deceased Mar-quis
of—adding with a Sneer, That she had
been brought up in the Country; knew nothing
of the World; and had some very peculiar No-tions,

as you may see, said she, by that odd
kind of Covering she wears.
               Her Name and Quality were presently whis-pered
all over the Room: The Men, hearing
she was a great Heiress, found greater Beauties
to admire in her Person: The Ladies, aw'd
by the Sanction of Quality, dropt their Ridi-cule
on her Dress, and began to quote Exam-ples
of Whims full as inexcusable.
               One remembred, that Lady J—T— al-always
wore her Ruffles reversed; that the
Countess of—went to Court in a Far-thingale;
that the Duchess of—sat astride
upon a Horse; and a certain Lady of great
Fortune, and nearly allied to Quality, because
she was not dignified with a Title, invented a
new one for herself; and directed her Servants
to say in speaking to her, Your Honouress, which
afterwards became a Custom among all her Ac-quaintance;
who mortally offended her, if
they omitted that Instance of Respect.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Containing some historical Anecdotes, the
Truth of which may possibly be doubted,
as they are not to be found in any of the
Historians.
               
               AFTER a short Stay in the Room, Ara-bella
expressing a Desire to return home,
Mr. Glanville conducted her out. Two Gentle-men
of his Acquaintance attending Miss Glan-ville,
                  

and were you not my Cousin, I should express
my Resentment in another Manner, for the
Injury you do her.
               Truly, said Miss Glanville, I am not much
obliged to you Madam, for not downright
quarrelling with me for one that has been in
her Grave Two thousand Years: However,
nothing shall make me change my Opinion,
and I am sure most People will be of my Side
of the Argument.
               That Moment Mr. Glanville sending for
Permission to wait upon Arabella, she ordered
him to be admitted, telling Miss Glanville, she
would acquaint her Brother with the Dispute:
To which she consented.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Which inculcates by a very good Example,
that a Person ought not to be too hasty in
deciding a Question he does not perfectly
understand.
               
               YOU are come very opportunely, Sir, said.
Arabella, when he entered the Room, to
be Judge of a great Controversy between Miss
Glanville and myself. I beseech you therefore,
let us have your Opinion upon the Matter.
               Miss Glanville maintains, that it is less cri-minal
in a Lady to hear Persons talk to her of
Love, allow them to kiss her Hand, and permit
them to write to her, than to make a charitable
Visit to a Man who is confined to his Bed

Sir, Charles detained them to Breakfast;
by which means they had an Opportunity of
satisfying their Curiosity; and beheld Arabella,
divested of that Veil, which had, as they said;
and 'tis probable they said no more than they
thought, concealed one of the finest Faces in
the World.
               Miss Glanville had the Mortification to see
both the Gentlemen so charmed with the Sight
of her Cousin's Face, that for a long time she
sat wholly neglected; but the Seriousness of her
Behaviour, giving some little Disgust to the
youngest of them, who was what the Ladies
call a Pretty-Fellow, a dear Creature, and the
most diverting Man in the World; he applied
himself wholly to Miss Glanville, and soon en-gaged
her in a particular Conversation.
               Mr. Selvin, so was the other Gentleman
called, was of a much graver Cast: He affected
to be thought deep-read in History, and never
failed to take all Opportunities of displaying
his Knowlege of Antiquity, which was indeed
but very superficial; but having some few Anec-dotes
by Heart, which he would take Occa-tion
to introduce as often as he could, he passed
among many Persons for one, who, by Appli-cation
and Study, had acquired an universal
Knowlege of antient History.
               Speaking of any particular Circumstance, he
would fix the Time, by computing the Year
with the Number of the Olympiads.
               It happened, he would say, in the 141st
Olympiad.
               Such an amazing Exactness, had a suitable

Effect on his Audience, and always procured
him a great Degree of Attention.
               This Gentleman hitherto had no Opportu-nity
of displaying his Knowledge of History,
the Discourse having wholly turned upon News,
and other Trifles; when Arabella, after some
more Inquiries concerning the Place, remark-ed,
that there was a very great Difference be-tween
the medicinal Waters at Bath, and the
fine Springs at the Foot of the Mountain Ther-mopylae
in Greece, as well in their Qualities, as
manner of using them; and I am of Opinion,
added she, that Bath, famous as it is for re-storing
Health, is less frequented by infirm
Persons, than the famous Springs of Thermopylae
were by the Beauties of Greece, to whom those
Waters have the Reputation of giving new
Lustre.
               Mr. Selvin, who, with all his Reading, had
never met with any Account of these celebrated
Grecian Springs, was extremely disconcerted at
not being able to continue a Conversation,
which the Silence of the rest of the Company
made him imagine, was directed wholly to
him.
               The Shame he conceived at seeing himself
posed by a Girl, in a Matter which so imme-diately
belonged to him, made him resolve to
draw himself out of this Dilemma at any Rate;
aud, though he was far from being convinced,
that there were no such Springs at Thermopylae as
Arabella mentioned; yet he resolutely main-tained,
that she must be mistaken in their Situa-tion;
for, to his certain Knowlege, there were

no medicinal Waters at the Foot of that Moun-tain.
               
                  Arabella, who could not endure to be con-tradicted
in what she took to be so incontest-able
a Fact, reddened with Vexation at his un-expected
Denial.
               It should seem, said she, by your Discourse,
that you are unacquainted with many material
Passages, that passed among very illustrious
Persons there; and if you knew any thing of
Pisistratus the Athenian, you would know, that
an Adventure he had at those Baths, laid the
Foundation of all those great Designs, which he
afterwards effected, to the total Subversion of
the Athenian Government.
               Mr. Selvin, surprised that this Piece of Hi-story
had likewise escaped his Observation, re-solved,
however, not to give up his Point.
               I think, Madam, replied he, with great
Self-sufficiency, that I am pretty well acquaint-ed
with every thing which relates to the Af-fairs
of the Athenian Commonwealth; and know
by what Steps Pisistratus advanced himself to
the Sovereignty. It was a great Stroke of Po-licy
in him, said he, turning to Mr. Glanville,
indeed, to wound himself, in order to get a
Guard assigned him.
               You are mistaken, Sir, said Arabella, if you
believe, there was any Truth in the Report of
his having wounded himself: It was done, either
by his Rival Lycurgus or Theocrites; who be-lieving
him still to be in Love with the fair
Cerinthe, whom he courted, took that Way to
get rid of him: Neither is it true, that Am-bition
alone inspired Pisistratus with a Design of

enslaving his Country: Those Authors who say
so, must know little of the Springs and Motives
of his Conduct. It was neither Ambition nor
Revenge, that made him act as he did; it was
the violent Affection he conceived for the beau-tiful
Chorante, whom he first saw at the famous
Baths of Thermopylae, which put him upon those
Designs; for, seeing that Lycurgus, who was
not his Rival in Ambition, but Love, would
certainly become the Possessor of Chorante, un-less
he made himself Tyrant of Athens, he had
recourse to that violent Method, in order to
preserve her for himself.
               I protest, Madam, said Mr. Selvin, casting
down his Eyes in great Confusion at her su-perior
Knowlege in History, these Particu-lars
have all escaped my Notice; and this is the
first time I ever understood, that Pisistratus was
violently in Love; and that it was not Ambi-tion,
which made him aspire to Sovereignty.
               I do not remember any Mention of this in
Plutarch, continued he, rubbing his Forehead,
or any of the Authors who have treated on the
Affairs of Greece.
               
               Very likely, Sir, replied Arabella; but you
will see the whole Story of Pisistratus's Love
for Chorante, with the Effects it produced, re-lated
at large in Scudery.
               
               
                  Scudery, Madam! said the sage Mr. Selvin,
I never read that Historian.
               No, Sir! replied Arabella, then your Read-ing
has been very confined.
               I know, Madam, said he, that Herodotus,
Thucydides, and Plutarch, have indeed quoted
him frequently.
               
                  

I am surprised, Sir, said Mr. Glanville, who
was excessively diverted at this Discovery of
his great Ignorance and Affectation, that you
have not read that famous Historian; especially,
as the Writers you have mentioned quote him
so often.
               Why, to tell you the Truth, Sir, said he;
though he was a Roman; yet it is objected to
him, that he wrote but indifferent Latin; with
no Purity or Elegance; and—
               You are quite mistaken, Sir, interrupted
Arabella; the great Scudery was a Frenchman;
and both his Clelia and Artamenes were written
in French.
               
               A Frenchman was he? said Mr. Selvin, with
a lofty Air: Oh! then, 'tis not surprising,
that I have not read him: I read no Authors,
but the Antients, Madam, added he, with a
Look of Self-applause; I cannot relish the Mo-derns
at all: I have no Taste for their Way of
Writing.
               But Scudery must needs be more ancient
than Thucydides, and the rest of those Greek
Historians you mentioned, said Mr. Glanville:
How else could they quote him?
               Mr. Selvin was here so utterly at a Loss, that
he could not conceal his Confusion: He held
down his Head, and continued silent; while the
Beau, who had listened to the latter Part of their
Discourse; exerted his supposed Talent of
Raillery against the unhappy Admirer of the
antient Authors; and increased his Confusion
by a thousand Sarcasms, which gave more Di-version
to himself, than any body else.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Which contains some excellent Rules for
Raillery.
               
               MR. Glanville, who had too much Polite-ness
and Good nature to insist too long
upon the Ridicule in the Character of his Ac-quaintance,
changed the Discourse: And Ara-bella,
who had observed, with some Concern,
the ill-judged Raillery of the young Beau, took
Occasion to decry that Species of Wit; and
gave it as her Opinion, that it was very dan-gerous
and unpleasing.
               For, truly, said she, it is almost impossible
to use it without being hated or feared: and
whoever gets a Habit of it, is in Danger of
wronging all the Laws of Friendship and Hu-manity.
               Certainly, pursued she, looking at the Beau,
it is extremely unjust to railly one's Friends, and
particular Acquaintance: First, choose them well,
and be as nice as you please in the Choice; but
when you have chosen them, by no means play
upon them: 'Tis cruel and malicious, to di-vert
one's self at the Expence of one's Friend.
               However, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was charmed to hear her talk so rationally, you
may give People Leave to railly their Ene-mies.
               Truly, resumed Arabella, I cannot allow
that, any more than upon Friends; for Raillery
is the poorest kind of Revenge that can be taken:

Methinks, it is mean to railly Persons who
have a small Share of Merit; since, haply, their
Defects were born with them, and not of their
own acquiring; and it is great Injustice to des-cant
upon one slight Fault in Men of Parts, to
the Prejudice of a thousand good Qualities.
               For aught I see, Madam, said the Beau, you
will not allow one to railly any body.
               I am of Opinion, Sir, said Arabella, that
there are very few proper Objects for Raillery;
and still fewer, who can railly well: The Ta-lent
of Raillery ought to be born with a Per-son;
no Art can infuse it; and those who en-deavour
to railly in spite of Nature, will be so
far from diverting others, that they will become
the Objects of Ridicule themselves.
               Many other pleasing Qualities of Wit may
be acquired by Pains and Study, but Raillery
must be the Gift of Nature: It is not enough
to have many lively and agreeable Thoughts;
but there must be such an Expression, as must
convey their full Force and Meaning; the
Air the Aspect, the Tone of the Voice, and
every Part in general, must contribute to its
Perfection.
               There ought also to be a great Distance be-tween
Raillery and Satire, so that one may ne-ver
be mistaken for the other: Raillery ought
indeed to surprise, and sensibly touch, those to
whom it is directed; but I would not have the
Wounds it makes, either deep or lasting: Let
those who feel it, be hurt like Persons, who,
gathering Roses, are pricked by the Thorns,
and find a sweet Smoll to make amends.
               
                  

I would have Raillery raise the Fancy, and
quicken the Imagination, the Fire of its Wit
should only enable us to trace its Original,
and shine as the Stars do, but not burn.
Yet, after all, I cannot greatly approve of
Raillery, or cease to think it dangerous; and,
to pursue my Comparison, said she, with an
inchanting Smile, Persons who possess the
true Talent of Raillery, are like Comets; they
are seldom seen, and are at once admir'd and
fear'd.
               I protest, Lady Bella, said Sir Charles, who
had listen'd to her with many Signs of Admi-ration,
you speak like an Orator.
               One would not imagine, interrupted Mr.
Glanville, who saw Arabella in some Confusion
at the coarse Praise her Uncle gave her, that
my Cousin could speak so accurately of a Qua-lity
she never practises: And 'tis easy to judge
by what she has said, that no body can railly
finer than herself, if she pleases.
               Mr. Selvin, tho' he bore her a Grudge for
knowing more History than he did, yet assur'd
her, that she had given the best Rules imagin-able
for raillying well. But the Beau, whom
she had silenc'd by her Reproof, was extremely
angry; and, supposing it would mortify her to
see him pay Court to her Cousin, he redoubled
his Assiduities to Miss Glanville, who was highly
delighted at seeing Arabella less taken Notice of
by this gay Gentleman, than herself.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which the Author condescends to be very
minute in the Description of our Heroin's
Dress.
               
               THE Indifference of Mr. Tinsel, convin-cing
Miss Glanville, that Arabella was
less to be dreaded than she imagin'd, she had no
Reluctance at seeing her prepare for her publick
Appearance the next Ball Night.
               Having consulted her Fancy in a rich Silver
Stuff, she had bought for that Purpose, a Person
was sent for to make it; and Arabella, who
follow'd no Fashion but her own Taste, which
was form'd on the Manners of the Heroines,
order'd the Woman to make her a Robe after
the same Model as the Princess Julia's.
               The Mantua-maker, who thought it might
do her great Prejudice with her new Customer,
to acknowledge she knew nothing of the Prin-cess
Julia, or the Fashion of her Gown, replied
at Random, and with great Pertness,
               That, that Taste was quite out; and, she
would advise her Ladyship to have her Cloaths
made in the present Mode, which was far more
becoming.
               You can never persuade me, said Arabella,
that any Fashion can be more becoming than
that of the Princess Julia's, who was the most
gallant Princess upon Earth, and knew better
than any other, how to set off her Charms.
It may indeed be a little obselete now, pursued

she, for the Fashion could not but alter a little
in the Compass of near two thousand Years.
               Two thousand Years! Madam, said the Wo-man,
in a great Surprize; Lord help us Trades-people,
if they did not alter a thousand Times
in as many Days! I thought your Ladyship
was speaking of the last Month's Taste; which,
as I said before, is quite out now.
               Well, replied Arabella, let the present Mode
be what it will, I insist upon having my Cloaths
made after the Pattern of the beautiful Daugh-ter
of Augustus; being convinced, that none
other can be half so becoming.
               What Fashion was that, pray, Madam, said
the Woman? I never saw it.
               How, replied Arabella, Have you already for-got
the Fashion of the Princess Julia's Robe,
which you said was wore but last Month? Or,
are you ignorant that the Princess Julia, and
the Daughter of Augustus, is the same Person?
               I protest, Madam, said the Woman, ex-tremely
confus'd, I had forgot that, till you
called it to my Mind.
               Well, said Arabella, make me a Robe in the
same Taste.
               The Mantua-maker was now wholly at a
Loss in what Manner to behave; for, being
conscious that she knew nothing of the Princess
Julia's Fashion, she could not undertake to
make it without Directions; and she was afraid
of discovering her Ignorance by asking for any;
so that her Silence and Embarrassment persua-ding
Arabella she knew nothing of the Matter,
she dismist her with a small Present, for the
Trouble she had given her, and had Recourse

through the Violence of his Passion and De-spair;
the Intent of this Visit being only to pre-vent
the Death of an unfortunate Lover, and,
if necessary, to lay her Commands upon him
to live.
               And this latter is your Opinion, is it not
Madam? said Mr. Glanville.
               
               Certainly, Sir, replied Arabella, and in this I
am justified by all the Heroines of Antiquity.
               Then you must be in the Right, Madam, re-turned
Mr. Glanville, both because your own
Judgment tells you so, and also the Example
of these Heroines you mention.
               Well, Madam, interrupted Miss Glanville
hastily, since my Brother has given Sentence on
your Side, I hope you will not delay your Visit
to Sir George any longer.
               How! said Mr. Glanville, surprised, is Lady
Bella going to visit Sir George? Pray, Madam,
may I presume to-inquire the Reason for your
doing him this extraordinary Favour?
               You are not very wise, said Arabella, looking
gravely upon Miss Glanville, to discover a
Thing, which may haply create a Quarrel be-tween
your Brother, and the unfortunate Per-son
you speak of: Yet since this Indiscretion
cannot be recalled, we must endeavour to pre-vent
the Consequences of it.
               I assure you, Madam, interrupted Mr. Glan-ville,
extremely impatient to know the Mean-ing
of these Hints, you have nothing to fear
from me: Therefore you need not think your-self
under any Necessity of concealing this Affair
from me.
               
                  

to her usual Expedient, which was, to make
one of her Women, who understood a little of
the Mantua-making Business, make a Robe for
her, after her own Directions.
               Miss Glanville, who imagin'd she had sent
for Work-women, in order to have Cloaths
made in the modern Taste, was surpriz'd at her
Entrance into her Chamber, to see her dressing
for the Ball, in a Habit singular to the last
Degree.
               She wore no Hoop, and the Blue and Silver
Stuff of her Robe, was only kept by its own
Richness, from hanging close about her. It
was quite open round her Breast, which was
shaded with a rich Border of Lace; and clasp-ing
close to her Waist, by small Knots of Dia-monds,
descended in a sweeping Train on the
Ground.
               The Sleeves were short, wide, and slash'd,
fastned in different Places with Diamonds, and
her Arms were partly hid by half a Dozen Falls
of Ruffles. Her Hair, which fell in very easy
Ringlets on her Neck, was plac'd with great
Care and Exactness round her lovely Face; and
the Jewels and Ribbons, which were all her
Head-dress, dispos'd to the greatest Advantage.
               Upon the whole, nothing could be more sin-gularly
becoming than her Dress; or set off
with greater Advantage the striking Beauties of
her Person.
               Miss Glanville, tho' she was not displeas'd to
see her persist in her Singularity of Dress; yet
could not behold her look so lovely in it, with-out
feeling a secret Uneasiness; but consoling
herself with the Hopes of the Ridicule she

would occasion, she assum'd a chearful Air,
approv'd her Taste in the Choice of her Co-lours,
and went with her at the usual Hour,
to the Rooms, attended by Mr. Glanville,
Mr. Selvin, and the young Beau we have for-merly
mention'd.
               The Surprize Arabella's unusual Appearance
gave to the whole Company, was very visible
to every one but herself.
               The Moment she enter'd the Room, every
one whisper'd the Person next to them; and for
some Moments, nothing was heard but the
Words, the Princess Julia; which was eccho'd
at every Corner, and at last attracted her Ob-servation.
               Mr. Glanville, and the rest of the Company
with her, were in some Confusion at the uni-versal
Exclamation, which they imagin'd was
occasion'd by the Singularity of her Habit;
tho' they could not conceive, why they gave
her that Title. Had they known the Adven-ture
of the Mantua-maker, it would doubtless
have easily occurr'd to them; for the Woman
had no sooner left Arabella, than she related
the Conference she had with a Lady newly ar-riv'd,
who had requir'd her to make a Robe in
the Manner of the Princess Julia's; and dis-miss'd
her, because she did not understand the
Fashions that prevail'd two thousand Years ago.
               This Story was quickly dispers'd, and for its
Novelty, afforded a great deal of Diversion;
every one long'd to see a Fashion of such An-tiquity;
and expected the Appearance of the
Princess Julia with great Impatience.
               
                  

It is not to be doubted but much Mirth was
treasur'd up for her Appearance; and the occa-sional
Humourist had already prepared his ac-custom'd
Jest, when the Sight of the devoted
fair One repell'd his Vivacity, and the design'd
Ridicule of the whole Assembly.
               Scarce had the first tumultous Whisper escap'd
the Lips of each Individual, when they found
themselves aw'd to Respect by that irresistable
Charm in the Person of Arabella, which com-manded
Reverence and Love from all who be-held
her.
               Her noble Air, the native Dignity in her
Looks, the inexpressible Grace which accom-pany'd
all her Motions, and the consummate
Loveliness of her Form, drew the Admiration
of the whole Assembly.
               A respectful Silence succeeded, and the Asto-nishment
her Beauty occasion'd, left them no
Room to descant on the Absurdity of her Dress.
               Miss Glanville, who felt a malicious Joy at
the Sneers she expected would be cast on her
Cousin, was greatly disappointed at the Defer-ence
which seem'd to be paid her; and to vent
some Part of her Spleen, took occasion to men-tion
her Surprize, at the Behaviour of the
Company on their Entrance; wondering what
they could mean by whispering the Princess
Julia to one another.
               I assure you, said Arabella, smiling, I am not
less surpriz'd than you at it; and since they di-rected
their Looks to me at the same Time, I
fancy they either took me for some Princess of
the Name of Julia, who is expected here to-Night,

or else flatter me with some Resem-blance
to the beautiful Daughter of Augustus.
               
               The Comparison, Madam, said Mr. Selvin,
who took all Occasions to shew his Reading, is
too injurious to you, for I am of Opinion you
as much excel that licentious Lady in the Beau-ties
of your Person, as you do in the Qualities
of your Mind.
               I never heard Licentiousness imputed to the
Daughter of Augustus Caesar, said Arabella;
and the most her Enemies can say of her, is,
that she loved Admiration, and would permit
herself to be beloved, and to be told so, with-out
shewing any Signs of Displeasure.
               Bless me, Madam, interrupted Mr. Selvin,
how strangely do you mistake the Character of
Julia: Tho' the Daughter of an Emperor,
she was, pardon the Expression, the most aban-don'd
Prostitute in Rome; many of her Intrigues
are recorded in History; but to mention only
one, Was not her infamous Commerce with
Ovid, the Cause of his Banishment?
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Some Reflexions very fit, and others very
unfit for an Assembly-Room.
               
               YOU speak in strange Terms, replied Ara-bella,
blushing, of a Princess, who if she
was not the most reserv'd and severe Person in
the World, was yet nevertheless, absolutely
chaste.
               
                  

I know there were People who represented
her Partiality for Ovid in a very unfavourable
Light; but that ingenious Poet, when he re-lated
his History to the great Agrippa, told him
in Confidence all that had pass'd between him
and the Princess Julia, than which nothing
could be more innocent tho' a little indiscreet.
For, 'tis certain that she permitted him to love
her, and did not condemn him to any rigorous
Punishment for daring to tell her so; yet, for
all this, as I said before, tho' she was not alto-gether
so austere as she ought to have been, yet
she was nevertheless a most virtuous Princess.
               Mr. Selvin, not daring to contradict a Lady
whose extensive Reading had furnish'd her with
Anecdotes unknown almost to any Body else,
by his Silence confess'd her Superiority. But
Mr. Glanville, who knew all these Anecdotes
were drawn from Romances, which he found
contradicted the known Facts in History, and
assign'd the most ridiculous Causes for Things
of the greatest Importance; could not help
smiling at the Facility with which Mr. Selvin
gave into those idle Absurdities. For notwith-standing
his Affectation of great Reading, his
superficial Knowledge of History made it ex-tremely
easy to deceive him; and as it was his
Custom to mark in his Pocket-Book all the
Scraps of History he heard introduced into Con-versation,
and retail them again in other Com-pany;
he did not doubt but he would make a
Figure with the curious Circumstances Arabella
had furnish'd him with.
               
                  Arabella observing Mr. Tinsel by his familiar
Bows, significant Smiles, and easy Salutations,

was acquainted with the greatest Part of the
Assembly, told him, that she did not doubt but
he knew the Adventures of many Persons whom
they were viewing; and that he would do her
a Pleasure, if he would relate some of them.
               Mr. Tinsel was charm'd with a Request which
afforded him an Opportunity of gratifying a fa-vourite
Inclination, and seating himself near
her immediately, was beginning to obey her
Injunctions, when she gracefully intreated him
to stay a Moment; and calling to Mr. Glanville
and his Sister, who were talking to Mr. Selvin,
ask'd them if they chose to partake of a more
rational Amusement than Dancing, and listen
to the Adventures of some illustrious Persons,
which Mr. Tinsel had promis'd to relate.
               I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanville,
smiling, you will find that a less innocent
Amusement than Dancing.
               Why so, Sir, replied Arabella, since it is not
an indiscreet Curiosity which prompts me to a
Desire of hearing the Histories Mr. Tinsel has
promis'd to entertain me with; but rather a
Hope of hearing something which may at once
improve and delight me; something which
may excite my Admiration, engage my Esteem,
or influence my Practice.
               'Twas doubtless, with such Motives as these,
that we find Princesses and Ladies of the most
illustrious Rank, in Clelia and the Grand Cyrus,
listning to the Adventures of Persons, in whom
they were probably as little interested, as we
are in these around us. Kings, Princes, and
Commanders of Armies, thought it was no
Waste of their Time, in the midst of the

Hurry and Clamour of a Camp, to listen many
Hours to the Relation of one single History,
and not fill'd with any extraordinary Events;
but haply a simple Recital of common Occur-rences:
The great Cyrus, while he was busy
in reducing all Asia to his Yoke, heard never-theless,
the Histories of all the considerable Per-sons
in the Camp, besides those of Strangers,
and even his Enemies. If there was therefore
any thing either criminal or mean, in hearing
the Adventures of others, do you imagine so
many great and illustrious Persons would have
given in to such an Amusement?
               After this Arabella turn'd gravely about to
Mr. Tinsel, and told him, he was at Liberty to
begin his Recital.
               The Beau, a little disconcerted by the So-lemnity
with which she requested his Informa-tion,
knew not how to begin with the Forma-lity
that he saw was required of him; and
therefore fat silent for a few Moments; which
Arabella suppos'd was to recall to his Memory
all the Passages he propos'd to relate.
               His Perplexity would probably have increas'd
instead of lessening by the profound Silence
which she observed, had not Miss Glanville
seated herself with a sprightly Air on the other
Side of him, and directing his Eyes to a tall
handsome Woman that had just enter'd, ask'd
him pleasantly, to tell her History if he knew it.
               Mr. Tinsel, brought into his usual Track by
this Question, answer'd smiling, That the Hi-story
of that Lady was yet a Secret, or known
but to very few; but my Intelligence, added

he, is generally the 
                     
                  , and may always
be depended on.
               Perhaps, said 
                     
                   the Lady is one of your
Acquaintances, 
                     
                   you with the Re-cital
of her 
                     
                   from her own Mouth.
               No, really, Madam, answer'd Mr. Tinsel,
surpriz'd at the great Simplicity of Arabella,
for so he understood it; the Lady, I believe, is
not so communicative: And to say the Truth,
I should not chuse to hear her Adventures from
herself, since she certainly would suppress the
most material Circumstances.
               In a Word, said he, lowering his Voice,
That Lady was for many Years the Mistress of
a young military Nobleman, whom she was so
complaisant to follow in all his Campaigns,
Marches, Sieges, and every Inconveniency of
War: He married her in Gibraltar, from
whence he is lately arriv'd, and introduc'd his
new Lady to his noble Brother, by whom she
was not unfavourably receiv'd. 'Tis worth
remarking, that this same haughty Peer thought
sit to resent with implacable Obstinacy, the
Marriage of another of his Brothers, with the
Widow of a brave Officer, of considerable
Rank in the Army. 'Tis true, she was several
Years older than the young Lord, and had no
Fortune; but the Duke assign'd other Reasons
for his Displeasure: He complain'd loudly, that
his Brother had dishonour'd the Nobility of his
Birth, by this Alliance, and continued his Re-sentment
till the Death of the young Hero, who
gave many remarkable Proofs of his Courage
and Fortitude upon several Occasions, and died
gloriously before the Walls of Carthagena;
                  

leaving his disconsolate Lady a Widow a se-cond
Time, with the Acquisition of a Title
indeed, but a very small Addition to her For-tune.
               Observe that gay, splendid Lady, I beseech
you, Madam, pursued he, turning to Arabella;
how affectedly she looks and talks, and throws
her Eyes around the Room, with a haughty
Self-sufficiency in her Aspect, and insolent Con-tempt
for every Thing but herself. Her Ha-bit,
her Speech, her Motions, are all French;
nothing in England is able to please her; the
People so dull, so aukwardly polite, the Man-ners
so gross; no Delicacy, no Elegance, no
Magnificence in their Persons, Houses, or Di-versions;
every Thing is so distasteful, there
is no living in such a Place. One may crawl
about, indeed, she says, and make a shift to
breathe in the odious Country, but one cannot
be said to live; and with all the Requisites to
render Life delightful, here, one can only suffer,
not enjoy it.
               Would one not imagine, pursued he, this
fine Lady was a Person of very exalted Rank,
who has the Sanction of Birth, Riches, and
Grandeur for her extraordinary Pride; and yet
she is no other than the Daughter of an Inn-Keeper
at Spa, and had the exalted Post assign'd
her of attending new Lodgers to their Apart-ments,
acquainting them with all the Conve-niences
of the Place, answering an humble
Question or two concerning what Company
was in the Town, what Scandal was stirring,
and the like.
               
                  

One of our great Sea Commanders going
thither for his Health, happen'd to lodge at this
Inn; and was so struck with her Charms, that
he marry'd her in a few Weeks, and soon after
brought her to England.
               
               Such was the Origin of this fantastick Lady;
whose insupportable Pride and ridiculous Af-fectation,
draws Contempt and Aversion where-she
appears.
               Did I not tell you, Madam, interrupted
Mr. Glanville, that the Amusement you had
chose was not so innocent as Dancing? What a
deal of Scandal has Mr. Tinsel utter'd in the
Compass of a few Minutes?
               I assure you, replied Arabella, I know not
what to make of the Histories he has been re-lating.
I think they do not deserve that Name,
and are rather detatched Pieces of Satire on
particular Persons, than a serious Relation of
Facts. I confess my Expectations from this
Gentleman have not been answer'd.
               I think, however, Madam, said Mr. Glan-ville,
we may allow that there is a negative
Merit in the Relations Mr. Tinsel has made;
for, if he has not shewn us any Thing to ap-prove,
he has at least shewn us what to condemn.
               The Ugliness of Vice, reply'd Arabella,
ought only to be represented to the Vicious;
to whom Satire, like a magnifying Glass, may
aggravate every Defect, in order to make its
Deformity appear more hideous; but since its
End is only to reprove and amend, it should
never be address'd to any but those who come
within its Correction, and may be the better
for it: A virtuous Mind need not be shewn

You are not, haply, so moderate as you pre-tend,
said Arabella, (who would not have been
displeased to have seen him in all the jealous
Transports of an enraged Orontes); but what-ever
ensues, I can no longer keep from your
Knowledge, a Truth your Sister has begun to
discover; but, in telling you what you desire to
know, I expect you will suppress all Inclina-tions
to Revenge, and trust the Care of your In-terest
to my Generosity.
               You are to know then, that in the Person of
your Friend Sir George, you have a Rival,
haply the more to be feared, as his Passion is
no less respectful than violent: I possibly tell
you more than I ought, pursued she, blushing,
and casting down her Eyes, when I confess,
that for certain Considerations, wherein perhaps
you are concerned, I have received the first In-sinuation
of this Passion with Disdain enough;
and I assure myself, that you are too generous
to desire any Revenge upon a miserable Rival,
of whom Death is going to free you.
               Then, taking Sir George's Letter out of her
Cabinet, she presented it to Mr. Glanville.
               
               Read this, added she; but read it without
suffering yourself to be transported with any
violent Motions of Anger: And as in Fight, I
am persuaded you would not oppress a fallen
and vanquished Foe; so in Love, I may hope,
an unfortunate Rival will merit your Com-passion.
               Never doubt it, Madam, replied Mr. Glan-ville,
receiving the Letter, which Miss Glanville,
with a beating Heart, earnestly desired to hear
read. Her Brother, after asking Permission of

the Deformity of Vice, to make it be hated and
avoided; the more pure and uncorrupted our
Ideas are, the less shall we be insluenc'd by Ex-ample.
A natural Propensity to Virtue or
Vice often determines the Choice: 'Tis suffi-cient
therefore to shew a good Mind what it
ought to pursue, though a bad one must be told
what to avoid. In a Word, one ought to be
always incited, the other always restrain'd.
               I vow, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville,
you'd make one think one came here to hear a
Sermon; you are so very grave, and talk upon
such high-flown Subjects. What Harm was
there in what Mr. Tinsel was telling us? It
would be hard indeed, if one might not divert
one's self with other Peoples Faults.
               I am afraid, Miss, said Arabella, those who
can divert themselves with the Faults of others,
are not behind hand in affording Diversion.
And that very Inclination, added she, smilingly,
to hear other Peoples Faults, may by those very
People, be condemned as one, and afford them
the same Kind of ill-natur'd Pleasure you are
so desirous of.
               Nay, Madam, return'd Miss Glanville, your
Ladyship was the first who introduc'd the Dis-course
you condemn so much. Did not you
desire Mr. Tinsel to tell you Histories about the
Company; and ask my brother and me, to
come and hear them?
               'Tis true, reply'd Arabella, that I did desire
you to partake with me of a pleasing and
rational Amusement, for such I imagin'd
Mr. Tinsel's Histories might afford; far from a
Detail of Vices, Follies, and Irregularities, I

expected to have heard the Adventures of some
illustrious Personages related; between whose
Actions, and those of the Heroes and Heroines
of Antiquity, I might have found some Re-semblance.
               For Instance, I hop'd to have heard imitated
the sublime Courage of a Clelia, who, to save
her Honour from the Attempts of the impious
Tarquin, leap'd into the River Tyber, and swam
to the other Side; or the noble Resolution of
the incomparable Candace, who, to escape out
of the Hands of her Ravisher, the Pirate Ze-nadorus,
set Fire to his Vessel with her own
Hands, and committed herself to the Mercy of
the Waves: Or, the Constancy and Affection
of a Mandana, who, for the Sake of a Cyrus,
refused the richest Crowns in the World, and
braved the Terrors of Death to preserve herself
for him.
               As for the Men, I hoped to have heard of
some who might have almost equall'd the great
Oroondates, the invincible Artaban, the valiant
Juba, the renowned Alcamenes, and many
thousand Heroes of Antiquity; whose glorious
Exploits in War, aud unsaken Constancy in
Love, have given them an immortal Fame.
               While Arabella was uttering this long Speech,
with great Emotion, Miss Glanville, with a sly
Look at the Beau, gave him to understand,
that was her Cousin's Foible.
               Mr. Tinsel, however, not able to compre-hend
the Meaning of what she said, listen'd to
her with many Signs of Perplexity and Wonder.
               Mr. Selvin in secret repin'd at her prodigious
Knowledge of History; and Mr. Glanville,
                  

with his Eyes fix'd on the Ground, bit his Lips
almost through with Madness.
               In the mean Time, several among the Com-pany,
desirous of hearing what the strange
Lady was saying so loud, and with so much
Eagerness and Emotion, gather'd round them;
which Mr. Glanville observing, and fearing
Arabella would expose herself still farther, whis-per'd
his Sister to get her away if possible.
               Miss Glanville, tho' very unwilling, obey'd
his Injunctions; and complaining of a sudden
Head-ach, Arabella immediately propos'd re-tiring,
which was joyfully complied with by
Mr. Glanville, who with the other Gentlemen
attended them home.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Being a Chapter of the Satyrical Kind.
               
               AT their Return, Sir Charles told his Niece,
That she had now had a Specimen of the
World, and some of the fashionable Amuse-ments;
and ask'd her, how she had been en-tertain'd.
               Why, truly, Sir, replied she, smiling, I
have brought away no great Relish for a Re-newal
of the Amusement I have partaken of
To-night. If the World, in which you seem
to think I am but new initiated, affords only
these Kinds of Pleasures, I shall very soon regret
the Solitude and Books I have quitted.
               
                  

Why pray, said Miss Glanville? What Kind
of Amusements did your Ladyship expect to
find in the World? And what was there dis-agreeable
in your Entertainment to Night? I
am sure there is no Place in England, except
London, where there is so much good Company
to be met with, as here. The Assembly was
very numerous and brillant, and one can be at
no Loss for Amusements: The Pump-Room in
the Morning, the Parade, and the Rooms, in
the Evening, with little occasional Parties of
Pleasure, will find one sufficient Employment,
and leave none of one's Time to lye useless up-on
one's Hand.
               I am of Opinion, replied Arabella, that
one's Time is far from being well employ'd in
the Manner you portion it out: And People
who spend theirs in such trifling Amusements,
must certainly live to very little Purpose.
               What room, I pray you, does a Lady give
for high and noble Adventures, who consumes
her Days in Dressing, Dancing, listening to
Songs, and ranging the Walks with People as
thoughtless as herself? How mean and con-temptible
a Figure must a Life spent in such idle
Amusements make in History? Or rather, Are
not such Persons always buried in Oblivion,
and can any Pen be found who would conde-scend
to record such inconsiderable Actions?
               Nor can I persuade myself, added she, that
any of those Men whom I saw at the Assembly,
with Figures so feminine, Voices so soft, such
tripping Steps, and unmeaning Gestures, have
ever signalized either their Courage or Con-stancy;

but might be overcome by their Enemy
in Battle, or be false to their Mistress in Love.
               Law! Cousin, reply'd Miss Glanville, you
are always talking of Battles and Fighting. Do
you expect that Persons of Quality, and fine
Gentlemen, will go to the Wars? What Bu-siness
have they to fight? That belongs to the
Officers.
               Then every fine Gentleman is an Officer,
said Arabella; and some other Title ought to
be found out for Men who do nothing but
Dance and Dress.
               I could never have imagined, interrupted
Mr. Tinsel, surveying Arabella, that a Lady so
elegant and gay in her own Appearance, should
have an Aversion to Pleasure and Magnificence.
               I assure you, Sir, replied Arabella, I have
an Aversion to neither: On the contrary, I
am a great Admirer of both. But my Ideas
of Amusements and Grandeur are probably
different from yours.
               I will allow the Ladies to be sollicitous about
their Habits, and dress with all the Care and
Elegance they are capable of; but such Trifles
are below the Consideration of a Man, who
ought not to owe the Dignity of his Appear-ance
to the Embroidery on his Coat, but to
his high and noble Air, the Grandeur of his
Courage, the Elevation of his Sentiments, and
the many heroick Actions he has perform'd.
               Such a Man will dress his Person with a
graceful Simplicity, and lavish all his Gold and
Embroidery upon his Armour, to render him
conspicuous in the Day of Battle. The Plumes
in his Helmet will look more graceful in the

Field, than the Feather in his Hat at a Ball;
and Jewels blaze with more Propriety on his
Shield and Cuirass in Battle, than glittering on
his Finger in a Dance.
               Do not imagine, however, pursued she, that
I absolutely condemn Dancing, and think it a
Diversion wholly unworthy of a Hero.
               History has recorded some very famous Balls,
at which the most illustrious Persons in the
World have appear'd.
               
                  Cyrus the Great, we are inform'd, open'd a
Ball with the divine Mandana at Sardis. The
renown'd King of Scythia danc'd with the
Princess Cleopatra at Alexandria. The brave
Cleomedon with the fair Candace at Ethiopia;
but these Diversions were taken but seldom,
and consider'd indeed as an Amusement, not as
a Part of the Business of Life.
               How would so many glorious Battles have
been fought, Cities taken, Ladies rescu'd, and
other great and noble Adventures been atchiev'd,
if the Men, sunk in Sloth and Effeminacy, had
continually follow'd the Sound of a Fiddle,
saunter'd in Publick Walks, and tattled over a
Tea-table.
               I vow, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, you are
infinitely more severe in your Censures than
Mr. Tinsel was at the Assembly. You had lit-tle
Reason methinks to be angry with him.
               All I have said, reply'd Arabella, were the
natural Inference from your own Account of
the Manner in which People live here. When
Actions are a Censure upon themselves, the Re-citer
will always be consider'd as a Satirist.
            
            
               

               CHAP. X.
               
                  In which our Heroine justifies her own
Notions by some very illustrious Ex-amples.
               
               MR. Selvin and Mr. Tinsel, who had listen'd
attentively to this Discourse of Ara-bella,
took Leave as soon as it was ended,
and went away with very different Opinions
of her.
               Mr. Tinsel declaring she was a Fool, and had
no Knowledge of the World, and Mr. Selvin
convinc'd she was a Wit, and very learn'd in
Antiquity.
               Certainly, said Mr. Selvin, in Support of his
Opinion, the Lady has great Judgment; has
been capable of prodigious Application, as is
apparent by her extensive Reading: Then her
Memory is quite miraculous. I protest, I am
quite charm'd with her: I never met with
such a Woman in my Life.
               Her Cousin, in my Opinion, reply'd Mr.
Tinsel, is infinitely beyond her in every Merit,
but Beauty. How sprightly and free her Con-versation?
What a thorough Knowledge of
the World? So true a Taste for polite Amuse-ments,
and a Fund of Spirits that sets Vapours
and Spleen at Defiance.
               This Speech bringing on a Comparison be-tween
the Ladies, the Champions for each grew
so warm in the Dispute, that they had like to
have quarrell'd. However, by the Interposition

of some other Gentlemen who were with them,
they parted tolerable Friends that Night, and
renew'd their Visits to Sir Charles in the Morn-ing.
               They found only Miss Glanville with her
Father and Brother. Arabella generally spent
the Mornings in her own Chamber, where
Reading and the Labours of the Toilet em-ploy'd
her Time till Dinner: Tho' it must be
confess'd to her Honour, that the latter en-gross'd
but a very small Part of it.
               Miss Glanville, with whom the Beau had a
long Conversation at one of the Windows;
in which he recounted his Dispute with Mr.
Selvin, and the Danger he ran of being pink'd
in a Duel, that was his Phrase, for her Sake,
at last propos'd a Walk; to which she con-sented,
and engag'd to prevail upon Arabella to
accompany them.
               That Lady at first positively refus'd; al-leging
in Excuse, That she was so extremely
interested in the Fate of the Princess Melisintha,
whose Story she was reading, that she could not
stir till she had finish'd it.
               That poor Princess, continu'd she, is at pre-sent
in a most terrible Situation. She has just
set Fire to the Palace, in order to avoid the
Embraces of a King who forc'd her to marry
him. I am in Pain to know how she escapes
the Flames.
               Pshaw, interrupted Miss Glanville, let her
perish there, if she will: Don't let her hinder
our Walk.
               Who is it you doom with so much Cruelty
to perish, said Arabella, closing the Book, and

looking stedfastly on her Cousin? Is it the beau-tiful
Melisintha, that Princess, whose Fortitude
and Patience have justly render'd her the Admi-ration
of the whole World? That Princess,
descended from a Race of Heroes, whose he-roick
Virtues all glow'd in her own beauteous
Breast; that Princess, who, when taken Cap-tive
with the King her Father, bore her Im-prisonment
and Chains with a marvellous Con-stancy;
and who, when she enslaved her Con-queror,
and given Fetters to the Prince who
held her Father and herself in Bonds, nobly
refus'd the Diadem he proffer'd her, and devoted
herself to Destruction, in order to punish the
Enemy of her House. I am not able to relate
the rest of her History, seeing I have read no
further myself; but if you will be pleased to
sit down and listen to me while I read what re-mains,
I am persuaded you will find new Cause
to love and admire this amiable Princess.
               Pardon me, Madam, said Miss Glanville, I
have heard enough; and I could have been
very well satisfy'd not to have heard so much.
I think we waste a great deal of Time talking
about People we know nothing of. The Morn-ing
will be quite lost, if we don't make Haste.
Come, added she, you must go: You have a
new Lover below, who waits to go with us;
he'll die if I don't bring you.
               A new Lover! return'd Arabella, surpriz'd.
               Aye, aye, said Miss Glanville, the learned
Mr. Selvin; I assure you, he had almost quar-rell'd
with Mr. Tinsel last Night about your
Ladyship.
               
                  

                  Arabella, at this Intelligence, casting down
her Eyes, discover'd many Signs of Anger and
Confusion: And after a Silence of some Mo-ments,
during which, Miss Glanville had been
employ'd in adjusting her Dress at the Glass,
addressing herself to her Cousin with an Accent
somewhat less sweet than before.
               Had any other than yourself, Miss, said she,
acquainted me with the Presumption of that
unfortunate Person, I should haply have disco-ver'd
my Resentment in other Terms: But, as
it is, must inform you, that I take it extremely
ill, you should be accessary to giving me this
Offence.
               Hey day! said Miss Glanville, turning about
hastily, How have I offended your Ladyship,
pray?
               I am willing to hope, Cousin, reply'd Ara-bella,
that it was only to divert yourself with
the Trouble and Confusion in which you see
me, that you have indiscreetly told Things
which ought to have been bury'd in Silence.
               And what is all this mighty Trouble and
Confusion about then, Madam, said Miss
Glanville, smiling? Is it because I told you,
Mr. Selvin was a Lover of your Ladyship?
               Certainly, said Arabella, such an Information
is sufficient to give one a great deal of Perplexi-ty.
Is it such a little Matter, think you, to
be told that a Man has the Presumption to love
one?
               A meer Trifle, reply'd Miss Glanville, laugh-ing;
a hundred Lovers are not worth a Mo-ment's
Thought, when one's sure of them, for
then the Trouble is all over. And as for this

                  Arabella, prepared to gratify her Curiosity; but
he no sooner read the first Sentence, than,
notwithstanding all his Endeavours, a Smile ap-peared
in his Face; and Miss Glanville, less able,
and indeed less concerned to restrain her Mirth
at the uncommon Stile, burst out a laughing,
with so much Violence, as obliged her Brother
to stop, and counterfeit a terrible Fit of Cough-ing,
in order to avoid giving Arabella the like
Offence.
               The Astonishment of this Lady, at the sur-prising
and unexpected Effect her Lover's Let-ter
produced on Miss Glanville, kept her in a
profound Silence, her Eyes wandering from the
Sister to the Brother; who, continuing his
Cough, was not able, for some Moments, to
go on with his Reading.
               
                  Arabella, during this Interval, having reco-vered
herself a little, asked Miss Glanville, if
she found any thing in a Lover's Despair,
capable of diverting her so much, as she seemed
to be with that of the unfortunate Sir George?
               
               My Sister, Madam, said Mr. Glanville,
preventing her Reply, knows so many of Sir
George's Infidelities, that she cannot persuade
herself he is really in such a dangerous Way
as he insinuates: Therefore you ought not to be
surprised, if she is rather disposed to laugh at
this Epistle, than to be moved with any Con-cern
for the Writer, who, though he is my Ri-val,
I must say, appears to be in a deplorable
Condition.
               Pray, Sir, resumed Arabella, a little compo-sed
by those Words, finish the Letter: Your

unfortunate Person, as your Ladyship called
him, let him die at his Leisure, while we go
to the Parade.
               Your Levity, Cousin, said Arabella, forces
me to smile, notwithstanding the Cause I have
to be incens'd; however, I have Charity enough
to make me not desire the Death of Mr. Selvin,
who may repair the Crime he has been guilty
of by Repentance and Discontinuation.
               Well then, said Miss Glanville, you are re-solv'd
to go to the Parade: Shall I reach you
your odd Kind of Capuchin?
               How, said Arabella, can I with any Pro-priety
see a Man who has discover'd himself to
have a Passion for me? Will he not construe
such a Favour into a Permission for him to
hope?
               Oh! no, interrupted Miss Glanville, he does
not imagine I have told your Ladyship he loves
you; for indeed he don't know that I am ac-quainted
with his Passion.
               Then he is less culpable than I thought him,
reply'd Arabella; and if you think I am in no
Danger of hearing a Confession of his Fault
from his own Mouth, I'll comply with your
Request, and go with you to the Parade. But
added she, I must first engage you to promise
not to leave me alone a Moment, lest he should
take Advantage of such an Opportunity, to
give some Hint of his Passion, that would force
me to treat him very rigorously.
               Miss Glanville answer'd laughing, That she
would be sure to mind her Directions. How-ever,
said she, your Ladyship need not be ap-prehensive
he will say any fine Things to you;

for I knew a young Lady he was formerly in
Love with, and the odious Creature visited her
a Twelve-month before he found Courage
enough to tell her she was handsome.
               Doubtless, reply'd Arabella, he was much
to be commended for his Respect. A Lover
should never have the Presumption to declare
his Passion to his Mistress, unless in certain
Circumstances, which may at the same Time
in part disarm her Anger. For Instance, he
must struggle with the Violence of his Passion,
till it has cast him into a Fever. His Physi-cians
must give him over, pronouncing his Di-stemper
incurable, since the Cause of it being
in his Mind, all their Art is incapable of re-moving
it. Thus he must suffer, rejoicing at
the Approach of Death, which will free him
from all his Torments, without violating the
Respect he owes to the Divine Object of his
Flame. At length, when he has but a few
Hours to live, his Mistress, with many Signs
of Compassion, conjures him to tell her the
Cause of his Despair. The Lover, conscious
of his Crime, evades all her Inquiries; but the
Lady laying at last a peremptory Command
upon him to disclose the Secret, he dares not
disobey her, and acknowledges his Passion with
the utmost Contrition for having offended her;
bidding her take the small Remainder of his
Life to expiate his Crime; and finishes his
Discourse by falling into a Swoon.
               The Lady is touch'd at his Condition, com-mands
him to live, and if necessary, permits
him to hope.
               
                  

This is the most common Way in which
such Declarations are, and ought to be brought
about. However, there are others, which are
as well calculated for sparing a Lady's Confu-sion,
and deprecating her Wrath.
               The Lover, for Example, like the Prince
of the Massage
                        •
                     es, after having buried his Pas-sion
in Silence for many Years, may chance to
be walking with his Confidant in a retir'd
Place; to whom, with a Deluge of Tears, he
relates the Excess of his Passion and Despair.
And while he is thus unbosoming his Griefs,
not in the least suspecting he is overheard, his
Princess, who had been listning to him in much
Trouble and Confusion, by some little Rustling
she makes, unawares discovers herself.
               The surpriz'd Lover throws himself at her
Feet, begs Pardon for his Rashness, observes
that he had never presum'd to discover his
Passion to her; and implores her Leave to die
before her, as a Punishment for his undesign'd
Offence.
               The Method which the great Artamenes took
to let the Princess of Media know he adored
her, was not less respectful. This valiant Prince,
who had long loved her, being to fight a great
Battle, in which he had some secret Presages he
should fall, which however deceiv'd him, wrote
a long Letter to the divine Mandana, wherein
he discover'd his Passion, and the Resolution his
Respect had inspir'd him with, to consume in
Silence, and never presume to disclose his Love
while he lived; acquainting her, that he had
order'd that Letter not to be deliver'd to her,
till it was certainly known that he was dead.
               
                  

Accordingly he receiv'd several Wounds in
the Fight, which brought him to the Ground,
and his Body not being found, they concluded
it was in the Enemy's Possession.
               His faithful 'Squire, who had receiv'd his In-structions
before the Battle, hastens to the Prin-cess,
who, with all the Court, is mightily af-fected
at his Death.
               He presents her the Letter, which she makes
no Scruple to receive, since the Writer is no
more. She reads it, and her whole Soul is
melted with Compassion; she bewails his Fate
with the most tender and affectionate Marks of
Grief.
               Her Confidant asks why she is so much af-fected,
since in all Probability, she would not
have pardon'd him for loving her, had he been
alive?
               She acknowledges the Truth of her Observa-tion,
takes Notice that his Death having can-cell'd
his Crime, his respectful Passion alone
employs her Thoughts; she is resolv'd to be-wail
as innocent and worthy of Compassion
when dead, whom living she would treat as a
Criminal, and insinuates, that her Heart had
entertain'd an Affection for him.
               Her Confidant treasures up this Hint, and
endeavours to console her, but in vain, till News
is brought, that Artamenes, who had been car-ry'd
for dead out of the Field, and by a very
surprizing Adventure conceal'd all this Time,
is return'd.
               The Princess is cover'd with Confusion, and
tho' glad he is alive, resolves to banish him for
his Crime.
               
                  

Her Confidant pleads his Cause so well, that
she consents to see him; and, since he can no
longer conceal his Passion, he confirms the Con-fession
in his Letter, humbly begging Pardon
for being still alive.
               The Princess, who cannot plead Ignorance
of his Passion, nor deny the Sorrow she testify'd
for his Death, condescends to pardon him, and
he is also permitted to hope. In like Manner
the great Prince of Persia—
               Does your Ladyship consider how late it is,
interrupted Miss Glanville, who had hitherto
very impatiently listen'd to her? Don't let us
keep the Gentlemen waiting any longer for us.
               I must inform you how the Prince of Persia
declar'd his Love for the incomparable Berenice,
said Arabella.
               
               Another Time, dear Cousin, said Miss
Glanville; methinks we have talk'd long enough
upon this Subject.
               I am sorry the Time has seem'd so tedious to
you, said Arabella, smiling; and therefore I'll
trespass no longer upon your Patience. Then
ordering Lucy to bring her Hat and Gloves, she
went down Stairs, follow'd by Miss Glanville,
who was greatly disappointed at her not putting
on her Veil.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XI.
               
                  In which our Heroine being mistaken her-self,
gives Oceasion for a great many
other Mistakes.
               
               AS soon as the Ladies enter'd the Room,
Mr. Selvin, with more Gaiety than usual,
advanc'd towards Arabella, who put on so cold
and severe a Countenance at his Approach, that
the poor Man, extreamly confus'd, drew back,
and remain'd in great Perplexity, fearing he had
offended her.
               Mr. Tinsel, seeing Mr. Selvin's Reception,
and aw'd by the becoming Majesty in her Per-son,
notwithstanding all his Assurance, accosted
her with less Confidence than was his Custom;
but Arabella softning her Looks with the most
engaging Smiles, made an Apology for detain-ing
them so long from the Parade, gave her
Hand to the Beau, as being not a suspected
Person, and permitted him to lead her out.
Mr. Glanville, to whom she always allow'd the
Preference on those Occasions, being a little in-dispos'd,
and not able to attend her.
               Mr. Tinsel, whose Vanity was greatly flat-ter'd
by the Preference Arabella gave him to
his Companion, proceeded according to his
usual Custom, to examine her Looks and Be-haviour
with more Care; conceiving such a
Preference must proceed from a latent Motive
which was not unfavourable for him. His
Discernment on these Occasions being very sur-prising,

he soon discover'd in the bright Eyes of
Arabella a secret Approbation of his Person,
which he endeavour'd to increase by displaying
it with all the Address he was Master of, and
did not fail to talk her into an Opinion of his
Wit, by ridiculing every Body that pass'd them,
and directing several study'd Compliments to
herself.
               Miss Glanville, who was not so agreeably en-tertain'd
by the grave Mr. Selvin, saw these
Advances to a Gallantry with her Cousin with
great Disturbance: She was resolved to in-terrupt
it if possible, and being convinc'd
Mr. Selvin preferr'd Arabella's Conversation to
hers, she plotted how to pair them together,
and have the Beau to herself.
               As they walk'd a few Paces behind her Cousin
and Mr. Tinsel, she was in no Danger of be-ing
over-heard; and taking Occasion to put
Mr. Selvin in mind of Arabella's Behaviour to
him, when he accosted her; she ask'd him, if
he was conscious of having done any thing to
offend her?
               I protest, Madam, reply'd Mr. Selvin, I know
not of any thing I have done to displease her.
I never fail'd, to my Knowledge, in my Re-spects
towards her Ladyship, for whom indeed
I have a most profound Veneration.
               I know so much of her Temper, resum'd
Miss Glanville, as to be certain, if she has taken
it into her Head to be angry with you, she will
be ten times more so at your Indifference: And
if you hope for her Favour, you must ask her
Pardon with the most earnest Submission ima-ginable.
               
                  

If I knew I had offended her, reply'd
Mr. Selvin, I would very willingly ask her Par-don;
but really, since I have not been guilty
of any Fault towards her Ladyship, I don't
know how to acknowledge it.
               Well, said Miss Glanville coldly, I only
took the Liberty to give you some friendly Ad-vice,
which you may follow, or not, as you
please. I know my Cousin is angry at some-thing,
and I wish you were Friends again,
that's all.
               I am mightily oblig'd to you, Madam, said
Mr. Selvin; and since you assure me her Lady-ship
is angry, I'll ask her Pardon, tho', really,
as I said before, I don't know for what.
               Well, interrupted Miss Glanville, we'll join
them at the End of the Parade; and to give
you an Opportunity of speaking to my Cousin,
I'll engage Mr. Tinsel myself.
               Mr. Selvin, who thought himself greatly
oblig'd to Miss Glanville for her good Intentions,
tho' in reality she had a View of exposing of
her Cousin, as well as an Inclination to engage
Mr. Tinsel, took Courage as they turn'd, to get
on the other Side of Arabella, whom he had not
dar'd before to approach, while Miss Glanville,
addressing a Whisper of no great Importance to
her Cousin, parted her from the Beau, and
slackning her Pace a little, fell into a particular
Discourse with him, which Arabella being too
polite to interrupt, remain'd in a very perplex-ing
Situation, dreading every Moment that
Mr. Selvin would explain himself. Alarm'd at
his Silence, yet resolv'd to interrupt him if he
began to speak, and afraid of beginning a Con-versation

first, lest he should construe it to his
Advantage.
               Mr. Selvin being naturally timid in the Com-pany
of Ladies, the Circumstance of Disgrace
which he was in with Arabella, her Silence and
Reserve so added to his accustom'd Diffidence,
that tho' he endeavour'd several times to speak,
he was not able to bring out any thing but a
preluding Hem; which he observ'd, to his ex-treme
Confusion, seem'd always to encrease
Arabella's Constraint.
               Indeed, that Lady, upon any Suspicion that
he was going to break his mysterious Silence,
always contracted her Brow into a Frown, cast
down her Eyes with an Air of Perplexity, en-deavour'd
to hide her Blushes with her Fan;
and to shew her In-attention, directed her Looks
to the contrary Side.
               The Lady and Gentleman being in equal
Confusion, no Advances were made on either
Side towards a Conversation, and they had
reach'd almost the End of the Parade in an un-interrupted
Silence; when Mr. Selvin, fearing he
should never again have so good an Opportu-nity
of making his Peace, collected all his Re-solution,
and with an Accent trembling under
the Importance of the Speech he was going to
make, began,
               Madam, Since I have had the Honour of
walking with your Ladyship, I have observed
so many Signs of Constraint in your Manner,
that I hardly dare intreat you to grant me a
Moment's Hearing while I—
               Sir, interrupted Arabella, before you go any
further, I must inform you, that what you are

going to say will mortally offend me. Take
heed then how you commit an Indiscretion
which will force me to treat you very rigorously.
               If your Ladyship will not allow me to speak
in my own Justification, said Mr. Selvin, yet I
hope you will not refuse to tell me my Offence,
since I—
               You are very confident, indeed, interrupted
Arabella, again, to suppose I will repeat what
would be infinitely grievous for me to hear.
Against my Will, pursued she, I must give you
the Satisfaction to know, that I am not igno-rant
of your Crime, but I also assure you that I
am highly incens'd; and that, not only with the
Thoughts you have dar'd to entertain of me,
but likewise with your Presumption in going
about to disclose them.
               Mr. Selvin, whom the seeming Contradictions
in this Speech astonish'd, yet imagin'd in ge-neral
it hinted at the Dispute between him and
Mr. Tinsel; and supposing the Story had been
told to his Disadvantage, which was the Cause
of her Anger, reply'd in great Emotion at the
Injustice done him.
               Since somebody has been so officious to ac-quaint
your Ladyship with an Affair which
ought to have been kept from your Knowledge;
'tis a Pity they did not inform you, that
Mr. Tinsel was the Person that had the least
Respect for your Ladyship, and is more worthy
of your Resentment.
               If Mr. Tinsel, replied Arabella, is guilty of
an Offence like yours, yet since he has con-ceal'd
it better, he is less culpable than you;
and you have done that for him, which haply

Sister may possibly find more Cause for Pity
than Contempt, in the latter Part of it.
               Mr. Glanville, giving a Look to his Sister,
sufficient to make her comprehend, that he
would have her restrain her Mirth for the future,
proceeded in his Reading; but every Line in-creasing
his strong Inclination to laugh, when
he came to the pathetic Wish, that her fair
Eyes might shed some Tears upon his Tomb,
no longer able to keep his assumed Gravity,
he threw down the Letter in a counterfeited
Rage.
               Curse the stupid Fellow! cried he, is he mad,
to call the finest Black Eyes in the Universe,
fair. Ah! Cousin, said he to Arabella, to must
be little acquainted with the Influence of your
Eyes, since he can so egregiously mistake their
Colour.
               And it is very plain, replied Arabella, that
you are little acquainted with the sublime Lan-guage
in which he writes, since you find Fault
with an Epithet, which marks the Beauty, not
the Colour, of those Eyes he praises; for, in
fine, Fair is indifferently applied, as well to
Black and Brown Eyes, as to Light and Blue
ones, when they are either really lovely in
themselves, or by the Lover's Imagination
created so: And therefore, since Sir George's
Prepossession has made him see Charms in my
Eyes, which questionless are not there; by
calling them fair, he has very happily expressed
himself, since therein he has the Sanction of
those great Historians, who wrote the Histories
of Lovers he seems to imitate, as well in his
Actions as Stile.
               
                  

he would never have had Courage enough to do
for himself as long as he lived.
               Poor Selvin, quite confounded at these intri-cate
Words, would have begg'd her to explain
herself, had she not silenc'd him with a dreadful
Frown: Aand making a Stop till Miss Glanville
and Mr. Tinsel came up to them. She told her
Cousin with a peevish Accent, that she had
perform'd her Promise very ill; and whisper'd
her, that she was to blame for all the Mortifi-cations
she had suffer'd.
               Mr. Tinsel, supposing the Alteration in
Arabella's Humour proceeded from being so long
depriv'd of his Company; endeavour'd to make
her Amends by a Profusion of Compliments;
which she receiv'd with such an Air of Dis-pleasure,
that the Beau, vex'd at the ill Success of
his Gallantry, told her, he was afraid Mr. Sel-vin's
Gravity had infected her Ladyship.
               Say rather, reply'd Arabella, that his Indis-cretion
has offended me.
               Mr. Tinsel, charm'd with this beginning Con-fidence,
which confirm'd his Hopes of having
made fome Impression on her Heart; conjur'd
her very earnestly to tell him how Mr. Selvin
had offended her.
               'Tis sufficient, resum'd she, that I tell you
he has offended me, without declaring the Na-ture
of his Crime, since doubtless it has not
escaped your Observation, which, if I may
believe him, is not wholly disinterested. To
confess yet more, 'tis true that he hath told me
something concerning you, which—
               Let me perish, Madam, interrupted the
Beau, if one Syllable he has said be true.
               
                  

How, said Arabella, a little disconcerted,
Will you always persist in a Denial then?
               Deny it, Madam, return'd Mr. Tinsel, I'll
deny what he has said with my last Breath; 'tis
all a scandalous Forgery: No Man living is less
likely to think of your Ladyship in that Man-ner.
If you knew my Thoughts, Madam,
you would be convinc'd nothing is more im-possible,
and—
               Sir, interrupted Arabella, extremely morti-fy'd,
methinks you are very eager in your Ju-stification.
I promise you, I do not think you
guilty of the Offence he charg'd you with; if
I did, you would haply experience my Resent-ment
in such a Manner, as would make you
repent of your Presumption.
               
                  Arabella, in finishing these Words, inter-rupted
Miss Glanville's Discourse with Mr. Selvin,
to tell her, she desir'd to return Home; to
which that young Lady, who had not been at
all pleas'd with the Morning's Walk, consented.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  In which our Heroine reconciles herself to
a mortifying Incident, by recollecting an
Adventure in a Romance, similar to her
own.
               
               AS soon as the Ladies were come to their
Lodgings, Arabella went up to her own
Apartment to meditate upon what had pass'd,
and Miss Glanville retir'd to dress for Dinner;

while the two Gentlemen, who thought they
had great Reason to be dissatisfy'd with each
other on Account of Lady Bella's Behaviour,
went to a Coffee-house, in order to come to
some Explanation about it,
               Well, Sir, said the Beau, with a sarcastick
Air, I am greatly oblig'd to you for the Endea-vours
you have us'd to ruin me in Lady Bella's
Opinion. Rat me, if it is not the greatest
Misfortune in the World, to give occasion for
Envy.
               Envy, Sir, interrupted Mr. Selvin; I protest
I do really admire your great Skill in Strata-gems,
but I do not envy you the Possession of
it. You have, indeed, very wittily contriv'd
to put your own Sentiments of that Lady,
which you deliver'd so freely the other Night,
into my Mouth. 'Twas a Master-piece of
Cunning, indeed; and, as I said before, I ad-mire
your Skill prodigiously.
               I don't know what you mean, reply'd Tinsel,
y
                     •
                  u talk in Riddles. Did you not yourself ac-quaint
Lady Bella with the Preference I gave
Miss Glanville to her? What would you pro-pose
by such a Piece of Treachery? You have
ruin'd all my Hopes by it: The Lady resents
it excessively, and it's no Wonder, 'faith, it
must certainly mortify her. Upon my Soul, I
can never forgive thee for so mal a propos a
Discovery.
               Forgive me, Sir, replied Selvin, in a Rage,
I don't want your Forgiveness. I have done
nothing unbecoming a Man of Honour. The
Lady was so prejudiced by your Insinuations,
that she would not give me Leave to speak;

otherwise, I would have fully inform'd her of
her Mistake, that she might have known how
much she was oblig'd to you.
               So she would not hear thee, interrupted Tinsel
laughing, dear Soul, how very kind was that?
'Faith, I don't know how it is, but I am very
lucky, without deserving to be so. Thou art
a Witness for me, Frank, I took no great Pains
to gain this fine Creature's Heart; but it was
damn'd malicious tho', to attempt to make
Discoveries. I see she is a little piqu'd, but
I'll set all to rights again with a Billet-doux. I've
an excellent Hand, tho' I say it, at a Billet-doux.
I never knew one of mine fail in my Life.
               Harky, Sir, said Selvin whispering, any
more Attempts to shift your Sentiments upon
me, and you shall hear of it. In the mean
Time, be assur'd, I'll clear myself, and put the
Saddle upon the right Horse.
               Demme, if thou art not 
                     
                   queer Fellow,
said Tinsel, endeavouring to hide his Discompo-sure
at this Threat under a forc'd Laugh.
               
                  Selvin, without making any Reply, retir'd
to write to Arabella; which Tinsel suspecting,
resolv'd to be before hand with him; and with-out
leaving the Coffee-house, call'd for Paper,
and wrote a Billet to her, which he dispatch'd
away immediately.
               The Messenger had just got Admittance to
Lucy, when another arriv'd from Selvin.
               
               They both presented their Letters, but Lucy
refus'd them, saying, her Lady would turn her
away, if she receiv'd such Sort of Letters.
               Such Sort of Letters, return'd Tinsel's Man!
Why, do you know what they contain, then?
               
                  

To be sure, I do, reply'd Lucy; they are
Love-Letters; and my Lady has charg'd me
never to receive any more.
               Well, reply'd Selvin's Servant, you may take
my Letter; for my Master desir'd me to tell
you, it was about Business of Consequence,
which your Lady must be acquainted with.
               Since you assure me it is not a Love-Letter,
I'll take it, said Lucy.
               
               And, pray take mine too, said Tinsel's Mer-cury;
for I assure you, it is not a Love-Letter
neither; it's only a Billet-doux.
               
               Are you sure of that, reply'd Lucy; because
I may venture to take it, I fancy, if its what
you say.
               I'll swear it, said the Man delivering it to
her. Well, said she, receiving it, I'll take
them both up. But what did you call this,
pursu'd she? I must not forget it, or else my
Lady will think it a Love-Letter.
               A Billet-doux, said the Man.
               
                  Lucy, for fear she should forget it, repeated
the Words Billet-doux several Times as she went
up Stairs; but entering her Lady's Apartment,
she perceiving the Letters in her Hand, ask'd
her so sternly, how she durst presume to bring
them into her Presence, that the poor Girl, in
her Fright, forgot the Lesson she had been con-ning;
and endeavouring to recal it into her
Memory, took no Notice of her Lady's Que-stion,
which she repeated several times, but to
no Purpose.
               
                  Arabella, surpriz'd at her in-attention, re-iterated
her Commands, in a Tone somewhat

louder than usual; asking her at the same Time,
why she did not obey her immediately?
               Indeed, Madam, reply'd Lucy, your Lady-ship
would not order me to take back the Let-ters,
if you knew what they were: They are
not Love-Letters; I was resolv'd to be sure of
that before I took them. This, Madam, is a
Letter about Business of Consequence; and the
other—Oh dear! I can't think what the
Man call'd it! But it is not a Love-Letter, in-deed,
Madam.
               You are a simple Wench, said Arabella
smiling: You may depend upon it, all Letters
directed to me, must contain Matters of Love
and Gallantry; and those I am not permitted
to receive. Take them away then immediately.
But stay, pursued she, seeing she was about to
obey her, one of them, you say, was deliver'd
to you as a Letter of Consequence; perhaps i
                     •
                  
is so: Indeed it may contain an Advertisement
of some Design to carry me away. How do I
know, but Mr. Selvin, incited by his Love and
Despair, may intend to make such an Attempt.
Give me that Letter, Lucy, I am resolved to
open it. As for the other—yet who knows
but the other may also bring me Warning of
the same Danger from another Quarter. The
Pains Mr. Tinsel took to conceal his Passion,
nay, almost as I think, to deny it, amounts to
a Proof that he is meditating some Way to
make sure of me. 'Tis certainly so: Give me
that Letter, Lucy; I should be accessary to
their intended Violence, if I neglected this
timely Discovery.
               
                  

Well, cried she, taking one of the Letters,
this is exactly like what happen'd to the beauti-ful
Princess of Cappadocia; who, like me, in
one and the same Day, receiv'd Advice that
two of her Lovers intended to carry her off.
               As she pronounc'd these Words Miss Glanville
enter'd the Room, to whom Arabella immedi-ately
recounted the Adventure of the Letters;
telling her, she did not doubt, but they contain'd
a Discovery of some Conspiracy to carry her
away.
               And whom does your Ladyship suspect of such
a strange Design, pray, said Miss Glanville
smiling?
               At present, reply'd Arabella, the two Cava-liers
who walk'd with us to Day, are the Per-sons
who seem the most likely to attempt that
Violence.
               I dare answer for Mr. Tinsel, replied Miss
Glanville, he thinks of no such Thing.
               Well, said Arabella, to convince you of your
Mistake, I must inform you, that Mr. Selvin,
having the Presumption to begin a Declaration
of Love to me on the Parade this Morning, I
reprov'd him severely for his Want of Respect,
and threatned him with my Displeasure; in the
Rage of his Jealousy, at seeing me treat
Mr. Tinsel well, he discover'd to me, that he
also was as criminal as himself, in order to
oblige me to a severer Usage of him.
               So he told you Mr. Tinsel was in Love with
you, interrupted Miss Glanville?
               
               He told it me in other Words, reply'd Arabella;
for he said, Mr. Tinsel was guilty of that Of-fence,
which I resented so severely to him.
               
                  

Miss Glanville beginning to comprehend the
Mystery, with great Difficulty forbore laugh-ing
at her Cousin's Mistake; for she well knew
the Offence Mr. Selvin hinted at, and desirous
of knowing what those Letters contain'd, she
begg'd her to delay opening them no longer.
               
                  Arabella, pleas'd at her Solicitude, open'd
one of the Letters; but glancing her Eye to
the Bottom, and seeing the Name of Selvin,
she threw it hastily upon the Table, and avert-ing
her Eyes, What a Mortification have I
avoided, said she, that Letter is from Selvin;
and questionless, contains an Avowal of his
Crime.
               Nay, you must read it, cried Miss Glanville,
taking it up; since you have open'd it, its the
same Thing: You can never persuade him but
you have seen it. However, to spare your
Nicety, I'll read it to you. Which accordingly
she did, and found it as follows.
               
                  
                     
                        MADAM,
                     
                     I Knows not what Insinuations have been
made use of to persuade you I was guilty
of the Offence, which, with Justice, occa-sion'd
your Resentment this Morning; but
I assure you, nothing was ever more false.
My Thoughts of your Ladyship are very
different, and full of the profoundest Re-spect
and Veneration. I have Reason to
suspect Mr. Tinsel is the Person who has thus
endeavoured to prejudice me with your La-dyship;
therefore I am excusable if I tell
you, that those very Sentiments, too dis-respectful
to be named, which he would per-suade

you are mine, he discover'd himself.
He then, Madam, is the Person guilty of
that Offence he so falsly lays to the Charge
of him, who is, with the utmost Respect and
Esteem,
                     
                        Madam,
                        Your Ladyship's
most obedient, and
most humble Servant,
F. SELVIN.
                     
                  
               
               How's this, cry'd Miss Glanville? Why,
Madam, you are certainly mistaken. You see
Mr. Selvin utterly denies the Crime of loving
you. He has suffer'd very innocently in your
Opinion. Indeed, your Ladyship was too hasty
in condemning him.
               If what he says be true, replied Arabella,
who had been in extream Confusion, while a
Letter so different from what she expected was
reading; I have indeed unjustly condemn'd
him. Nevertheless, I am still inclin'd to be-lieve
this is all Artifice; and that he is really
guilty of entertaining a Passion for me.
               But why should he take so much Pains to
deny it, Madam, said Miss Glanville? Methinks
that looks very odd.
               Not at all, interrupted Arabella, whose Spi-rits
were rais'd by recollecting an Adventure in
her Romance, similar to this. Mr. Selvin has
fallen upon the very same Stratagem with Sera-menes;
who being in Love with the beautiful
Cleobuline, Princess of Corinth, took all ima-ginable
Pains to conceal his Passion, in order

to be near that fair Princess; who would have
banish'd him from her Presence, had she known
he was in Love with her. Nay, he went so
far in his Dissimulation, as to pretend Love to
one of the Ladies of her Court; that his Pas-sion
for the Princess might be the less taken no-tice
of. In these Cases therefore, the more re-solutely
a Man denies his Passion, the more
pure and violent it is.
               Then Mr. Selvin's Passion is certainly very
violent, reply'd Miss Glanville, for he denies it
very resolutely; and I believe none but your
Ladyship would have discover'd his Artifice.
But shall we not open the other Letter? I have
a strong Notion it comes from Tinsel.
               
               For that very Reason I would not be ac-quainted
with the Contents, reply'd Arabella,
You see, Mr. Selvin accuses him of being guilty
of that Offence which he denies: I shall doubt-less,
meet with a Confirmation of his Love in
that Letter. Do not, I beseech you added
she, seeing her Cousin preparing to open the
Letter, expose me to the Pain of hearing a pre-sumptuous
Declaration of Love. Nay, pur-sued
she, rising in great Emotion, if you are
resolved to persecute me by reading it, I'll en-deavour
to get out of the hearing of it.
               You shan't, I declare, said Miss Glanville,
laughing and holding her, I'll oblige you to
hear it.
               I vow, Cousin, said Arabella smiling, you
use me just as the Princess Cleopatra did the fair
and wise Antonia. However, if by this you
mean to do any Kindness to the unfortunate
Person who wrote that Billet, you are greatly

I find my Rival is very happy in your Opi-nion,
Madam, said Mr. Glanville; and I am
apt to believe, I shall have more Reason to
envy than pity his Situation.
               If you keep within the Bounds I prescribe
you, replied Arabella, you shall have no Rea-son
to envy his Situation; but, considering the
Condition to which his Despair has by this Time
certainly reduced him, Humanity requires that
we should take some Care of him; and, to
shew you how great my Opinion of your Ge-nerosity
is, I will even intreat you to accom-pany
me in the Visit I am going to make him.
               Mr. Glanville, being determined, if possible,
to prevent her exposing herself, affected to be
extremely moved at this Request; and, rising
from his Chair in great seeming Agitation, tra-versed
the Room for some Moments, without
speaking a Word: Then suddenly stopping;
               And can you, Madam, said he, looking
upon Arabella, suppose, that I will consent to
your visiting my Rival; and that I will be mean
enough to attend you myself to his House? Do
you think, that Orontes you have often re-proached
me with, would act in such a
Manner?
               I don't know how Orontes would have acted
in this Case, said Arabella, because it never
happened that such a Proof of his Submission
was ever desired of him; but, considering that
he was of a very fiery and jealous Disposition,
it is probable he might act as you do.
               I always understood, Madam, said Mr. Glan-ville,
that Orontes was a Favourite of yours,
but it seems I was mistaken.
               
                  

mistaken; since, if you oblige me to listen to
a Declaration of his Crime, you will lay me
under a Necessity to banish him. A Sentence
he would have avoided, while I remained ig-norant
of it.
               To this Miss Glanville made no other Reply
than by opening the Billet, the Contents of
which may be found in the following Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  In which our Heroin's Extravagance will
be thought, perhaps, to be carried to an
extravagant Length.
               
               
                  
                     
                        MADAM,
                     
                     I Had the Honour to assure you this Morn-ing
on the Parade, that the Insinuations
Mr. Selvin made use of to rob me of the
superlative Happiness of your Esteem were
entirely false and groundless. May the Beams
of your bright Eyes never shine on me more,
if there is any Truth in what he said to pre-judice
me with your Ladyship. If I am
permitted to attend you to the Rooms this
Evening, I hope to convince you, that it
was absolutely impossible I could have been
capable of such a Crime, who am, with the
most profound Respect,
                     
                        Your Ladyship's
most devoted, &amp;c.
D. TINSEL.
                     
                  
               
               
                  

Well, Madam, said Miss Glanville when
she had read this Epistle, I fancy you need not
pronounce a Sentence of Banishment upon poor
Mr. Tinsel; he seems to be quite innocent of
the Offence your Ladyship suspects him of.
               Why, really, return'd Arabella, blushing
with extreme Confusion at this second Disap-pointment,
I am greatly perplex'd to know
how I ought to act on this Occasion. I am
much in the same Situation with the Princess
Serena. For you must know, this Princess—
Here Lucy entering, inform'd the Ladies Din-ner
was serv'd—I shall defer till another Op-portunity,
said Arabella, upon this Interruption,
the Relation of the Princess Serena's Adven-tures;
which you will find, added she, in a low
Voice, bears a very great Resemblance to mine.
               Miss Glanville reply'd, she would hear it
whenever she pleas'd, and then follow'd Arabella
to the Dining Room.
               The Cloth was scarce remov'd, when
Mr. Selvin came in. Arabella blush'd at his
Appearance, and discover'd so much Perplexity
in her Behaviour, that Mr. Selvin was appre-hensive
he had not yet sufficiently justify'd him-self;
and therefore took the first Opportunity
to approach her.
               I shall think myself very unhappy, Madam,
said he bowing, if the Letter I did myself the
Honour to write to you this Morning—
               Sir, interrupted Arabella, I perceive you are
going to forget the Contents of that Letter,
and preparing again to offend me by a presump-tuous
Declaration of Love.
               
                  

Who I, Madam, reply'd he, in great Asto-nishment
and Confusion, I-I-I protest—tho'
I-I have a very great Respect for your Lady-ship,
yet—yet I never presum'd to—to—to—
               You have presum'd too much, replied Ara-bella,
and I should forget what I ow'd to my
own Glory, if I furnish'd you with any more
Occasions of offending me.—Know then, I
absolutely forbid you to appear before me again,
at least, till I am convinc'd you have chang'd
your Sentiments.
               Saying this, she rose from her Seat, and
making a Sign to him not to follow her, which
indeed he had no Intention to do, she quitted
the Room, highly satisfy'd with her own Con-duct
upon this Occasion, which was exactly
conformable to the Laws of Romance.
               Mr. Tinsel, who had just alighted from his
Chair, having a Glimpse of her, as she pass'd
to her own Apartment, resolv'd, if possible, to
procure a private Interview; for he did not
doubt but his Billet had done Wonders in his
Favour.
               For that Purpose he ventur'd up to her Anti-Chamber,
where he found Lucy in waiting,
whom he desir'd to acquaint her Lady, that he
intreated a Moment's Speech with her.
               
                  Lucy, after hesitating a Moment, and look-ing
earnestly at him, replied, Sir, if you'll
promise me faithfully, you are not in Love
with my Lady, I'll go and deliver your Mes-sage.
               Duce take me, said Tinsel, if that is not a
very whimsical Condition truly—Pray, my
Dear, how came it into thy little Brain, to

suspect I was in Love with thy Lady? But,
suppose I should be in Love with her, what
then?
               Why, then its likely you would die, that's
all, said Lucy, without my Lady would be so
kind to command you to live.
               I vow thou hast mighty pretty Notions, Child,
said Tinsel smiling; hast thou been reading
any Play-Book lately? But pray, dost think
thy Lady would have compassion on me, if I
was in Love with her? Come, I know thou
art in her Confidence? Hast thou ever heard
her talk of me? Does she not tell thee all her
Secrets?
               Here Arabella's Bell ringing, the Beau slipp'd
half a Guinea into her Hand, which Lucy not
willing to refuse, went immediately to her
Lady; to whom, with a trembling Accent,
she repeated Mr. Tinsel's Request.
               Imprudent Girl, cried Arabella, for I am
loth to suspect thee of Disloyalty to thy Mistress.
Dost thou know the Nature and Extent of the
Request thou hast deliver'd? Art thou ignorant
that the presumptuous Man whom thou sollicitest
this Favour for, has mortally offended me?
               Indeed, Madam, said Lucy frighted out of
her Wits, I don't sollicit for him. I scorn to do
any such Thing. I would not offend your
Ladyship for the World: For, before I would
deliver his Message to your Ladyship, I made
him assure me, that he was not in Love with
your Ladyship.
               That was very wisely done, indeed, replied
Arabella, smiling: And do you believe he spoke
the Truth?
               
                  

Yes, indeed, I am sure of it, said Lucy
eagerly, if your Ladyship will but be pleas'd to
see him, he is only in the next Room; I dare
promise—
               How, interrupted Arabella! What have you
done? Have you brought him into my Apart-ment
then? I protest this Adventure is exactly
like what befel the beautiful Statira, when, by
a Stratagem of the same Kind, Oroondates was
introduc'd into her Presence. Lucy, thou art
another Barsina, I think; but I hope thy In-tentions
are not less innocent than hers was.
               Indeed, Madam, reply'd Lucy, excessively
uneasy at her Lady's Words, I am very inno-cent,
I am no Barsina, as your Ladyship calls
me.
               I dare answer for thee, said Arabella smiling
at the Turn she gave to her Words, thou art
no Barsina; and I should wrong thee very
much to compare thee with that wise Princess;
for thou art certainly one of the most simple
Wenches in the World. But since thou hast
gone so far, let me know what the unfortunate
Person desires of me; for, since I am neither
more rigid, nor pretend to more Virtue than
Statira, I may do at least as much for him, as
that great Queen did for Oroondates.
               
               He desires, Madam, said Lucy, that your
Ladyship would be pleas'd to let him speak with
you.
               Or, in his Words, I suppose, replied Arabella,
he humbly implor'd a Moment's Audience.
               I told your Ladyship his very Words, indeed,
Madam, said Lucy.
               
               
                  

I tell thee, Girl, thou art mistaken, said
Arabella; 'tis impossible he should sue for such
a Favour in Terms like those: Therefore, go
back, and let him know that I consent to grant
him a short Audience upon these Conditions.
               First, Provided he does not abuse my Indul-gence
by offending me with any Protestations
of his Passion.
               Secondly, That he engages to fulfil the In-junctions
I shall lay upon him, however cruel
and terrible they may appear.
               Lastly, That his Despair must not prompt
him to any Act of Desperation against himself.
               
                  Lucy having received this Message, quitted
the Room hastily, for fear she should forget it.
               Well, my pretty Ambassadress, said Tinsel
when he saw her enter the Anti-Chamber,
Will your Lady see me?
               No, Sir, replied Lucy.
               
               No, interrupted Tinsel, that's kind 'faith,
after waiting so long.
               Pray Sir, said Lucy, don't put me out so; I
shall forget what my Lady order'd me to tell
you.
               Oh! I ask your Pardon, Child, said Tinsel.
Come, let me hear your Message.
               Sir, said Lucy adapting the Solemnity of her
Lady's Accent—My Lady bad me say, that she
will grant—No, that she consents to grant you
a short Dience.
               Audience you would say Child, said Tinsel.
But how came you to tell me before she would
not see me?—
               
                  

I vow and protest, Sir, said Lucy, you have
put all my Lady's Words clean out of my
Head—I don't know what comes next—
               Oh, no matter, said Tinsel, you have told
me enough: I'll wait upon her directly.
               
                  Lucy, who saw him making towards the
Door, prest between it and him; and having
all her Lady's Whims in her Head, suppos'd
he was going to carry her away—Possess'd with
this Thought, she scream'd out, Help! Help!
for Heaven's Sake! My Lady willl be carry'd
away!
               
                  Arabella hearing this Exclamation of her
Woman's, eccho'd her Screams, tho' with a
Voice infinitely more delicate; and seeing Tinsel,
who, confounded to the last Degree at the
Cries of both the Lady and her Woman, had
got into her Chamber he knew not how,
she gave herself over for lost, and fell back in
her Chair in a Swoon, or something she took
for a Swoon, for she was persuaded it could
happen no otherwise; since all Ladies in the
same Circumstances arr terrify'd into a fainting
Fit, and seldom recover till they are conveni-ently
carried away; and when they awake, find
themselves many Miles off in the Power of
their Ravisher.
               
                  Arabella's other Women, alarm'd by her
Cries, came running into the Room; and see-ing
Mr. Tinsel there, and their Lady ia a Swoon,
concluded some very extraordinary Accident
had happen'd.
               What is your Business here, cry'd they all at
a Time? Is it you that has frighted her Lady-ship?
               
                  

Devil take me, said Tinsel amaz'd, if I can
tell what all this means.
               By this Time Sir Charles, Mr. Glanville, and
his Sister, came running astonish'd up Stairs.
Arabella still continu'd motionless in her Chair,
her Eyes clos'd, and her Head reclin'd upon
Lucy, who with her other Women, was en-deavouring
to recover her.
               Mr. Glanville eagerly ran to her Assistance,
while Sir Charles and his Daughter as eagerly
interrogated Mr. Tinsel, who stood motionless
with Surprize, concerning the Cause of her
Disorder.
               
                  Arabella, then first discovering some Signs
of Life, half open'd her Eyes.
               Inhuman Wretch, cry'd she, with a faint
Voice, supposing herself in the Hands of her
Ravisher, think not thy cruel Violence shall
procure thee what thy Submissions could not
obtain; and if when thou hadst only my In-difference
to surmount, thou didst find it so dif-ficult
to overcome my Resolution, now that by
this unjust Attempt, thou hast added Aversion
to that Indifference, never hope for any Thing
but the most bitter Reproaches from me.—
               Why, Niece, said Sir Charles approaching
her, what's the Matter? Look up, I beseech
you, no-body is attempting to do you any Hurt;
here's none but Friends about you.
               
                  Arabella, raising her Head at the Sound of
her Uncle's Voice, and casting a confus'd Look
on the Persons about her,
               May I believe my Senses? Am I rescu'd,
and in my own Chamber? To whose Va-lour
is my Deliverance owing? Without

doubt, 'tis to my Cousin's; but where is he?
Let me assure him of my Gratitude.
               Mr. Glanville, who had retir'd to a Window
in great Confusion, as soon as he heard her call
for him, came towards her, and in a Whisper
begg'd her to be compos'd; that she was in no
Danger.
               And pray, Niece, said Sir Charles, now you
are a little recover'd, be so good to inform us
of the Cause of your Fright. What has hap-pen'd
to occasion all this Confusion?
               How, Sir, said Arabella, don't you know
then what has happen'd?—Pray how was I
brought again into my Chamber, and by what
Means was I rescu'd?
               I protest, said Sir Charles, I don't know that
you have been out of it.
               Alas, replied Arabella, I perceive you are
quite ignorant of what has befallen me; nor
am I able to give you any Information: All I
can tell you is, that alarm'd by my Womens
Cries, and the Sight of my Ravisher, who
came into my Chamber, I fainted away, and
so faciliated his Enterprize; since doubtless it
was very easy for him to carry me away while
I remain'd in that senseless Condition. How I
was rescu'd, or by whom, one of my Women
can haply inform you; since its probable one of
them was also forc'd away with me—Oh
Heav'ns! cry'd she, seeing Tinsel, who all this
while stood gazing like one distracted; what
makes that impious Man in my Presence!
What am I to think of this? Am I really de-liver'd
or no?
               
                  

What can this mean, cried Sir Charles, turn-ing
to Tinsel? Have you, Sir, had any Hand
in frighting my Niece?—
               I, Sir, said Tinsel! Let me perish if ever I
was so confounded in my Life: The Lady's
Brain is disorder'd I believe.
               Mr. Glanville, who was convinc'd all this
Confusion was caus'd by some of Arabella's
usual Whims, dreaded lest an Explanation would
the more expose her; and therefore told his
Father, that it would be best to retire, and leave
his Cousin to the Care of his Sister and her Wo-men;
adding, that she was not yet quite reco-ver'd,
and their Presence did but discompose
her.
               Then addressing himself to Tinsel, told him
he would wait upon him down Stairs.
               
                  Arabella seeing them going away together,
and supposing they intended to dispute the Pos-session
of her with their Swords, call'd out to
them to stay.
               Mr. Glanville however, without minding her,
press'd Mr. Tinsel to walk down.
               Nay, pray, Sir, said the Beau, let us go in
again; she may grow outrageous if we disoblige
her.
               Outrageous, Sir, said Glanville, do you sup-pose
my Cousin is mad?
               Upon my Soul, Sir, replied Tinsel, if she is
not mad, she is certainly a little out of her
Senses, or so—
               
                  Arabella having reiterated her Commands for
her Lovers to return, and finding they did not
obey her, ran to her Chamber-door, where they
were holding a surly Sort of Conference, espe-cially

            THE
Female QUIXOTE;
OR, THE
ADVENTURES
OF
ARABELLA. In TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.
            
               LONDON:
Printed for A. MILLAR, over-against Cathe-rine-Street
in the Strand.
               M.DCC.LII.
            
         
      
      
         
            

You will be very unjust, said Arabella, to
draw any unfavourable Conclusion from what
I have said, to the Prejudice of that valiant
Prince, for whom I confess I have a great Es-teem;
and truly whoever reflects upon the
great Actions he did in the Wars between the
Amazons and the fierce Naobarzanes King of
the Cilicians, must needs conceive a very high
Idea of his Virtue; but if I cannot bring the
Example of Orontes to influence you in the pre-sent
Case, I can mention those of other Per-sons,
no less illustrious for their Birth and Cou-rage,
than him. Did not the brave Memnon,
when his Rival Oxyatres was sick, intreat the
beautiful Barsina to favour him with a Visit?
And the complaisant Husband of the divine Pa-risatis
was not contented with barely desiring
her to visit Lysimachus, who was dying with
Despair at her Marriage, but would many
times bring her himself to the Bed-side of this
unfortunate Lover, and, leaving her there, give
him an Opportunity of telling her what he
suffered for her sake.
               I am afraid, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, I
shall never be capable of imitating either the
brave Memnon, nor the complaisant Lysimachus,
in this Case, and the Humour of Orontes seems
to me the most commendable.
               Nevertheless, said Arabella, the Humour of
Orontes cost him an infinite Number of Pains;
and it may happen, you will as near resemble
him in his Fortune as you do in his Disposition:
But pray let us end this Dispute at present.
If you are not generous enough to visit an un-fortunate
Rival, you shall not put a Stop to

on Glanville's Side, who was horridly out
of Humour.
               I perceive by your Looks. said Arabella to
her Cousin, the Design you are meditating;
but know that I absolutely forbid you, by all
the Power I have over you, not to engage in
Combat with my Ravisher here.
               Madam, interrupted Glanville, I beseech you
do not—
               I know, said she, you will object to me the
Examples of Artamenes, Aronces, and many
others, who were so generous as to promise
their Rivals not to refuse them that Satisfaction
whenever they demanded it—but consider, you
have not the same Obligations to Mr. Tinsel that
Artamenes had to the King of Assyria, or that
Arances had to—
               For God's Sake, Cousin, said Glanville, what's
all this to the Purpose? Curse on Aronces and
the King of Assyria, I say—
               The Astonishment of Arabella at this intem-perate
Speech of her Cousin, kept her for a Mo-ment
immoveable, when Sir Charles, who du-ring
this Discourse, had been collecting all the
Information he could from Lucy, concerning
this perplex'd Affair, came towards Tinsel, and
giving him an angry Look, told him, He should
take it well if he forbore visiting any of his Fa-mily
for the future.
               Oh! Your most obedient Servant, Sir, said
Tinsel: You expect, I suppose, I should be ex-cessively
chagrin'd at this Prohibition? But up-on
my Soul, I am greatly oblig'd to you. Agad!
I have no great Mind to a Halter: And since
this Lady is so apt to think People have a Design

to ravish her, the wisest Thing a Man can do,
is to keep out of her Way.
               Sir, replied Glanville, who had follow'd him
to the Door, I believe there was been some little
Mistake in what has happen'd To-day—How-ever,
I expect you'll take no unbecoming Li-berties
with the Character of Lady Bella—
               Oh! Sir, said Tinsel, I give you my Honour
I shall always speak of the Lady with the most
profound Veneration. She is a most accom-plish'd,
incomprehensible Lady: And the De-vil
take me, if I think there is her Fellow in
the World—And so, Sir, I am your most
obedient—
               A Word with you before you go, said
Glanville stopping him—No more of these Sneers
as you value that smooth Face of yours, or I'll
despoil it of a Nose.
               Oh! Your humble Servant, said the Beau,
retiring in great Confusion, with something be-twixt
a Smile and a Grin upon his Countenance,
which he took Care however Mr. Glanville
should not see; who as soon as he quitted him
went again to Arabella's Apartment, in order to
prevail upon his Father and Sister to leave her
a little to herself, for he dreaded lest some more
Instances of her Extravagance would put it in-to
his Father's Head, that she was really out of
her Senses.
               Well, Sir, said Arabella upon his Entrance,
you have I suppose, given your Rival his Li-berty.
I assure you this Generosity is highly
agreeable to me—And herein you imitate the
noble Artamenes, who upon a like Occasion,
acted as you have done. For when Fortune

had put the Ravisher of Mandana in his Power,
and he became the Vanquisher of his Rival,
who endeavour'd by Violence to possess that di-vine
Princess; this truly generous Hero relin-quish'd
the Right he had of disposing of his Pri-soner,
and instead of sacrificing his Life to his
just and reasonable Vengeance, he gave a Proof
of his admirable Virtue and Clemency by dis-missing
him in Safety, as you have done. How-ever,
added she, I hope you have made him
swear upon your Sword, that he will never
make a second Attempt upon my Liberty. I
perceive, pursued she, seeing Mr. Glanville con-tinued
silent, with his Eyes bent on the
Ground, for indeed he was asham'd to look up;
that you would willingly avoid the Praise due
to the heroick Action you have just perform'd—
Nay, I suppose you are resolv'd to keep it secret
if possible; yet I must tell you, that you will
not escape the Glory due to it. Glory is as
necessarily the Result of a virtuous Action, as
Light is an Effect of the Sun which causeth it,
and has no Dependence on any other Cause;
since a virtuous Action continues still the same,
tho' it be done without Testimony; and Glory,
which is, as one may say born with it, con-stantly
attends it, tho' the Action be not known.
               I protest Niece, said Sir Charles, that's very
prettily said.
               In my Opinion, Sir, pursued Arabella, if
any thing can weaken the Glory of a good
Action, its the Care a Person takes to make it
known: As if one did not do Good for the
Sake of Good, but for the Praise that generally
follows it. Those then that are govern'd by

so interested a Motive, ought to be consider'd
as sordid rather than generous Persons; who
making a Kind of Traffick between Virtue and
Glory, barter just so much of the one for the
other and expect like other Merchants, to
make Advantage by the Exchange.
               Mr. Glanville, who was charm'd into an Ex-tacy
at this sensible Speech of Arabella's, forgot
in an Instant all her Absurdities. He did not
fail to express his Admiration of her Under-standing
in Terms that brought a Blush into
her fair Face, and oblig'd her to lay her Com-mands
upon him to cease his excessive Com-mendations.
Then making a Sign to them to
leave her alone, Mr. Glanville who understood
her, took his Father and Sister down Stairs,
leaving Arabella with her faithful Lucy, whom
she immediately commanded to give her a Re-lation
of what had happen'd to her from the
Time of her swooning till she recover'd.
            
            
               CHAP. XIV.
               
                  A Dialogue between Arabella and Lucy,
in which the latter seems to have the
Advantage.
               
               WHY, Madam, said Lucy, all I can tell
your Ladyship is, that we were all ex-cessively
frighted, to be sure, when you faint-ed,
especially myself; and that we did what
we could to recover you—And so accordingly
your Ladyship did recover.
               
                  

What's this to the Purpose, said Arabella,
perceiving she stop'd here? I know that I faint-ed,
and 'tis also very plain that I recover'd
again—I ask you what happen'd to me in the
intermediate Time between my Fainting and
Recovery. Give me a faithful Relation of all
the Accidents, to which by my Fainting I am
quite a Stranger; and which no doubt, are very
considerable—
               Indeed, Madam, replied Lucy, I have given
your Ladyship a faithful Relation of all I can
remember.
               When, resum'd Arabella surpiz'd?—
               This Moment, Madam, said Lucy.
               
               Why, sure thou dream'st Wench, replied
she, Hast thou told me how I was seiz'd and
carry'd off? How I was rescu'd again? And—
               No, indeed, Madam, interrupted Lucy, I
don't dream; I never told your Ladyship that
you was carry'd off.
               Well, said Arabella, and why dost thou not
satisfy my Curiosity? Is it not fit I should be
acquainted with such a momentous Part of my
History?
               I can't indeed, and please your Ladyship,
said Lucy.
               
               What, can'st thou not, said Arabella, en-rag'd
at her Stupidity, as she thought it.
               Why, Madam, said Lucy sobbing, I can't
make a History of nothing.
               Of nothing, Wench, resum'd Arabella, in
a greater Rage than before: Dost thou call an
Adventure to which thou was a Witness, and
borest haply so great a Share in, nothing?—An
Adventure which hereafter will make a consi-derable

Figure in the Relation of my Life, dost
thou look upon as trisling and of no Conse-quence?
               No, indeed I don't, Madam, said Lucy.
               
               Why then, pursued Arabella, dost thou wil-fully
neglect to relate it? Suppose, as there is
nothing more likely, thou wert commanded by
some Persons of considerable Quality, or haply
some great Princes and Princesses, to recount
the Adventures of my Life, would'st thou omit
a Circumstance of so much Moment?
               No indeed, Madam, said Lucy.
               
               I am glad to hear thou art so discreet, said
Arabella; and pray do me the Favour to relate
this Adventure to me, as thou would'st do to
those Princes and Princesses, if thou wert com-manded.
               Here, Arabella making a full Stop, fix'd her
Eyes upon her Woman, expecting every Mo-ment
she would begin the desir'd Narrative—
But finding she continu'd silent longer than she
thought was necessary for recalling the several
Circumstances of the Story into her Mind,
               I find, said she, it will be necessary to cau-tion
you against making your Audience wait too
long for your Relation; it looks as if you was
to make a studied Speech, not a simple Relation
of Facts, which ought to be free from all Af-fectation
of Labour and Art; and be told with
that graceful Negligence which is so becoming
to Truth.
               This I thought proper to tell you, added she,
that you may not fall into that Mistake when you
are called upon to relate my Adventures—
Well, now if you please to begin—,
               
                  

What, pray, Madam, said Lucy?
               
               What, repeated Arabella? Why, the Ad-ventures
which happen'd to me so lately. Re-late
to me every Circumstance of my being
carried away, and how my Deliverance was ef-fected
by my Cousin.
               Indeed, Madam, said Lucy, I know nothing
about your Ladyship's being carried away. All
I know is—
               Begone, cried Arabella losing all Patience at
her Obstinacy, get out of my Presence this
Moment. Wretch, unworthy of my Confi-dence
and Favour, thy Treason is too manifest,
thou art brib'd by that presumptuous Man to
conceal all the Circumstances of his Attempt
from my Knowleddge, to the End that I may
not have a full Conviction of his Guilt.
               
                  Lucy, who never saw her Lady so much of-fended
before, and knew not the Occasion of
it, burst into Tears; which so affected the
tender Heart of Arabella, that losing insensibly
all her Anger, she told her with a Voice soft-en'd
to a Tone of the utmost Sweetness and
Condescension, that provided she would con-fess
how far she had been prevail'd upon by his
rich Presents, to forget her Duty, she would
pardon and receive her again into Favour—
               Speak, added she, and be not afraid after this
Promise, to let me know what Mr. Tinsel re-quir'd
of thee, and what were the Gifts with
which he purchas'd thy Services: doubtless, he
presented thee with Jewels of a considerable
Value—
               Since your Ladyship, said Lucy sobbing, has
promis'd not to be angry, I don't care if I do

tell your Ladyship what he gave me. He gave
me this half Guinea, Madam, indeed he did;
but for all that, when he would come into
your Chamber I struggled with him, and cry'd
out, for fear he should carry your Ladyship
away—
               
                  Arabella, lost in Astonishment and Shame at
hearing of so inconsiderable a Present made to
her Woman, the like of which not one of her
Romances could furnish her, order'd her im-mediately
to withdraw, not being willing she
should observe the Confusion this strange Bribe
had given her.
               After she had been gone some Time, she en-deavour'd
to compose her Looks, and went
down to the Dining-Room, where Sir Charles
and his Son and Daughter had been engag'd in
a Conversation concerning her, the Particulars
of which may be found in the first Chapter of
the next Book.
               
                  The End of the Seventh BOOK.
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK VIII.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Contains the Conversation referr'd to in
the last Chapter of the preceding Book.
               
               
                  MISS Glanville, who with a mali-cious
Pleasure had secretly tri-umph'd
in the Extravagances her
beautiful Cousin had been guilty
of, was now sensibly disappointed
to find they had had so little Effect on her Father
and Brother; for instead of reflecting upon the
Absurdities to which they had been a Witness,
Mr. Glanville artfully pursu'd the Subject Arabella
just before had been expatiating upon, taking no-tice
frequently of some Observations of hers, and

by a well contriv'd Repetition of her Words,
oblig'd his Father a second Time to declare that
his Niece had spoken extremely well.
               Mr. Glanville taking the Word, launch'd out
into such Praises of her Wit, that Miss Glan-ville,
no longer able to listen patiently, reply'd,
               'Twas true Lady Bella sometimes said very
sensible Things; that 'twas a great Pity she was
not always in a reasonable Way of thinking,
or that her Intervals were not longer—
               Her Intervals, Miss, said Glanville, pray
what do you mean by that Expression?—
               Why, pray, said Miss Glanville, don't you
think my Cousin is sometimes a little wrong in
the Head?
               Mr. Glanville at these Words starting from
his Chair, took a Turn a-cross the Room in
great Discomposure, then stopping all of a sud-den,
and giving his Sister a furious Look—
Charlotte, said he, don't give me Cause to think
you are envious of your Cousin's superior Ex-cellencies—
               Envious, repeated Miss Glanville, I envious
of my Cousin—I vow I sh
                     •
                  uld never have
thought of that—Indeed, Brother, you are
much mistaken; my Cousin's superior Excel-lencies
never gave me a Moment's Disturbance—
Tho' I must confess her unaccountable Whims
have often excited my Pity—
               No more of this, Charlotte, interrupted
Mr. Glanville, as you value my Friendship—
No more of it—
               Why, really Son, said Sir Charles, my Niece
has very strange Whimsies sometimes. How
it came into her Head to think Mr. Tinsel would

the Charity of my Intentions; and since Miss
Glanville is all of a sudden become so severe,
that she will not accompany me in this Visit,
I shall be contented with the Attendance of
my Women.
               Saying this, she rose from her Seat, calling
Lucy, and ordered her to bid her Companions
attend.
               Mr. Glanville, seeing her thus determined,
was almost mad with Vexation.
               Upon my Soul, Madam, said he, feizing
her Hand, you must not go.
               How, Sir! said Arabella, sternly.
               Not without seeing me die first, resumed he,
in a languishing Tone.
               You must not die, replied Arabella, a little
softened, nor must you pretend to hinder me
from going.
               Nay, Madam, said Glanville, one of these
two Things will certainly happen: Either you
must resolve not to visit Sir George, or else be
contented to see me die at your Feet.
               Was ever any Lady in so cruel a Dilemma?
said Arabella, throwing herself into the Chair
in a languishing Posture: What can I do to
prevent the Fate of two Persons, one of whom
I infinitely pity, and the other, obstinate as he
is, I cannot hate? Shall I resolve to let the
miserable Bellmour die, rather than grant him a
Favour the most rigid Virtue would not re-fuse
him? or shall I, by opposing the impetuous
Humour of a Lover, to whom I am some-what
obliged, make myself the Author of his
Death? Fatal Necessity! which obliges me
either to be cruel or unjust; and, with a Dispo-sition

attempt to carry her away, I can't imagine?
For after all, he only prest rather too rudely
into her Chamber, for which, as you see, I
have ferbidden his Visits.
               That was of a Piece, said Miss Glanville
sneeringly to her Brother, with her asking you
if you had made Mr. Tinsel swear upon your
Sword, that he would never again attempt to
carry her away; and applauding you for having
given him his Liberty, as the generous Atermens
did on the same Occasion.
               I would advise you, Charlotte, said Mr. Glan-ville,
not to aim at repeating your Cousins's
Words, till you know how to pronounce them
properly.
               Oh! that's one of her superior Excellencies,
said Miss Glanville.
               
               Indeed, Miss, said Glanville very provokingly,
she is superior to you in many Things; and as
much so in the Goodness of her Heart, as in
the Beauty of her Person—
               Come, come, Charles, said the Baronet,
who observ'd his Daughter sat swelling and bi-ting
her Lip at this Reproach, personal Reflecti-ons
are better avoided. Your Sister is very well,
and not to be disparag'd; tho' to be sure, Lady
Bella is the finest Woman I ever saw in my
Life.
               Miss Glanville was, if possible, more disgusted
at her Father's Palliation than her Brother's Re-proaches;
and in order to give a Loose to her
Passion, accus'd Mr. Glanville of a Decrease in
his Affection for her, since he had been in Love
with her Cousin; and having found this Excuse
for her Tears, very freely gave vent to them—
               
                  

Mr. Glanville being softned by this Sight, sa-crificed
a few Compliments to her Vanity,
which soon restor'd her to her usual Tranquillity;
then turning the Discourse on his beloved Ara-bella,
pronounc'd a Panegyrick on her Virtues
and Accomplishments of an Hour long; which,
if it did not absolutely persuade his Sister to
change her Opinion, it certainly convinc'd his
Father, that his Niece was not only perfectly
well in her Understanding, but even better than
most others of her Sex.
               Mr. Glanville had just finish'd her Eulogium,
when Arabella appear'd; Joy danc'd in his
Eyes at her Approach; he gaz'd upon her with
a Kind of conscious Triumph in his Looks;
her consummate Loveliness justifying his Pas-sion,
and being in his Opinion, more than an
Excuse for all her Extravagancies.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  In which our Heroine, as we presume,
shews herself in two very different
Lights.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, who at her Entrance had
perceiv'd some Traces of Uneasiness upon
Miss Glanville's Countenance, tenderly ask'd her
the Cause; to which that young Lady answer-ing
in a cold and reserv'd Manner, Mr. Glan-ville,
to divert her Reflexions on it, very freely
accus'd himself of having given his Sister some
Offence. To be sure, Brother, said Miss Glanville,
                  

you are very vehement in your Temper, and
are as violently carry'd away about Things of
little Importance as of the greatest; and then,
whatever you have a Fancy for, you love so
obstinately.
               I am oblig'd to you, Miss, interrupted
Mr. Glanville, for endeavouring to give Lady
Bella so unfavourable an Opinion of me—
               I assure you, said Arabella, Miss Glanville has
said nothing to your Disadvantage: For, in my
Opinion, the Temperament of great Minds
ought to be such as she represents yours to be.
For there is nothing at so great a Distance from
true and heroick Virtue, as that Indifference
which obliges some People to be pleas'd with all
Things or nothing: Whence it comes to pass,
that they neither entertain great Desires of Glo-ry,
nor Fear of Infamy; that they neither love
nor hate; that they are wholly influenc'd by
Custom, and are sensible only of the Afflictions
of the Body, their Minds being in a Manner
insensible—
               To say the Truth, I am inclin'd to conceive
a greater Hope of a Man, who in the Begin-ning
of his Life is hurry'd away by some evil
Habit, than one that fastens on nothing: The
Mind that cannot be brought to detest Vice,
will never be persuaded to love Virtue; but one
who is capable of loving or hating irreconcile-bly,
by having, when young, his Passions di-rected
to proper Objects, will remain fix'd in
his Choice of what is good. But with him who
is incapable of any violent Attraction, and
whose Heart is chilled by a general Indiffer-ence,
Precept or Example will have no Force—

And Philosophy itself, which boasts it hath Re-medies
for all Indispositions of the Soul, never
had any that can cure an indifferent Mind—
Nay, added she, I am persuaded that Indiffe-rence
is generally the inseparable Companion of
a weak and imperfect Judgment. For it is so
natural to a Person to be carry'd towards that
which he believes to be good, that if indifferent
People were able to judge of Things, they would
fasten on something. But certain it is that this
luke-warmness of Soul, which sends sorth but
seeble Desires, sends also but feeble Lights; so
that those who are guilty of it, not knowing
any thing clearly, cannot fasten on any thing
with Perseverance.
               Mr. Glanville, when Arabella had finish'd
this Speech, cast a triumphing Glance at his
Sister, who had affected great In-attention all
the while she had been speaking. Sir Charles
in his Way, express'd much Admiration of her
Wit, telling her, if she had been a Man, she
would have made a great Figure in Parliament,
and that her Speeches might have come perhaps
to be printed in time.
               This Compliment, odd as it was, gave great
Joy to Glanville, when the Conversation was
interrupted by the Arrival of Mr. Selvin, who
had slipt away unobserv'd at the Time that
Arabella's Indisposition had alarm'd them, and
now came to enquire after her Health; and also
if an Opportunity offer'd to set her right with
Regard to the Suspicions she had entertain'd of
his designing to pay his Addresses to her.
               
                  Arabella, as soon as he had sent in his Name,
appear'd to be in great Disturbance; and upon

his Entrance, offer'd immediately to withdraw,
telling Mr. Glanville, who would have detain'd
her, that she found no Place was likely to se-cure
her from the Persecutions of that Gen-tleman.
               
                  Glanville star'd, and look'd strangely per-plex'd
at this Speech; Miss Glanville smil'd,
and poor Selvin, with a very silly Look—hem'd
two or three times, and then with a faultring
Accent said, Madam, I am very much con-cern'd
to find your Ladyship resolv'd to per-sist
in—
               Sir, interrupted Arabella, my Resolutions
are unalterable. I told you so before, and am
surpriz'd, after the Knowledge of my Inten-tions,
you presume to appear in my Presence
again, from whence I had so positively banish'd
you.
               Pray, Niece, said Sir Charles, what has
Mr. Selvin done to disoblige you?
               Sir, reply'd Arabella, Mr. Selvin's Offence
can admit of no other Reparation than that
which I requir'd of him, which was a volun-tary
Banishment from my Presence: And in
this pursu'd she, I am guilty of no more Seve-rity
to you, than the Princess Udosia was to the
unfortunate Thrasimedes. For the Passion of
this Prince having come to her Knowledge,
notwithstanding the Pains he took to conceal it,
this fair and wise Princess thought it not enough
to forbid his speaking to her, but also banish'd
him from her Presence; laying a peremptory
Command upon him, never to appear before
her again till he was perfectly cur'd of that un-happy
Love he had entertain'd for her—Imitate

therefore the meritorious Obedience of this poor
Prince, and if that Passion you profess for me—
               How, Sir, interrupted Sir Charles, Do you
make Love to my Niece then?—
               Sir, replied Mr. Selvin, who was strangely
confounded at Arabella's Speech, tho' I really
admire the Perfections this Lady is possess'd of,
yet I assure you, upon my Honour, I never had
a Thought of making any Addresses to her;
and I can't imagine why her Ladyship persists
in accusing me of such Presumption.
               So formal a Denial after what Arabella had
said, extremely perplex'd Sir Charles, and fill'd
Mr. Glanville with inconceivable Shame—
               Miss Glanville enjoy'd their Disturbance, and
full of an ill-natur'd Triumph, endeavour'd to
look Arabella into Confusion: But that Lady
not being at all discompos'd by this Declaration
of Mr. Selvin's, having accounted for it al-ready,
replied with great Calmness,
               Sir, 'Tis easy to see thro' the Artifice of your
disclaiming any Passion for me—Upon any other
Occasion questionless, you would rather sacri-fice
your Life, than consent to disavow these
Sentiments, which unhappily for your Peace
you have entertain'd. At present the Desire of
continuing near me, obliges you to lay this
Constraint upon yourself; however you know
Thrasimedes fell upon the same Stratagem to no
Purpose. The rigid Udosia saw thro' the Dis-guise,
and would not dispense with herself from
banishing him from Rome, as I do you from
England—
               How, Madam! interrupted Selvin amaz'd—
               
                  

Yes, Sir, replied Arabella hastily, nothing
less can satisfy what I owe to the Consideration
of my own Glory.
               Upon my Word, Madam, said Selvin, half
angry, and yet strongly inclin'd to laugh, I
don't see the Necessity of my quitting my na-tive
Country, to satisfy what you owe to the
Consideration of your own Glory. Pray, how
does my staying in England affect your Lady-ship's
Glory?
               To answer your Question with another, said
Arabella, Pray how did the Stay of Thrasimedes
in Rome, affect the Glory of the Empress
Udosia?
               
               Mr. Selvin was struck dumb with this Speech,
for he was not willing to be thought so deficient
in the Knowledge of History, as not to be ac-quainted
with the Reasons why Thrasimedes
should not stay in Rome.
               
               His Silence therefore seeming to Arabella to
be a tacit Confession of the Justice of her Com-mands,
a Sentiment of Compassion for this un-fortunate
Lover, intruded itself into her Mind;
and turning her bright Eyes, full of a soft Com-placency
upon Selvin, who star'd at her as if he
had lost his Wits—
               I will not, said she, wrong the Sublimity of
your Passion for me so much, as to doubt your
being ready to sacrifice the Repose of your own
Life to the Satisfaction of mine: Nor will I
do so much Injustice to your Generosity, as to
suppose the Glory of obeying my Commands,
will not in some Measure soften the Rigour of
your Destiny—I know not whether it may be
lawful for me to tell you, that your Misfortune

does really cause me some Affliction; but I am
willing to give you this Consolation, and also
to assure you, that to whatever Part of the
World your Despair will carry you, the good
Wishes and Compassion of Arabella shall follow
you—
               Having said this, with one of her fair Hands
she cover'd her Face, to hide the Blushes which
so compassionate a Speech had caus'd—Holding
the other extended with a careless Air, sup-posing
he would kneel to kiss it, and bathe it
with his Tears, as was the Custom on such me-lancholy
Occasions, her Head at the samè Time
turned another Way, as if reluctantly and
with Confusion she granted this Favour.—
But after standing a Moment in this Posture,
and finding her Hand untouch'd, she concluded
Grief had depriv'd him of his Senses, and that
he would shortly fall into a Swoon as Thrasime-des
did: And to prevent being a Witness of so
doleful a Sight, she hurry'd out of the Room
without once turning about, and having reach'd
her own Apartment, sunk into a Chair, not a
little affected with the deplorable Condition in
which she had left her suppos'd miserable Lover.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The Contrast continued.
               
               THE Company she had left behind her be-ing
all, except Mr. Glanville, to the last
Degree surpriz'd at her strange Words and

Actions, continued mute for several Minutes
after she was gone, staring upon one another,
as if each wish'd to know the other's Opinion
of such an unaccountable Behaviour. At last
Miss Glanville, who observed her Brother's Back
was towards her, told Mr. Selvin in a low
Voice, that she hop'd he would call and take
his Leave of them before he set out for the
Place where his Despair would carry him.—
               Mr. Selvin in spite of his natural Gravity,
could not forbear laughing at this Speech of
Miss Glanville's, which shock'd her Brother,
and not being able to stay where Arabella was
ridicul'd, nor intitled to resent it, which would
have been a manifest Injustice on that Occasion,
he retir'd to his own Apartment to give vent to
that Spleen which in those Moments made him
out of Humour with all the World.
               Sir Charles, when he was gone, indulg'd
himself in a little Mirth on his Niece's Extra-vagance,
protesting he did not know what to do
with her. Upon which Miss Glanville observ'd,
that it was a Pity there were not such Things
as Protestant Nunneries; giving it as her Opi-nion,
that her Cousin ought to be confin'd in
one of those Places, and never suffer'd to see
any Company, by which Means she would avoid
exposing herself in the Manner she did now.
               Mr. Selvin, who possibly thought this a rea-sonable
Scheme of Miss Glanville's, seem'd by
his Silence to assent to her Opinion; but Sir
Charles was greatly displeas'd with his Daughter
for expressing herself so freely; alledging that
Arabella, when she was out of those Whims,
was a very sensible young Lady, and sometimes.

talk'd as learnedly as a Divine. To which
Mr. Selvin also added, that she had a great
Knowledge of History, and had a most sur-prizing
Memory; and after some more Dis-course
to the same Purpose, he took his Leave,
earnestly entreating Sir Charles to believe that
he never entertain'd any Design of making his
Addresses to Lady Bella.
               
               In the mean Time, that Lady after having
given near half an Hour to those Reflexions
which occur to Heroines in the same Situation
with herself, called for Lucy, and order'd her
to go to the Dining-Room, and see in what
Condition Mr Selvin was, telling her she had
certainly left him in a Swoon, as also the Oc-casion
of it; and bid her give him all the Con-solation
in her Power.
               
                  Lucy, with Tears in her Eyes at this Recital,
went down as she was order'd, and entering the
Room without any Ceremony, her Thoughts
being wholly fix'd on the melancholy Circum-stance
her Lady had been telling her; she look'd
eagerly round the Room without speaking a
Word, till Sir Charles and Miss Glanville, who
thought she had been sent with some Message
from Arabella, ask'd her both at the same In-stant,
What she wanted?—
               I came, Sir, said Lucy, repeating her Lady's
Words, to see in what Condition Mr. Selvin is
in, and to give him all the Solation in my
Power.
               Sir Charles, laughing heartily at this Speech,
ask'd her what she could do for Mr. Selvin?
To which she reply'd, she did not know; but

to neither, makes me, in some Degree,
guilty of both!
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  In which our Heroine is in some little
Confusion.
               
               WHILE Arabella was uttering this pa-thetic
Complaint, Mr. Glanville, with
great Difficulty, kept himself from smiling;
and, by some supplicating Looks to his Sister,
prevented her laughing out; yet she gigled in
secret behind her Fan: But Arabella was so lost
in her melancholy Reflections, that she kept
her Eyes immoveably fixed on the Ground for
some Moments: At last, casting an upbraiding
Glance at Glanville;
               
               Is it possible, cruel Person that you are !
said she to him, that you can, without Pity,
see me suffer so much Uneasiness; and, knowing
the Sensibility of my Temper, can expose me
to the Grief of being accessary to the Death of
an unfortunate Man, guilty indeed of a too
violent Passion, which merits a gentler Punish-ment,
than that you doom him to?
               Don't be uneasy, dear Cousin, interrupted
Miss Glanville; I dare assure you Sir George
won't die.
               It is impossible to think that, said Arabella,
since he has not so much as received a Com-mand
from me to live; but tell me truly, pur-sued
she, do you believe it probable, that he will
obey me, and live?
               
                  

her Lady had told her to give him all the Sola-tion
in her Power.
               Consolation thou would'st say, I suppose, said
Sir Charles.
               
               Yes, Sir, said Lucy curtesying. Well, Child,
added he, go up and tell your Lady, Mr. Selvin
does not need any Consolation.
               
                  Lucy accordingly return'd with this Message,
and was met at the Chamber-Door by Arabella,
who hastily ask'd her if Mr. Selvin was reco-ver'd
from his Swoon: To which Lucy reply'd
that she did not know; but that Sir Charles
bid her tell her Ladyship, Mr. Selvin did not
need any Consolation.
               Oh Heavens! cry'd Arabella, throwing her-self
into a Chair as pale as Death—He is dead,
he has fallen upon his Sword, and put an End
to his Life and Miseries at once—Oh! how un-happy
am I, cry'd she, bursting into Tears, to
be the Cause of so cruel an Accident—Was
ever any Fate so terrible as mine—Was ever
Beauty so fatal—Was ever Rigour so unfortu-nate—How
will the Quiet of my future Days
be disturbed by the sad Remembrance of a Man
whose Death was caused by my Disdain—But
why, resum'd she after a little Pause—Why do
I thus afflict myself for what has happen'd by an
unavoidable Necessity? Nor am I singular in
the Misfortune which has befallen me—Did not
the sad Perinthus die for the beautiful Panthea—
Did not the Rigour of Barsina bring the mise-rable
Oxyatres to the Grave—And the Severity
of Statira make Oroondates fall upon his Sword
in her Presence, tho' happily he escap'd being
kill'd by it—Let us then not afflict ourselves

unreasonably at this sad Accident—Let us la-ment
as we ought the fatal Effects of our
Charms—But let us comfort ourselves with the
Thought that we have only acted conformable
to our Duty.
               
                  Arabella having pronounc'd these last Words
with a solemn and lofty Accent, order'd Lucy,
who listen'd to her with Eyes drown'd in Tears,
to go down and ask if the Body was remov'd—
for added she, all my Constancy will not be
sufficient to support me against that pitiful
Sight.
               
                  Lucy accordinly deliver'd her Message to
Sir Charles and Miss Glanville, who were still
together, discoursing on the fantastical Turn of
Arabella, when the Knight, who could not
possibly comprehend what she meant by asking
if the Body was removed, bid her tell her Lady
he desired to speak with her.
               
                  Arabella, upon receiving this Summons, set
herself to consider what could be the Intent of
it. If Mr. Selvin be dead, said she, what Good
can my Presence do among them? Surely it
cannot be to upbraid me with my Severity, that
my Uncle desires to see me—No, it would be
unjust to suppose it. Questionless my unhappy
Lover is still struggling with the Pangs of Death,
and for a Consolation in his last Moments, im-plores
the Favour of resigning up his Life in my
Sight. Pausing a little at these Words, she rose
from her Seat with a Resolution to give the un-happy
Selvin her Pardon before he dy'd. Meet-ing
Mr. Glanville as he was returning from his
Chamber to the Dining-Room, she told him,
she hop'd the Charity she was going to discover

towards his Rival, would not give him any
Uneasiness; and preventing his Reply by going
hastily into the Room, he follow'd her dreading
some new Extravagance, yet not able to prevent
it, endeavour'd to conceal his Confusion from her
Observation—Arabella after breathing a gentle
Sigh told told Sir Charles, that she was come to
grant Mr. Selvin her Pardon for the Offence he
had been guilty of, that he might depart in
Peace.
               Well, well, said Sir Charles, he is departed in
Peace without it.
               How, Sir, interrupted Arabella, is he dead
then already? Alas! why had he not the Satis-faction
of seeing me before he expir'd, that his
Sould might have departed in Peace! He would
have been assur'd not only of my Pardon, but
Pity also; and that Assurance would have made
him happy in his last Moments.
               Why, Niece, interrupted Sir Charles staring,
you surprize me prodigiously: Are you in
earnest?
               Questionless I am, Sir, said she, nor ought you
to be surpriz'd at the Concern I express for the
Fate of this unhappy Man, nor at the Pardon I
propos'd to have granted him; since herein I am
justified by the Example of many great and
virtuous Princesses, who have done as much,
nay, haply more than I intended to have done,
for Persons whose Offences were greater than
Mr. Selvin's.
               I am very sorry, Madam, said Sir Charles,
to hear you talk in this Manner: 'Tis really
enough to make one suspect you are—
               
                  

You do me great Injustice, Sir, interrupted
Arabella, if you suspect me to be guilty of any
unbecoming Weakness for this Man: If barely
expressing my Compassion for his Misfortunes
be esteem'd so great a Favour, what would you
have thought if I had supported his Head on my
Knees while he was dying, shed Tears over
him, and discover'd all the Tokens of a sincere
Affliction for him?—
               Good God! said Sir Charles lifting up his
Eyes, Did any body ever hear of any thing like
this?
               What, Sir, said Arabella, with as great an
Appearance of Surprize in her Countenance as
his had discover'd, Do you say you never heard
of any thing like this? Then you never heard
of the Princess of Media, I suppose—
               No, not I, Madam, said Sir Charles peevishly.
               Then, Sir, resum'd Arabella, permit me to
tell you, that this fair and virtuous Princess
condescended to do all I have mention'd for the
fierce Labynet, Prince of Assyria; who tho' he
had mortally offended her by stealing her away
out of the Court of the King her Father, ne-vertheless,
when he was wounded to Death in
her Presence, and humbly implor'd her Pardon
before he died, she condescended as I have said,
to support him on her Knees, and shed Tears
for his Disaster—I could produce many more
Instances of the like Compassion in Ladies al-most
as highly born as herself, tho' perhaps their
Quality was not quite so illustrious, she being
the Heiress of two powerful Kingdoms. Yet
to mention only these—
               
                  

Good Heav'ns! cry'd Mr. Glanville here,
being quite out of Patience, I shall go di-stracted—
               
                  Arabella surpriz'd at this Exclamation, look'd
earnestly at him for a Moment—and then ask'd
him, Whether any thing she had said had given
him Uneasiness?
               Yes, upon my Soul, Madam, said Glanville
so vex'd and confus'd that he hardly knew what
he said—
               I am sorry for it, reply'd Arabella gravely,
and also am greatly concern'd to find that in
Generosity you are so much exceeded by the il-lustrious
Cyrus; who was so far from taking
Umbrage at Mandana's Behaviour to the dying
Prince, that he commended her for the Com-passion
she had shewn him. So also did the
brave and generous Oroondates, when the fair
Statira—
               By Heav'ns! cry'd Glanville rising in a Pas-sion,
there's no hearing this. Pardon me,
Madam, but upon my Soul, you'll make me
hang myself.
               Hang yourself, repeated Arabella, sure you
know not what you say?—You meant, I sup-pose,
that you'll fall upon your Sword. What
Hero ever threatned to give himself so vulgar
a Death? But pray let me know the Cause of
your Despair, so sudden and so violent.
               Mr. Glanville continuing in a sort of sullen
Silence, Arabella raising her Voice went on:
               Tho' I do not conceive myself oblig'd to give
you an Account of my Conduct, seeing that I
have only permitted you yet to hope for my
Favour; yet I owe to myself and my own

Honour the Justification I am going to make.
Know then, that however suspicious my Com-passion
for Mr. Selvin may appear to your mi-staken
Judgment, yet it has its Foundation
only in the Generosity of my Disposition, which
inclines me to pardon the Fault when the un-happy
Criminal repents; and to afford him my
Pity when his Circumstances require it. Let
not therefore the Charity I have discover'd to-wards
your Rival, be the Cause of your De-spair,
since my Sentiments for him were he
living, would be what they were before; that
is, full of Indifference, nay, haply Disdain.
And suffer not yourself to be so carried away
by a violent and unjust Jealousy, as to threaten
your won Death, which if you really had any
Ground for your Suspicions, and truly lov'd me,
would come unsought for, tho' not undesir'd—
For indeed, was your Despair reasonable, Death
would necessarily follow it; for what Lover can
live under so desperate a Misfortune. In that
Case you may meet Death undauntedly when it
comes, nay, embrace it with Joy; but truly
the killing one's self is but a false Picture of true
Courage, proceeding rather from Fear of a fur-ther
Evil, than Contempt of that you fly to:
For if it were a Contempt of Pain, the same
Principle would make you resolve to bear pa-tiently
and fearlesly all kind of Pains; and
Hope being of all other the most contrary Thing
to Fear, this being an utter Banishment of Hope,
seems to have its Ground in Fear.
            
            
               

               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which Mr. Glanville makes an unsuc-cessful
Attempt upon Arabella.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, when she had finish'd these
Words, which banish'd in part Mr. Glan-ville's
Confusion, went to her own Apartment,
follow'd by Miss Glanville, to whom she had
made a Sign for that Purpose; and throwing
herself into a Chair, burst into Tears, which
greatly surprizing Miss Glanville, she prest her
to tell her the Cause.
               Alas! reply'd Arabella, have I not Cause to
think myself extremely unhappy? The deplo-rable
Death of Mr. Selvin, the Despair to which
I see your Brother reduc'd, with the fatal Con-sequences
which may attend it, fills me with a
mortal Uneasiness.
               Well, said Miss Glanville, your Ladyship
may make yourself quite easy as to both these
Matters; for Mr. Selvin is not dead, nor is my
Brother in Despair that I know of.
               What do you say, Miss, interrupted Arabella,
is not Mr. Selvin dead? Was the Wound he
gave himself not mortal then?
               I know of no Wound that he gave himself,
not I, said Miss Glanville; what makes your
Ladyship suppose he gave himself a Wound▪
Lord bless me, what strange Thoughts come
into your Head.
               Truly I am rejoic'd to hear it, reply'd Ara-bella;
and in order to prevent the Effects of his
Despair, I'll instantly dispatch my Commands
to him to live.
               
                  

I dare answer for his Obedience, Madam,
said Miss Glanville smiling.
               
                  Arabella then gave Orders for Paper and Pens
to be brought her, and seeing Mr. Glanville en-ter
the Room, very formally acquainted him
with her Intention, telling him, that he ought
to be satisfy'd with the Banishment to which
she had doom'd his unhappy Rival, and not re-quire
his Death, since he and nothing to fear
from his Pretensions.
               I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, I
am perfectly easy upon that Account: And in
order to spare you the Trouble of sending to
Mr. Selvin, I may venture to assure you that he
is in no Danger of dying.
               'Tis impossible, Sir, reply'd Arabella, ac-cording
to the Nature of Things, 'tis impossi-ble
but he must already be very near Death—
You know the Rigour of my Sentence, you
know—
               I know, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, that
Mr. Selvin does not think himself under a Ne-cessity
of obeying your Sentence; and has the
Impudence to question your Authority for ba-nishing
him from his native Country.
               My Authority, Sir, said Arabella strangely
surpriz'd, is founded upon the absolute Power
he has given me over him.
               He denies that, Madam, said Glanville, and
says that he neither can give, nor you exercise
an absolute Power over him; since you are
both accountable to the King, whose Subjects
you are, and both restrain'd by the Laws un-der
whose Sanction you live.
               
                  

                  Arabella's apparent Confusion at these Words
giving Mr. Glanville Hopes that he had fallen
upon a proper Method to cure her of some of
her strange Notions, he was going to pursue his
Arguments, when Arabella looking a little
sternly upon him,
               The Empire of Love, said she, like the Em-pire
of Honour, is govern'd by Laws of its
own, which have no Dependence upon, or Re-lation
to any other.
               Pardon me, Madam, said Glanville, if I pre-sume
to differ from you. Our Laws have fix'd
the Boundaries of Honour as well as those of
Love.
               How is that possible, reply'd Arabella, when
they differ so widely, that a Man may be justi-fy'd
by the one, and yet condemn'd by the
other? For Instance, pursued she, you are not
permitted by the Laws of the Land to take
away the Life of any Person whatever; yet the
Laws of Honour oblige you to hunt your Ene-my
thro' the World, in order to sacrifice him
to your Vengeance. Since it is impossible then
for the same Actions to be at once just and un-just,
it must necessarily follow, that the Law
which condemns it, and that which justifies it
is not the same, but directly opposite—And
now, added she, after a little Pause, I hope I
have entirely clear'd up that Point to you.
               You have indeed, Madam, reply'd Mr. Glan-ville,
proved to a Demonstration, that what
is called Honour is something distinct from Ju-stice,
since they command Things absolutely
opposite to each other.
               
                  

                  Arabella without reflecting on this Inference,
went on to prove the independent Sovereignty
of Love, which, said she, may be collected
from all the Words and Actions of those Heroes
who were inspir'd by this Passion. We see it
in them, pursued she, triumphing not only over
all natural and avow'd Allegiance, but superior
even to Friendship, Duty, and Honour itself.
This the Actions of Oroondates, Artaxerxes,
Spitridates, and many other illustrious Princes
sufficiently testify.
               Love requires a more unlimited Obedience
from its Slaves, than any other Monarch can
expect from his Subjects; an Obedience which
is circumscrib'd by no Laws whatever, and de-pendent
upon nothing but itself.
               I shall live, Madam, says the renowned
Prince of Scythia to the divine Statira, I shall
live, since it is your Command I should do so;
and Death can have no Power over a Life which
you are pleas'd to take Care of—
               Say only that you wish I should conquer,
said the great Juba to the incomparable Cleo-patra,
and my Enemies will be already van-quish'd
—Victory will come over to the Side
you favour—and an Army of a hundred thou-sand
Men will not be able to overcome the Man
who has your Commands to conquer—
               How mean and insignificant, pursued she,
are the Titles bestow'd on other Monarchs com-par'd
with those which dignify the Sovereigns of
Hearts, such as divine Arbitress of my Fate,
Visible Divinity, Earthly Goddess, and many
others equally sublime—
               
                  

Indeed, Madam, said Miss Glanville, I could
swear for him that he will.
               Well, replied Arabella, I will content myself
with sending him my Commands in Writing;
but it is to be feared they will not have so much
Efficacy upon his Spirit.
               Mr. Glanville, extremely pleased that she
had laid aside her Design of visiting Sir George,
did not oppose her writing to him, though he
was plotting how to prevent the Letter reaching
his Hands; and while she went into her Closet
to write, he conferred with his Sister upon the
Means he should use, expressing, at the same
time, great Resentment against Sir George,
for endeavouring to supplant him in his Cousin's
Affection.
               What then, said Miss Glanville, do you
really imagine Sir George is in Love with Lady
Bella?
               
               He is either in Love with her Person or
Estate, replied Mr. Glanville, or perhaps with
both; for she is handsome enough to gain a
Lover of his Merit, though she had no For-tune;
and she has Fortune enough to do it,
though she had no Beauty.
               My Cousin is well enough, to be sure, said
Miss Glanville; but I never could think her a
Beauty.
               If, replied Mr. Glanville, a most lovely
Complection, regular Features, a fine Stature,
an elegant Shape, and an inexpressible Grace
in all her Motions, can form a Beauty, Lady
Bella may pretend to that Character, without
any Dispute.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville losing all patience at her obsti-nate
Folly, interrupted her here with a Question
quite foreign to the Subject she was discussing,
and soon after quitting her Chamber, retir'd to
his own, more than ever despairing of her Re-covery.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  In which is introduc'd a very singular
Character.
               
               MISS Glanville, whose Envy and Dislike
of her lovely Cousin was heighten'd by
her Suspicions that she disputed with her the
Possession of Sir George's Heart, she having
been long in reality a great Admirer of that gay
Gentleman, was extremely delighted with the
Ridicule her absurd Behaviour had drawn upon
her at Bath, which she found by Enquiry was
thro' Mr. Tinsel's Representation grown almost
general.
               In order therefore to be at Liberty to go to the
Publick Places un-eclips'd by the superior Beau-ty
of Arabella, she acquainted her Father and
Brother with Part of what she had heard, which
determin'd them to prevent that young Lady's
Appearance in Publick while they staid at Bath;
this being no difficult Matter to bring about,
since Arabella only went to the Rooms or Parade
in Compliance with the Invitation of her
Cousins.
               
                  

Miss Glanville being by these Means rid of a
Rival too powerful even to contend with, went
with more than usual Gaiety to the Assembly,
where the Extravagancies of Arabella afforded
a perpetual Fund for Diversion. Her more
than passive Behaviour upon this Occasion, ba-nishing
all Restraint among those she convers'd
with, the Jest circulated very freely at Arabella's
Expence. Nor did Miss Glanville fail to give
new Poignancy to their Sarcasms, by artfully
disclosing the bent of her Cousin's Studies, and
enumerating the many Absurdities they had
made her guilty of.
               
                  Arabella's uncommon Beauty had gain'd her
so many Enemies among the Ladies that com-pos'd
this Assembly, that they seem'd to con-tend
with each other who should ridicule her
most. The celebrated Countess of—be-ing
then at Bath, approach'd a Circle of these
fair Defamers, and listning a few Moments to
the contemptuous Jests they threw out against
the absent Beauty, declar'd herself in her Fa-vour;
which in a Moment, such was the Force
of her universally acknowledg'd Merit, and the
Deference always pay'd to her Opinion, silenc'd
every pretty Impertinent around her.
               This Lady, who among her own Sex had no
Superior in Wit, Elegance, and Ease, was in-ferior
to very few of the other in Sense, Learn-ing,
and Judgment. Her Skill in Poetry,
Painting, and Musick, tho' incontestably great,
was number'd among the least of her Accom-plishments.
Her Candour, her Sweetness, her
Modesty and Benevolence, while they secur'd
her from the Darts of Envy, render'd her su-perior

to Praise, and made the one as unneces-sary
as the other ineffectual.
               She had been a Witness of the Surprize
Arabella's extraordinary Appearance had occa-sion'd,
and struck with that as well as the un-common
Charms of her Person, had prest near
her with several others of the Company, when
she was discoursing in the Manner we have re-lated.
               A Person of the Countess's nice Discern-ment
could not fail of observing the Wit and
Spirit, which tho' obscur'd, was not abso-lutely
hid under the Absurdity of her No-tions.
And this Discovery adding Esteem to
the Compassion she felt for the fair Visionary,
she resolv'd to rescue her from the ill-natur'd
Raillery of her Sex; praising therefore her
Understanding, and the Beauty of her Person
with a Sweetness and Generosity peculiar to
herself, she accounted in the most delicate
Manner imaginable for the Singularity of her
Notions, from her Studies, her Retirment, her
Ignorance of the World, and her lively Ima-gination.
And to abate the Keenness of their
Sarcasms, acknowledg'd, that she herself had
when very young, been deep read in Roman-ces;
and but for an early Acquaintance with
the World, and being directed to other Studies,
was likely to have been as much a Heroine as
Lady Bella.
               
               Miss Glanville, tho' she was secretly vex'd at
this Defence of her Cousin, was however under
a Necessity of seeming oblig'd to the Countess
for it: And that Lady expressing a Desire to be
acquainted with Lady Bella, Miss Glanville
                  

respectfully offer'd to attend her Cousin to her
Lodgings, which the Countess as respectfully
declin'd, saying, As Lady Bella was a Stranger,
she would make her the first Visit.
               Miss Glanville at her Return gave her Bro-ther
an Account of what had happen'd at the
Assembly, and fill'd him with an inconceivable
Joy at the Countess's Intention. He had al-ways
been a zealous Admirer of that Lady's
Character, and flatter'd himself that the Con-versation
of so admirable a Woman would be
of the utmost Use to Arabella.
               
               That very Night he mention'd her to his be-loved
Cousin; and after enumerating all her
fine Qualities, declar'd that she had already con-ceiv'd
a Friendship for her, and was solicitous of
her Acquaintance.
               I think myself extremely fortunate, replied
Arabella, in that I have (tho' questionless un-deservedly)
acquir'd the Amity of this lovely
Person; and I beg you, pursued she to Miss
Glanville, to tell her, that I long with Impa-tience
to embrace her, and to give her that
Share in my Heart which her transcendent Me-rit
deserves.
               Miss Glanville only bow'd her Head in An-swer
to this Request, giving her Brother at the
same Time a significant Leer; who tho' used
to Arabella's Particularities, could not help be-ing
a little confounded at the heroick Speech
she had made.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Containing something which at first Sight
may possibly puzzle the Reader.
               
               THE Countess was as good as her Word,
and two Days after sent a Card to Ara-bella,
importing her Design to wait on her that
Afternoon.
               Our Heroine expected her with great Impa-tience,
and the Moment she enter'd the Room
flew towards her with a graceful Eagerness, and
straining her in her Arms, embrac'd her with
all the Fervour of a long absent Friend.
               Sir Charles and Mr. Glanville were equally
embarrass'd at the Familiarity of this Address;
but observing that the Countess seem'd not to
be surpriz'd at it, but rather to receive it with
Pleasure, they were soon compos'd.
               You cannot imagine, lovely Stranger, said
Arabella to the Countess, as soon as they were
seated, with what Impatience I have long'd to
behold you, since the Knowledge I have receiv'd
of your rare Qualities, and the Friendship you
have been pleas'd to honour me with—And I
may truly protest to you, that such is my Ad-miration
of your Virtues, that I would have
gone to the farthest Part of the World to ren-der
you that which you with so much Genero-sity
have condescended to bestow upon me.
               Sir Charles star'd at this extraordinary Speech,
and not being able to comprehend a Word of
it, was concern'd to think how the Lady to
whom it was address'd would understand it.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville look'd down, and bit his Nails
in extreme Confusion; but the Countess who
had not forgot the Language of Romance, re-turn'd
the Compliment in a Strain as heroick as
hers.
               The Favour I have receiv'd from For-tune,
said, she, in bringing me to the Happiness
of your Acquaintance, charming Arabella, is
so great, that I may rationally expect some ter-rible
Misfortune will befall me: Seeing that in
this Life our Pleasures are so constantly succeed-ed
by Pains, that we hardly ever enjoy the one
without suffering the other soon after.
               
                  Arabella was quite transported to hear the
Countess express herself in Language so con-formable
to her own; but Mr. Glanville was
greatly confounded, and began to suspect she was
diverting herself with his Cousin's Singularities:
And Sir Charles was within a little of thinking
her as much out of the Way as his Niece.
               Misfortunes, Madam, said Arabella, are too
often the Lot of excellent Persons like yourself.
The sublimest among Mortals both for Beauty
and Virtue have experienc'd the Frowns of Fate.
The Sufferings of the divine Statira or Cassan-dra,
for she bore both Names, the Persecutions
of the incomparable Cleopatra, the Dissresses of
the beautiful Cundace, and the Afflictions of the
fair and generous Mandana, are Proofs that the
most illustrious Persons in the World have felt
the Rage of Calamity.
               It must be confess'd, said the Countess, that
all those fair Princesses you have nam'd, were
for a while extremely unfortunate: Yet in the
Catalogue of these lovely and afflicted Persons

you have forgot one who might with Justice
dispute the Priority of Sufferings with them all—
I mean the beautiful Elisa, Princess of Parthia.
               
               Pardon me, Madam, reply'd Arabella, I can-not
be of your Opinion. The Princess of Par-thia
may indeed justly be rank'd among the
Number of unfortunate Persons, but she can
by no means dispute the melancholy Precedence
with the divine Cleopatra—For in fine, Madam,
what Evils did the Princess of Parthia suffer
which the fair Cleopatra did not likewise en-dure,
and some of them haply in a greater De-gree?
If Elisa by the tyrannical Authority of
the King her Father, saw herself upon the Point
of becoming the Wife of a Prince she detested,
was not the beautiful Daughter of Antony, by
the more unjustifiable Tyranny of Augustus, likely
to be forced into the Arms of Tyberius, a proud
and cruel Prince, who was odious to the whole
World as well as to her? If Elisa was for some
time in the Power of Pyrates, was not Cleo-patra
Captive to an inhuman King, who pre-sented
his Sword to the fair Breast of that di-vine
Princess worthy the Adoration of the
whole Earth? And in fine, if Elisa had the
Grief to see her dear Artaban imprison'd by the
Order of Augustus, Cleopatra beheld with mor-tal
Agonies, her beloved Coriolanus inclos'd
amidst the Guards of that enrag'd Prince, and
doom'd to a cruel Death.
               'Tis certain, Madam, reply'd the Countess,
that the Misfortunes of both these Princesses
were very great, tho' as you have shew'd me
with some Inequality: And when one reflects
upon the dangerous Adventures to which Per-sons

of their Quality were expos'd in those
Times, one cannot help rejoicing that we live
in an Age in which the Customs, Manners,
Habits, and Inclinations differ so widely from
theirs, that 'tis impossible such Adventures
should even happen.
               Such is the strange Alteration of Things, that
some People I dare say at present, cannot be per-suaded
to believe there ever were Princesses wan-dering
thro' the World by Land and Sea in mean
Disguises, carry'd away violently out of their Fa-ther's
Dominions by insolent Lovers—Some
discover'd sleeping in Forests, other Shipwreck'd
on desolate Islands, confin'd in Castles, bound
in Chariots, and even strugling amidst the tem-pestuous
Waves of the Sea, into which they
had cast themselves to avoid the brutal Force of
their-Ravishers. Not one of these Things hav-ing
happen'd within the Compass of several
thousand Years, People unlearn'd in Antiquity
would be apt to deem them idle Tales, so im-probable
do they appear at present.
               
                  Arabella, tho' greatly surpriz'd at this Dis-course,
did not think proper to express her
Thoughts of it. She was unwilling to appear
absolutely ignorant of the present Customs of
the World, before a Lady whose good Opinion
she was ardently desirous of improving. Her
Prepossessions in favour of the Countess made
her receive the new Delights she held out to her
with Respect, tho' not without Doubt and Ir-resolution.
Her Blushes, her Silence, and
down-cast Eyes gave the Countess to understand
Part of her Thoughts; who for fear of alarm-ing
her too much for that Time, dropt the

Subject, and turning the Conversation on others
more general, gave Arabella an Opportunity of
mingling in it with that Wit and Vivacity
which was natural to her when Romances
were out of the Question.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which if the Reader has not antici-pated
it, he will find an Explanation
of some seeming Inconsistencies in the
foregoing Chapter.
               
               THE Countess, charm'd with the Wit
and good Sense of Arabella, could not
conceal her Admiration, but exprest it in Terms
the most obligingly imaginable: And Arabella,
who was excessively delighted with her, return'd
the Compliments she made her with the most
respectful Tenderness.
               In the midst of these mutual Civilities,
Arabella in the Style of Romance, intreated
the Countess to favour her with the Recital of
her Adventures.
               At the Mention of this Request, that Lady
convey'd so much Confusion into her Counte-nance,
that Arabella extremely embarrass'd by
it, tho' she knew not why, thought it neces-sary
to apologize for the Disturbance she seem'd
to have occasion'd in her.
               Pardon me, Madam, reply'd the Countess
recovering herself, if the uncommoness of your
Request made a Moment's Reflexion necessary

to 
                     
                   that a young Lady of your
Sense and Delicacy could mean no Offence to
Decorum by making it. The Word Adven-tures
carries in it so free and licentious a Sound
in the Apprehensions of People at this Period
of Time, that it can hardly with Propriety be
apply'd to those few and natural Incidents which
compose the History of a Woman of Honour.
And when I tell you, pursued she with a Smile,
that I was born and christen'd, had a useful
and proper Education, receiv'd the Addresses of
my Lord—through the Recommendation
of my Parents, and marry'd him with their
Consents and my own Inclination; and that
since we have liv'd in great Harmony together,
I have told you all the material Passages of my
Life, which upon Enquiry you will find differ
very little from those of other Women of the
same Rank, who have a moderate Share of
Sense, Prudence and Virtue.
               Since you have already, Madam, replied
Arabella blushing, excus'd me for the Liberty
I took with you, it will be un-necessary to tell
you it was grounded upon the Customs of an-tient
Times, when Ladies of the highest Rank
and sublimest Virtue, were often expos'd to a
Variety of cruel Adventures which they im-parted
in Confidence to each other, when
Chance brought them together.
               Custom, said the Countess smiling, changes the
very Nature of Things, and what was honour-able
a thousand Years ago, may probably be look'd
upon as infamous now—A Lady in the heroick
Age you speak of, would not be thought to pos-sess
any great Share of Merit, if she had not

Though she was all that you say, returned
Miss Glanville, I am certain Sir George is not
in Love with her.
               I wish I was certain of that, replied Mr.
Glanville; for 'tis very probable you are mis-taken.
               You may see by his Letter, interrupted Miss
Glanville, what a Jest he makes of her; and
if you had heard how he talked to her the other
Day in the Garden, you would have died with
Laughing; yet my poor Cousin thought he was
very serious, and was so foolishly pleased!
               I assure you Charlotte, said Mr. Glanville,
gravely, I shall take it very ill, if you make so
free with your Cousin's little Foibles; and if
Sir George presumes to make a Jest of her, as
you say, I shall teach him better Manners.
               You are the strangest Creature in the World!
said Miss Glanville: A Minute or two ago, you
was wishing to be sure he was not in Love with
her; and now you are angry, when I assure
you he is only in Jest.
               
                  Arabella, that Moment coming out of her
Closet, broke off their Discourse. I have
written to Sir George, said she, addressing herself
to Mr. Glanville; and you are at Liberty, if
you please, to read my Letter, which I pro-pose
to send away immediately.
               Mr. Glanville, taking the Letter out of her
Hand, with a low Bow, began to read it to
himself; but Arabella, willing his Sister should
also be acquainted with the Contents, obliged
him, much against his Will, to read it aloud.
It was as follows:
               
                  
                     

been many times carried away by one or other
of her insolent Lovers: Whereas a Beauty in
this could not pass thro' the Hands of several
different Ravishers, without bringing an Impu-tation
on her Chastity.
               The same Actions which made a Man a
Hero in those Times, would constitute him a
Murderer in These—And the same Steps which
led him to a Throne Then, would infallibly
conduct him to a Scaffold Now.
               But Custom, Madam, said Arabella, cannot
possibly change the Nature of Virtue or Vice:
And since Virtue is the chief Characteristick of
a Hero, a Hero in the last Age will be a Hero
in this—Tho' the Natures of Virtue or Vice
cannot be changed, replied the Countess, yet
they may be mistaken; and different Princi-ples,
Customs, and Education, may probably
change their Names, if not their Natures.
               Sure, Madam, said Arabella a little moved,
you do not intend by this Inference to prove
Oroondates, Artaxerxes, Juba, Artaban, and the
other Heroes of Antiquity, bad Men?
               Judging them by the Rules of Christianity,
and our present Notions of Honour, Justice,
and Humanity, they certainly are, replied the
Countess.
               Did they not possess all the necessary Quali-fications
of Heroes, Madam, said Arabella, and
each in a superlative Degree?—Was not their
Valour invincible, their Generosity unbounded,
and their Fidelity inviolable?
               It cannot be denied, said the Countess, but
that their Valour was invincible; and many
thousand Men less courageous than themselves,

felt the fatal Effects of that invincible Valour,
which was perpetually seeking after Occasions
to exert itself. Oroondates gave many extraor-dinary
Proofs of that unbounded Generosity so
natural to the Heroes of his Time. This Prince
being sent by the King his Father, at the Head
of an Army, to oppose the Persian Monarch,
who had unjustly invaded his Dominions, and
was destroying the Lives and Properties of his
Subjects; having taken the Wives and Daugh-ters
of his Enemy Prisoners, had by these Means
an Opportunity to put a Period to a War so
destructive to his Country: Yet out of a Ge-nerosity
truly heroick, he releas'd them imme-diately
without any Conditions; and falling in
Love with one of those Princesses, secietly
quitted his Father's Court, resided several Years
in that of the Enemy of his Father and Coun-try,
engag'd himself to his Daughter, and when
the War broke out again between the two
Kings, fought furiously against an Army in
which the King his Father was in Person, and
shed the Blood of his future Subjects without
Remorse; tho' each of those Subjects, we are
told, would have sacrific'd his Life to save that
of their Prince, so much was he belov'd▪
Such are the Actions which immortalize the
Heroes of Romance, and are by the Authors
of those Books styl'd glorious, godlike, and di-vine.
Yet judging of them as Christians, we
shall find them impious and base, and directly
opposite to our present Notions of moral and re-lative
Duties.
               'Tis certain therefore, Madam, added the
Contess with a Smile, that what was Virtue in

those Days, is Vice in ours: And to form a
Hero according to our Notions of 'em at pre-sent,
'tis nessary to give him Qualities very dif-ferent
from Oroondates.
               
               The secret Charm in the Countenance, Voice,
and Manner of the Countess, join'd to the
Force of her reasoning, could not fail of mak-ing
some Impression on the Mind of Arabella;
but it was such an Impression as came far short
of Conviction. She was surpriz'd embarrass'd,
perplex'd, but not convinc'd. Heroism, roman-tick
Heroism, was deeply rooted in her Heart;
it was her Habit of thinking, a Principle im-bib'd
from Education. She could not separate
her Ideas of Glory, Virtue, Courage, Gene-rosity,
and Honour, from the false Representa-tions
of them in the Actions of Oroondates,
Juba, Artaxerxes, and the rest of the imaginary
Heroes. The Countess's Discourse had rais'd a
Kind of Tumult in her Thoughts, which gave
an Air of Perplexity to her lovely Face, and
made that Lady apprehensive she had gone too
far, and lost that Ground in her Esteem, which
she had endeavour'd to acquire by a Conformity
to some of her Notions and Language. In this
however, she was mistaken; Arabella felt a
Tenderness for her that had already the Force of
a long contracted Friendship, and an Esteem
little less than Veneration.
               When the Countess took Leave, the Profes-sions
of Arabella, tho' deliver'd in the Language
of Romance, were very sincere and affecting,
and were return'd with an equal Degree of
Tenderness by the Countess, who had conceiv'd
a more than ordinary Affection for her.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville who could have almost wor-ship'd
the Countess for the generous Design be
saw she had entertain'd, took an Opportunity
as he handed her to her Chair, to intreat in a
Manner as earnestly as polite, that she would
continue the Happiness of her Acquaintance to
his Cousin; which with a Smile of mingled
Dignity and Sweetness she assur'd him of.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Which concludes Book the Eighth.
               
               MR. Glanville at his Return to the Dining-Room,
finding Arabella retir'd, told his
Father in a Rapture of Joy, that the charming
Countess would certainly make a Convert of
Lady Bella.
               
               Methinks, said the Baronet, she has as strange
Whims in her Head as my Niece. Ad's-heart,
what a deal of Stuff did she talk about! A
Parcel of Heroes as she calls them, with con-founded
hard Names—In my Mind she is more
likely to make Lady Bella worse than better.
               Mr. Glanville, a little vex'd at his Father's
Mis-apprehension, endeavour'd with as much
Delicacy as he could, to set him right with Re-gard
to the Countess; so that he brought him
at last to confess she manag'd the Thing very
well.
               The Countess, who had resolv'd to take
Arabella openly into her Protection, was think-ing
on Means to engage her to appear at the

Assembly, whither she propos'd to accompany
her in a modern Dress. But her good Intenti-ons
towards our lovely Heroine were suspended
by the Account she receiv'd of her Mother's
Indisposition, which commanded her immedi-ate
Attendance on her at her Seat in—
               Her sudden Departure gave Arabella an ex-treme
Uneasiness, and proved a cruel Disap-pointment
to Mr. Glanville, who had founded
all his Hopes of her Recovery on the Conver-sation
of that Lady.
               Sir Charles having Affairs that requir'd his
Presence in London, propos'd to his Niece the
leaving Bath in a few Days, to which she con-sented;
and accordingly they set out for Lon-don
in Arabella's Coach and Six, attended by
several Servants on Horseback, her Women
having been sent away before in the Stage.
               Nothing very remarkable happen'd during
this Journey, so we shall not trouble our Read-ers
with several small Mistakes of Arabella's
such as her supposing a neat Country Girl who
was riding behind a Man, to be some Lady or
Princess in Disguise, forc'd away by a Lover
she hated, and intreating Mr. Glanville to at-tempt
her Rescue; which occasion'd some
little Debate between her and Sir Charles, who
could not be persuaded to believe it was as she
said, and forbid his Son to meddle in other
Peoples Affairs. Several of these Sort of Mi-stakes,
as we said before, we omit, and will
therefore if our Reader pleases, bring our He-roine
without further Delay to London.
               
               
                  The End of the Eighth Book.
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK IX.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  In which is related an admirable Ad-venture.
               
               
                  MISS Glanville whose Spirits were
greatly exhilerated at their En-trance
into London, that Seat of
Magnificence and Pleasure, con-gratulated
her Cousin upon the
Entertainment she would receive from the new
and surprizing Objects which every Day for a
considerable Time would furnish her with; and
ran over the Catalogue of Diversions with such
a Volubility of Tongue, as drew a gentle Re-primand
from her Father, and made her keep
a sullen Silence till they were set down in

St. James's Square, the Place of their Residence
in Town.
               Sir Charles having order'd his late Lady's
Apartment to be prepar'd for the Accommoda-tion
of his Niece; as soon as the first Civilities
were over, she retir'd to her Chamber, where
she employ'd herself in giving her Women Di-rections
for placing her Books, of which she
had brought a moderate Quantity to London, in
her Closet.
               Miss Glanville as soon as she had dispatch'd
away some hundred Cards to her Acquaintance,
to give them Notice she was in Town, attend-ed
Arabella in her own Apartment; and as they
sat at the Tea she begun to regulate the Diver-sions
of the Week, naming the Drawing-Room,
Park, Concert, Ranelagh, Lady—As-sembly,
the Dutchess of Rant, Vaux-Hall, and
a long &amp;c. of Visits; at which Arabella, with
an Accent that express'd her Surprize, ask'd
her, If she suppos'd she intended to stay in
Town three or four Years—
               Law, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, all this is
but the Amusement of a few Days.
               Amusement, do you say, replied Arabella,
methinks it seems to be the sole Employment of
those Days: And what you call the Amuse-ment,
must of Necessity be the Business of Life.
               You are always so grave, Cousin, said Miss
Glanville, one does not know what to say to
you. However, I shan't press you to go to
Publick Places against your Inclination, yet you'll
condescend to receive a few Visits, I suppose?
               Yes, replied Arabella, and if among the La-dies
whom I shall see, I find any like the amia-ble

Countess of —, I shall not scruple to
enter into the most tender Amity with them.
               The Countess of — is very well, to be sure,
said Miss Glanville, yet I don't know how it is,
she does not suit my Taste—She is very par-ticular
in a great many Things, and knows too
much for a Lady, as I heard my Lord Fribble
say one Day: Then she is quite unfashionable:
She hates Cards, keeps no Assembly, is seen but
seldom at Publick Places; and in my Opinion,
as well as in a great many others, is the dullest
Company in the World. I'm sure I met her
at a Visit a little before I went down to your
Seat, and she had not been a quarter of an Hour
in the Room, before she set a whole Circle of
Ladies a yawning.
               
                  Arabella, tho' she had a sincere Contempt for
her Cousin's Manner of thinking, yet always
politely conceal'd it; and vex'd as she was at
her Sneers upon the Countess, she contented
herself with gently defending her, telling her at
the same Time, that till she met with a Lady
who had more Merit than the Countess pos-sess'd,
she should always possess the first Place
in her Esteem.
               
                  Arabella, who had from Youth adopted
the Resentments of her Father, refus'd to make
her Appearance at Court, which Sir Charles
gently intimated to her; yet being not wholly
divested of the Curiosity natural to her Sex, she
condescended to go incog. to the Gallery on a
B
                     •
                  ll Night, accompanied by Mr. Glanville and
his Sister, in order to behold the Splendor of the
British Court.
               
                  

As her Romances had long familiariz'd her
Thoughts to Objects of Grandeur and Magni-ficence,
she was not so much struck as might
have been expected, with those that now pre-sented
themselves to her View. Nor was she
a little disappointed to find that among the Men
she saw none whose Appearance came up to her
Ideas of the Air and Port of an Artaban, Oroon-dates,
or Juba; or any of the Ladies, who did
not in her Opinion, fall short of the Perfections
of Elisa, Mandana, Statira, &amp;c. 'Twas re-markable
too, that she never enquir'd how often
the Princesses had been carried away by capti-vated
Monarchs, or how many Victories the
King's Sons had gain'd; but seem'd the whole
Time she was there to have suspended all her
Romantick Ideas of Glory, Beauty, Gallantry,
and Love.
               Mr. Glanville was highly pleas'd with her
compos'd Behaviour, and a Day or two after
intreated her to allow him the Honour of shew-ing
her what was remarkable and worthy of her
Observation in this great Metropolis. To this
she also consented, and for the greater Privacy
began their Travels in a hir'd Coach.
               Part of several Days were taken up in this
Employment; but Mr. Glanville had the Mor-tification
to find she was full of Allusions to her
Romances upon every Occasion, such as her
asking the Person who shews the Armoury at
the Tower, the Names of the Knights to whom
each Suit belong'd, and wondering there were no
Devices on the Shields or Plumes of Feathers
in the Helmets: She observ'd that the Lyon Ly-simachus
kill'd, was according to the History of

that Prince, much larger than any of those she
was shew'd in the Tower, and also much fiercer.
Took Notice that St. Paul's was less magnifi-cent
in the Inside, than the Temple in which
Cyrus, when he went to Mandana, heard her
return Thanks for his suppos'd Death: En-quir'd
if it was not customary for the King and
his whole Court to sail in Barges upon the
Thames, as Augustus used to do upon the Tyber,
whether they had not Musick and Collations
in the Park, and where they celebrated the Justs
and Tournaments.
               The Season for Vaux-Hall being not yet over,
she was desirous of once seeing a Place, which
by the Description she had heard of it, greatly
resembled the Gardens of Lucullus at Rome, in
which the Emperor, with all the Princes and
Princesses of his Court were so nobly entertain'd,
and where so many gallant Conversations had
pass'd among those admirable Persons.
               The Singularity of her Dress, for she was
cover'd with her Veil, drew a Number of
Gazers after her, who prest round her with so
little Respect, that she was greatly embarrass'd,
and had Thoughts of quitting the Place, de-lightful
as she own'd it, immediately, when her
Attention was wholly engross'd by an Adven-ture
in which she soon interested herself very
deeply.
               An Officer of Rank in the Sea Service had
brought his Mistress disguis'd in a Suit of Man's
or rather Boy's Cloaths, and a Hat and Fea-ther,
into the Gardens. The young Creature
being a little intoxicated with the Wine she had
taken too freely, was thrown so much off her

                     
                        Arabella, To Bellmour.
                     
                     WHATEVER Offence your presump-tuous
Declaration may have given me,
yet my Resentment will be appeased with a
less Punishment than Death: And that
Grief and Submission you have testified in your
Letter, may haply have already procured you
Pardon for your Fault, provided you do not
forfeit it by Disobedience.
                     I therefore command you to live, and com-mand
you by all that Power you have given me
over you.
                     Remember I require no more of you, than
Parisatis did of Lysimachus, in a more cruel
and insupportable Misfortune: Imitate then
the Obedience and Submission of that illustrious
Prince; and tho' you should be as unfortunate
as he, let your Courage also be equal to his;
and, like him, be contented with the Esteem
that is offered you, since it is all that can be
bestowed, by
                     
                        Arabella.
                     
                  
               
               Mr. Glanville, finding by this Epistle, that
Arabella did not design to encourage the Ad-dresses
of Sir George, would not have been
against his receiving it, had he not feared the
Consequence of his having such a convincing
Proof of the Peculiarity of her Temper in his
Possession; and while he kept the Letter in his
Hand, as if he wanted to consider it a little
better, he meditated on the Means to prevent
its being ever delivered; and had possibly fixed
upon some successful Contrivance, when a

Guard as to give Occasion to some of the Com-pany
to suspect her Sex; and a gay Fellow, in
order to give them some Diversion at her Ex-pence,
pretending to be affronted at something
she said, drew his Sword upon the disguis'd Fair
One, which so alarm'd her, that she shriek'd
out, She was a Woman, and ran for Protection
to her Lover, who was so dis
                     •
                  rder'd with Liquor,
that he was not able to defend her.
               Miss Glanville ever curious and inquisitive,
demanded the Cause why the Company ran in
Crouds to that particular Spot; and receiv'd
for Answer, That a Gentleman had drawn his
Sword upon a Lady disguis'd in a Man's Habit.
               Oh Heav'ns! cry'd Arabella, this must cer-tainly
be a very notable Adventure. The Lady
has doubtless some extraordinary Circumstances
in her Story, and haply upon Enquiry, her Mis-fortunes
will be found to resemble those which
oblig'd the beautiful Aspasia to put on the same
Disguise, who was by that Means murder'd by
the cruel Zenodorus in a Fit of Jealousy at the
Amity his Wife exprest for her. But can I
not see this unfortunate Fair One, added she,
pressing in spite of Mr. Glanville's Intreaties
thro' the Croud—I may haply be able to afford
her some Consolation.
               Mr. Glanville finding his Persuasions were
not regarded, follow'd her with very little Dif-ficulty:
For her Veil falling back in her Hurry,
she did not mind to replace it, and the Charms
of her Face, join'd to the Majesty of her Per-son,
and Singularity of her Dress, attracting
every Person's Attention and Respect, they
made Way for her to pass, not a little surpriz'd

at the extreme Earnestness and Solemnity that
appear'd in her Countenance upon an Event so
diverting to every one else.
               The disguis'd Lady whom she was endea-vouring
to approach, had thrown herself upon
a Bench in one of the Boxes, trembling still
with the Apprehension of the Sword, tho' her
Antagonist was kneeling at her Feet, making
Love to her in Mock-Heroicks for the Diver-sion
of the Company.
               Her Hat and Peruke had fallen off in her
Fright, and her Hair which had been turn'd
up under it, hung now loosely about her Neck,
and gave such an Appearance of Woe to a Face,
which notwithstanding the Paleness that Terror
had overspread it with, was really extremely
pretty, that Arabella was equally struck with
Compassion and Admiration of her.
               Lovely Unknown, said she to her with an
Air of extreme Tenderness, tho' I am a Stran-ger
both to your Name and History, yet your
Aspect persuading me your Quality is not mean,
and the Condition and Disguise in which I be-hold
you, shewing that you are Unfortunate, per-mit
me to offer you all the Assistances in my Pow-er,
seeing that I am mov'd thereto by my Com-passion
for your Distress, and that Esteem which
the Sight of you must necessarily inspire.
               Mr. Glanville was struck dumb with Confu-sion
at this strange Speech, and at the Whispers
and Scoffs it occasion'd among the Spectators. He
attempted to take hold of her Hand in order to
lead her away, but she disengag'd herself from
him with a Frown of Displeasure; and taking
no Notice of Miss Glanville, who whisper'd

with great Emotion, Lord, Cousin, how you
expose yourself! prest nearer to the Beautiful
Disguis'd, and again repeated her Offers of
Service.
               The Girl being perfectly recover'd from her
Intoxication by the Fright she had been in, gaz'd
upon Arabella with a Look of extreme Sur-prize:
Yet being mov'd to respect by the Dig-nity
of her Appearance, and strange as her
Words seem'd to be by the obliging Purport of
them, and the affecting Earnestness with which
they were deliver'd, she rose from her Seat and
thank'd her, with an Accept full of Regard
and Submission.
               Fair Maid, said Arabella, taking her Hand,
let us quit this Place, where your Discovery
may probably subject you to more Dangers: If
you will be pleas'd to put yourself into my Pro-tection,
and acquaint me with the History of
your Misfortunes; I have Interest enough with
a valiant Person who shall undertake to free you
from your Persecutions, and re-establish the
Repose of your Life.
               The kneeling Hero, who as well as every
one else that were present, had gaz'd with Asto-nishment
at Arabella during all this Passage,
perceiving she was about to rob him of the dis-guis'd
Fair, seiz'd hold of the Hand she had at
Liberty, and swore he would not part with her.
               Mr. Glanville almost mad with Vexation,
endeavour'd to get Arabella away.
               Are you mad, Madam, said he in a Whisper,
to make all this Rout about a Prostitute? Do
you see how every body stares at you? What
will they think—For Heav'ns sake let us be
gone.
               
                  

What, Sir, replied Arabella in a Rage, Are
you base enough to leave this admirable Crea-ture
in the Power of that Man, who is que-stionless
her Ravisher; and will you not draw
your Sword in her Defence?
               Hey day! cry'd the Sea-Officer, wak'd out of
his stupid Dose by the Clamour about him: What's
the Matter here—What are you doing? Where's
my Lucy? Zoons! Sir, said he to the young
Fellow who held her, What Business have you
with my Lucy? And uttering a dreadful Oath,
drew out his Sword, and stagger'd towards his
gay Rival, who observing the Weakness of his
Antagonist, flourish'd with his Sword to shew
his Courage and frighten the Ladies, who all
ran away screaming. Arabella taking Miss
Glanville under the Arm, cried out to Mr.
Glanville as she left the Place, to take Care of
the distress'd Lady, and while the two Comba-tants
were disputing for her, to carry her away
in Safety.
               But Mr. Glanville without regarding this In-junction,
hasten'd after her; and to pacify her,
told her the Lady was rescu'd by her favourite
Lover, and carry'd off in Triumph.
               But are you sure, said Aabella, it was not
some other of her Ravishers who carry'd her
away, and not the Person whom she has haply
favour'd with her Affection? May not the same
Thing have happen'd to her, as did to the beau-tiful
Candace, Queen of Ethiopia; who while
two of her Ravishers were fighting for her, a
third whom she took for her Deliverer, came
and carry'd her away.
               
                  

But she went away willingly, I assure you,
Madam, said Mr. Glanville: Pray don't be in
any Concern about her—
               If she went away willingly with him, reply'd
Arabella, 'tis probable it may not be another
Ravisher: And yet if this Person that rescu'd
her happen'd to be in Armour, and the Vizor
of his Helmet down, she might be mistaken as
well as Queen Candace.
               
               Well, well, he was not in Armour, Madam,
said Glanville almost beside himself with Vexation
at her Folly—
               You seem to be disturb'd, Sir, said Arabella
a little surpriz'd at his peevish Tone: Is there
any Thing in this Adventure which concerns
you? Nay, now I remember, you did not of-fer
to defend the Beautiful Unknown. I am
not willing to impute your In-action upon such
an Occasion, to Want of Courage or Genero-sity;
perhaps you are acquainted with her Hi-story,
and from this Knowledge refus'd to en-gage
in her Defence.
               Mr. Glanville perceiving the Company gather
from all Parts to the Walk they were in, told
her he would acquaint her with all he knew
concerning the disguis'd Lady when they were
in the Coach on their Return Home; and Ara-bella
impatient for the promis'd Story, propos'd
to leave the Gardens immediately, which was
gladly comply'd with by Mr. Glanville, who
heartily repented his having carry'd her thither.
            
            
               

               CHAP. II.
               
                  Which ends with a very unfavourable Pre-diction
for our Heroine.
               
               AS soon as they were seated in the Coach she
did not fail to call upon him to perform
his Promise: But Mr. Glanville, excessively out
of Humour at her exposing herself in the Gar-dens,
reply'd, without considering whether he
shuld not offend her, That he knew no more
of the disguis'd Lady than any body else in the
Place.
               How, Sir, reply'd Arabella, Did you not
promise to relate her Adventures to me? And
would you have me believe you knew no more
of them than the rest of the Cavaliers and La-dies
in the Place?
               Upon my Soul, I don't, Madam, said Glan-ville;
yet what I know of her is sufficient to
let me understand she was not worth the Con-sideration
you seem'd to have for her.
               She cannot sure be more indiscreet than the
fair and unfortunate Hermione, reply'd Arabella;
who like her put on Man's Apparel, through
Despair at the ill Success of her Passion for Alex-ander
—And certain it is, that tho' the beautiful
Hermione was guilty of one great Error which
lost her the Esteem of Alexander, yet she had a
high and noble Soul; as was manifest by her
Behaviour and Words when she was run thro'
by the Sword of Demetrius. Oh! Death, cry'd
she, as she was falling, how sweet do I find

thee, and how much and how earnestly have I
desir'd thee!
               Oh Lord! oh Lord! cry'd Mr. Glanville
hardly sensible of what he said, Was there ever
any Thing so intolerable?
               Do you pity the unhappy Hermione, Sir? said
Arabella interpreting his Exclamation her own
Way? Indeed she is well worthy of your Com-passion.
And if the bare Recital of the Words
she utter'd at receiving her Death's Wound af-fects
you so much, you may guess what would
have been your Agonies, had you been Deme-trius
that gave it to her.
               Here Mr. Glanville groaning aloud thro' Im-patience
at her Absurdities—
               This Subject affects you deeply, I perceive,
said Arabella. There is no Question but you
would have acted in the same Circumstance, as
Demetrius did: Yet let me tell you, the Ex-travagancy
of his Rage and Despair for what
he had innocently committed, was imputed to
him as a great Imbecillity, as was also the vio-lent
Passion he conceiv'd soon after for the Fair
Deidamia. You know the Accident which
brought that fair Princess into his Way.
               Indeed, I do not, Madam, said Glanville
peevishly.
               Well, then I'll tell you, said Arabella, but
pausing a little:
               The Recital I have engag'd myself to make,
added she, will necessarily take up some Hours
Time, as upon Reflexion I have found: So if
you will dispense with my beginning it at pre-sent,
I will satisfy your Curiosity To-morrow,
when I may be able to pursue it without Inter-ruption.
               
                  

To this Mr. Glanville made no other An-swer
than a Bow with his Head; and the Coach
a few Moments after arriving at their own
House, he led her to her Apartment, firmly
resolv'd never to attend her to any more Publick
Places while she continued in the same ridicu-lous
Folly.
               Sir Charles, who had several Times been in
doubt whether Arabella was not really disorder'd
in her Senses; upon Miss Glanville's Account
of her Behaviour at the Gardens, concluded
she was absolutely mad, and held a short Debate
with himself, Whether he ought not to bring
a Commission of Lunacy against her, rather
than marry her to his Son, whom he was per-suaded
could never be happy with a Wife so un-accountably
absurd. Tho' he only hinted at
this to Mr. Glanville, in a Conversation he had
with him while his Dissatisfaction was at its
Height, concerning Arabella, yet the bare Sup-position
that his Father ever thought of such a
Thing, threw the young Gentleman into such
Agonies, that Sir Charles to compose him, pro-tested
he would do nothing in relation to his
Niece that he would not approve of. Yet he
expostulated with him on the Absurdity of her
Behaviour, and the Ridicule to which she ex-pos'd
herself wherever she went; appealing to
him, whether in a Wife he could think those
Follies supportable, which in a Mistress occasion'd
him so much Confusion.
               Mr. Glanville, as much in Love as he was,
felt all the Force of this Inference, and acknow-ledg'd
to his Father, That he could not think
of marrying Arabella, till the Whims her Ro-mances

had put into her Head, were craz'd by
a better Knowledge of Life and Manners. But
he added with a Sigh, That he knew not how
this Reformation would be effected; for she
had such a strange Facility in reconciling every
Incident to her own fantastick Ideas, that every
new Object added Strength to the fatal Deception
she laboured under.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  In which Arabella meets with another
admirable Adventure.
               
               OUR lovely Heroine had not been above a
Fortnight in London, before the gross Air
of that smoaky Town affected her Health so
much, that Sir Charles propos'd to her to go for
a few Weeks to Richmond, where he hir'd a
House elegantly furnish'd for her Reception.
               Miss Glanville had been too long out of that
darling City, to pay her the Compliment of at-tending
her constantly at Richmond; yet she
promis'd to be as often as possible with her: And
Sir Charles, having Affaris that could not dis-pense
with his Absence from town, plac'd his
Steward in her House, being a Person whose
Prudence and Fidelity he could rely upon; and
he, with her Women, and two or three other
menial Servants, made up her Equipage.
               As it was not consistent with Decorum for
Mr. Glanville to reside in her House, he con-tented
himself with riding to Richmond generally

every Day: And as long as Arabella was pleas'd
with that Retirement, he resolv'd not to
press her Return to Town till the Countess
of—arriv'd, in whose Conversation he
grounded all his Hopes of her Cure.
               At that Season of the Year Richmond not
being quite deserted by Company, Arabella was
visited by several Ladies of Fashion; who
charm'd with her Affability, Politeness, and
good Sense, were strangely perplex'd how to ac-count
for some Peculiarities in her Dress and
Manner of thinking.
               Some of the younger Sort from whom Arabella's
extraordinary Beauty took away all Pretensions
to Equality on that Score, made themselves ex-tremely
merry with her Oddnesses, as they call'd
them, and gave broad Intimations that her
Head was not right.
               As for Arabella, whose Taste was as delicate,
Sentiments as refin'd, and Judgment as clear as
any Person's could be who believ'd the Authen-ticity
of Scudery's Romances, she was strange-ly
disappointed to find no Lady with whom she
could converse with any tolerable Pleasure: And
that instead of Clelia's, Statira's Mandana's, &amp;c.
she found only Miss Glanville among all she
knew.
               The Comparison she drew between such as
these and the charming Countess of—whom
she had just begun to be acquainted with at Bath,
increas'd her Regret for the Interruption that
was given to so agreeable a Friendship: And it
was with infinite Pleasure Mr. Glanville heard
her repeatedly wish for the Arrival of that admi-rable
Lady (as she always call'd her) in Town.
               
                  

Servant coming in, to inform the Ladies, that
Sir George was come to wait on them, put an
End to his Schemes; and he immediately ran
down to receive him, not being willing to in-crease,
by his Stay, the Astonishment and Con-fusion,
which appeared in the Countenance of
Arabella, at hearing a Man, whom she had
believed and represented to be dying, was
come to pay her a Visit.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  Where the Lady extricates herself out of
her former Confusion, to the great Asto-nishment,
we will suppose, of the Rea-der.
               
               MISS Glanville, not having so much De-licacy
as her Brother, could not help
exulting a little upon this Occasion.
               After the terrible Fright you have been in,
Madam, said she, upon Sir George's Account,
I wonder you do not rather think it is his
Ghost than himself, that is come to see us.
               There is no Question, but it is himself that
is come, said Arabella, (who had already recon-ciled
this Visit, to her first Thoughts of him;)
and it is, haply, to execute his fatal Design in
my Presence, that has brought him here; and,
like the unfortunate Agilmond, he means to
convince me of his Fidelity and Love, by fall-ing
upon his Sword before my Eyes.
               
                  

Not being able to relish that insipid Conver-sation
of the young Ladies that visited her at
Richmond, her chief Amusement was to walk in
the Park there; which because of its Rural Priva-cy,
was extremely agreeable to her Inclinations.
               Here she indulg'd Contemplation, leaning on
the Arm of her faithful Lucy, while her other
Women walk'd at some Distance behind her, and
two Men Servants kept her always in Sight.
               One Evening when she was returning from
her usual Walk, she heard the Sound of a Wo-man's
Voice, which seem'd to proceed from a
Tuft of Trees that hid her from her View.
And stopping a Moment, distinguish'd some
plaintive Accents, which increasing her Curio-sity,
she advanc'd towards the Place, telling
Lucy, she was resolv'd if possible to discover
who the distress'd Lady was, and what was the
Subject of her Affliction.
               As she drew nearer with softly treading Steps,
she could distinguish through the Branches of
the Trees, now despoil'd of great part of their
Leaves, two Women seated on the Ground,
their Backs towards her, and one of them with
her Head gently reclin'd on the other's Shoulder,
seem'd by her mournful Action to be weeping;
for she often put her Handkerchief to her Eyes,
breathing every Time a Sigh, which, as Arabella
phras'd it, seem'd to proceed from the deepest
Recesses of her Heart.
               This Adventure, more worthy indeed to be
styl'd an Adventure than all our Fair Heroine
had ever yet met with, and so conformable to
what she had read in Romances, fill'd her Heart
with eager Expectation. She made a Sign to

                  Lucy to make no Noise, and creeping still closer
towards the Place where this afflicted Person
sat, she heard her distinctly utter these Words,
which however were often interrupted with her
Sighs.
               Ah! Ariamenes, whom I to my Misfortune
have too much loved, and whom to my Mis-fortune
I fear I shall never sufficiently hate,
since that Heav'n and thy cruel Ingratitude hath
ordain'd that thou shalt never be mine, and that
so many sweet and dear Hopes are for ever
taken from me, return me at least, ungrateful
Man, return me those Testimonies of my in-nocent
Affection, which were sometimes so
dear and precious to thee. Return me those
Favours, which all innocent as they were, are
become Criminal by thy Crime. Return me,
Cruel Man, return me those Reliques of my
Heart which thou detainest in Despight of me,
and which, notwithstanding thy Infidelity, I
cannot recover.
               Here her Tears interrupting her Speech,
Arabella being impatient to know the History
of this afflicted Person, came softly round to
the other Side, and shewing herself, occasion'd
some Disturbance to the sad Unknown; who
rising from her Seat, with her Face averted, as
if asham'd of having so far disclos'd her Sor-rows
in a Stranger's Hearing, endeavour'd to
pass by her un-notic'd.
               
                  Arabella perceiving her Design, stop'd her
with a very graceful Action, and with a Voice
all compos'd of Sweetness, earnestly conjur'd
her to relate her History.
               
                  

Think not, Lovely Unknown, said she (for
she was really very pretty) that my Endeavours
to detain you proceed from an indiscreet Curio-sity.
'Tis true, some Complaints which have
fallen from your fair Mouth, have rais'd in me a
Desire to be acquainted with your Adventures;
but this Desire has its Foundation in that Com-passion
your Complaints have fill'd me with:
And if I wish to know your Misfortunes,
'tis only with a View of affording you some
Consolation.
               Pardon me, Madam, said the Fair Afflicted,
gazing on Arabella with many Signs of Ad-miration,
if my Confusion at being over-heard
in a Place I had chosen to bewail my Misfor-tunes,
made me be guilty of some Appearance
of Rudeness, not seeing the admirable Person I
wanted to avoid. But pursued she, hesitating
a little, those Characters of Beauty I behold in
your Face, and the Gracefulness of your De-portment
convincing me you can be of no or-dinary
Rank, I will the less scruple to acquaint
you with my Adventures, and the Cause of
those Complaints you have heard proceed from
my Mouth.
               
                  Arabella assuring her, that whatever her Mis-fortunes
were, she might depend upon all the
Assistance in her Power, seated herself near her
at the Foot of the Tree where she had been fit-ting,
and giving Lucy Orders to join the rest of
her Women, and stay at a Distance till she
made a Sign to them to advance, she pre-par'd
to listen to the Adventures of the Fair
Unknown, who after some little Pause, began
to relate them in this Manner.
            
            
               

               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which is related the History of the
Princess of Gaul.
               
               MY Name, Madam, is Cynccia, my Birth
Illustrious enough, seeing that I am the
Daughter of a Sovereign Prince, who possesses
a large and spacious Territory in what is now
called Antient Gaul.
               
               What, Madam, interrupted Arabella, Are
you a Princess then?
               Questionless I am, Madam, replied the La-dy;
and a Princess happy and prosperous, till
the Felicity of my Life was interrupted by the
perfidious Ariamenes.
               
               Pardon me, Madam, interrupted Arabella
again, that my Ignorance of your Quality
made me be deficient in those Respects which
are due to your high Birth, and which notwith-standing
those Characters of Greatness I might
read in the Lineaments of your Visage, I yet
neglected to p
                     •
                  y—
               Alas! Madam, said the Stranger, that little
Beauty which the Heavens bestow'd on me
only to make me wretched, as by the Event it
has proved, has long since taken its Flight, and
together with my Happiness, I have lost that
which made me Unhappy. And certain it is,
Grief has made such Ravages among what might
once have been thought tolerable in my Face,
that I should not be surpriz'd if my being no
longer Fair, should make you with Difficulty
believe I ever was so.
               
                  

                  Arabella after a proper Compliment in An-swer
to this Speech, intreated the Princess to go
on with her History, who hesitating a little,
comply'd with her Request.
               Be pleas'd to know then, Madam, said she,
that being bred up with all imaginable Tender-ness
in my Father's Court, I had no sooner
arriv'd to my Sixteenth Year than I saw myself
surrounded with Lovers; who nevertheless,
such was the Severity with which I behav'd
myself, conceal'd their Passions under a respect-ful
Silence, well knowing Banishment from my
Presence was the least Punishment they had to
expect, if they presum'd to declare their Senti-ments
to me.
               I liv'd in this Fashion, Madam, for Two
Years longer, rejoicing in the Insensibility of
my own Heart, and triumphing in the Suffer-ings
of others, when my Tranquillity was all
at once interrupted by an Accident which I am
going to relate to you.
               The Princess stopt here to give Vent to some
Sighs which a cruel Remembrance forc'd from
her; and continuing in a deep Muse for five
or six Minutes, resum'd her Story in this
Manner.
               It being my Custom to walk in a Forest
adjoining to one of my Father's Sum mer
Residences, attended only by my Women,
one Day when I was taking this A muse-ment,
I perceiv'd at some Distance a Man ly-ing
on the Ground; and impell'd by a sudden
Curiosity, I advanc'd towards this Person, whom
upon a nearer View I perceiv'd to have been
wounded very much, and fainted away through

Loss of Blood. His Habit being very rich, I
concluded by that he was of no mean Quality:
But when I had look'd upon his Countenance,
pale and languishing as it was, methought there
appear'd so many Marks of Greatness, accom-pany'd
with a Sweetness so happily blended, that
my Attention was engag'd in an extraordinary
Manner, and interested me so powerfully in his
Safety, that I commanded some of my Women
to run immediately for proper Assistance, and
convey him to the Castle, while I directed
others to throw some Water in his Face, and
to apply some Linen to his Wounds, to stop
the Bleeding.
               These charitable Cares restor'd the wounded
Stranger to his Senses; he open'd his Eyes, and
turning them slowly to the Objects around him,
fix'd at last their languishing Looks on me:
When mov'd, as it should seem, to some Respect
by what he saw in my Countenance, he rose
with some Difficulty from the Ground, and
bowing almost down to it again, by that Action
seem'd to pay me his Acknowledgments for what
he suppos'd I had done for his Preservation.
               His extreme Weakness having oblig'd him to
creep towards a Tree, against the Back of which
he supported himself, I went nearer to him, and
having told him the Condition in which I found
him, and the Orders I had dispatch'd for Assist-ance,
requested him to acquaint me with his
Name and Quality, and the Adventure which
had brought him into that Condition.
               My Name, Madam, answer'd he, is Aria-menes,
my Birth is Noble enough; I have spent
some Years in my Travels, and was returning

to my native Country, when passing thro' this
Forest I was seiz'd with an Inclination to sleep.
I had ty'd my Horse to a Tree, and retiring
some few Paces off, stretch'd myself at the Foot
of a large Oak whose Branches promis'd me an
agreeable Shade. I had not yet clos'd my Eyes,
when the Slumber I invited was dissipated by
the Sound of some Voices near me.
               A Curiosity, not natural to me, made me
listen to the Discourse of these Persons, whom by
the Tone of their Voices, tho' I could not see
them, I knew to be Men.
               In short, Madam, I was a Witness to a most
horrible Scheme which they concerted together;
my Weakness will not permit me to enter into
an exact Detail of all I heard: The Result of
their Conference was, To seize the Princess of
this Country and carry her off.
               Here, pursued Cynecia, I interrupted the
Stranger with a loud Cry, which giving him
to understand who I was, he apologiz'd in the
most graceful Manner imaginable for the little
Respect he had hitherto paid me.
               I then intreated him to tell me, If he had any
Opportunity of hearing the Name of my design'd
Ravisher; to which he reply'd, that he under-stood
it to be Taxander.
               
               This Man, Madam, was one of my Father's
Favourites, and had been long secretly in Love
with me.
               
                  Ariamenes then inform'd me, that being en-flam'd
with Rage against these impious Villains,
he rose from the Ground, re-mounted his Horse,
and defy'd the two Traytors aloud, threatning
them with Death, unless they abandon'd their
impious Design.
               
                  

                  Taxander made no Answer, but rush'd furi-ously
upon him, and had the Biseness to suffer
his wicked Associate to assist him: But the va-liant
Ariamenes, tho' he spoke modestly of his
Victory, yet gave me to understand that he had
made both the Villams abandon their wicked En-terprize,
with their Lives; and that dismount-ing
in order to see if they were quite dead, he
found himself so faint with the Wounds he had
received from them both, that he had not
Strength to re-mount his Horse; but crawling
on, in Hopes of meeting with some Assistance,
sainted away at last through Weariness and Loss
of Blood.
               While he was giving me this Account, the
Chariot I had sent for arrived, and having made
him such Acknowledgments as the Obligation
I had received from him demanded, I caus'd
him to get into the Chariot, and sending one
with him to acquaint the Prince my Father
with all that had happen'd, and the Merit o
                     •
                  
the valiant Stranger, I return'd the same Way
I came with my Women, my Thoughts being
wholly engross'd by this Unknown.
               The Service he had done me fill'd me with a
Gratitude and Esteem for him, which prepar'd
my Heart for those tender Sentiments I after-wards
entertain'd to the Ruin of my Repose.
               I will not tire your Patience, Madam, with
a minute Detail of all the succeeding Passages
of my Story; it shall suffice to tell you, That
Ariamenes was received with extraordinary
Marks of Esteem by my Father; that his Cure
was soon compleated; and that having vow'
                     •
                  
himself to my Service, and declar'd an unal-terable

Passion for me, I permitted him to love
me, and gave him that Share in my Heart,
which I fear not all his Infidelities will ever de-prive
him of.
               His Attachment to me was soon suspected by
Taxander's Relations, who having secretly
vow'd his Ruin, endeavour'd to discover if I
had admitted his Addresses, and having made
themselves Masters of our Secrets, by means of
the Treachery of one of my Women, procur'd
Information to be given to my Father of our
mutual Passion.
               Alas! what Mischiefs did not this fatal Dis-covery
produce: My Father, enrag'd to the
last Degree at this Intelligence, confin'd me to
my Apartments, and order'd Ariamenes to leave
his Dominions within three Days.
               Spare me, Madam, the Repetition of what
pass'd at our last sad Interview, which by large
Bribes to my Guards, he obtain'd.
               His Tears, his Agonies, his Vows of ever-lasting
Fidelity, so sooth'd my Melancholy at
parting with him, and persuaded me of his
Constancy, that I waited for several Months
with perfect Tranquillity for the Performance
of the Promise he made me, to do my Father
such considerable Services in the War he was
engag'd in with one of his Neighbours, as should
oblige him to give me to him for his Reward.
               But, alas! two Years roll'd on without
bringing back the unfaithful Ariamenes. My
Father died, and my Brother who succeeded
him, being about to force me to marry a Prince
whom I detested, I secretly quitted the Court, and
attended only by this faithful Confidant whom

you behold with me, and some few of my trusty
Domesticks, I came hither in Search of Aria-menes,
he having told me this Country was the
Place of his Birth.
               
                  Polenor, the most prudent and faithful of my
Servants, undertook to find out the ungreateful
Ariamenes, whom yet I was willing to find Ex-cuses
for, but all his Enquiries were to no Ef-fect;
the Name of Ariamenes was not known
in this Part of the World.
               Tir'd out with unsuccessful Enquiries, I re-solv'd
to seek out some obscure Place, where I
might in secret lament my Misfortunes, and
expect the End of them in Death. My At-tendants
found me out such a Retreat as I
wanted, in a neighbouring Village, which they
call Twickenham, I think, from whence I often
make Excursions to this Park, attended only as
you see; and here indulge myself in Com-plaints
upon the Cruelty of my Destiny.
               The sorrowful Cynecia here ended her Story,
to which in the Course of her Relation she had
given a great many Interruptions through the
Violence of her Grief: And Arabella, after
having said every thing she could think on to al-leviate
her Affliction, earnestly intreated her to
accept of an Asylum at her House; where she
should be treated with all the Respect due to
her illustrious Birth.
               The afflicted Lady, tho' she respectfully de-clin'd
this Offer, yet express'd a great Desire of
commencing a strict Amity with our fair He-roine,
who on her Part, made her the most
tender Protestations of Friendship.
               
                  

Bless me, Madam, said Miss Glanville, what
horrid Things come into your Head! I vow,
you terrify me out of my Wits, to hear you.
               There is no Occasion for your Fears, in-terrupted
Arabella: Since we already suspect his
Designs, it will be very easy to prevent them:
Had the Princess of the Sarmatians known the
fatal Intentions of her despairing Lover, doubt-less,
she would have used some Precautions to
hinder him from executing them; for want of
which, she saw the miserable Agilmond wel-tering
in his Blood at her Feet; and with Rea-son
accused herself of being the Cause of so
deplorable a Spectacle.
               The Astonishment Miss Glanville was in, to
hear her Cousin talk in this Manner, kept her
from giving her any Interruption, while she re-lated
several other terrible Instances of Despair.
               In the mean time, Sir George, who was im-patient
to go up to Lady Bella's Apartment,
having flattered himself with an Hope, that his
Letter was favourably received; and that he
should be permitted to hope at least; made a
short Visit to Sir Charles in his own Room; and,
accompanied by Mr. Glanville, who was resolv-ed
to see in what manner Arabella received
him, went to her Apartment.
               As he had taken care, at his Entrance, to
accommodate his Looks to the Character he
had assumed of an humble despairing Lover,
Arabella no sooner saw him, but her Counte-nance
changed; and, making a Sign to Mr.
Glanville, who could not comprehend what
she meant, to seize upon the Guard of his
Sword, she hastily stept forward to meet him.
               
                  

The Evening being almost clos'd, they parted
with great Reluctancy on both Sides; mutually
promising to meet in the same Place the next
Day.
               
                  Cynecia, having enjoin'd her new Friend ab-solute
Secrecy, Arabella was under a Necessity
of keeping this Adventure to herself. And tho'
she long'd to tell Mr. Glanville, who came to
visit her the next Day, that the Countess was
extremely mistaken, when she maintain'd there
were no more wandering Princesses in the
World, yet the Engagement she had submitted
to, kept her silent.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  A very mysterious Chapter.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, who impatiently long'd for
the Hour of meeting the fair Princess,
with whom she was extremely delighted, con-sulted
her Watch so often, and discover'd so
much Restlessness and Anxiety, that Mr. Glan-ville
began to be surpriz'd; and the more, as
she peremptorily commanded him not to attend
her in her Evening Walk. This Prohibition,
which, tho' he durst not dispute, he secretly re-solv'd
to disobey; and as soon as she set out for
the Park with her usual Attendants, he slipp'd
out by a Back-door, and keeping her in his
Sight, himself unseen, she ventur'd to watch
her Motions.
               
                  

As he had expected to unravel some great
Mystery, he was agreeably disappointed to find
she continu'd her Walk in the Park with great
Composure; and tho' she was soon join'd by the
imaginary Princess, yet conceiving her to be some
young Lady, with whom she had commenc'd an
Acquaintance at Richmond, his Heart was at Rest;
and for fear of displeasing her, he took a con-trary
Path from that she was in, that he might
not meet her, yet resolv'd to stay till he thought
she would be inclin'd to return, and then shew
himself, and conduct her Home. A Solicitude
for which he did not imagine she need be of-fended.
               The two Ladies being met, after reciprocal
Compliments, the Princess intreated Arabella
to relate her Adventures; who not being wil-ling
to violate the Laws of Romance, which
require an unbounded Confidence upon these
Occasions, began very succinctly to recount the
History of her Life; which, as she manag'd
it, contain'd Events almost as Romantick and
Incredible as any in her Romances; winding
them up with a Confession that she did not hate
Mr. Glanville, whom she acknowledg'd to be
one of the most faithful and zealous of Lovers.
               
                  Cynecia with a Sigh, congratulated her upon
the Fidelity of a Lover, who by her Descrip-tion,
was worthy the Place he possess'd in her
Esteem: And expressing a Wish, that she could
see, unobserv'd by him, this gallant and gene-rous
Person, Arabella, who that Moment espy'd
him at a Distance, yet advancing towards them,
told her, with a Blush that overspread all her
Face, That her Curiosity might be satisfy'd in

the Manner she wish'd, for, yonder, added she
is the Person we have been talking of.
               
                  Cynecia, at these Words, looking towards
the Place where her fair Friend had directed;
no sooner cast her Eyes upon Mr. Glanville,
than giving a loud Cry, she sunk into the Arms
of Arabella, who, astonish'd and perplex'd as
she was, eagerly held them out to support her.
               Finding her in a Swoon, she dispatch'd. Lucy,
who was near her, to look for some Water to
throw in her Face; but that Lady breathing a
deep Sigh, open'd her languishing Eyes, and fix-ing
a melancholy Look upon Arabella,
               
               Ah! Madam, said she, wonder not at my
Affliction and Surprize, since in the Person of
your Lover I behold the ungrateful Ariamenes.
               
               Oh Heav'ns! my fair Princess, replied Ara-bella,
What is it you say? Is it possible Glan-ville
can be Ariamenes?
               
               He, cried the afflicted Princess with a dis-order'd
Accent, He whom I now behold! and
whom you call Glanville, was once Ariamenes,
the perjur'd, the ungrateful Ariamenes. Adieu,
Madam, I cannot bear this Sight; I will hide
myself from the World for ever; nor need you
fear a Rival or an Enemy in the unfortunate
Cynecia, who if possible, will cease to love the
unfaithful Ariamenes, and will never hate the
beautiful Arabella.
               
               Saying this, without giving her Time to an-swer,
she took hold of her Confidant by the
Arm, and went away with so much Swiftness,
that she was out of sight before Arabella was
enough recover'd from her Astonishment to be
able to intreat her Stay.
               
                  

Our charming Heroine, ignorant till now of
the true State of her Heart, was surpriz'd to
find it assaulted at once by all the Passions which
attend disappointed Love. Grief, Rage, Jea-lousy,
and Despair made so cruel a War in her
gentle Bosom, that unable either to express or
to conceal the strong Emotions with which she
was agitated, she gave Way to a violent Burst
of Tears, leaning her Head upon Lucy's Shoulder,
who wept as heartily as her Lady, tho' igno-rant
of the Cause of her Affliction.
               Mr. Glanville, who was now near enough
to take Notice of her Posture, came running
with eager Heart to see what was the matter;
when Arabella, rous'd from her Extacy of Grief
by the Sound of his Steps, lifted up her Head,
and seeing him approach,
               
                  Lucy, cried she, trembling with the Violence
of her Resentment, Tell that Traitor to keep
out of my Sight. Tell him, I forbid him ever
to appear before me again. And, tell him, ad-ded
she, with a Sigh that shook her whole
tender Frame, All that Blood in his Body is too
little to wash away his Guilt, or to pacify my
Indignation.
               Then hastily turning away, she ran towards
her other Attendants, who were at some Di-stance;
and joining her Women, proceeded
directly Home.
               Mr. Glanville, amaz'd at this Action, was
making after her as fast as he could, when Lucy
crossing in his Way, cry'd out to him to stop.
               My Lady, said she, bid me tell you, Trai-tor—
               
                  

Hey day! interrupted Glanville, What the
Devil does the Girl mean?
               Pray Sir, said she, let me deliver my Mes-sage:
I shall forget if you speak to me till I
have said it all—Stay, let me see, What comes
next?
               No more Traitor, I hope, said Glanville.
               
               Nor, Sir, said Lucy; but there was some-thing
about washing in Blood, and you must
keep out of her Sight, and not appear before
the Nation—Oh dear! I have forgot it half:
My Lady was in such a piteous Taking, I for-got
it, I believe, as soon as she said it. What
shall I do?—
               No Matter, said Glanville, I'll overtake her,
and ask—
               No, no, Sir, said Lucy, Pray don't do that,
Sir, my Lady will be very angry: I'll venture
to ask her to tell me over again, and come back
and let you know it.
               But tell me, reply'd Glanville, Was any thing
the Matter with your Lady? She was in a pi-teous
Taking, you say.
               Oh dear! yes, Sir, said Lucy; but I was not
bid to say any thing about that. To be sure,
my Lady did cry sadly, and sigh'd as if her
Heart would break; but I don't know what
was the Matter with her.
               Well, said Glanville, excessively shock'd at
this Intelligence, Go to your Lady; I am go-ing
Home—You may bring me her Message to
my own Apartment.
               
                  Lucy did as she was desir'd; and Mr. Glan-ville,
impatient as he was to unravel the My-stery,
yet dreading lest his Presence should make

                  Arabella be guilty of some Extravagance before
the Servants who were with her, he follow'd
slowly after her, resolving if possible, to pro-cure
a private Interview with the lovely Vision-ary,
for whose Sorrow, tho' he suspected it was
owing to some ridiculous Cause, he could not
help being affected.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Not much plainer than the former.
               
               
                  ARABELLA, who had walk'd as fast as
her Legs would carry her, got Home
before Lucy could overtake her, and retiring to
her Chamber, gave Way to a fresh Burst of
Grief, and bewail'd the Infidelity of Glanville
in Terms befitting a Clelia or Mandana.
               
               As soon as she saw Lucy enter, she started
from her Chair with great Emotion.
               Thou comest, said she, I know, to inter-cede
for that ungrateful Man, whose Infidelity
I am weak enough to lament: But open not
thy Mouth, I charge thee, in his Defence.
               No, indeed, Madam, said Lucy.
               
               Nor bring me any Account of his Tears, his
Desparation, or his Despair, said Arabella, since
questionless he will feign them all to deceive
me.
               Here Glanville, who had watch'd Lucy's com-ing,
and had follow'd her into Arabella's Apart-ment,
appear'd at the Door.
               
                  

Oh Heav'ns! cry'd Arabella lifting up her
fine Eyes, Can it be that this disloyal Man, un-aw'd
by the Discovery of his Guilt, again pre-sumes
to approach me!—
               Dearest Cousin, said Glanville, What is the
Meaning of all this?—How have I disoblig'd
you?—What is my Offence? I beseech you,
tell me.
               
                  This Enigmatical Way of speaking upon such Occasions, is of great Use in the voluminous French Romances; since the Doubt and Confusion it is the Cause of, both to the Accus'd and Accuser, gives Ris
                        •
                      to a great Number of succeding Mistakes, and consequently Adventures. Ask the inconstant Ariamenes, reply'd
Arabella, the Offence of the ungrateful Glan-ville.
The Betrayer of Cynecia can best answer
that Question to the Deceiver of Arabella. And
the Guilt of the one can only be compar'd to
the Crimes of the other.
               Good God! interrupted Mr. Glanville fret-ting
excessively, What am I to understand by
all this? On my Soul, Madam, I don't know
the Meaning of one Word you say.
               Oh Dissembler! said Arabella, Is it thus that
thou would'st impose upon my Credulity? Does
not the Name of Ariamenes make thee tremble
then? And can'st thou hear that of Cynecia
without Confusion?
               Dear Lady Bella, said Glanville smiling,
What are these Names to me?
               False Man, interrupted Arabella, Dost thou
presume to sport with thy Crimes then? Are
not the Treacheries of Ariamenes the Crimes of
Glanville? Could Ariamenes be false to the Prin-cess

of Gaul, and can Glanville be innocent to-wards
Arabella?
               
               Mr. Glanville, who had never heard her in
his Opinion, talk so ridiculously before, was so
amaz'd at the incomprehensible Stuff she utter'd
with so much Emotion, that he began to fear
her Intellects were really touch'd. This
Thought gave him a Concern that spread itself
in a Moment over his Countenance. He gaz'd
on her with a fix'd Attention, dreading, yet
wishing she would speak again; equally divided
between his Hopes, that her next Speech would
remove his Suspicion, and his Fears, that it
might more confirm them.
               
                  Arabella taking Notice of his pensive Posture,
turn'd away her Head, lest by beholding him,
she should relent, and treat him with less Seve-rity
than she had intended; making at the same
Time a Sign to him to be gone.
               Indeed, Lady Bella, said Glanville who un-derstood
her perfectly well, I cannot leave you
in this Temper. I must know how I have
been so unfortunate as to offend you.
               
                  Arabella, no longer able to contain herself,
burst into Tears at this Question: With one
Hand she made repeated Signs to him to be
gone, with the other she held her Handkerchief
to her Eyes, vex'd and asham'd of her Weak-ness.
               But Mr. Glanville, excessively shock'd at this
Sight, instead of leaving her, threw himself on
his Knees before her, and taking her Hand,
which he tenderly prest to his Lips,
               Good God! my dearest Cousin, said he,
How you distract me by this Behaviour! Sure

something extraordinary must be the Matter.
What can it be that thus afflicts you?—Am I
the Cause of these Tears?—Can I have offended
you so much?—Speak, dear Madam—Let me
know my Crime. Yet may I perish if I am
conscious of any towards you—
               Disloyal Man, said Arabella dis-engaging her
Hand from his, Does then the Crime of Aria-menes
seem so light in thy Apprehension, that
thou can'st hope to be thought innocent by
Arabella? No, no, ungrateful Man, the un-fortunate
Cynecia shall have no Cause to say,
that I will triumph in her Spoils. I myself will
be the Minister of her Revenge; and Glanville
shall suffer for the Crime of Ariamenes.
               
               Who the Devil is this Ariamenes, cry'd
Glanville rising in a Passion? And why am I to
suffer for his Crime, pray? For Heav'ns Sake,
dear Cousin, don't let your Imagination wan-der
thus. Upon my Soul, I don't believe there
is any such Person as Ariamenes in the World,
               Vile Equivocator, said Arabella; Ariamenes,
tho' dead to Cynecia, is alive to the deluded
Arabella. The Crimes of Ariamenes are the
Guilt of Glanville: And if the one has made
himself unworthy of the Princess of Gaul, by
his Perfidy and Ingratitude, the other by his
Baseness and Deceit, merits nothing but Con-tempt
and Detestation from Arabella.
               
               Frenzy, by my Soul, cry'd Glanville mutter-ingly
between his Teeth: This is downright
Frenzy. What shall I do?—
               Hence, from my Presence, resum'd Arabella,
false and ungrateful Man; persecute me no
more with the hateful Offers of thy Love. From

this Moment I banish thee from my Thoughts
for ever; and neither as Glanville or as Aria-menes,
will I ever behold thee more.
               Stay, dear Cousin, said Glanville holding her
(for she was endeavouring to rush by him, un-willing
he should see the Tears that had over-spread
her Face as she pronounc'd those Words)
hear me, I beg you, but one Word. Who is
it you mean by Ariamenes?—Is it me?—Tell
me, Madam, I beseech you—This is some hor-rid
Mistake—You have been impos'd upon by
some villainous Artifice—Speak, dear Lady
Bella—Is it me you mean by Ariamenes? For
so your last Words seem'd to hint—
               
                  Arabella, without regarding what he said,
struggled violently to force her Hand from his:
and finding him still earnest to detain her, told
him with an enrag'd Voice, That she would
call for Help, if he did not unhand her directly.
               Poor Glanville, at this Menace, submissively
dropt her Hand; and the Moment she was free,
she flew out of the Room, and locking herself
up in her Closet, sent her Commands to him
by one of her Women, whom she call'd to
her, to leave her Apartment immediately.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Containing indeed no great Matters, but
being a Prelude to greater.
               
               MR. Glanville, who stood fix'd like a Statue
in the Place where Arabella had left him,
was rous'd by this Message, which tho' palliated

I am too well convinced, said she to Sir
George, that the Intent of your coming hither
To day, is to commit some Violence against
yourself before my Eyes: But listen not, I be-seech
you, to the Dictates of your Despair:
Live; I command you, live; and since you say,
I have the absolute Disposal of your Life, do
not deprive yourself of it, without the Consent
of her, on whom you profess to have bestowed
it.
               Sir George, who did not imagine Arabella
would communicate his Letter to her Cousins,
and only expected some distant Hints from her
concerning it, was so confounded at this Re-ception
before them, that he was not able to
reply: He blushed, and turned pale alternately;
and, not daring to look, either upon Miss Glan-ville,
or her Brother, or to meet the Eyes of the
fair Visionary, who, with great Impatience, ex-pected
his Answer, he hung down his Head
in a very silly Posture; and, by his Silence, con-firmed
Arabella in her Opinion.
               As he did not want for Wit and Assurance,
during that Interval of Silence, and Expecta-tion
from all Parties; his Imagination suggested
to him the Means of extricating himself out of
the ridiculous Perplexity he was in; and as it
concerned him greatly to avoid any Quarrel,
with the Brother and Sister, he determined to
turn the whole Matter into a Jest; but, if pos-sible,
to manage it so, that Arabella should not
enter into his Meaning.
               Raising therefore his Eyes, and looking upon
Arabella with a melancholy Air;
               
                  

a little by the Girl that deliver'd it, who was
not quite so punctual as Lucy, nevertheless fill'd
him with extreme Confusion. He obey'd how-ever
immediately, and retiring to his own Apart-ment,
endeavour'd to recall to his Memory all
Lady Bella had said.
               The Ambiguity of her Style, which had led
him into a Suspicion he had never entertain'd
before, her last Words had partly explain'd, if
as he understood she did, she meant him by
Ariamenes. Taking this for granted, he easily
conceiv'd some Plot grounded on her Roman-tick
Notions had been laid, to prepossess her
against him.
               Sir George's Behaviour to her rush'd that Mo-ment
into his Thoughts: He instantly recollected
all his Fooleries, his History, his Letter, his
Conversation, all apparently copied from those
Books she was so fond of, and probably done
with a View to some other Design upon her.
               These Reflections, join'd to his new awak'd
Suspicions, that he was in Love with her, con-vinc'd
him he was the Author of their present
Mis-understanding; and that he had impos'd
some new Fallacy upon Arabella, in order to
promote a Quarrel between them.
               Fir'd almost to Madness at this Thought, he
stamp'd about his Room, vowing Revenge up-on
Sir George, execrating Romances, and curs-ing
his own Stupidity for not discovering Sir
George was his Rival, and knowing his plotting
Talent, not providing against his Artifices.
               His first Resolutions were to set out imme-diately
for Sir George's Seat, and force him to
confess the Part he had acted against him: But a

Moment's Consideration convinc'd him, that
was not the most probable Place to find him in,
since it was much more likely he was waiting
the Success of his Schemes in London, or perhaps
at Richmond.
               
               Next to satiating his Vengeance, the Pleasure
of detecting him in such a Manner, that he
could not possibly deny or palliate his Guilt, was
next his Heart.
               He resolv'd therefore to give it out, that he
was gone to London, to make Lady Bella be-lieve
it was in Obedience to her Commands
that he had left her, with a Purpose not to re-turn
till he had clear'd his Innocence; but in
reality to conceal himself in his own Apartment,
and see what Effects his reputed Absence would
produce.
               Having thus taken his Resolution, he sent
for Mr. Roberts his Father's Steward, to whose
Care he had entrusted Lady Bella in her Retire-ment,
and acquainting him with Part of his
Apprehensions with Regard to Sir George's At-temp
                     •
                  s
upon his Cousin; he imparted to him
his Design of staying conceal'd there, in order
to discover more effectually those Attempts, and
to preserve Lady Bella from any Consequence
of them.
               Mr. Roberts approv'd of his Design; and as-sur'd
him of his Vigilance and Care, both in
concealing his Stay, and also in giving him No-tice
of every Thing that pass'd.
               Mr. Glanville then wrote a short Billet to
Arabella, expressing his Grief for her Displea-sure,
his Departure in Obedience to her Orders,
and his Resolution not to appear in her Presence,

till he could give her convincing Proofs of his
Innocence.
               This Letter he sent by Roberts, which Ara-bella
condescended to read, but would return no
Answer.
               Mr. Glanville then mounting his Horse,
which Roberts had order'd to be got ready, rode
away, and leaving him at a House he sometimes
put up at, return'd on Foot, and was let in by
Mr. Roberts at the Garden-door, and conducted
unseen to his Chamber.
               While he pass'd that Night and great Part of
the next Day, meditating on the Treachery of
Sir George, and soothing his Uneasiness with the
Hopes of Revenge, Arabella, no less disquieted,
mus'd on the Infidelity of her Lover, the De-spair
of Cynecia, and the Impossibility of her
ever being happy. Then ransacking her Me-mory
for Instances in her Romances of Ladies
equally unfortunate with herself, she would
sometimes compare herself to one Lady, some-times
to another, adapting their Sentiments,
and making Use of their Language in her Com-plaints.
               Great Part of the Day being spent in this
Manner, the uneasy Restlessness of her Mind
made her wish to see Cynecia again. She long'd
to ask her a hundred Questions about the un-faithful
Ariamenes, which the Suddainess of her
Departure, and her own Astonishment prevented
her from doing, when she made that fatal Dis-covery,
which had cost her so much Uneasiness.
               Sometimes a faint Hope would arise in her
Mind that Cynecia might be mistaken, thro' the
great Resemblance that possibly was between
Ariamenes and Glanville.
               
               
                  

She remember'd that Mandana had been de-ceiv'd
by the Likeness of Cyrus to Spitridates;
and concluded that illustrious Prince inconstant,
because Spitridates, whom she took for Cyrus,
saw her carry'd away, without offering to
rescue her.
               Dwelling with Eagerness upon this Thought,
because it afforded her a temporary Relief from
others more tormenting, she resolv'd to go to
the Park, tho' she had but little Hopes of find-ing
Cynecia there; supposing it but too proba-ble,
that the Disturbance which the Sight, or
fancy'd Sight of Ariamenes had given her, would
confine her for some Days to her Chamber.
Yet however small the Probability was of meet-ing
with her, she could not resist the impatient
Desire she felt of going to seek her.
               Dispensing therefore with the Attendance of
any other Servant but Lucy, she left her Apart-ment,
with a Design of resuming her usual
Walk, when she was met at her stepping out of
the Door by Lady L—'s three Daughters, (who
had visited her during her Residence at Richmond)
and another young Lady.
               These Ladies, who to vary the Scene of their
Rural Diversions, were going to cross over to
Twickenham, and walk there, prest Lady Bella
to accompany them. Our melancholy Heroine
refus'd them at first, but upon their repeated
Importunity, recollecting that the Princess of
Gaul had inform'd her she resided there, she
consented to go, in Hopes some favourable
Chance might bring her in their Way, or dis-cover
the Place of her Retreat, when she could
easily find some Excuse for leaving her Compa-nions,
and going to her.
               
                  

Mr. Roberts, who according to his Instructi-ons,
narrowly watch'd Arabella's Motions, find-ing
she did not command his Attendance as
usual, resolv'd however to be privately of this
Party. He had but just Time to run up and
acquaint Mr. Glanville, and then follow'd the
Ladies at a Distance, who taking Boat, pass'd
over to Twickenham, which he also did as soon
as he saw them landed.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Which acquaints the Reader with two very
extraordinary Accidents.
               
               MR. Glanville, who did not doubt but
Roberts would bring him some Intelli-gence,
sat waiting with anxious Impatience for
his Return. The Evening drew on apace, he
number'd the Hours, and began to grow uneasy
at Arabella's long Stay. His Chamber Win-dow
looking into the Garden, he thought he
saw his Cousin, cover'd with her Veil as usual,
hasten down one of the Walks; his Heart
leap'd at this transient View, he threw up the
Sash, and looking out, saw her very plainly
strike into a cross Walk, and a Moment after
saw Sir George, who came out of a little Sum-mer-house,
at her Feet. Transported with
Rage at this Sight, he snatch'd up his Sword,
flew down the Stairs into the Garden, and
came running like a Madman up the Walk in
which the Lovers were. The Lady observing
him first, for Sir George's Back was towards

him, shriek'd aloud, and not knowing what
she did, ran towards the House, crying for
Help, and came back as fast, yet not Time
enough to prevent Mischief: For Mr. Glan-ville,
actuated by an irresistible Fury, cry'd out
to Sir George to defend himself, who had but
just Time to draw his Sword and make an in-effectual
Pass at Mr. Glanville, when he receiv'd
his into his Body, and fell to the Ground.
               Mr. Glanville losing his Resentment insensi-bly
at the Sight of his Rival's Blood, threw
down his Sword, and endeavour'd to support
him; while the Lady, who had lost her Veil
in her running, and to the great Astonishment
of Mr. Glanville, prov'd to be his Sister, came
up to them, with Tears and Exclamations,
blaming herself for all that had happen'd.
Mr. Glanville, with a Heart throbbing with Re-morse
for what he had done, gaz'd on his Sister
with an accusing Look, as she hung over the
wounded Baronet with streaming Eyes, some-times
wringing her Hands, then clasping them
together in an Agony of Grief.
               Sir George having Strength enough left to
observe her Disorder, and the generous Concern
of Glanville, who holding him in his Arms,
intreated his Sister to send for proper Assistance,
Dear Charles, said he, you are too kind, I
have us'd you very ill, I have deserv'd my
Death from your Hand—You know not what
I have been base enough to practise against you—
If I can but live to clear your Innocence to
Lady Bella, and free you from the Consequen-ces
of this Action, I shall die satisfy'd—
               
                  

His Strength failing him at these Words, he
fainted away in Mr. Glanville's Arms; who tho'
now convinc'd of his Treachery, was extremely
shock'd at the Condition he saw him in.
               Miss Glanville renewing her Tears and Ex-clamations
at this Sight, he was oblig'd to lay
Sir George gently upon the Ground, and ran to
find out somebody to send for a Surgeon, and
to help him to convey him into the House.
               In his Way he was met by Mr. Roberts, who
was coming to seek him; and with a Look of
Terror and Confusion told him, Lady Bella
was brought Home extremely ill—that her Life
had been in Danger, and that she was but just
recover'd from a terrible fainting Fit.
               Mr. Glanville, tho' greatly alarm'd at this
News, forgot not to take all possible Care of
Sir George; directing Roberts to get some Per-son
to carry him into the House, and giving
him Orders to procure proper Assistance, flew
to Lady Bella's Apartment.
               Her Women had just put her to Bed, raving
as in a strong Delirium. Mr. Glanville ap-proach'd
her, and finding she was in a violent
Fever, dispatch'd a Man and Horse immedi-ately
to Town, to get Physicians, and to ac-quaint
his Father with what had happen'd.
               Mr. Roberts, upon the Surgeon's Report that
Sir George was not mortally wounded, came
to inform him of this good News, but he sound
him incapable of listning to him, and in Ago-nies
not to be exprest. 'Twas with Difficulty
they forc'd him out of Arabella's Chamber into
his own; where throwing himself upon his

                     
                  , he refus'd to see or speak to any Body, till

he was told Sir Charles and the Physicians were
arriv'd.
               He then ran eagerly to hear their Opinions of
his beloved Cousin, which he soon discover'd
by their significant Gestures and half pronounc'd
Words, to be very bad. They comforted him
however, with Hopes that she might recover,
and insisting upon her being kept very quiet,
oblig'd him to quit the Room. While all the
necessary Methods were taken to abate the Vio-lence
of the Disease, Sir Charles, who had been
inform'd by his Steward of his Son's Duel with
Sir George, was amaz'd to the last Degree at
two such terrible Accidents.
               Having seen his Son to his Chamber, and re-commended
him to be patient and compos'd,
he went to visit the young Baronet, and was
not a little surpriz'd to find his Daughter sitting
at his Bed's Head, with all the Appearance of
a violent Affliction.
               Indeed Miss Glanville's Cares were so wholly
engross'd by Sir George's, that she hardly
ever thought of her Cousin Arabella, and had
just stept into her Chamber while the Surgeons
were dressing Sir George's Wound, and renew'd
her Attendance upon him as soon as that was
over.
               Miss Glanville however, thought proper to
make some trifling Excuses to her Father for
her Solicitude about Sir George. And the
young Baronet, on whom the Fear of Death
produc'd its usual Effects, and made him ex-tremely
concern'd for the Errors of his past
Life, and very desirous of attoning for them if
possible, assur'd Sir Charles, that if he liv'd he

would offer himself to his Acceptance for a Son-in-law;
declaring that he had basely trifled
with the Esteem of his Daughter, but that she
had wholly subdued him to herself by her for-giving
Tenderness.
               Sir Charles was very desirous of knowing the
Occasion of his Quarrel with his Son, but Sir
George was too weak to hold any further Con-versation,
upon which Sir Charles, after a short
Visit retir'd, taking Miss Glanville along with
him.
               That the Reader, whose Imagination is no
doubt upon the Stretch to conceive the Meaning
of these Two extraordinary Incidents, may be
left no longer in Suspence, we think proper to
explain them both in the following Chapter,
that we may in the next pursue our History
without Interruption.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Which will be found to contain Informa-tion
absolutely necessary for the right
understanding of this History.
               
               OUR fair and afflicted Heroine, accompa-nied
by the Ladies we have mention'd,
having cross'd the River, pursu'd their Walk
upon its winding Banks, entertaining them-selves
with the usual Topicks of Conversation
among young Ladies, such as their Winnings
and Losings at Brag, the Prices of Silks, the
newest Fashions, the best Hair-Cutter, the
Scandal at the last Assembly, &amp;c.
               
               
                  

                  Arabella was so disgusted with this (as she
thought) insipid Discourse, which gave no Re-lief
to the Anxiety of her Mind, but added a
Kind of Fretfulness and Impatience to her
Grief; that she resolv'd to quit them, and with
Lucy, go in quest of the Princess of Gaul's
Retreat.
               The Ladies however, insisted upon her not
leaving them; and her Excuse that she was
going in search of an unfortunate Unknown,
for whom she had vow'd a Friendship, made
them all immediately resolve to accompany her,
extremely diverted with the Oddity of the De-sign,
and sacrificing her to their Mirth by sly
Leers, Whispers, stifled Laughs, and a thou-sand
little sprightly Sallies, which the disconso-late
Arabella took no Notice of, so deeply were
her Thoughts engag'd.
               Tho' she knew not which Way to direct her
Steps, yet concluding the melancholy Cynccia
would certainly chuse some very solitary Place
for her Residence, she rambled about among
the least frequented Paths, follow'd by the young
Ladies, who ardently desir'd to see this unfor-tunate
Unknown; tho' at Arabella's earnest
Request, they promis'd not to shew themselves
to the Lady, who, she inform'd them, for
very urgent Reasons, was oblig'd to keep herself
conceal'd.
               Fatiguing as this Ramble was to the delicate
Spirits of Arabella's Companions, they were en-abled
to support it by the Diversion her Beha-viour
afforded them.
               Every Peasant she met, she enquir'd if a Beau-tiful
Lady disguis'd did not 
                     
                  
thereabout.
               
                  

You are not deceived, Madam, said he: This
Criminal, with whom you are so justly offend-ed,
comes with an Intention to die at your
Feet, and breathe out his miserable Life, to ex-piate
those Crimes of which you accuse him:
But since your severe Compassion will oblige
me to live, I obey, oh! most divine, but cruel
Arabella! I obey your harsh Commands; and,
by endeavouring to live, give you a more con-vincing
Proof of that Respect and Submission
I shall always have for your Will.
               I expected no less from your Courage and
Generosity, said Arabella, with a Look of great
Complacency; and since you so well know
how to imitate the great Lysimachus in your
Obedience, I shall not be less acknowleging
then the fair Parisatis; but will have for you
an Esteem equal to that Virtue I have ob-served
in you.
               Sir George, having received this gracious Pro-mise,
with a most profound Bow, turned to
Mr. Glanville, with a kind of chastened Smile
upon his Countenance.
               And, you, fortunate and deserving Knight,
said he, happy in the Affections of the fairest
Person in the World! grudge me not this small
Alleviation of my Misfortunes; and envy me
not that Esteem, which alone is able to make
me suffer Life, while you possess, in the Heart
of the divine Arabella, a Felicity that might
be envied by the greatest Monarchs in the
World.
               As diverting as this Scene was, Mr. Glan-ville
was extremely uneasy: For though Sir
George's Stratagem took, and he believed he

To some she gave a Description of her Per-son,
to others an Account of the Domesticks
that were with her; not forgetting her Dress,
her Melancholy, and the great Care she took
to keep herself conceal'd.
               These strange Enquiries, with the strange
Language in which they were made, not a lit-tle
surpriz'd the good People to whom she ad-dress'd
herself, yet mov'd to Respect by the ma-jestick
Loveliness of her Person, they answer'd
her in the Negative, without any Mixture of
Scoff and Impertinence.
               How unfavourable is Chance, said Arabella
fretting at the Disappointment, to Persons who
have any Reliance upon it! This Lady that I
have been in Search of so long without Success,
may probably be found by others who do not
seek her, whose Presence she may wish to
avoid, yet not be able.
               The young Ladies finding it grew late, ex-press'd
their Apprehensions at being without any
Attendants; and desir'd Arabella to give over
her Search for that Day. Arabella at this Hint
of Danger, enquir'd very earnestly, If they ap-prehended
any Attempts to carry them away?
And without staying for an Answer, urg'd them
to walk Home as fast as possible, apologizing
for the Danger into which she had so indiscreet-ly
drawn both them and herself; yet added her
Hopes, that if any Attempt should be made
upon their Liberty, some generous Cavalier
would pass by who would rescue them: A Thing
so common, that they had no Reason to de-spair
of it.
               
                  

                  Arabella construing the Silence with which
her Companions heard these Assurances, into a
Doubt of their being so favoured by Fortune,
proceeded to inform them of several Instances
wherein Ladies met with unexpected Relief and
Deliverance from Ravishers.
               She mention'd particularly the Rescue of
Statira by her own Brother, whom she ima-gin'd
for many Years dead; that of the Prin-cess
Berenice by an absolute Stranger, and many
others, whose Names, Characters and Adven-tures
she occasionally run over; all which the
young Ladies heard with inconceivable Asto-nishment.
And the Detail had such an Effect
upon Arabella's Imagination, bewilder'd as i
                     •
                  
was in the Folies of Romances, that 'spying
three or four Horsemen riding along the Road
towards them, she immediately concluded they
would be all seiz'd and carry'd off.
               Possess'd with this Belief, she utter'd a loud
Cry, and flew to the Water-side, which alarm-ing
the Ladies, who could not imagine what
was the Matter, they ran after her as fast as
possible.
               
                  Arabella stop'd when she came to the Water-side,
and looking round about, and not perceiv-ing
any Boat to waft them over to Richmond, a
Thought suddenly darted into her Mind, wor-thy
those ingenious Books which gave it Birth.
               Turning therefore to the Ladies, who all at
once were enquiring the Cause of her Fright;
               'Tis now, my fair Companions, said she,
with a solemn Accent, that the Destinies have

furnish'd you with an Opportunity of display-ing
in a Manner truly Heroick, the Sublimity
of your Virtue, and the Grandeur of your
Courage to the World.
               The Action we have it in our Power to per-form
will immortalize our Fame, and raise us
to a Pitch of Glory equal to that of the re-nown'd
Clelia herself.
               Like her, we may expect Statues erected to
our Honour: Like her, be propos'd as Patterns
to Heroines in ensuing Ages: And like her,
perhaps, meet with Sceptres and Crowns for
our Reward.
               What that beauteous Roman Lady perform'd
to preserve herself from Violation by the impi-ous
Sextus, let us imitate to avoid the Violence
our intended Ravishers yonder come to offer us.
               Fortune, which has thrown us into this Exi-gence,
presents us the Means of gloriously
escaping: And the Admiration and Esteem of
all Ages to come, will be the Recompence of
our noble Daring.
               Once more, my fair Companions, If your
Honour be dear to you, if an immortal Glory
be worth your seeking, follow the Exam-ple
I shall set you, and equal with me the Ro-man
Clelia.
               
               Saying this, she plung'd into the Thames, in-tending
to swim over it, as Clelia did the Tyber.
               
               The young Ladies, who had listen'd with
silent Astonishment at the long Speech she had
made them, the Purport of which not one of
them understood, scream'd out aloud at this

horrid Spectacle, and wringing their Hands,
ran backwards and forwards like distracted Per-sons,
crying for Help. Lucy tore her Hair,
and was in the utmost Agony of Grief, when
Mr. Roberts, who, as we have said before, kept
them always in Sight, having observ'd Arabella
running towards the Water-side, follow'd them
as fast as he could, and came Time enough up
to see her frantick Action. Jumping into the
River immediately after her, he caught hold of
her Gown, and drew her after him to the Shore.
A Boat that Instant appearing, he put her into
it, senseless, and to all Appearance dead. He
and Lucy supporting her, they were wasted over
in a few Moments to the other Side: Her House
being near the River, Mr. Roberts carry'd her
in his Arms to it; and as soon as he saw her
shew Signs of returning Life, left her to the
Care of the Women, who made haste to put
her into a warm Bed, and ran to find out
Mr. Glanville, as we have related.
               There remains now only to account for
Sir George and Miss Glanville's sudden Appear-ance,
which happen'd, gentle Reader, exactly
as follows.
               Miss Glanville, having set out pretty late in
the Afternoon, with a Design of staying all
Night at Richmond, as her Chaise drove up
Kew-Lane, saw one of her Cousin's Women,
Deborah by Name, talking to a Gentleman,
whom, notwithstanding the Disguise of a Horse-man's
Coat, and a Hat slouch'd over his Face,
she knew to be Sir George Bellmour.
               
               
                  

This Sight alarming her Jealousy, and re-newing
all her former Suspicions, that her Cou-sin's
Charms rival'd hers in his Heart, as soon
as she alighted, finding Arabella was not at
Home, she retir'd in great Anguish of Mind to
her Chamber, revolving in her Mind every
Particular of Sir George's Behaviour to her Cou-sin
in the Country, and finding new Cause for
Suspicion in every Thing she recollected, and
reflecting upon the Disguise in which she saw
him, and his Conference with her Woman, she
concluded herself had all along been the Dupe
of his Artifice, and her Cousin the real Object
of his Love.
               This Thought throwing her into an Extre-mity
of Rage, all her tenderest Emotions were
lost in the Desire of Revenge. She imagin'd
to herself so much Pleasure from exposing his
Treachery, and putting it our of his Power to
deny it, that she resolv'd, whatever it cost her,
to have that Satisfaction.
               Supposing therefore Deborah was now re-turn'd,
she rung her Bell, and commanded her
Attendance on her in her Chamber.
               The Stern Brow with which she receiv'd
her, frighten'd the Girl, conscious of her Guilt,
into a Disposition to confess all, even before she
was tax'd with any thing.
               Miss Glanville saw her Terror, and endea-vour'd
to heighten it, by entering at once into
Complaints and Exclamations against her,
threatning to acquaint her Father with her Plots
to betray her Lady, and assuring her of a very
severe Punishment for her Treachery.
               
                  

The Girl, terrify'd extremely at these Me-naces,
begg'd Miss Glanville, with Tears, to
forgive her, and not to acquaint Sir Charles or
her Lady, with her Fault; adding, that she
would confess all, and never while she liv'd, do
such a Thing again.
               Miss Glanville would make her no Promises,
but urg'd her to confess: Upon which Deborah
sobbing, own'd, That for the Sake of the Pre-sents
Sir George had made her, she consented to
meet him privately from Time to Time, and
give him an Account of every Thing that
pass'd with Regard to her Lady; not thinking
there was any Harm in it. That according to
his Desires, she had constantly acquainted him
with all her Lady's Motions, when, and where
she went, how she and Mr. Glanville agreed,
and a hundred other Things which he enquir'd
about. That that Day in particular, he had
intreated her to procure him the M
                     •
                  ans of an
Interview with her Lady, if possible; and un-derstanding
Mr. Glanville was not at Richmond,
she had let him privately into the Garden,
where she hop'd to prevail upon her Lady
to go.
               What, said Miss Glanville surpriz'd, Is Sir
George waiting for my Cousin in the Garden
then?
               Yes, indeed, Madam, said Deborah: But
I'll go and tell him to wait no longer; and
never speak to him again, if your Ladyship
will but be pleas'd to forgive me.
               Miss Glanville having taken her Resolution,
not only promis'd Deborah her Pardon, but also

a Reward, provided she would contrive it so,
that she might meet Sir George instead of her
Cousin.
               The Girl, having the true Chamber-Maid
Spirit of Intrigue in her, immediately propos'd
her putting on one of her Lady's Veils; which
as it was now the Close of the Evening, would
disguise her sufficiently; to which Miss Glanville,
transported with the Thoughts of thus having
an Opportunity of convincing Sir George of his
Perfidy, and reproaching him for it, consented,
and bid her bring it without being observ'd, into
her Chamber.
               
                  Deborah informing her, that Sir George was
conceal'd in the Summer-House, as soon as she
had equipp'd herself with Arabella's Veil she
went into the Walk that led to it; and Sir George,
believing her to be that Lady, hasten'd to throw
himself at her Feet, and had scarce got through
half a Speech he had study'd for his present
Purpose, when Mr. Glanville gave a fatal In-terruption
to his Heroicks, in the Manner we
have already related.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  A short Chapter indeed, but full of Matter.
               
               
                  RICHMOND was now a Scene of the ut-most
Confusion and Distress. Arabella's
Fever was risen to such a Height, that she was

given over by the Physicians; and Sir George's
Wounds, tho' not judg'd mortal at first, yet by
the great Effusion of Blood had left him in so
weak a Condition, that he was thought to be
in great Danger.
               Sir Charles, almost distracted with the Fears
of the Consequences of Sir George's Death, in-treated
his Son to quit the Kingdom; but
Mr. Glanville, protesting he would rather die
than leave Arabella in that Illness, he was
oblig'd to give Bail for his Appearance, in Case
Sir George dy'd: This Affair, notwithstanding
all Endeavours to prevent it, having made a
great Noise.
               Poor Sir Charles, opprest as he was with the
Weight of all these Calamities, was yet oblig'd
to labour incessantly to keep up the Spirits of
his Son and Daughter. The settled Despair of
the one, and the silent swelling Grief of the
other, cut him to the Heart. He omitted no
Arguments his Paternal Affection suggested to
him, to moderate their Affliction. Mr. Glan-ville
often endeavour'd to assume a Composure
he was very far from feeling, in order to satisfy
his Father. But Miss Glanville, looking upon
herself to be the Cause of Sir George's Misfor-tune,
declar'd, She should be miserable all her
Life, if he died.
               
                  Arabella in her lucid Intervals, being sensible
of her Danger, prepar'd for Death, with great
Piety and Constancy of Mind, having solemnly
assur'd Mr. Glanville of her Forgiveness, who
would not at that Time enter into an Explana-tion

of the Affair which had given her Offence
for fear of perplexing her. She permitted his
Presence often in her Chamber, and desir'd with
great Earnestness the Assistance of some worthy
Divine in her Preparations for Death. The
Pious and Learned Doctor—at Sir Charles's
Intimation of his Niece's Desire, came con-stantly
twice a Day to attend her. Her Fever,
by a favourable Crisis, and the great Skill of her
Physicians, left her in a Fortnight; but this
violent Distemper had made such a Ravage in
her delicate Constitution, and reduc'd her so low
that there seem'd very little Probability of her
Recovery. Doctor—, in whom her un-feign'd
Piety, her uncommon Firmness of Mind,
had created a great Esteem and Tenderness for
her, took all Opportunities of comforting, ex-horting,
and praying by her. The Occasion of
her Illness being the Subject of every body's
Conversation at Richmond, he gently hinted it
to her, and urg'd her to explain her Reasons for
so extravagant an Action.
               In the Divine Frame Arabella was then in,
this Action appear'd to her rash and vain-glori-ous,
and she acknowledg'd it to be so to her
pious Monitor: Yet she related the Motives
which induc'd her to it, the Danger she was in
of being carry'd away, the Parity of her Cir-cumstances
then with Clelia, and her emulous
Desire of doing as much to preserve her Ho-nour
as that renown'd Roman Lady did for
hers.
               The good Doctor was extremely surpriz'd at
this Discourse: He was beginning to think her

again delirious; but Arabella added to this Ac-count
such sensible Reasoning on the Nature
of that Fondness for Fame, which prompted
her to so rash an Undertaking, that the Doctor
left her in strange Embarrassment, not knowing
how to account for a Mind at once so enlight-en'd,
and so ridiculous.
               Mr. Glanville, meeting him as he came out
of her Chamber, the Doctor took this Oppor-tunity
to acknowledge the Difficulties Arabella's
inconsistent Discourse had thrown him into.
Mr. Glanville taking him into his own Apart-ment,
explain'd the Nature of that seeming
Inconsistency, and expatiated at large upon the
Disorders Romances had occasion'd in her Ima-gination;
several Instances of which he re-counted,
and fill'd the Doctor with the greatest
Astonishment and Concern. He lamented pa-thetically
the Ruin such a ridiculous Study had
brought on so noble a Mind; and assur'd Mr.
Glanville, he would spare no Endeavours to rescue
it from so shocking a Delusion.
               Mr. Glanville thank'd him for his good De-sign,
with a Transport which his Fears of his
Cousin's Danger almost mingled with Tears;
and the Doctor and he agreed to expect for some
few Days longer an Alteration for the better in
the Health of her Body, before he attempted
the Cure of her Mind. Mr. Glanville's extreme
Anxiety had made him in Appearance neglect
the repentant Sir George, contenting himself
with constantly sending twice a Day to enquire
after his Health, but had not yet visited him.
               
                  

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK V.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  A Dispute very learnedly handled by two
Ladies, in which the Reader may take
what Part he pleases.
               
               
                  MR. Glanville, who was too much
in Love to pass the Night with
any great Degree of Tranquillity,
under the Apprehensions he felt;
it being the Nature of that Pas-sion,
to magnify the most inconsiderable
Trifles into Things of the greatest Import-ance,
when they concern the beloved Ob-ject;
did not fail to torment himself with
a thousand different Fears, which the mysteri-ous

was only indulging the Gaiety of his Humour,
by carrying on this Farce; yet he could not
endure, he should divert himself at Arabella's
Expence. The solemn Speech he had made him,
did indeed force him to smile; but he soon as-sumed
a graver Look, and told Sir George, in
a low Voice, that when he had finished his
Visit, he should be glad to take a Turn with
him in the Garden.
               Sir George promised to follow him, and Mr.
Glanville left the Room, and went into the
Gardens; where the Baronet, having taken a
respectful Leave of Arabella, and, by a sly
Glance, convinced Miss Glanville, he had sa-crificed
her Cousin to her Mirth, went to join
her Brother.
               Mr. Glanville, as soon as he saw him, walk-ed
to meet him with a very reserved Air: Which
Sir George observing, and being resolved to keep
up his Humour;
               What, inhuman, but too happy Lover, said
he, what, am I to understand by that Cloud
upon your Brow? Is it possible, that thou
canst envy me the small Comfort I have re-ceived;
and, not satisfied with the glorious
Advantages thou possessest, wilt thou still deny
me that Esteem, which the divine Arabella
has been pleased to bestow upon me?
               Pray, Sir George, said Mr. Glanville, lay
aside this pompous Style: I am not disposed to
be merry at present, and have not all the Re-lish
for this kind of Wit, that you seem to ex-pect.
I desired to see you here, that I might
tell you without Witnesses, I take it extreme-ly
ill, you should presume to make my Cousin

No sooner had the Physicians declared that
Arabella was no longer in Danger, than his
Mind being freed from that tormenting Load
of Suspence under which it had labour'd while
her Recovery was yet doubful, he went to
Sir George's Chamber, who by reason of his
Weakness, tho' he was also upon the Recovery,
still kept his Bed.
               Sir George, tho' he ardently wish'd to see him,
yet conscious of the Injuries he had both done
and design'd him, could not receive his Visit
without extreme Confusion: But entering into
the Cause of their Quarrel, as soon as he was
able to speak, he freely acknowledg'd his Fault,
and all the Steps he had taken to supplant him
in Arabella's Affection.
               Mr. Glanville understanding by this Means,
that he had brib'd a young Actress to personate
a Princess forsaken by him; and had taught her
all that Heap of Absurdity with which she had
impos'd upon Arabella, as has been related, desir'd
only by Way of Reparation, That when his
Cousin was in a Condition to be spoken to upon
that Subject, he would condescend to own the
Fraud to her; which Sir George faithfully pro-mising,
an Act of Oblivion pass'd on Mr.
Glanville's Side for all former Injuries, and a so-lemn
Assurance from Sir George of inviolable
Friendship for the future. An Assurance, how-ever,
which Mr. Glanville would willingly have
dispens'd with: For tho' not of a vindictive
Temper, it was one of his Maxims, That a
Man who had once betray'd him, it would be
an Error in Policy ever to trust again.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Being in the Author's Opinion, the best
Chapter in this History.
               
               THE good Divine, who had the Cure of
Arabella's Mind greatly at Heart, no
sooner perceiv'd that the Health of her Body was
almost restor'd, and that he might talk to her
without the Fear of any Inconvenience, than
he introduc'd the Subject of her throwing her-self
into the River, which he had before lightly
touch'd upon, and still declar'd himself dissatis-fy'd
with.
               
                  Arabella, now more dispos'd to defend this
Point than when languishing under the Pressure
of Pain and Dejection of Mind, endeavour'd
by Arguments founded upon Romantick Hero-ism,
to prove, That it was not only reasonable
and just, but also great and glorious, and exactly
conformable to the Rules of Heroick Virtue.
               The Doctor listen'd to her with a mix'd
Emotion, between Pity, Reverence, and Amaze-ment:
And tho' in the Performance of his Of-fice
he had been accustom'd to accommodate
his Notions to every Understanding, and had
therefore accumulated a great Variety of To-picks
and Illustrations; yet he found himself
now engag'd in a Controversy for which he was
not so well prepar'd as he imagin'd, and was at

a Loss for some leading Principle, by which he
might introduce his Reasonings, and begin his
Confutation.
               Tho' he saw much to praise in her Discourse,
he was afraid of confirming her Obstinacy by
Commendation: And tho' he also found much
to blame, he dreaded to give Pain to a Delicacy
he rever'd.
               Perceiving however, that Arabella was silent,
as if expecting his Reply, he resolv'd not to
bring upon himself the Guilt of abandoning her
to her Mistake, and the Necessity of speaking
forc'd him to find something to say.
               Tho' it is not easy, Madam, said he, for any
one that has the Honour of conversing with
your Ladyship to preserve his Attention free to
any other Idea, than such as your Discourse
tends immediately to impress, yet I have not
been able while you was speaking, to refrain
from some very mortifying Reflections on the
Imperfection of all human Happiness, and the
uncertain Consequences of all those Advantages
which we think ourselves not only at Liberty
to desire, but oblig'd to cultivate.
               Tho' I have known some Dangers and Di-stresses,
reply'd Arabella gravely, yet I did not
imagine myself such a Mirror of Calamity as
could not be seen without Concern. If my Life
has not been eminently fortunate, it has yet
escap'd the great Evils of Persecution, Captivity,
Shipwrecks and Dangers to which many Ladies
far more Illustrious both by Birth and Merit
than myself, have been expos'd. And indeed,

tho' I have sometimes rais'd Envy, or possibly
incurr'd Hatred, yet I have no Reason to believe
I was ever beheld with Pity before.
               The Doctor saw he had not introduc'd his
Discourse in the most acceptable Manner; but
it was too late to repent.
               Let me not, Madam, said he, be censur'd
before I have fully explain'd my Sentiments.
               That you have been envy'd, I can readily
believe: For who that gives Way to natural
Passions has not Reason to envy the Lady Ara-bella?
But that you have been hated, I am in-deed
less willing to think, tho' I know how ea-sily
the greater Part of Mankind hate those by
whom they are excell'd.
               If the Misery of my Condition, reply'd
Arabella, has been able to excite that Melan-choly
your first. Words seem'd to imply, Flat-tery
will contribute very little towards the Im-provement
of it. Nor do I expect from the
Severity of the Sacerdotal Character, any of
those Praises, which I hear perhaps with too
much Pleasure, from the rest of the World.
               Having been so lately on the Brink of that
State, in which all Distinctions but that of Good-ness
are destroy'd, I have not recover'd so much
Laevity, but that I would yet rather hear In-structions
than Compliments.
               If therefore you have observ'd in me any
dangerous Tenets, corrupt Passions, or crimi-nal
Desires, I conjure you discover me to my-self.
Let no false Civility restrain your Admo-nitions.
Let me know this Evil which can

strike a good Man with Horror, and which I
dread the more, as I do not feel it.
               I cannot suppose that a Man of your Order
would be alarm'd at any other Misery than Guilt:
Nor will I think so meanly of him whose Di-rection
I have intreated, as to imagine he can
think Virtue unhappy, however overwhelm'd
by Disasters or Oppression.
               Keep me therefore no longer in Suspence: I
expect you will exert the Authority of your
Function, and I promise you on my Part, Sin-cerity
and Submission.
               The good Man was now compleatly embar-rass'd;
he saw his Meaning mistaken, but was
afraid to explain it, left he should seem to pay
Court by a cowardly Retraction: He therefore
paus'd a little, and Arabella supposed he was
studying for such Expressions as might convey
Censure without Offence.
               Sir, said she, if you are not yet satisfy'd of
my Willingness to hear your Reproofs, let me
evince my Docility, by intreating you to con-sider
yourself as dispens'd from all Ceremony
upon this Occasion.
               Your Imaginations, Madam, reply'd the
Doctor, are too quick for Language; you con-jecture
too soon, what you do not wait to
hear; and reason upon Suppositions which can-not
be allow'd you.
               When I mention'd my Reflections upon hu-man
Misery, I was far from concluding your
Ladyship miserable, compar'd with the rest of
Mankind; and though contemplating the ab-stracted

Idea of possible Felicity, I thought that
even You might be produc'd as an Instance that
it is not attainable in this World, I did not
impute the Imperfection of your State to
Wickedness, but intended to observe, That
though even Virtue be added to external Ad-vantages,
there will yet be something wanting
to Happiness.
               Whoever sees you, Madam, will immedi-ately
say, That nothing can hinder you from
being the happiest of Mortals, but Want of
Power to understand your own Advantages.
And whoever is admitted to your Conversation,
will be convinc'd that you enjoy all that Intel-lectual
Excellence can confer; yet I see you
harrass'd with innumerable Terrors and Per-plexities,
which never disturb the Peace of Po-verty
of Ignorance.
               I cannot discover, said Arabella, how Po-verty
or Ignorance can be privileg'd from Ca-sualty
or Violence, from the Ravisher, the
Robber, or the Enemy. I should hope rather
that if Wealth and Knowledge can give no-thing
else, they at least confer Judgment to
foresee Danger, and Power to oppose it.
               They are not indeed, return'd the Doctor,
secur'd against real Misfortunes, but they are
happily defended from wild Imaginations:
They do not suspect what cannot happen, nor
figure Ravishers at a Distance, and leap into
Rivers to escape them.
               Do you suppose then, said Arabella, that I
was frighted without Cause?
               
                  

It is certain, Madam, reply'd he, that no
Injury was intended you.
               Disingennuity, Sir, said Arabella, does not
become a Clergyman—I think too well of your
Understanding to imagine your Fallacy de-ceives
yourself: Why then should you hope that
it will deceive me?
               The Laws of Conference require that the
Terms of the Question and Answer be the
same.
               I ask, if I had not Cause to be frighted?
Why then am I answer'd that no Injury was
intended?
               Human Beings cannot penetrate Intentions,
nor regulate their Conduct but by exterior
Appearances. And surely there was sufficient
Appearance of intended Injury, and that the
greatest which my Sex can suffer.
               Why, Madam, said the Doctor, should you
still persist in so wild an Assertion?
               A coarse Epithet, said Arabella, is no
Confutation. It rests upon you to shew, That
in giving Way to my Fears, even supposing
them groundless, I departed from the Character
of a reasonable Person.
               I am afraid, replied the Doctor, of a Di-spute
with your Ladyship, not because I
think myself in Danger of Defeat, but be-cause
being accustom'd to speak to Scholars
with Scholastick Ruggedness, I may perhaps
depart in the Heat of Argument, from that
Respect to which you have so great a Right,
and give Offence to a Person I am really
afraid to displease.
               
                  

But, if you will promise to excuse my
Ardour, I will endeavour to prove that you
have been frighted without Reason.
               I should be content, replied Arabella, to
obtain Truth upon harder Terms, and there-fore
intreat you to begin.
               The Apprehension of any future Evil, Ma-dam,
said the Divine, which is called Ter-ror,
when the Danger is from natural Causes,
and Suspicion, when it proceeds from a mo-ral
Agent, must always arise from Compa-rison.
               We can judge of the Future only by the
Past, and have therefore only Reason to fear
or suspect, when we see the same Causes in
Motion which have formerly produc'd Mis-chief,
or the same Measures taken as have
before been preparatory to a Crime.
               Thus, when the Sailor in certain Lati-tudes
sees the Clouds rise, Experience bids
him expect a Storm. When any Monarch
levies Armies, his Neighbours prepare to re-pel
an Invasion.
               This Power of Prognostication, may, by
Reading and Conversation, be extended be-yond
our own Knowledge: And the great
Use of Books, is that of participating without
Labour or Hazard the Experience of others.
               But upon this Principle how can you find
any Reason for your late Fright.
               Has it ever been known, that a Lady of
your Rank was attack'd with such Inten-tions,
in a Place so publick, without any

Preparations made by the Violator for Defence
or Escape?
               Can it be imagin'd that any Man would
so rashly expose himself to Infamy by Failure,
and to the Gibbet by Success?
               Does there in the Records of the World
appear a single Instance of such hopeless Vil-lany?
               It is now Time, Sir, said Arabella,, to an-swer
your Questions, before they are too many
to be remembered.
               The Dignity of my Birth can very little
defend me against an Insult to which the
Heiresses of great and powerful Empires,
the Daughters of valiant Princes, and the
Wives of renowned Monarchs, have been a
thousand Times exposed.
               The Danger which you think so great,
would hardly repel a determin'd Mind; for in
Effect, Who would have attempted my Re-scue,
seeing that no Knight or valiant Ca-valier
was within View?
               What then should have hinder'd him from
placing me in a Chariot? Driving it into
the pathless Desart? And immuring me in
a Castle, among Woods and Mountains?
Or hiding me perhaps in the Caverns of a
Rock? Or confining me in some Island of
an immense Lake?
               From all this, Madam, interrupted the
Clergyman, he is hinder'd by Impossibility.
               
                  

He cannot carry you to any of these dread-ful
Places, because there is no such Castle,
Desart, Cavern, or Lake.
               You will pardon me, Sir, said Arabella,
it I recur to your own Principles:
               You allow that Experience may be gain'd
by Books: And certainly there is no Part
of Knowledge in which we are oblig'd to
trust them more than in Descriptive Geo-graphy.
               The most restless Activity in the longest
Life, can survey but a small Part of the
habitable Globe: And the rest can only be
known from the Report of others.
               Universal Negatives are seldom safe, and
are least to be allow'd when the Disputes
are about Objects of Sense; where one Po-sition
cannot be inferr'd from another.
               That there is a Castle, any Man who
has seen it may safely affirm. But you can-not
with equal Reason, maintain that there
is no Castle, because you have not seen it.
               Why should I imagine that the Face of
the Earth is alter'd since the Time of those
Heroines, who experienc'd so many Changes
of uncouth Captivity?
               Castles indeed, are the Works of Art;
and are therefore subject to Decay. But
Lakes, and Caverns, and Desarts, must always
remain.
               And why, since you call for Instances, should
I not dread the Misfortunes which happen'd

the Object of your Mirth. Lady Bella, Sir,
is not a Person, with whom such Liberties
ought to be taken; nor will I, in the double
Character of her Lover and Relation, suffer it
from any one whatever.
               Cruel Fortune! said Sir George, stepping back
a little, and lifting up his Eyes, shall I al-ways
be exposed to thy Persecutions? And
must I, without any apparent Cause, behold
an Enemy in the Person of my Friend; who,
though, without murmuring, I resign to him
the adorable Arabella, is yet resolved to dis-pute
with me, a Satisfaction, which does not
deprive him of any Part of that glorious For-tune
to which he is destined? Since it is so,
unjust and cruel Friend, pursued he, strike
this Breast, which carries the Image of the
divine Arabella; but think not, that I will offer
to defend myself, or lift my Sword, against a
Man beloved by her.
               This is all very fine, returned Mr. Glan-ville,
hardly able to forbear laughing; but 'tis
impossible, with all your Gaiety, to hinder me
from being serious upon this Business.
               Then be as serious as thou wilt, dear Charles,
interrupted Sir George, provided you will allow
me to be gay; and not pretend to infect me
with thy unbecoming Gravity.
               I have but a few Words to say to you, then,
Sir, replied Mr. Glanville: Either behave with
more Respect to my Cousin; or prepare to
give me Satisfaction, for the Insults you offer
her.
               Oh! I understand you, Sir, said Sir George;
and because you have taken it into your Head

to the divine Clelia, who was carry'd to one
of the Isles of the Thrasymenian Lake?
               Or those which befel the beautiful Candace,
Queen of Ethiopia, whom the Pyrate Zeno-donus
wander'd with on the Seas?
               Or the Accidents which imbitter'd the Life
of the incomparable Cleopatra?
               
               Or the Persecutions which made that of the
fair Elisa miserable?
               Or, in fine, the various Distresses of many
other fair and virtuous Princesses: Such as
those which happen'd to Olympia, Bellamira,
Parisatis, Berenice, Amalagantha, Agione, Al-bysinda,
Placidia, A
                        •
                     sinoe, Deidamia, and a
thousand others I could mention.
               To the Names of many of these illustrious
Sufferers I am an absolute Stranger, replied the
Doctor.
               The rest I saintly remember some Mention
of in those contemptible Volumes, with which
Children are sometimes injudiciously suffer'd
to amuse their Imaginations; but which I
little expected to hear quoted by your Ladyship
in a serious Discourse.
               And though I am very far from catching
Occasions of Resentment, yet I think myself
at Liberty to observe, That if I merited your
Censure for one indelicate Epithet, we have
engag'd on very unequal Terms, if I may
not likewise complain of such contemptuous
Ridicule as you are pleas'd to exercise upon
my Opinions by opposing them with the Au-thority
of Scribblers, not only of Fictions,

but of senseless Fictions; which at once vi-tiate
the Mind, and pervert the Unstander-standing;
and which if they are at any Time
read with Safety, owe their Innocence only to
their Absurdity.
               From these Books, Sir, said Arabella, which
you condemn with so much Ardour, though
you acknowledge yourself little acquainted
with them, I have learnt not to recede from
the Conditions I have granted, and shall not
therefore censure the Licence of your Lan-guage,
which glances from the Books upon the
Readers.
               These Books, Sir, thus corrupt, thus ob-surd,
thus dangerous alike to the Intellect
and Morals, I have read; and that I hope
without Injury to my Judgment, or my Vir-tue.
               The Doctor, whose Vehemence had hin-der'd
him from discovering all the Consequen-ces
of his Position, now found himself entan-gled,
and reply'd in a submissive Tone,
               I confess, Madam, my Words imply an
Accusation very remote from my Intention.
               It has always been the Rule of my Life, not
to justify any Words or Actions because they
mine.
               I am asham'd of my Negligence, I am
sorry for my Warmth, and intreat your Lady-ship
to pardon▪ a Fault which I hope never
to repeat.
               The Reparation, Sir, said Arabella smiling,
over-balances the Offence, and by thus daring

to own you have been in the Wrong, you
have rais'd in me a much higher Esteem for
you.
               Yet I will not pardon you, added she,
without enjoining you a Penance for the Fault
you own you have committed; and this Pe-nance
shall be to prove,
               First, That these Histories you condemn
are Fictions.
               Next, That they are absurd.
               And Lastly, That they are Criminal.
               The Doctor was pleas'd to find a Reconci-liation
offer'd upon so very easy Terms, with
a Person whom he beheld at once with Reve-rence
and Affection, and could not offend
without extreme Regret.
               He therefore answered with a very chearful
Composure:
               To prove those Narratives to be Fictions,
Madam, is only difficult, because the Position
is almost too evident for Proof.
               Your Ladyship knows, I suppose to what
Authors these Writings are ascrib'd?
               To the French Wits of the last Century,
said Arabella.
               
               And at what Distance, Madam, are the
Facts related in them from the Age of the
Writer?
               I was never exact in my Computation, re-plied
Arablela; but I think most of the Events
happen'd about two thousand Years ago.
               How then, Madam, resum'd the Doctor,
could these Events be so minutely known to

Writers so far remote from the Time in which
they happen'd?
               By Records, Monuments, Memoirs, and
Histories, answered the Lady.
               But by what Accident, then, said the Doctor
smiling, did it happen these Records and Mo-numents
were kept universally secret to Man-kind
till the last Century?
               What brought all the Memoirs of the re-motest
Nations and earliest Ages only to
France?
               
               Where were they hidden that none could con-sult
them but a few obscure Authors?
               And whither are they now vanished again
that they can be found no more?
               
                  Arabella having sat silent a while, told him,
That she found his Questions very difficult to
be answer'd; and that though perhaps the Au-thors
themselves could have told whence they
borrowed their Materials, she should not at
present require any other Evidence of the first
Assertion:
               But allow'd him to suppose them Fictions,
and requir'd now that he should shew them to
be absurd.
               Your Ladyship, return'd he, has, I find,
too much Understanding to struggle against
Demonstration, and too much Veracity to de-ny
your Convictions; therefore some of the
Arguments by which I intended to shew the
Falshood of these Narratives may be now used
to prove their Absurdity.
               
                  

You grant them, Madam, to be Fictions?
               Sir, interrupted Arabella eagerly, You are
again infringing the Laws of Disputation.
               You are not to confound a Supposition
of which I allow you only the present Use,
with an unlimited and irrevocable Conces-sion.
               I am too well acquainted with my own
Weakness to conclude an Opinion false,
merely because I find myself unable to de-fend
it.
               But I am in haste to hear the Proof of the
other Positions, not only because they may
perhaps supply what is deficient in your Evi-dence
of the first, but because I think it of
more Importance to detect Corruption than
Fiction.
               Though indeed Falshood is a Species of Cor-ruption,
and what Falshood is more hateful
than the Falshood of History.
               Since you have drawn me back, Madam,
to the first Question, returned the Doctor,
Let me know what Arguments your Lady-ship
can produce for the Veracity of these
Books.
               That there are many Objections against
it, you yourself have allowed, and the high-est
moral Evidence of Falshood appears when
there are many Arguments against an Assertion,
and none for it.
               
                  

Sir, replied Arabella, I shall never think that
any Narrative, which is not confuted by its
own Absurdity, is without one Argument at
least on its Side; there is a Love of Truth in
the human Mind, if not naturally implanted,
so easily obtained from Reason and Expe-rience,
that I should expect it universally to
prevail where there is no strong Temptation to
Deceit; we hate to be deceived, we therefore
hate those that deceive us; we desire not to
be hated, and therefore know that we are not
to deceive. Shew me an equal Motive to
Falshood, or confess that every Relation has
some Right to Credit.
               This may be allowed, Madam, said the Doc-tor,
when we claim to be credited, but that
seems not to be the Hope or Intention of these
Writers.
               Surely Sir, replied Arabella, you must mis-take
their Design; he that writes without In-tention
to be credited, must write to little Pur-pose;
for what Pleasure or Advantage can a-rise
from Facts that never happened? What
Examples can be afforded by the Patience
of those who never suffered, or the Chastity of
those who were never solicited? The great
End of History, is to shew how much human
Nature can endure or perform. When we
hear a Story in common Life that raises our
Wonder or Compassion, the first Confutation
stills our Emotions, and however we were
touched before, we then chase it from the Me-mory
with Contempt as a Trifle, or with In-dignation
as an Imposture. Prove, therefore,
that the Books which I have hitherto read as

Copies of Life, and Models of Conduct, are
empty Fictions, and from this Hour I deliver
them to Moths and Mould; and from this
Time consider their Authors as Wretches who
cheated me of those Hours I ought to have
dedicated to Application and Improvement,
and betrayed me to a Waste of those Years in
which I might have laid up Knowledge for my
future Life.
               
                  Shakespear, said the Doctor, calls just Re-sentment
the Child of Integrity, and therefore
I do not wonder, that what Vehemence the
Gentleness of your Ladyship's Temper allows,
should be exerted upon this Occasion. Yet
though I cannot forgive these Authors for ha-ving
destroyed so much valuable Time, yet I
cannot think them intentionally culpable, be-cause
I cannot believe they expected to be cre-dited.
Truth is not always injured by Fiction.
An admirableRichardson. Writer of our own Time, has
found the Way to convey the most solid In-structions,
the noblest Sentiments, and the most
exalted Piety, in the pleasing Dress of aClarissa. No-vel,
and, to use the Words of the greatestThe Author of the Ra
                        •
                     bler.
Genius in the present Age, Has taught the
Passions to move at the Command of Vir-tue.
The Fables of Aesop, though never
I suppose believed, yet have been long consi-dered
as Lectures of moral and domestic
Wisdom, so well adapted to the Faculties of
Man, that they have been received by all civi-lized
Nations; and the Arabs themselves have
honoured his Translator with the Appellation
of Looman the Wise.
               
                  

The Fables of Aesop, said Arabella, are a-mong
those of which the Absurdity discovers
itself, and the Truth is comprised in the Ap-plication;
but what can be said of those Tales
which are told with the solemn Air of histori-cal
Truth, and if false convey no Instruction?
               That they cannot be defended Madam, said
the Doctor, it is my Purpose to prove, and if to
evince their Falshood be sufficient to procure
their Banishment from your Ladyship's Closet,
their Day of Grace is near an end. How is
any oral, or written Testimony, confuted or
confirmed?
               By comparing it, says the Lady, with the
Testimony of others, or with the natural Ef-fects
and standing Evidence of the Facts rela-ted,
and sometimes by comparing it with itself.
               If then your Ladyship will abide by this last,
returned he, and compare these Books with
antient Histories, you will not only find innu-merable
Names, of which no Mention was
ever made before, but Persons who lived in
different Ages, engaged as the Friends or Ri-vals
of each other. You will perceive that
your Authors have parcelled out the World at
Discretion, erected Palaces, and established
Monarchies wherever the Conveniency of
their Narrative required them, and set Kings
and Queens over imaginary Nations. Nor have
they considered themselves as invested with less
Authority over the Works of Nature, than the
Institutions of Men; for they have distributed
Mountains and Desarts, Gulphs and Rocks,
wherever they wanted them, and whenever the
Course of their Story required an Expedient,

raised a gloomy Forest, or overflowed the Re-gions
with a rapid Stream.
               I suppose, said Arabella, you have no In-tention
to deceive me, and since, if what you
have asserted be true, the Cause is undefensi-ble,
I shall trouble you no longer to argue on
this Topic, but desire now to hear why, sup-posing
them Fictions, and intended to be re-ceived
as Fictions, you censure them as ab-surd?
               The only Excellence of Falshood, answered
he, is its Resemblance to Truth; as therefore
any Narrative is more liable to be confuted by
its Inconsistency with known Facts, it is at a
greater Distance from the Perfection of Fic-tion;
for there can be no Difficulty in framing
a Tale, if we are left at Liberty to invert all
History and Nature for our own Conveniency.
When a Crime is to be concealed, it is easy
to cover it with an imaginary Word. When
Virtue is to be rewarded, a Nation with
a new Name may, without any Ex-pence
of Invention, raise her to the Throne.
When Ariosto was told of the Magnificence of
his Palaces, he answered, that the Cost of po-etical
Architecture was very little; and
still less is the Cost of Building without Art,
than without Materials. But their historical
Failures may be easily passed over, when we
consider their physical or philosophical Absur-dities;
to bring Men together from different
Countries does not shock with every inherent or
demonstrable Absurdity, and therefore when
we read only for Amusement, such Impropri-eries
may be born: But who can forbear to

throw away the Story that gives to one Man
the Strength of Thousands; that puts Life
or Death in a Smile or a Frown; that recounts
Labours and Sufferings to which the Powers
of Humanity are utterly unequal; that disfigures
the whole Appearance of the World, and re-presents
every Thing in a Form different from
that which Experience has shewn. It is the
Fault of the best Fictions, that they teach
young Minds to expect strange Adventures
and sudden Vicissitudes, and therefore encou-rage
them often to trust to Chance. A long
Life may be passed without a single Occur-rence
that can cause much Surprize, or pro-duce
any unexpected Consequence of great
Importance; the Order of the World is so
established, that all human Affairs proceed in
a regular Method, and very little Opportunity
is left for Sallies or Hazards, for Assault or
Rescue; but the Brave and the Coward, the
Sprightly and the Dull, suffer themselves to
be carried alike down the Stream of Custom.
               
                  Arabella, who had for some Time listened
with a Wish to interrupt him, now took
Advantage of a short Pause. I cannot imagine,
Sir, said she, that you intend to deceive me,
and therefore I am inclined to believe that you
are yourself mistaken, and that your Applica-tion
to Learning has hindered you from that
Acquaintance with the World, in which these
Authors excelled. I have not long conversed
in Public, yet I have found that Life is sub-ject
to many Accidents. Do you count my
late Escape for nothing? Is it to be numbered
among daily and cursory Transactions, that a

to be offended at a Trifle of no Consequence in
the World, I must give you a fair Chance to
run me through the Body! There is something
very foolish, saith, in such an extravagant Ex-pectation:
But since Custom has made it ne-cessary,
that a Man must venture his Soul and
Body upon these important Occasions; because
I will not be out of the Fashion, you shall com-mand
me whenever you think sit; though I
shall fight with my Schoolfellow with a very
ill Will, I assure you.
               There is no Necessity for fighting, said Mr.
Glanville, blushing at the ludicrous Light, in
which the gay Baronet had placed his Challenge:
The Concession I have required, is very small,
and not worth the contesting for, on your Side.
Lady Beila's Peculiarity, to which you contri-bute
so much, can afford you, at best, but an
ill-natured Diversion, while it gives me a real
Pain; and sure, you must acknowlege, you
are doing me a very great Injury, when you
endeavour to confirm a Lady, who is to be my
Wife, in a Behaivour that excites your Mirth,
and makes her a fit Object for your Ridicule,
and Contempt.
               You do Lady Bella, a mnch greater Injury
than I do, replied Sir George, by supposing,
she can ever be an Object of Ridicule and Con-tempt:
I think very highly of her Understand-ing;
and though the Bent of her Studies has
given her Mind a romantic Turn, yet the
Singularity of her Manners is far less disagree-able,
than the lighter Follies of most of her
Sex.
               
                  

Woman flies from a Ravisher into a rapid
Stream?
               You must not, Madam, said the Doctor,
urge as an Argument the Fact which is at pre-sent
the Subject of Dispute.
               
                  Arabella blushing at the Absurdity she had
been guilty of, and not attempting any Sub-terfuge
or Excuse, the Doctor found himself
at Liberty to proceed:
               You must not imagine, Madam, continued
he, that I intend to arrogate any Superiority,
when I observe that your Ladyship must suffer
me to decide, in some Measure authoritatively,
whether Life is truly described in those Books;
the Likeness of a Picture can only be determin-ed
by a Knowledge of the Original. You
have yet had little Opportunity of knowing the
Ways of Mankind, which cannot be learned
but from Experience, and of which the highest
Understanding, and the lowest, must enter the
World in equal Ignorance. I have lived
long in a public Character, and have thought
it my Duty to study those whom I have under-taken
to admonish or instruct. I have never
been so rich as to affright Men into Disguise
and Concealment, nor so poor as to be kept
at a Distance too great for accurate Observation.
I therefore presume to tell your Lady-ship,
with great Confidence, that your Wri-ters
have instituted a World of their own, and
that nothing is more different from a human
Being, than Heroes or Heroines.
               I am afraid, Sir, said Arabella, that the
Difference is not in Favour of the present
World.
               
                  

That, Madam, answered he your own
Penetration will enable you to judge when it
shall have made you equally acquainted with
both: I have no desire to determine a Question,
the Solution of which will give so little
Pleasure to Purity and Benevolence.
               The Silence of a Man who loves to praise
is a Censure sufficiently severe, said the
Lady. May it never happen that you should
be unwilling to mention the Name of Arabella.
I hope wherever Corruption prevails in the
World, to live in it with Virtue, or, if I find
myself too much endanger'd, to retire from it
with Innocence. But if you can say so little
in Commendation of Mankind, how will
you prove these Histories to be vicious, which
if they do not describe real Life, give us an Idea
of a better Race of Beings than now inhabit
the World.
               It is of little Importance, Madam, replied
the Doctor, to decide whether in the real or
fictitious Life, most Wickedness is to be
found. Books ought to supply an Antidote
to Example, and if we retire to a contem-plation
of Crimes, and continue in our
Closets to inflame our Passions, at what time
must we rectify our Words, or purify our
Hearts? The immediate Tendency of these
Books which your Ladyship must allow me to
mention with some Severity, is to give new
Fire to the Passions of Revenge and Love;
two Passions which, even without such power-ful
Auxiliaries, it is one of the severest La-bours
of Reason and Piety to suppress, and
which yet must be suppressed if we hope to be

approved in the Sight of the only Being
where Approbation can make us Happy. I
am afraid your Ladyship will think me too
serious.—I have already learned too much
from you, said Arabella, to presume to
instruct you, yet suffer me to caution you ne-ver
to dishonour your sacred Office by the Low-liness
of Apologies. Then let me again ob-serve,
resumed he, that these Books soften the
Heart to Love, and harden it to Murder.
that they teach Women to exact Ven-geance,
and Men to execute it; teach Women to
expect not only Worship, but the dteadful
Worship of human Sacrifices. Every Page of
these Volumes is filled with such extravagance
of Praise, and expressions of Obedience as one
human Being ought not to hear from another;
or with Accounts of Battles, in which thousands
are slaughtered for no other Purpose than to
gain a Smile from the haughty Beauty, who
sits a calm Spectatress of the Ruin and De-solation,
Bloodshed and Misery, incited by
herself.
               It is impossible to read these Tales with
out lessening part of that Humility, which
by preserving in us a Sense of our Alliance
with all human nature, keeps us awake to Ten-derness
and Sympathy, or without impairing
that Compassion which is implanted in us as
an Incentive to Acts of Kindness. If there be
any preserved by natural Softness, or early
Education from learning Pride and Cruelty,
they are yet in danger of being betrayed to the
Vanity of Beauty, and taught the Arts of
Intrigue.
               
                  

Love, Madam, is, you know, the Business, the
sole Business of Ladies in Romances. Arabella's
Blushes now hinder'd him from proceeding as
he had intended. I perceive, continued, he that
my Arguments begin to be less agreeable to
your Ladyship's Delicacy, I shall therefore
insist no longer upon false Tenderness of
Sentiment, but proceed to those Outrages of
the violent Passions which, though not more
dangerous, are more generally hateful.
               It is not necessary, Sir, interrupted Arabella,
that you strengthen by any new Proof a Posi-tion
which when calmly considered cannot be
denied; my Heart yields to the Force of Truth,
and I now wonder how the Blaze of Enthu-siastic
Bravery, could hinder me from remark-ing
with Abhorrence the Crime of deliberate
unnecessary Bloodshed.
               I begin to perceive that I have hitherto at
least trifled away my Time, and fear that I have
already made some Approaches to the Crime of
encouraging Violence and Revenge. I hope,
Madam, said the good Man with Horror in his
Looks, that no Life was ever lost by your In-citement.
Arabella seeing him thus moved,
burst into Tears, and could not immediately
answer. Is it possible, cried the Doctor, that
such Gentleness and Elegance should be stained
with Blood? Be not too hasty in your Censure,
said Arabella, recovering herself, I tremble in-deed
to think how nearly I have apprroached
the Brink of Murder, when I thought myself
only consulting my own Glory; but whatever
I suffer, I will never more demand or instigate
Vengeance, nor consider my Punctilios as

important enough to be ballanced against Life.
               The Doctor confirmed her in her new Re-solutions,
and thinking Solitude was necessary
to compose her Spirits after the Fatigue of so
long a Conversation, be retired to acquaint Mr
Glanville with his Success, who in the Trans-port
of his Joy was almost ready to throw
himself at his Feet, to thank him for the Miracle,
as he called it, that he had performed.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  In which the History is concluded.
               
               MR Glanville, who fancied to himself the
most ravishing Delight from conversing
with his lovely Cousin, now recovered to the
free Use of all her noble Powers of Reason,
would have paid her a Visit that afternoon,
had not a moments Reflection convinced him
that now was the Time, when her Mind was
labouring under the force of Conviction,
to introduce the repentant Sir George to her,
who by confessing the ridiculous Farce he had
invented to deceive her, might restore him to
her good Opinion, and add to the Doctor's
solid Arguments the poignant Sting of Ri-dicule
which she would then perceive she had
incurred.
               Sir George being now able to leave his Cham-ber,
and Arabella well enough recovered to
admit a Visit in hers, Mr Glanville intreated
his Father to wait on her, and get Permission

for Sir George to attend her upon a Business
of some Consequence. Sir Charles no sooner
mentioned this Request, than Arabella after
a little Hesitation complied with it. As she
had been kept a Stranger to all the Particulars
of Mr Glanville's Quarrels with the young
Baronet, her Thoughts were a little perplex'd
concerning the Occasion of this Visit, and
her Embarrassment was considerably increased
by the Confusion which she perceived in the
Countenance of Sir George. It was not
without some Tokens of a painfully supprest
Reluctance that Sir George consented to per-form
his Promise, when Mr Glanville claim'd
it, but the Disadvantages that would attend
his Breach of it, dejected and humbled as he
now was, presenting themselves in a forcible
manner to his Imagination, confirmed his
wavering Resolutions. And since he found
himself obliged to be his own Accuser, he en-deavoured
to do it with the best Grace he
could. Acknowledging therefore to Lady
Bella all the Artifices her Deception by Ro-mances
had given him Encouragement to
use upon her, and explaining very explicitly
the last with relation to the pretended Princess
of Gaul, he submissively asked her Pardon for
the Offence it would now give her, as well
as for the Trouble it had formerly.
               
                  Arabella struck with inconceivable Cnfusion,
having only bowed her Head to his Apology desi-red
to be left alone, and continued for near two
Hours afterwards wholly absorb'd in the most
disagreeable Reflections on the Absurdity of
her past Behaviour, and the Contempt and Ri-dicule

to which she now saw plainly she had
exposed herself. The Violence of these first
Emotions having at length subsided, she sent
for Sir Charles, and Mr. Glanville, and having
with a noble Ingenuity expatiated upon the
Follies her vitiated Judgment had led her into,
she apologized to the first, for the frequent
Causes she had given him of Uneasiness; and,
turning to Mr. Glanville, whom she beheld
with a Look of mingled Tenderness and Mo-desty,
To give you myself, with all my re-maining
Imperfections, is making you but a
poor Present in return for the Obligations your
generous Affection has laid me under to you;
yet since I am so happy as to be desired for a
Partner for Life by a Man of your Sense and
Honour, I will endeavour to make myself as
worthy as I am able of such a favourable Di-stinction.
               Mr. Glanville kissed the Hand she gave him
with an emphatic Silence, while Sir Charles,
in the most obliging Manner imaginable,
thanked her for the Honour she conferred both
on himself and Son by this Alliance.
               Sir George, entangled in his own Artifices,
saw himself under a Necessity of confirming the
Promises he had made to Miss Glanville during
his Fit of Penitence, and was accordingly mar-ried
to that young Lady, at the same Time
that Mr. Glanville and Arabella were united.
               We chuse, Reader, to express this Circum-stance,
though the same, in different Words,
as well to avoid Repetition, as to intimate that
the first mentioned Pair were indeed only mar-ried

in the common Acceptation of the Word;
that is, they were privileged to join Fortunes,
Equipages, Titles, and Expence; while Mr.
Glanville and Arabella were united, as well in
these, as in every Virtue and laudable Affec-tion
of the Mind.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   


But to be absolutely perfect, interrupted Mr.
Glanville, I must cure her of that Singularity;
and therefore I beg you will not persist in as-suming
a Behaviour conformable to her ro-mantic
Ideas; but rather help me to banish them
from her Imagination.
               Well, replied Sir George, since you no longer
threaten, I'll do what I can to content you; but
I must quit my Heroics by Degrees, and sink
with Decency into my own Character; other-wise
she will never endure me in her Presence.
               
                  Arabella and Miss Glanville, appearing in
the Walk, broke off the Conversation. The
Baronet and Mr. Glanville walked forward to
meet them; but Arabella, who did not desire
Company, struck into another Walk, whi-ther
Mr. Glanville following, proposed to join
her; when he saw his Father, who had been
taking a Turn there alone, make up to Ara-bella;
and, supposing he would take that Opportunity
to talk to her concerning him, he
went back to his Sister and Sir George, whose
Conversation he interrupted, to the great Regret
of Miss Glanville.
               
            
            
               

               CHAP. V.
               
                  In which will be found one of the former
Mistakes pursued, and another cleared
up, to the great Satisfaction of Two
Persons; among whom, the Reader, we
expect, will make a Third.
               
               
                  ARABELLA no sooner saw Sir Charles
advancing towards her, when, sensible of
the Consequence of being alone with a Per-son
whom she did not doubt, would make use
of that Advantage, to talk to her of Love, she
endeavoured to avoid him, but in vain; for Sir
Charles, guessing her Intentions, walked hastily
up to her; and, taking hold of her Hand,
               You must not go away, Lady Bella, said he:
I have something to say to you.
               
                  Arabella, extremely discomposed at this Be-haviour,
struggled to free her Hand from her
Uncle; and, giving him a Look, on which Dis-dain
and Fear were visibly painted,
               Unhand me, Sir, said she, and force me not
to forget the Respect I owe you, as my Uncle,
by treating you with a Severity such uncom-mon
Insolence demands.
               Sir Charles, letting go her Hand in a great
Surprize, at the Word Insolent, which she had
used, asked her, If she knew to whom she was
speaking?
               Questionless, I am speaking to my Uncle,
replied she; and 'tis with great Regret I see
myself obliged to make use of Expressions no

way conformable to the Respect I bear that
sacred Character.
               And, pray, Madam, said Sir Charles, some-what
softened by this Speech, who is it that
obliges you to lay aside that Respect you seem
to acknowlege is due to your Uncle?
               You do, Sir, replied she; and 'tis with in-finite
Sorrow, that I beheld you assuming a
Character unbecoming the Brother of my Fa-ther.
               This is pretty plain, indeed, interrupted Sir
Charles: But pray, Madam, inform me, what
it is you complain of.
               You, questionless, know much better than I
can tell you, replied Arabella, blushing, the
Offence I accuse you of; nor is it proper for
me to mention, what it would not become me
to suffer.
               Zounds! cried Sir Charles, no longer able
to suppress his growing Anger, this is enough
to make a Man mad.
               Ah! I beseech you, Sir, resumed Arabella,
suffer not an unfortunate and ill-judged Pas-sion
to be the Bane of all your Happiness and
Virtue: Recall your wandring Thoughts; re-flect
upon the Dishonour you will bring upon
yourself, by persisting in such unjustifiable Sen-timents.
               I do not know how it is possible to avoid it,
said Sir Charles; and, notwithstanding all this
fine Reasoning, there are few People but would
fly into greater Extremities; but my Affection
for you makes me.—
               Hold, hold, I conjure you, Sir, interrupted
Arabella; force me not to listen to such injurious

Language; carry that odious Affection some-where
else; and do not persecute an unfortu-nate
Maid, who has contributed nothing to thy
Fault, and is only guilty of too much Com-passion
for thy Weakness.
               Good God, cried Sir Charles, starting back,
and looking upon Arabella with Astonishment;
how I pity my Son! What would I not give, if
he did not love this Girl?
               Think not, replied Arabella, that the Passion
your Son has for me, makes your Condition a
bit the worse; for I would be such as I am,
with respect to you, were there no Mr. Glan-ville
in the World.
               I never thought, Niece, said Sir Charles, af-ter
a little Pause, that any Part of my Beha-viour,
could give you the Offence you com-plain
of, or authorize that Hatred and Con-tempt
you take the Liberty to express for me:
But since it is so, I promise you, I will quit
your House, and leave you to your self; I have
always been solicitous for your Welfare; and,
ungrateful as you are—
               Call me not ungrateful, interrupted Ara-bella
again: Heaven is my Witness, that had
you not forgot I was your Niece, I would have
always remembred you was my Uncle; and
not only have regarded you as such, but have
looked upon you as another Father, under
whose Direction Providence had placed me,
since it had deprived me of my real Father; and
whose Tenderness and Care, might have in
some measure supplied the Loss I had of him:
But Heaven has decreed it otherwise; and since
it is his Will, that I should be deprived of the

Comfort and Assistance my Orphan State re-quires,
I must submit, without murmuring, to
my Destiny. Go then, unfortunate and la-mented
Uncle, pursued she, wiping some
Tears from her fine Eyes; go, and endeavour
by Reason and Absence to recover thy Re-pose;
and be assured, whenever you can con-vince
me you have triumphed over these Sen-timents
which now cause both our Unhappiness,
you shall have no Cause to complain of my
Conduct towards you.
               Finishing these Words, she left him with so
much Speed, that it would have been impos-sible
for him to have stopped her, though he
had intended it: But indeed, he was so lost in
Wonder and Confusion at a Behaviour for
which he was not able to assign any other
Cause than Madness, that he remained fixed
in the same Posture of Surprize, in which she
had left him; and from which he was first in-terrupted
by the Voice of his Son, who, see-ing
Arabella flying towards the House in great
seeming Emotion, came to know the Result of
their Conversation.
               Sir, said Mr. Glanville, who had spoken to
his Father before, but had no Answer, will
you not inform me, what Success you have had
with my Cousin? How did she receive your
Proposal.
               Speak of her no more, said Sir Charles, she
is a proud ungrateful Girl, and unworthy the
Affection you have for her.
               Mr. Glanville, who trembled to hear so un-favourable
an Answer to his Inquiries, was
struck dumb with his Surprize and Grief; when

Sir Charles taking Notice of the Alteration in
his Countenance;
               I am sorry, said he, to find you have set
your Heart upon this fantastic Girl: If ever
she be your Wife, which I very much doubt,
she will make you very unhappy: But, Charles,
pursued he, I would advise you to think no
more of her; content yourself with the Estate
you gain by her Refusal of you: With that Ad-dition
to your own Fortune, you may pretend
to any Lady whatever; and you will find many
that are full as agreeable as your Cousin, who
will be proud of your Addresses.
               Indeed, Sir, said Mr. Glanville, with a Sigh,
there is no Woman upon Earth whom I would
choose to marry, but Lady Bella: I flattered
myself, I had been happy enough to have made
some Progress in her Affection; but it seems, I
was mistaken; however, I should be glad to
know, if she gave you any Reasons for refusing
me.
               Reasons! said Sir Charles: There is no mak-ing
her hear Reason, or expecting Reason from
her; I never knew so strange a Woman in my
Life: She would not allow me to speak what
I intended concerning you; but interrupted me,
every Moment, with some high-flown Stuff or
other.
               Then I have not lost all Hopes of her, cried
Mr. Glanville eagerly; for since she did not
hear what you had to say, she could not pos-sibly
deny you.
               But she behaved in a very impertinent Man-ner
to me, interrupted Sir Charles; complained
of my harsh Treatment of her; and said seve-ral

other Things, which, because of her uncom-mon
Style, I could not perfectly understand;
yet they seemed shocking; and, upon the Whole,
treated me so rudely, that I am determined to
leave her to herself, and trouble my Head no
more about her.
               For God's sake, dear Sir, said Mr. Glan-ville,
alarmed at this Resolution, suspend your
Anger, till I have seen my Cousin: There is
some Mistake, I am persuaded, in all this. I
know she has some very odd Humours, which
you are not so well acquainted with, as I am.
I'll go to her, and prevail upon her to explain
herself.
               You may do so, if you please, replied Sir
Charles; but I fear it will be to very little Pur-pose;
for I really suspect her Head is a little
turned: I do not know what to do with her:
It is not fit she should have the Management of
herself; and yet 'tis impossible to live upon easy
Terms with her.
               Mr. Glanville, who did not doubt but Ara-bella
had been guilty of some very ridiculous
Folly, offered nothing more in her Justifica-tion;
but, having attended his Father to his own
Chamber went to Arabella's Apartment.
               He found the pensive Fair-one, in a melan-choly
Posture, her Head reclined upon one
of her fair Hands; and though her Eyes were
fixed upon a Book she held in the other, yet
she did not seem to read, but rather to be
wholly buried in Contemplation.
               Mr. Glanville having so happily found her
alone (for her Women were not then in her
Chamber) seated himself near her; having first

Behaviour of his Father, and the more
mysterious Words of his Mistress, gave Rise to.
Among many various Conjectures, all equally
unreasonable, he fixed upon one, no way ad-vantageous
to Sir Charles; for, supposing that
the Folly of Arabella had really disgusted him,
and made him desirous of breaking off the de-signed
Match between them; he was, as he
thought, taking Measures to bring this about,
knowing, that if Lady Bella refused to fulfil
her Father's Desire in this Particular, a very
considerable Estate would descend to him.
               Upon any other Occasion, Mr. Glanville
would not have suspected his Father of so un-generous
an Action; but Lovers think every
thing possible, which they fear; and being pre-possessed
with this Opinion, he resolved the
next Morning to sound his Father's Inclina-tions,
by intreating him to endeavour to pre-vail
upon Lady Bella to marry him before her
Year of Mourning for the marquis was ex-pired.
               Attending him, therefore, at Breakfast, in
his own Chamber, he made his designed Re-quest,
not without heedfully observing his
Countenance at the same time; and trembling,
lest he should make him an Answer, that
might confirm his uneasy Suspicion.
               Sir Charles, however, agreeably surprised
him, by promising to comply with his Desire
that Day; for, added he, tho' my Niece has
some odd ways, yet, upon the Whole, she is a
very accomplished Woman; and when you
are her Husband, you may probably find the
Means of curing her of those little Follies,

asked Pardon for the Interruption he had given
to her Studies; and Arabella, throwing aside her
Book, prepared to listen to his Discourse;
which by the Agitation, which appeared in
Looks, she imagined, would be upon some
extraordinary Subject.
               I left my Father just now, said he, in a
great deal of Uneasiness, on account of some-thing
you said to him, Lady Bella: He ap-prehends
you are disobliged, and he would
willingly know how.
               Has your Father then acquainted you with
the Subject of our Conversation? interrupted
Arabella.
               
               I know what would have been the Subject of
your Conversation, replied Mr. Glanville, if
you had been pleased to listen to what Sir
Charles intended to say to you on my Be-half.
               On your Behalf? interrupted Arabella: Ah
poor deceived Glanville! how I pity thy blind
Sincerity! But it is not for me to undeceive
thee: Only thus much I must say to you, Beware
of committing your Interests to a Person, who
will be a much better Advocate for another
than for you.
               Mr. Glanville, rejoiced to find by these
Words, that her Resentment against his Fa-ther
was occasioned by a Suspicion so favour-able
for him, assured her, that Sir Charles
wished for nothing more earnestly, than that he
might be able to merit her Esteem; and that
it was to dispose her to listen to his Addresses,
that he wanted to discourse with her that Morn-ing.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville, being obliged, through his
Knowlege of his Cousin's Temper, to speak
to her in this distant Manner, went on with
his Assurances of his Father's Candour in this
Respect; and Arabella, who would not de-clare
her Reasons for doubting it, only replied,
That she wished Sir Charles meant all that he
had said to him; but that she could not per-suade
herself to believe him sincere, till his fu-ture
Actions had convinced her he was so.
               Mr. Glanville, impatient to let his Father
know, how greatly he had been mistaken in
the Cause of Arabella's Behaviour, made his
Visit shorter than he would otherwise have done,
in order to undeceive him.
               It is possible, said Sir Charles, when his Son
had repeated the Conversation he had just had
with Arabella, that she could be so foolish, as
to imagine, I had a Design to propose any one
else to her but you? What Reason have I ever
given her, to think I would not be glad to
have her for my Daughter-in-law? Indeed,
she has some odd Ways that are very disagree-able;
but she is one of the best Matches in
England for all that: Poor Girl! pursued he,
she had Reason to be angry, if that was the
Case; and now I remember, she cried, when
I told her I would leave the House; yet her
Spirit was so great, that she told me, I might
go. Well, I'll go and make it up with her;
but who could have imagined, she would have
been so foolish? Sir Charles, at the Repetition
of these Words, hurried away to Arabella's
Apartment.
               
                  

Niece, said he at his Entrance, I am come
to ask you Pardon, for having led you into a
Belief, that I meant—
               'Tis enough, Sir, interrupted Arabella; I grant
you my Pardon for what is past; and as it does not
become me to receive Submissions from my
Uncle, while he remembers he is so, I will dis-pense
with your Acknowlegements at present:
Only to convince me, that this sudden Altera-tion
is sincere, avoid, I beseech you, for the fu-ture,
all Occasions of displeasing me.
               I protest, cried Sir Charles, that I never in-tended—
               I will not hear you say a Word more of your
past Intentions, interrupted Arabella again: I
have forgot them all; and, while you con-tinue
to regard me as your Niece, I will ne-ver
remember them to your Disadvantage.
               Then I may hope, said Sir Charles—
               Oh! Heavens! cried Arabella, not suffering
him to proceed; do you come to insult me
thus, with a mock Repentance? And has my
Easiness, in being so ready to forget the In-jury
you would have done me, made you pre-sumptuous
enough to cherish an insolent Hope
that I will ever change my Resolution?
               How vexatious is this! replied Sir Charles,
fretting to see her continually mistaking him.
I swear to you, by all that is sacred, that 'tis
my Son, for whom I would solicit your Con-sent.
               How! said Arabella, astonished, Will you
then be just at last? And can you resolve to
plead for that Son, whose Interest, but a Mo-ment
ago, you would have destroyed?
               
                  

I see, said Sir Charles, it is impossible to
convince you.
               No, no interrupted Arabella, hastily; it is
not impossible but my own ardent Wishes that
it may be so, will help to convince me of the
Truth of what you say: For in fine, do you
think, I shall not be as glad as yourself, to find
you capable of acting honourably by your Son;
and to see myself no longer the Cause of the
most unjustifiable Conduct imaginable?
               Sir Charles was opening his Mouth, to press
her in Favour of Mr. Glanville; whom, not-withstanding
her strange Behaviour, he was
glad to find, she loved; when Arabella pre-venting
him,
               Seek not, I beseech you, said she, to de-stroy
that Belief I am willing to give your
Words, by any more Attempts at this time
to persuade me; for truly, I shall interpret
your Solicitude no way in your Favour; there-fore,
if you desire I should be convinced you
are sincere, let the Silence I require of you, be
one Proof of it.
               Sir Charles, who looked excessively out of
Countenance at such a peremptory Command
from his Niece, was going out of her Cham-ber
in a very ill Humour, when the Dinner-bell
ringing, she gave him her Hand, with a
very gracions Air; and permitted him to lead
her into the Dining-room, where they found
Mr. Glanville, his Sister, and Sir George, who
had been detained to Dinner by Miss Glan-ville,
expecting their coming.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Containing some Account of Thalestris,
Queen of the Amazons, with other
curious Anecdotes.
               
               LADY Bella having recovered her usual
Chearfulness, thro' the Satisfaction she
felt at her Uncle's returning to Reason, and
the Abatement she perceived in Sir George's
extreme Melancholy, mixed in the Conversa-tion
with that Wit and Vivacity which was
natural to her, and which so absolutely charmed
the whole Company, that not one of them re-membred
any of her former Extravagancies.
               Mr. Glanville gazed on her with a passionate
Tenderness, Sir George with Admiration, and
the old Baronet with Wonder and Delight.
               But Miss Glanville, who was inwardly vexed
at the Superiority her Cousin's Wit gave her
over herself, wished for nothing more than an
Opportunity of interrupting a Conversation in
which she could have no Share; and, willing
to put them in mind of some of Arabella's
strange Notions, when she observed them
disputing concerning some of the Actions of
the antient Romans, she very innocently asked
Sir George, Whether in former times Women
went to the Wars, and fought like Men? For
my Cousin, added she, talks of one Thaltris, a
Woman, that was as courageous as any Soldier
whatever.
               
                  

Mr. Glanville, horridly vexed at a Question
that was likely to engage Arabella in a Discourse
very different from that she had been so capa-ble
of pleasing in, frowned very intelligibly at
his Sister; and, to prevent any Answer being
given to her absurd Demand, directed some
other Conversation to Arabella: But she, who
saw a favourite Subject started, took no Notice
of what Mr. Glanville was saying to her; but,
directing her Looks to Sir George,
               
               Though Miss Glanville, said she, be a little
mistaken in the Name of that fair Queen she
has mentioned; yet I am persuaded you know
whom she means; and that it is the renowned
Thalestris, whose Valour staggers her Belief,
and of whom she wants to be informed.
               Ay, ay, Thalestris, said Miss Glanville: It
is such a strange Name I could not remember
it; but, pray, was there ever such a Person?
               Certainly, Madam, there was, replied Sir
George: She was Queen of the Amazons, a war-like
Nation of Women, who possessed great
Part of Cappadocia, and extended their Con-quests
so far, that they became formidable to
all their Neighbours.
               You find, Miss, said Arabella, I did not at-tempt
to impose upon you, when I told you
of the admirable Valour of that beautiful
Queen; which indeed was so great, that the
united Princes, in whose Cause she fought,
looked upon her Assistance to be equal to that
of a whole Army; and they honoured her,
accordingly, with the most distinguishing Marks
of their Esteem and Acknowlegement, and
offered her the chief Command of their Forces.
               
                  

O shameful! cried Sir Charles, offer a
Woman the Command of an Army! Brave
Fellows indeed, that would be commanded by
a Woman! Sure your mistake, Niece; there
never was such a thing heard of in the World.
               What, Sir, said Arabella, will you contradict
a Fact attested by the greatest Historians that
ever were? You may as well pretend to say,
there never were such Persons as Oroondates or
Juba, as dispute the Existence of the famous
Thalestris.
               
               Why, pray, Madam, said Sir Charles, who
were those?
               One of them, replied Arabella, was the
great King of Scythia; and the other, Prince
of the Two Mauritanias.
               
               Ods-heart! interrupted Sir Charles, I believe
their Kingdoms are in the Moon: I never heard
of Scythia, or the Two Mauritanias, before.
               And yet, Sir, replied Arabella, those King-doms
are doubtless as well known, as France
or England; and there is no Question, but the
Descendants of the great Oroondates, and the
valiant Juba, sway the Sceptres of them to this
Day.
               I must confess, said Sir George, I have a
very great Admiration for those Two renowned
Princes, and have read their beautiful Exploits
with infinite Pleasure; notwithstanding which,
I am more inclined to esteem the great Arta-ban,
then either of them.
               Though Artaban, replied Arabella, is without
Question, a Warrior equal to either of them,
and haply no Person in the World possessed so
sublime a Courage as his was; yet, it may be,

your Partiality proceeds from another Cause;
and you having the Honour to resemble him in
some little Infidelities he was accused of, with
less Justice than yourself perhaps, induces you
to favour him more than any other.
               
                  Arabella blushed when she ended these
Words: And Sir George replied, with a Sigh;
               I have, indeed, the Honour, Madam, to re-semble
the great Artaban, in having dared to
raise my Thoughts towards a Divine Person,
who, with Reason, condemns my Adorations.
               Hey-day! cried Sir Charles, are you going
to speak of Divine Things, after all the Fables
you have been talking of? Troth, I love to
hear young Men enter upon such Subjects: But
pray, Niece, who told you Sir George was an
Infidel?
               Mr. Glanville, replied Arabella: And I am
inclined to think he spoke Truth; for Sir
George has never pretended to deny it.
               How! interrupted Sir Charles; I am sorry
to hear that. I hope you have never, added
he, looking at the young Baronet, endea-voured
to corrupt my Son with any of your
Free-thinking Principles: I am for every
body having Liberty of Conscience; but I
cannot endure to hear People of your Stamp
endeavouring to propagate your mischievous
Notions; and because you have no Regard for
your own future Happiness, disturbing other
People in the laudable Pursuit of theirs.
               We will not absolutely condemn Sir George,
said Arabella, till we have heard his History
from his own Mouth, which he promised, some
time ago, to relate when I desired it.
               
                  

I do not imagine his History is fit to be heard
by Ladies, said Sir Charles; for your Infidels
live a strange kind of Life.
               However that may be, replied Arabella, we
must not dispense with Sir George from per-forming
his Promise: I dare say there are no
Ladies here, who will think the worse of him
for freely confessing his Faults.
               You may answer for yourself, if you please,
Madam, said Sir Charles; but I hope my Girl
there, will not say as much.
               I dare say my Cousin is not so rigid, said
Arabella: She has too much the Spirit of Ju-lia
in her, to find Fault with a little Infidelity.
               I am always obliged to you for your Com-parisons,
Cousin, said Miss Glanville: I sup-pose
this is greatly to my Advantage too.
               I assure you, Madam, said Sir George, Lady
Bella has done you no Injury by the Compari-son
she has just now made; for Julia was one
of the finest Princesses in the World.
               Yet she was not free from the Suspicion of
Infidelity, replied Arabella; but though I do
not pretend to tax my Cousin with that Fault,
yet it is with a great deal of Reason that I say
she resembles her in her volatile Humour.
               I was never thought to be ill-humoured in
my Life, Madam, said Miss Glanville, co-louring;
and I cannot imagine what Reason I
have given you for saying I am.
               Nay, Cousin, said Arabella, I am not con-demning
your Humour; for, to say the Truth,
there are a great many Charms in a volatile
Disposition; and, notwithstanding the admirable
Beauty of Julia, it is possible she made as

many Slaves by her light and airy Carriage, as
she did by her Eyes, though they were the
fairest in the World, except the divine Cleo-patra's.
               
                  Cleopatra! cried Sir Charles: Why she was
a Gypsey, was she not?
               I never heard her called so, said Arabella,
gravely; and I am apt to believe you are not at
all acquainted with her: But pray, pursued she,
let us wave this Discourse at present, and pre-pare
to listen to Sir George's Relation of his
Life; which, I dare say, is full of very extra-ordinary
Events: However, Sir, added she, di-recting
her Speech to the young Baronet, I am
afraid your Modesty will induce you to speak
with less Candour than you ought, of those
great Actions, which questionless you have per-formed:
Therefore we shall hear your History,
with greater Satisfaction, from the Mouth of
your faithful 'Squire, who will not have the
same Reasons that you have, for suppressing
what is most admirable in the Adventures of
your Life.
               Since it is your Pleasure, Madam, replied
Sir George, to hear my Adventures, I will re-count
them as well as I am able my self, to
the end that I may have an Opportunity of
obliging you by doing some Violence to my na-tural
Modesty, which will not suffer me to re-late
Things the World have been pleased to
speak of to my Advantage, without some little
Confusion.
               Then, casting down his Eyes, he seemed to
be recollecting the most material Passages in his
Life. Mr. Glanville, though he could have

which at present are conspicuous enough; but
being occasioned by a Country Education, and
a perfect Ignorance of the World, the In-struction,
which then you will not scruple to
give her, and which, from a Husband, with-out
any Offence to her Delicacy, she may
receive, may reform her Conduct; and make
her Behaviour as complete, as, it must be
confessed, both her Person and Mind now
are.
               Mr. Glanville having acquiesced in the Jus-tice
of this Remark, as soon as Breakfast was
over, went to visit the two Ladies, who ge-nerally
drank their Chocolate together.
               Miss Glanville being then in Lady Bella's
Apartment, he was immediately admitted,
where he found them engaged in a high Dis-pute;
and, much against his Will, was obliged
to be Arbitrator in the Affair, they having, up-on
his Entrance, both appealed to him.
               But, in order to place this momentous Af-fair
in a true Light, 'tis necessary to go back a
little, and acquaint the Reader with what had
passed in the Apartment; and also, following
the Custom of the Romance and Novel-Wri-ters,
in the Heart, of our Heroine.
               No sooner were her fair Eyes open in the
Morning, than the unfortunate Sir George pre-senting
himself to her Imagination, her Thoughts
to use Scudery's Phrase, were at a cruel War with
each other: She wished to prevent the Death
of this obsequious Lover; but she could not re-solve
to preserve his Life, by giving him that
Hope he required; and without which, she

wished he had not indulged Arabella in her ridi-culous
Request, was not able to deny himself
the Diversion of hearing what Kind of History
he would invent; and therefore resolved to stay
and listen to him.
               Miss Glanville was also highly delighted with
the Proposal; but Sir Charles, who could not
conceive there could be any thing worth
listening to, in a young Rake's Account of
himself, got up with an Intention to walk in
the Garden; when, perceiving it rained, he
changed his Resolution, and, resuming his Seat,
prepared to listen, as every one else did, to the
expected Story.
               When Sir George, after having paused a
Quarter of an Hour longer, during which all
the Company observed a profound Silence, be-gan
his Relation in this Manner, addressing
himself to Arabella.
               
               End of the Fifth BOOK.
            
         
         
            

            THE
Female QUIXOTE. BOOK VI.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Containing the Beginning of Sir George's
History; in which the ingenious Relater
has exactly copied the Stile of Romance.
               
               
                  THOUGH at present, Madam,
you behold me in the Quality of a
private Gentleman, in the Posses-sion
only of a tolerable Estate;
yet my Birth is illustrious enough:
My Ancestors having formerly worn a Crown▪
which, as they won by their Valour, so they lost
by their Misfortune only.
               
                  

How, interrupted Sir Charles, are you de-scended
from Kings? Why, I never heard you
say so before: Pray, Sir, how far are you re-moved
from Royal Blood? and which of your
Forefathers was it that wore a Crown?
               Sir, replied Sir George, it is not much more
than Eight hundred Years since my Ancestors,
who were Saxons, swayed the Sceptre of Kent;
and from the first Monarch of that mighty
Kingdom, am I lineally descended.
               Pray where may that Kingdom of Kent lie?
said Sir Charles.
               
               In—replied Sir George.
               
               A mighty Kingdom indeed! said Sir Charles:
Why, it makes but a very small Part of the King-dom
of Britain now: Well, if your An-cestors
were Kings of that County as it is now
called, it must be confessed their Dominions
were very small.
               However that may be, said Arabella, it raises
Sir George greatly in my Esteem, to hear he is
descended from Kings; for, truly, a Royal Ex-traction
does infinitely set off noble and valiant
Actions, and inspires only lofty and generous
Sentiments: Therefore, illustrious Prince (for
in that Light I shall always consider you), be
assured, though Fortune has despoiled you of
your Dominions, yet since she cannot deprive
you of your Courage and Virtue, Providence
will one Day assist your noble Endeavours to
recover your Rights, and place you upon the
Throne of your Ancestors, from whence you
have been so inhumanly driven: Or, haply, to
repair that Loss, your Valour may procure you

other Kingdoms, no less considerable than that
to which you was born.
               For Heaven's sake, Niece, said Sir Charles,
How come such improbable Things into your
Head? Is it such an easy Matter, think you, to
conquer Kingdoms, that you can flatter a young
Man, who has neither Fleets nor Armies, with
such strange Hopes?
               The great Artaban, Sir, resumed Arabella,
had neither Fleets nor Armies, and was Master
only of a single Sword; yet he soon saw him-self
greater than any King, disposing the De-stinies
of Monarchs by his Will, and deciding
the Fates of Empires by a single Word: But
pray let this Dispute rest where it is, and per-mit
Sir George to continue his Relation.
               It is not necessary, Madam, resumed Sir
George, to acquaint you with the Misfortunes
of my Family, or relate the several Progres-sions
it made towards the private Condition in
which it now is: For, besides that reciting the
Events of so many Hundred Years may haply,
in some measure, try your Patience, I should
be glad if you would dispense with me from
entering into a Detail of Accidents that would
sensibly afflict me: It shall suffice, therefore, to
inform you, that my Father, being a peaceable
Man, fond of Retirement and Tranquillity,
made no Attempts to recover the Sovereignty
from which his Ancestors had been unjustly
expelled; but quietly beheld the Kingdom of
Kent in the Possession of other Masters, while
he contented himself with the Improvement of
that small Pittance of Ground, which was all

that the unhappy Prince Veridomer, my Grand-father,
was able to bequeath to him.
               Hey-day! cried Sir Charles, Will you new-christen
your Grandfather, when he has been
in his Grave these Forty Years? I knew ho-nest
Sir Edmard Bellmour very well, though I
was but a Youth when he died; but I be-lieve
no Person in Kent ever gave him the
Title of Prince Veridomer: Fie! fie! these are
idle Brags.
               Sir George, without taking Notice of the old
Baronet's Heat, went on with his Narration in
this manner:
               Things were in this State, Madam, when I
was born. I will not trouble you with the
Relation of what I did in my Infancy.
               No, pray skip over all that, interrupted Sir
Charles; I suppose your Infancy was like other
Peoples? What can there be worth hearing in
that?
               You are deceived, Sir, said Arabella: The
Infancy of illustrious Personages has always
something very extraordinary in it; and from
their childish Words and Actions there have
been often Presages drawn of their future
Greatness and Glory.
               Not to disoblige Sir Charles, however, said
the young Prince of Kent, I will not repeat
many things, which I said and did in the first
Years of my Life, that those about me thought
very surprising; and from them prognosti-cated,
that very strange Accidents would befal
me.
               I have been a Witness of some very unfa-vourable
Prognostics of you, said Sir Charles,
                  

smiling; for you was the most unlucky bold
Spark, that ever I knew in my Life.
               'Tis very certain, pursued Sir George, that the
Forwardness of my Spirit gave great Uneasiness
to my Father; who, being, as I said before, in-clinable
to a peaceable and sedentary Life, en-deavoured
as much as possible to repress that
Vivacity in my Disposition, which he feared
might involve me in dangerous Enterprizes.
The Pains he took in my Education, I re-compensed
by a more than ordinary Docility:
and, before I was Thirteen, performed all my
Exercises with a marvelous Grace; and, if I
may dare say so, was, at those early Years, the
Admiration and Wonder of all that saw me.
               Lady Bella had some Reason to fear your
Modesty, I find, said Sir Charles, smiling; for,
methinks you really speak too slightly of your
Excellencies.
               However that may be, resumed Sir George;
my Father saw these early Instances of a tower-ing
Genius in me, with a Pleasure, chastened
by his Fears, that the Grandeur of my Courage
would lead me to attempt something for the
Recovery of that Kingdom, which was my
Due; and which might haply occasion his losing
me.
               Possessed with these Thoughts, he carefully
avoided saying any thing to me concerning the
glorious Pretences, to which my Birth gave me
a Right; and often wished it had been possible
for him to conceal from me, that I was the
true and lawful Heir of the Kingdom of Kent;
a Circumstance he never chose to mention to

any Person, and would have been glad, if it
had always remained a Secret.
               And so it was a Secret, interrupted Sir
Charles; for, till this Day, I never heard of it;
and it might still have been a Secret, if you had
pleased; for nobody, I dare say, would suspect
such a Thing; and very few, I believe, will
be inclined to think there is any thing in such
an improbable Tale.
               Notwithstanding all my Father's Endeavours
to the contrary, Madam, pursued Sir George,
I cherished those towering Sentiments, the
Knowledge of my Birth inspired me with; and
it was not without the utmost Impatience, that
I brooked the private Condition, to which I
found myself reduced.
               Cruel Fate! would I sometimes cry; was it
not enough to deprive me of that Kingdom,
which is my Due, and, subject me to a mean,
and inglorious State; but, to make that Condi-tion
infinitely more grievous, must thou give
me a Soul, towering above my abject For-tune?
A Soul, that cannot but disdain the base
Submission, I must pay to those, who triumph
in the Spoils of my ruined House? A Soul,
which sees nothing above its Hopes and Ex-pectations?
And, in fine, a Soul, that excites
me daily to attempt Things worthy of my
Birth, and those noble Sentiments I inherit
from my great Forefathers? Ah! pursued I,
unhappy Bellmour; what hinders thee from
making thyself known and acknowleged for
what thou art? What hinders thee from bold-ly
asserting thy just and natural Rights; and

from defying the Usurper, who detains them
from thee? What hinders thee, I say?
               What? Interrupted Sir Charles, why the
Fear of a Halter, I suppose: There is nothing
more easy than to answer that Question.
               Such, Madam, said Sir George, were the
Thoughts, which continually disturbed my
Imagination; and, doubtless, they had not fail-ed
to push me on to some hazardous Enter-prize,
had not a fatal Passion interposed; and
by its sweet, but dangerous Allurements,
stifled for a while that Flame, which Ambi-tion,
and the Love of Glory, kindled in my
Soul.
               Sir George here pausing, and fixing his Eyes
with a melancholy Air on the Ground, as if
prest with a tender Remembrance;
               Mr. Glanville asked him, similing, If the
Thoughts of poor Dolly disturbed him? Pray,
added he, give us the History of your first
Love, without any Mixture of Fable; or shall
I take the Trouble off you? For you know, I
am very well acquainted with your Affair with
the pretty Milk-maid, and can tell it very suc-cinctly.
               'Tis true, Sir, said Sir George, sighing, I
cannot recall the Idea of Dorothea, into my
Remembrance, without some Pain: That fair,
but unfaithful Shepherdess, who first taught me
to sigh, and repaid my Tenderness with the
blackest Infidelity: Yet I will endeavour to
compose myself, and go on with my Narra-tion.
               Be pleased to know then, Madam, pursued
Sir George, that having my Thoughts, in this

manner, wholly employed with the Disasters
of my Family, I had arrived to my seventeenth
Year, without being sensible of the Power of
Love; but the Moment now arrived, which
was to prove fatal to my Liberty. Following
the Chace one Day with my Father, and some
other Gentlemen, I happened to lag a little be-hind
them; and, being taken up with my ordi-nary
Reflections, I lost my Way, and wander-ed
a long time, without knowing or consider-ing
whither I was going. Chance at last con-ducted
me to a pleasant Valley, surrounded
with Trees; and, being tired with riding, I
lighted, and tying my Horse to a Tree, walked
forward, with an Intention to repose myself a
few Moments under the Shade of one of those
Trees, that had attracted my Observation: But
while I was looking for the most convenient
Place, I spied, at the Distance of some few
Yards from me, a Woman lying asleep upon
the Grass: Curiosity tempted me to go nearer
this Person; and, advancing softly, that I
might not disturb her, I got near enough to
have a View of her Person: But, ah! Hea-vens!
what Wonders did my Eyes encounter
in this View!—The Age of this fair Sleeper
seemed not to exceed Sixteen; her Shape was
formed with the exactest Symmetry; one of her
Hands supported her Head; the other, as it
lay carelesly stretched at her Side, gave me an
Opportunity of admiring its admirable Colour
and Proportion: The thin Covering upon her
Neck discovered Part of its inimitable Beauty
to my Eyes; but her Face, her lovely Face,
fixed all my Attention.
               
                  

Certain it is, Madam, that, out of this Com-pany,
it would be hard to find any thing so
perfect, as what I now viewed. Her Com-plexion
was the purest White imaginable,
heightened by the inchanting Glow, which
dyed her fair Cheeks with a Colour like that
of a new-blown Rose: Her Lips, formed with
the greatest Perfection, and of a deeper Red,
seemed to receive new Beauties from the Fra-grance
of that Breath, that parted from them:
Her auburn Hair fell in loose Ringlets over her
Neck; and some straggling Curls, that played
upon her fair Forehead, set off by a charming
Contrast the Whitness of that Skin it partly
hid: Her Eyes indeed were closed; and though
I knew not whether their Colour and Beauty
were equal to those other Miracles in her Face,
yet their Proportion seemed to be large; and
the snowy Lids, which covered them, were
admirably set off by those long and fable Lashes
that adorned them.
               For some Moments I gazed upon this love-ly
Sleeper, wholly lost in Wonder and Admira-tion.
               Where, whispered I, where has this Miracle
been concealed, that my Eyes were never bles-sed
with the Sight of her before? These Words,
though I uttered them softly, and with the
utmost Caution; yet by the murmuring Noise
they made, caused an Emotion in the beauteous
Sleeper, that she started, and presently after
opened her Eyes: But what Words shall I find
to express the Wonder, the Astonishment, and
Rapture, which the Sight of those bright Stars
inspired me with? The Flames which darted

feared, it would be impossible for him to
live.
               After pondering a few Hours upon the Ne-cessity
of his Case, and what a just Regard to
her own Honour required of her, Decorum
prevailed so much over Compassion, that she
resolved to abandon the miserable Sir George
to all the Rigour of his Destiny; when, hap-pily
for the disconsolate Lover, the History of
the fair Amalazotha coming into her Mind,
she remembred, that this haughty Princess,
having refused to marry the Person, her Fa-ther
recommended to her, because he had not
a Crown upon his Head; nevertheless, when he
was dying for Love of her, condescended to
visit him, and even to give him a little Hope,
in order to preserve his Life: See conceived it
could be no Blemish to her Character, if she
followed the Example of this most glorious
Princess; and suffered herself to relax a little in
her Severity, to prevent the Effects of her Lo-ver's
Despair.
               Fear not, Arabella, said she to herself; fear
not to obey the Dictates of thy Compassion,
since the glorious Amalazontha justifies, by her
Example, the Means thou wilt use to preserve
a noble Life, which depends upon a few Words
thou shalt utter.
               When she had taken this Resolution, she
rung her Bell for her Women; and as soon as
she was dressed, she dismissed them all but Lucy,
whom she ordered to bring her Paper and Pens,
telling her, she would write an Answer to Sir
George's Letter.
               
                  Lucy obeyed with great Joy; but by that

from those glorious Orbs, cast such a dazling
Splendor upon a Sight too weak to bear a
Radiance so unusual, that, stepping back a few
Paces, I contemplated at a Distance, that
Brightness, which began already to kindle a
consuming Fire in my Soul.
               Bless me! interrupted Sir Charles, con-founded
at so pompous a Description; who
could this be?
               The pretty Milk-maid, Dolly Acorn, replied
Mr. Glanville gravely: Did you never see her,
Sir, when you was at your Seat, at—?
She used often to bring Cream to my Lady.
               Aye, aye, replied Sir Charles, I remember
her: She was a very pretty Girl: And so it was
from her Eyes, that all those Splendors and
Flames came, that had like to have burnt you
up, Sir George: Well, well, I guess how the
Story will end: Pray let us hear it out.
               I have already told you, Madam, resumed
Sir George, the marvelous Effects the Sight of
those bright Eyes produced upon my Spirit: I
remained fixed in a Posture of Astonishment
and Delight; and all the Faculties of my Soul
were so absorbed in the Contemplation of the
Miracles before me, that I believe, had she
still continued before my Eyes, I should never
have moved from the Place where I then stood:
But the fair Virgin, who had spied me at the
small Distance to which I was retired, turned
hastily about, and flew away with extraordi-nary
Swiftness.
               When Love, now lending me Wings, whom
Admiration had before made motionless, I per-sued
her so eagerly, that at last I overtook her;

and, throwing myself upon my Knees before
her,
               Stay, I conjure you, cried I; and if you be
a Divinity, as your celestial Beauty makes me
believe, do not refuse the Adoration I offer
you: But if, as I most ardently wish, you are
a Mortal, though sure the fairest that ever
graced the Earth; stop a Moment, to look up-on
a Man, whose Respects for you as a Mor-tal
fall little short of those Adorations he of-fers
you as a Goddess.
               I can't but think, cried Sir Charles, laughing,
how poor Dolly must be surprised at such a rho-domontade
Speech!
               Oh, Sir! replied Mr. Glanville, you will
find she will make as good a one.
               Will she, by my Troth, said Sir Charles. I
don't know how to believe it.
               This Action, pursued Sir George, and the
Words I uttered, a little surprised that fair
Maid, and brought a Blush into her lovely
Cheeks; but, recovering herself, she replied
with an admirable Grace,
               I am no Divinity, said she; and therefore
your Adorations are misplaced: But if, as you
say, my Countenance moves you to any Re-spect
for me, give me a Proof of it, by not
endeavouring to hold any further Discourse
with me, which is not permitted me from one
of your Sex and Appearance.
               A very wise Answer, indeed! interrupted
Sir Charles again: Very few Town Ladies
would have disclaimed the Title of Goddess, if
their Lovers had thought proper to bestow it

upon them. I am mightily pleased with the Girl
for her Ingenuity.
               The Discretion of so young a Damsel, re-sumed
Sir George, charmed me no less than her
Beauty; and I besought her, with the utmost
Earnestness, to permit me a longer Conversa-tion
with her.
               Fear not, lovely Virgin, said I, to listen to
the Vows of a Man, who, till he saw you,
never learnt to sigh: My Heart, which de-fended
its Liberty against the Charms of many
admirable Ladies, yields, without Reluctance,
to the pleasing Violence your Beauties lay
upon me. Yes, too charming and dangerous
Stranger, I am no longer my own Master: It
is in your Power to dispose of my Destiny:
Consider therefore, I beseech you, whether you
can consent to see me die? For I swear to
you, by the most sacred Oaths, unless you pro-mise
to have some Compassion on me, I will
no longer behold the Light of Day.
               You may easily conceive, Madam, that, con-sidering
this lovely Maid in the Character of
a Shepherdess, in which she appeared, I made
her a Declaration of my Passion, without think-ing
myself obliged to observe those Respects,
which, to a Person of equal Rank with myself,
Decorum would not have permitted me to for-get.
               However, she repelled my Boldness with
so charming a Modesty, that I began to be-lieve,
she might be a Person of illustrious Birth,
disguised under the mean Habit she wore: But,
having requested her to inform me who she was,
she told me, her Name was Dorothea; and that

she was Daughter to a Farmer, that lived in
the neighbouring Valley. This Knowlege in-creasing
my Confidence, I talked to her of my
Passion, without being the least afraid of of-fending
her.
               And therein you was greatly to blame, said
Arabella: For, truly, though the fair Dorothea
told you, she was Daughter to a Farmer; yet,
in all Probability, she was of a much higher
Extraction, if the Picture you have drawn of
her be true.
               The fair Arsinoe, Princess of Armenia, was
constrained for a while to conceal her true
Name and Quality, and pass for a simple
Country-woman, under the Name of Delia:
Yet the generous Philadelph, Prince of Cilicia,
who saw and loved her under that Disguise,
treated her with all the Respect he would have
done, had he known she was the Daughter of a
King. In like manner, Prince Philoxipes, who
fell in Love with the beautiful Policrete, before
he knew she was the Daughter of the great
Solon; and while he looked upon her as a poor
Stranger, born of mean Parents; nevertheless,
his Love supplying the Want of those Advan-tages
of Birth and Fortune, he wooed her with
a Passion as full of Awe and Delicacy, as if her
Extraction had been equal to his own. And
therefore those admirable Qualities the fair
Dorothea possessed, might also have convinced
you, she was not what she seemed, but, haply,
some great Princess in Disguise.
               To tell you the Truth, Madam, replied Sir
George, notwithstanding the fair Dorothea in-formed
me, she was of a mean Descent, I could

not easily forego the Opinion, that she was of
an illustrious Birth: And the Histories of those
fair Princesses you have mentioned, coming in-to
my Mind, I also thought it very possible,
that this divine Person might either be the
Daughter of a great King, or Lawgiver, like
them; but, being wholly engrossed by the Vio-lence
of my new-born Affection, I listened to
nothing, but what most flattered my Hopes;
and, addressing my lovely Shepherdess with all
the Freedom of a Person who thinks his Birth
much superior to hers; she listened to my Pro-testations,
without any seeming Reluctance,
and condescended to assure me before we part-ed,
that she did not hate me. So fair a Begin-ning,
seemed to promise me the most favour-able
Fortune I could with Reason expect. I
parted from my fair Shepherdess with a thousand
Vows of Fidelity; exacting a Promise from
her, that she would meet me as often as she
conveniently could, and have the Goodness to
listen to those Assurances of inviolable Tender-ness
my Passion prompted me to offer her.
When she left me, it seemed as if my Soul had
forsaken my Body to go after her: My Eyes
pursued her Steps as long as she was in Sight; I
envied the Ground she prest as she went along,
and the Breezes that kissed that celestial
Countenance in their Flight.
               For some Hours I stood in the same Posture
in which she had left me; contemplating the
sudden Change I had experienced in my Heart,
and the Beauty of that divine Image, which
was now engraven in it. Night drawing on, I
began to think of going home; and, untying my

Horse, I returned the Way I had come; and
at last struck into a Road, which brought me
to the Place where I parted from the Company;
from whence I easily found my Way home,
so changed both in my Looks and Carriage,
that my Father, and all my Friends, observed
the Alteration with some Surprize.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  In which Sir George, continuing his sur-prising
History, relates a most stupen-dous
Instance of a Valour only to be pa-rallelled
by that of the great Oroondates,
Caesareo, &amp;c. &amp;c. &amp;c.
               
               FOR some Months, continued Sir George,
I prosecuted my Addresses to the admir-able
Dorothea; and I flattered myself with a
Hope, that I had made some Progress in her
Heart: But, alas! this deceitful Fair-one, who
only laughed at the Torments she made me en-dure,
at the time she vowed eternal Constancy
to me, gave her Hand to a Lover of her Fa-ther's
providing, and abandoned me, without
Remorse, to the most cruel Despair.
               I will not trouble you, Madam, with the
Repetition of those Complaints, which this
perfidious Action drew from me for a long time.
At length, my Courage enabling me to over-come
the Violence of my Grief, I resolved to
think of the ungrateful Dorothea no more; and

the Sight of another Beauty completing my
Cure, I no longer remembred the unfaithful
Shepherdess, but with Indifference.
               Thus, Madam, have I faithfully related one
of those Infidelities, wherewith my Enemies
slander me; who can support their Assertion,
with no better Proof, than that I did not die,
when Dorothea abandoned me: But I submit
it to your Candour, whether an unfaithful
Mistress deserved such an Instance of Affec-tion,
from a Lover she had betrayed?
               Why, really, replied Arabella, after a little
Pause, you had some Excuse to plead for your
Failure in this Point: And though you cannot
be called, the most perfect amongst Lovers,
seeing you neither died, nor was in Danger of
dying; yet neither ought you to be ranked
among those who are most culpable: But pray
proceed in your Story: I shall be better able to
form a right Judgment of your Merit as a Lo-ver,
when I have heard all your Adventures.
               My Passion for Dorothea, resumed Sir George,
being cured by her Treachery towards me,
the Love of Glory began again to revive in my
Soul. I panted after some Occasion to signa-lize
my Valour, which yet I had met with no
Opportunity of doing; but, hearing that a
mighty Army was preparing to march upon a
secret Expedition, I privately quitted my Fa-ther's
Seat; and, attended only by my faithful
'Squire, I took the same Route the Army had
taken, and arrived the Day before the terrible
Battle of—was fought, where, without
making myself known, I performed such Pro-digies
of Valour, as astonished all who beheld

me. Without doubt, I should have been highly
caressed by the Commander, who certainly
would have given me the Honour of a Victory
my Sword alone had procured for him; but,
having unwittingly engaged myself too far in
Pursuit of the flying Enemy, I found myself
alone, encompassed with a Party of about Five
hundred Men; who, seeing they were pursued
only by a single Man, faced about, and pre-pared
to kill or take me Prisoner.
               Pray, Sir, interrupted Sir Charles, when did
all this happen? And how came it to pass, that
your Friends have been ignorant to this Mo-ment
of those Prodigies of Valour you per-formed
at that Battle? I never heard you was
ever in a Battle: Fame has done you great In-justice,
by concealing the Part you had in that
famous Victory.
               The great Care I took to conceal myself,
replied Sir George, was one Reason why my
Friends did not attribute to me the Exploits,
which the Knight in black Armour, who was
no other than myself, performed; and the Ac-cident
I am going to relate, prevented my be-ing
discovered, while the Memory of those
great Exploits were yet fresh in the Minds of
those I had so greatly obliged.
               Be pleased to know, therefore, Madam, that,
seeing myself about to be encompassed by this
Party of the Enemy, I disdained to fly; and,
though I was alone, resolved to sustain their
Attack, and sell my Life as dear as possible.
               Why, if you did so, you was a Madman,
cried Sir Charles in a Heat: The bravest Man
that ever lived, would not have presumed to

fight with so great a Number of Enemies. What
could you expect, but to be cut in Pieces?
Pooh! pooh! don't think any body will credit
such a ridiculous Tale: I never knew you was
so addicted to—
               Lying, perhaps, the good Knight would have
said; but Sir George, who was concerned he
was present at his Legend, and could not
blame him for doubting his Veracity, prevent-ed
his Utterance of a Word he would be oblig-ed
to take ill, by abruptly going on with his
Story.
               Placing my Back therefore against a Tree,
pursued he, to prevent my being assaulted be-hind,
I presented my Shield to the Boldest of
these Assailants; who, having struck an impo-tent
Blow upon it, as he was lifting up his Arm
to renew his Attack, I cut it off with one
Stroke of my Sword; and the same Instant
plunged it to the Hilt in the Breast of another,
and clove the Scull of a Third, who was mak-ing
at me, in two Parts.
               Sir Charles, at this Relation, burst into a
loud Fit of Laughter; and, being more inclined
to divert himself, than be offended at the Folly
and Vanity of the young Baronet, he permitted
him to go on with his surprising Story, with-out
giving him any other Interruption.
               These Three Executions, Madam, pursued
Sir George, were the Effects only of so many
Blows; which raised such Indignation in my
Enemies, that they prest forward in great Num-bers
to destroy me; but, having, as I before
said, posted myself so advantageously, that I
could only be assaulted before, not more than

Three or Four could attack me at one time. The
Desire of lengthening out my Life, till happily
some Succour might come to my Relief, so in-vigorated
my Arm, and added to my ordinary
Strength an almost irresistible Force, that I dealt
Death at every Blow; and in less than a quar-ter
of an Hour, saw more than Fifty of my
Enemies at my Feet, whose Bodies served for a
Bulwark against their Fellows Swords.
               The Commander of this little Body, not
having Generosity enough to be moved with
those prodigious Effects of my Valour in my
Favour, was transported with Rage at my Re-sistance;
and the Sight of so many of his Men
slain before his Face, served only to increase
his Fury; and that Moment, seeing, that, with
Two more Blows, I had sent Two of his most
valiant Soldiers to the Shades, and that the rest
fearing to come within the Length of my
Sword, had given me a few Moments Re-spite,
               Ah! Cowards! cried he, are you afraid of
a single Man? And will you suffer him to
escape from your Vengeance, who has slain so
many of your brave Comrades before your
Eyes?
               These Words inspiring them with a Fierce-ness,
such as he desired, they advanced towards
me with more Fury than before: By this time,
I had received several large Wounds, and my
Blood ran down from many Parts of my Body:
Yet was I not sensible of any Decay of Strength,
nor did the settled Designs of my Enemies to
destroy me daunt me in the least: I still relied
upon the Assistance I expected Providence

time she had brought her Lady all the Mate-rials
for Writing, her Mind was changed; she
having reflected, that Amalazontha, whose Ex-ample,
in order to avoid the Censure of future
Ages, she was resolved exactly to follow, did
not write to Ambiome
                        •
                     , but paid him a Visit,
she resolved to do the like; and therefore bid
Lucy take them away again, telling her: She
had thought better of it, and would not write
to him.
               
                  Lucy, extremely concerned at this Resolution,
obeyed her very slowly, and with greeat seem-ing
Regret.
               I perceive, said Arabella, you are afraid, I
shall abandon the unfortunate Man you so-licit▪
for, to the Violence of his Despair; but
tho' I do not intend to write to him, yet I'll
make use of a Method, perhaps as effectual;
for, to speak truly, I mean to make him a Visit;
for by this time his Fever is, I suppose, vio-lent
enough to make him keep his Bed.
               And will you be so good, Madam, said
Lucy, to go and see the poor Gentleman? I
warrant you, he will be ready to die for Joy,
when he sees you.
               There must be proper Precautions used, said
Arabella, to prevent those Consequences, which
the sudden and unexpected Sight of me may
produce. Those about him, I suppose, will have
Discretion enough for that: Therefore give Or-ders
for the Coach to be made ready, and tell
my Women, they must attend me; and be
sure you give them Directions, when I enter
Sir George's Chamber, to stay at a convenient
Distance, in order to leave me an Opportunity

would send to my Relief, and determined, if
possible, to preserve my Life, till it arrived.
               I fought, therefore, with a Resolution, which
astonished my Enemies, but did not move them
to any Regard for my Safety: And, observing
their brutal Commander, a few Paces from me,
encouraging his Men, both with his Cries and
Gestures, Indignation against this inhuman
Wretch so transported me out of my Discre-tion,
that I quitted my Post, in order to sacri-fice
him to my Revenge.
               Seeing me advance furiously towards him, he
turned pale with Fear, and endeavoured to shel-ter
himself in the midst of his Men; who, more
valiant than himself, opposed themselves to my
Rage, to favour his Retreat: But quickly clear-ing
myself a Way with my Sword, I pressed to-wards
the barbarous Coward; and, ere he could
avoid the Blow I aimed at him, it struck him
senseless at my Feet.
               My particular Revenge thus satisfied, I was
sensible of the Fault I had committed in quit-ting
my Post, by which I exposed myself to be
surrounded by the Enemy. I endeavoured to
regain it, but in vain: I was beset on all Sides,
and now despaired of any Safety; and there-fore
only fought to die courageously, and make
as many of my Enemies as I could, attend
my Fall.
               Exasperated by the Misfortune of their Com-mander,
they pressed upon me with redoubled
Fury. Faint as I was, with the Loss of Blood,
and so fatigued with the past Action, and the
obstinate Fight I had maintained so long with
such a considerable Number, I could hardly any

longer lift up my Arm; and, to complete, my
Misfortune, having thrust my Sword into the
Body of one of the forwardest of my Enemies,
in my endeavouring to regain it, it broke in
Pieces, and the Hilt only remained in my Hand.
               This Accident completed my Defeat: De-prived
of my Sword, I was no longer capable
of making any Defence: Several of them pressed
upon me at once; and, throwing me down,
tied my Hands together behind me. Shame and
Rage at this Indignity worked so forcibly up-on
my Spirts, weakened as I then was, that I
fell into a Swoon. What happened till my Re-covery,
I am not able to tell; but, at the Re-turn
of my Senses, I found myself laid on a
Bed in a tolerable Chamber, and some Persons
with me, who kept a profound Silence.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  A Love-Adventure, after the Romantic
Taste.
               
               RECOLLECTING in a few Moments
all that happened to me, I could not
choose but be surprised at finding myself
treated with so little Severity, considering I
was Prisoner to Persons who had been Wit-nesses
of the great Quantity of Blood I had
shed in my own Defence. My Wounds had
been dressed while I continued in my Swoon;
and the Faces of those Persons who were about
me, expressed nothing of Unkindness.
               
                  

After reflecting some time longer on my
Situation, I called to a young Man, who sat
near my Bed-side, and intreated him to inform
me, Where I was, and to whom I was a Pri-soner?
But could get no other Answer to those
Questions, than a most civil Intreaty to com-pose
myself, and not protract the Cure of my
Wounds by talking, which, the Surgeons had
declared, would be of a bad Consequence;
and had therefore ordered me to be as little
disturbed as possible.
               Notwithstanding this Remonstrance, I re-peated
my Request, promising to be entirely
governed by them for the future in what re-garded
my Health, provided they would satisfy
me in those Particulars: But my Attendant did
not so much as reply to those Importunities;
but, to prevent the Continuance of them, rose
from his Seat, and retired to the other End of
the Chamber.
               I passed that Day, and several others, with-out
being able to learn the Truth of my Condi-tion:
All this time, I was diligently waited on
by the two Persons I had first seen, neither
of whom I could prevail upon to inform me
of what I desired to know; and, judging, by
this obstinate Reserve, and the Manner of my
Treatment, that there was some Mystery in
the Case, I forbore to ask them any more
Questions, conceiving they had particular Or-ders
not to answer them.
               The Care that was taken to forward my
Cure, in Three Weeks entirely restored me
to Health: I longed impatiently to know,
what was to be my Destiny; and busied myself

in conjecturing it, in vain; when, one Morning,
an elderly Lady entered my Chamber, at whose
Appearance my Two Attendants retired.
               After she had saluted me very civilly, and
inquired after my Health, she seated herself in
a Chair near my Bedside, and spoke to me in
this manner:
               I make no question, Sir, but you are sur-prised
at the Manner in which you have been
treated, and the Care there has been taken to
prevent discovering to you the Place where
you now are; but you will doubtless be more
surprised, to hear you are in the Fortress of—,
and in the House of Prince Marcomire, whose
Party you fought against alone; and whom
you so dangerously wounded, before you was
taken Prisoner by his Men.
               Is it possible, Madam, said I, who, from
the first Moment of her Appearance, had been
in a strange Perplexity, is it possible, I am in
the House of a Man, whose Life I endeavoured
so eagerly to destroy? And is it to him, who
oppressed me so basely with Numbers, that I
am obliged for the Succour I have received?
               It is not to him, replied the Lady, that you
are obliged for the favourable Treatment you
have had; but listen to me patiently, and I
will disclose the Truth of your Adventure.
               Prince Marcomire, who was the Person that
headed that Party against which you so valiant-ly
defended yourself, after the Loss of the
Battle, was hastening to throw himself into
this Place, where his Sister, and many Ladies
of Quality, had come for Security: Your in-discreet

Pursuit engaged you in the most un-equal
Combat that ever was fought; and—
               Nay, Sir, interrupted Arabella, though I do
not refuse to give you all the Praises your gal-lant
Defence of yourself against Five hundred
Men deserves; yet I cannot agree with that
Lady, in saying, it was the most unequal Com-bat
that ever was fought: For, do but reflect, I
beseech you, upon that which the brave Prince
of Mauritania sustained against twice that Num-ber
of Men, with no other Arms than his
Sword; and, you having been in Battle that
Day, was, as I conceive, completely armed.
The young Prince of Egypt, accompanied only
by the valiant, but indiscreet, Cepio his Friend,
engaged all the King of Armenia's Guards,
and put them all to Flight. The courageous
Ariobasanes scorned to turn his Back upon a
whole Army; not to mention the invincible
Artaban, whom a thousand Armies together
could not have made to turn.
               Be pleased to observe, Madam, said Sir George,
that to the end I may faithfully recount my
History, I am under a Necessity of repeating
Things, which, haply, may seem too advan-tageous
for a Man to say of himself: Therefore
I indeed greatly approve of the Custom, which,
no doubt, this Inconveniency introduced, of a
'Squire, who is thoroughly instructed with the
Secrets of his Master's Heart, relating his Ad-ventures,
and giving a proper Eulogium of his
rare Valour, without being in Danger of of-fending
the Modesty of the renowned Knight;
who, as you know, Madam, upon those Oc-casions,
commodiously slips away.
               
                  

It being, however, this Lady's Opinion, that
no Man ever undertook a more hazardous Com-bat,
or with greater Odds, against him, she did
not fail to express her Admiration of it, in very
high Terms.
               The Noise of this Accident, pursued she,
was soon spread over the whole Town; and
the beautiful Sydimiris, Marcomire's Sister, hear-ing
that her Brother was wounded, as it was
thought to Death, and that the Person who
killed him, was taken Prisoner; she flew out
to meet her wounded Brother, distracted with
Grief, and vowing to have the severest Tor-tures
executed on him, who had thus barba-rously
murdered her Brother. Those who bore
that unhappy Prince, having brought him into
the House, his Wounds were searched; and
the Surgeons declared, they were very dan-gerous.
               
                  Sydimiris, hearing this, redoubled her Com-plaints
and Vows of Vengeance against you:
Her Brother having then the chief Authority in
the Place, she commanded, in his Name, to
have you brought hither, and to be most strictly
guarded; determined, if her Brother died, to
sacrifice you to his Ghost.
               Full of these sanguinary Resolutions, she
left his Chamber, having seen him laid in Bed;
and his Wounds dressed; but passing along a
Gallery to her own Apartment, she met the
Persons who were bringing you to the Room
that was to be your Prison: You was not, pur-sued
the Lady, yet recovered from your Swoon,
so that they carried you like one that was dead:
They had taken off your Helmet to give you

Air; by which means your Face being quite
uncovered, pale, languishing, and your Eyes
closed, as if in Death, presented the most
moving, and, at the same time, most pleasing
Object in the World.
               
                  Sydimiris, who stopt, and for a Moment
eagerly gazed upon you, lost all of a sudden
the Fierceness, which before had animated her
against you: And lifting up her Eyes to view
those Men that carried you;
               Are you sure, said she to them, that this is
the Person who wounded my Brother?
               Yes, Madam, replied one of them; this must
be he, since there was no other in his Com-pany;
and he alone sustained the Attack of Five
hundred Men; and would probably not have
left one of them alive, had not his Sword, by
breaking, put it into our Power to take him
Prisoner.
               Carry him away, said Sydimiris; but let his
Wounds be dressed, and let him be carefully
looked to, that, if my Brother dies, he may
be punished as he deserves.
               Pronouncing these Words in a low and fal-tering
Voice, she turned her Eyes a second time
upon you; then, hastily averting her Looks,
she hurried to her own Chamber, and threw
herself into a Chair, with all the Marks of a
very great Disturbance.
               The Affection I have for her, being the Per-son
who had brought her up, and most favoured
with her Confidence, made me behold her in
this Condition with great Concern; and sup-posing
it was her Brother that disquieted her,
I besought her not to give way to the Violence

of her Grief, but to hope that Heaven would
restore him to her Prayers.
               Alas! my dear Urinoe, said she, I am more
culpable than you can imagine; and I grieve less
for the Condition to which I see Marcomire re-duced,
than for that Moderation wherewith I
am constrained, spite of myself, to behold his
Enemy.
               Yes, dear Urinoe, pursued she, blushing,
and casting down her Eyes, the Actions of
this Unknown appear to me in quite another
Light, since I have seen him; and, instead of
looking upon him as the Murderer of my Bro-ther,
I cannot help admiring that rare Valour,
with which he defended himself against so great
a Number of Enemies; and am even ready to
condemn the furious Marcomire, for oppressing
so brave a Man.
               As I had never approved of those violent
Transports of Grief and Rage, which she had
expressed upon the first News of her Brother's
Misfortune; and as I looked upon your glo-rious
Defence with the utmost Admiration; so,
far from condemning the Change of her
Thoughts, I confirmed her in the favourable
Opinion she began to entertain of you; and,
continuing to make Remarks upon all the Par-ticulars
of the Combat, which had come to
our Knowlege, we found nothing in your Be-haviour,
but what increased our Admiration.
               
                  Sydimiris therefore, following the Dictates
of her own Generosity, as well as my Advice,
placed Two Persons about you, whose Fide-lity
we could rely on; and gave them Orders
to treat you with all imaginable Care and Re-spect,

but not to inform you of the Place in
which you was, or to whom you was Pri-soner.
               In the mean time, Marcomire, whose
Wounds had been again examined, was de-clared
out of Danger by the Surgeons; and he
having understood the Excess of his Sister's
Grief, and the Revenge she had vowed against
you, gave her Thanks for those Expressions of
her Tenderness; and also uttered some Threats,
which intimated a violent Hatred against you;
and a Design of prosecuting his Revenge upon
you, as soon as he was in a Condition to leave
his Chamber.
               
                  Sydimiris, who heard him, could with Dif-ficulty
dissemble her Concern.
               Ah! Urinoe, said she to me, when we were
alone; 'tis now, that I more than ever repent
of that Excess of Rage, which transported me
against the brave Unknown. I have thereby
put him intirely into my Brother's Power, and
shall be haply accessary to that Death he is
meditating for him, or else a perpetual Impri-sonment.
               This Reflection gave her so much Pain, that
I could not choose but pity her; and consider-ing,
that the only way to preserve you, was
for her to dissemble a Rage equal to Mar-comire's
against you, in order to prevent being
suspected of any Design in your Favour, I per-suaded
her to join with him in every thing he
said; while, in the mean time, we would en-deavour
to get you cured of your Wounds, that
you might at least be in a Condition once more

to defend yourself with that miraculous Valour
Heaven has bestowed on you.
               
                  Sydimiris perceiving her Brother would soon
be in a Condition to execute his Threats, resolv-ed
to hazard every thing, rather than to expose
you to his Rage: She therefore communicated
to me her Design of giving you Liberty, and,
by presenting a sufficient Reward to your
Guard, inducing them to favour your Escape.
               I undertook to manage this Business in her
Name, and have done it so effectually, that
you will this Night be at Liberty, and may
depart the Town immediately, in which it will
be dangerous to stay any time, for fear of
being discovered.
               
                  Sydimiris forbad me to let you know the
Person to whom you would be obliged for your
Freedom; but I could not endure, that you
should unjustly involve the Sister of Marcomire,
in that Resentment you will questionless always
preserve against him; and to keep you from being
innocently guilty of Ingratitude, I resolved to
acquaint you with the Nature of those Obliga-tions
you owe to her.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  The Adventure continued.
               
               AH! Madam, said I, perceiving she had
finished her Discourse, doubt not but I
shall most gratefully preserve the Remembrance
of what the generous Sydimiris has done for me;

of speaking to him, without being heard: As
for you, you may approach the Bed-side with
me; since, being my Confident, you may hear
all we have to say.
               
                  Arabella, having thus settled the Ceremonial
of her Visit, according to the Rules prescribed
by Romances, sat down to her Tea-table,
having sent to know, if Miss Glanville was up,
and received for Answer, that she would at-tend
her at Breakfast.
               
                  Arabella, who had at first determined to
say nothing of this Affair to her Cousin, could
not resist the Desire she had of talking upon a
Subject so interesting; and, telling her with a
Smile, that she was about to make a very
charitable Visit that Morning, asked her, if
she was disposed to bear her Company in it.
               I know you Country Ladies, said Miss
Glanville, are very fond of visiting your sick
Neighbours: For my Part, I do not love such
a grave kind of Amusement; yet, for the sake
of the Airing, I shall be very willing to attend
you.
               I think, said Arabella, with a more serious
Air than before, it behoves every generous Per-son
to compassionate the Misfortunes of their
Acquaintance and Friends, and to relieve them
as far as lies in their Power; but those Miseries
we ourselves occasion to others, demand, in a
more particular Manner, our Pity; and, if con-sistent
with Honour, our Relief.
               And pray, returned Miss Glanville, who is
it you have done any Mischief to, which you
are to repair by this charitable Visit, as you
call it?
               
                  

and shall always be ready to lose that Life in
her Defence, which she has had the superlative
Goodness to take so much Care of. But, Ma-dam,
pursued I, with an earnest Look, do not,
I beseech you, refuse me one Favour, without
which I shall depart with inconceivable Sorrow.
               Depend upon it, valiant Sir, replied she,
that if what you will require of me, be in my
Power, and fit for me to grant, I shall very
willingly oblige you.
               It is then, resumed I, trembling at the Bold-ness
of my Request, that you would conde-scend
to intreat the most generous Sydimiris to
favour me with an Interview, and give me an
Opportunity of throwing myself at her Feet,
to thank her for all those Favours I have re-ceived
from her Compassion.
               I cannot promise you, replied the Lady,
rising, to prevail upon Sydimiris to grant you an
Audience; but I assure you, that I will endea-vour
to dispose her to do you this Favour; and
it shall not be my Fault, if you are not sa-tisfied.
               Saying this, she went out of my Chamber,
I having followed her to the Door, with Pro-testations
that I would never forget her Kindness
upon this Occasion.
               I past the rest of that Day in an anxious Im-patience
for Night, divided between Fear and
Hope, and more taken up with the Thoughts
of seeing Sydimiris, than with my expected
Liberty.
               Night came at last, and the Door of my
Apartment opening, I saw the Lady who had
been with me in the Morning, enter.
               
                  

I have prevailed upon Sydimiris to see you,
said she; and she is willing, at my Intreaty, to
grant that Favour to a Person, who, she with
Reason thinks, has been inhumanly treated by
her Brother.
               Then, giving me her Hand, she conducted
me along a large Gallery, to a stately Apart-ment;
and after traversing several Rooms, she
led me into one, where Sydimiris herself was:
Who, as soon as she perceived me, rose from
her Seat, and received me with great Civility.
               In the Transport I then was, I know not
how I returned the grateful Salute the incom-parable
Sydimiris gave me; for most certain
it is, that I was so lost in Wonder, at the Sight
of the many Charms I beheld in her Person,
that I could not unlock my Tongue, or re-move
my Eyes from her inchanting Face; but
remained fixed in a Posture, which at once ex-pressed
my Admiration and Delight.
               To give you a Description of that Beauty
which I then contemplated, I must inform
you, Madam, that Sydimiris is tall, of a hand-some
Stature, and admirably proportioned; her
Hair was of the finest Black in the World; her
Complexion marvelously fair; and all the Li-neaments
of her Visage were perfectly beauti-ful;
and her Eyes, which were large and black,
sparkled with so quick and piercing a Fire, that
no Heart was able to resist their powerful
Glances: Moreover, Sydimiris is admirably
shaped; her Port is high and noble; and her
Air so free, yet so commanding, that there are
few Persons in the World, with whom she may
not dispute the Priority of Beauty: In fine,

Madam, Sydimiris appeared with so many Ad-vantages,
to a Spirit prepossessed already with
the most grateful Sense of her Favours, that
I could not resist the sweet Violence wherewith
her Charms took Possession of my Heart: I
yielded therefore, without Reluctance, to my
Destiny, and resigned myself, in an Instant, to
those Fetters, which the Sight of the Divine
Sydimiris prepared for me: Recovering there-fore
a little from that Admiration, which
had so totally ingrossed all my Faculties, I
threw myself at her Feet, with an Action whol-ly
composed of Transport.
               Divine Sydimiris, said I, beholding her with
Eyes, in which the Letters of my new-born
Passion might very plainly be read, see at
your Feet a Man devoted to your Service, by
all the Ties of Gratitude and Respect. I come,
Madam, to declare to you, that from the First
Moment you gave me Liberty, I had devoted
that and my Life to you; and at your Feet I
confirm the Gift; protesting by all that is most
dear and sacred to me, that since I hold my
Life from the Divine Sydimiris, she alone shall
have the absolute Disposal of it for the future;
and shuld she please again to demand it, either
to appease her Brother's Fury, or to sacrifice
it to her own Security, I will most faithfully
perform her Will, and shed the last Drop of
that Blood at her Command, which I would
with Transport lose in her Defence.
               A fine high-flown Speech indeed! said Sir
Charles, laughing; but I hope you did not in-tend
to keep your Word.
               
                  

Sure, Sir, replied Arabella, you do not ima-gine,
that Sir George would have failed in
executing all he had promised to the beautiful
and generous Sydimiris: What could he possi-bly
have said less? And indeed what less could
she have expected from a Man, whom at the
Hazard of her own Life and Happiness, she had
given Freedom to?
               I accompanied these Words, Madam, pur-sued
Sir George, with so passionate a Look and
Accent, that the fair Sydimiris blushed, and,
for a Moment, cast down her Eyes with a
visible Confusion. At last,
               Sir, replied she, I am too well satisfied with
what I have done, with respect to your Safety,
to require any Proofs of your Gratitude, that
might be dangerous to it; and shall remain ex-tremely
well satisfied, if the Obligations you
think you owe me, may induce you to mode-rate
your Resentment against my Brother, for
the cruel Treatment you received from him.
               Doubt not, Madam, interrupted I, eagerly,
but I shall, in the Person of Marcomire, regard
the Brother of the divine Sydimiris; and that
Consideration will be sufficient, not only to
make me forget all the Violences he committed
against me, but even to desend his Life, if need
be, with the Hazard of my own.
               Excessively generous indeed! said Sir Charles:
I never heard any thing like it.
               Oh! dear, Sir, replied Arabella, there are
numberless Instances of equal, and even supe-rior
Generosity, to be met with in the L
                     •
                  ves of
the Heroes of Antiquity: You will there see
a Lover, whose Mistress has been taken from

him, either by Treachery or Force, venture
his Life in Defence of the injurious Husband
who possesses her; and though all his Felicity
depends upon his Death, yet he will rescue him
from it, at the Expence of the greater Part of
his Blood.
               Another, who after a long and bloody War,
has, by taking his Enemy Prisoner, an Oppor-tunity
of terminating it honourably; yet, thro'
an heroick Principle of Generosity, he gives
his Captive Liberty, without making any Con-ditions,
and has all his Work to do over again.
               A Third, having contracted a violent Friend-ship
with the Enemies of his Country, through
the same generous Sentiments, draws his Sword
in their Defence, and makes no Scruple to fight
against an Army, where the King his Father
is in Person.
               I must confess, said Sir Charles, that Gene-rosity
seems to me very peculiar, that will make
a Man fight for his Enemies against his own
Father.
               It is in that Peculiarity, Sir, said Arabella,
that his Generosity consists; for certainly there
is nothing extraordinary in fighting for one's
Father, and one's Country; but when a Man
has arrived to such a Pitch of Greatness of
Soul, as to neglect those mean and selfish Con-siderations,
and, loving Virtue in the Persons
of his Enemies, can prefer their Glory before
his own particular Interest, he is then a perfect
Hero indeed: Such a one was Oroondates, Ar-taxcrxes,
and many others I could name, who
all gave eminent Proofs of their Disinterested-ness
and Greatness of Soul, upon the like Oc-casions:

Therefore not, to detract from Sir
George's Merit, I must still insist, that in the
Resolutions he had taken to defend his Ene-my's
Life at the Expence of his own, he did
no more, than what any Man of ordinary Ge-nerosity
ought to do, and what he was particu-larly
obliged to, by what the amiable Sydimiris
had done for him.
               I was so happy, however, Madam, continued
Sir George, to find that those Expressions of my
Gratitude wrought somewhat upon the Heart
of the lovely Sydimiris in my Favour: Her
Words discovered as much, and her Eyes spoke
yet more intelligibly; but our Conversation was
interrupted by the discreet Urinoe, who, fearing
the Consequence of so long a Stay in her Cham-ber,
represented to me, that it was time to
take my Leave.
               I turned pale at this cruel Sound; and, be-holding
Sydimiris with a languishing Look,
               Would to Heaven, Madam, said I, that
instead of giving me Liberty, you would keep
me eternally your Prisoner; for though a Dun-geon
was to be the Place of my Confinement,
yet if it was near you, it would seem a Palace
to me; for indeed I am no longer in a Condi-tion
to relish that Freedom you bestow upon
me, since it must remove me farther from you:
But I beseech you, Madam, to believe, that in
delivering me from your Brother's Fetters, you
have cast me into your own, and that I am more
a Prisoner than ever, but a Prisoner to so lovely
a Conqueror, that I do not wish to break my
Chains, and prefer the sweet and glorious Cap-tivity

I am in, to all the Crowns in the
World.
               You are very bold, said Sydimiris, blushing,
to entertain me with such Discourse; yet I
pardon this Offence, in Consideration of what
you have suffered from my Brother, and on
Condition that you will depart immediately,
without speaking another Word.
               
                  Sydimiris spoke this so earnestly, that I durst
not disobey her; and, kissing the Hem of her
Robe, with a passionate Air, I left ber Cham-ber,
conducted by Urinoe; who having brought
me to a private Door, which carried us into
the Street, I there found a Man waiting for
me, whom I knew to be the same that had
attended me during my Stay in that House.
               
                  Urinoe having recommended to him to see
me safe out of the Town, I took Leave of
her, with the most grateful Acknowlegements
for her Kindness; and followed my Conductor,
so oppressed with Grief at the Thoughts of
leaving the Place where Sydimiris was, that I
had hardly Strength to walk.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  An extraordinary Instance of Generosity in
a Lover, somewhat resembling that of the
great Artaxerxes, in Cassandra.
               
               THE farther I went, continued Sir George,
the more my Regret increased; and,
finding it would be impossible to live, and quit

the Divine Sydimiris, I all at once took a Re-solution
to remain in the Town concealed; and,
communicating my Design to my Guide, I en-gaged
him to assist me in it, by a Present of a
considerable Sum, which he could not resist:
Accordingly he left me in a remote Part of the
Town, and went to find out a convenient Lodg-ing
for me; which he soon procured, and also
a Suit of Cloaths to disguise me, my own being
very rich and magnificent.
               Having recommended me as a Relation of
his, who was newly arrived, I was received
very civilly by the People with whom he placed
me; and, finding this young Man to be very
witty and discreet, and also very capable of
serving me, I communicated to him my In-tentions
by staying, which were only to be near
the Divine Sydimiris, and to have the Happiness
of sometimes seeing her, when she went
abroad.
               This Man entering into my Meaning, assured
me, he would faithfully keep my Secret; and
that he would not fail to bring me Intelligence
of all that passed in the Palace of Marcomire.
               
               I could with Difficulty keep myself from
falling at his Feet, to express my Sense of his
kind and generous Offers; but I contented
myself with presenting him another Sum of
Money, larger than the first, and assured him
of my future Gratitude.
               He then took Leave, and left me to my Re-flections,
which were wholly upon the Image
of the Divine Sydimiris, and the Happiness of
being so near the Object I adored.
               
                  

My Confident came to me the next Day;
but brought me no other News, than that my
Escape was not yet known to Marcomire. I
inquired if he had seen Sydimiris; but he re-plied
he had not, and that Urinoe had only
asked him, if he had conducted me safe out of
Town: To which he had answered as we had
agreed, that I had got out safe and undisco-vered.
               A Day or two after, he brought me News
more pleasing; for he told me, that Sydimiris
had sent for him into her Chamber, and asked
him several Questions concerning me: That
she appeared very melancholy, and even blush-ed,
whenever she mentioned my Name.
               This Account gave sufficient Matter for my
Thoughts to work upon for several Days. I
interpreted Sydimiris's Blush a Thousand differ-ent
Ways; I reflected upon all the different
Causes to which it might be owing, and busied
myself with all those innumerable Conjectures,
which, as you know, Madam, such an Incident
always gives Rise to in a Lover's Imagination.
At length I explained it to my own Advantage,
and felt thereby a considerable Increase of my
Affection.
               A whole Week having elapsed, without
another Sight of my Confidant, I began to be
greatly alarmed; when, on the Eighth Day of
this cruel Suspense, I saw him appear; but with
so many Marks of Disturbance in his Face,
that I trembled to hear what he had to acquaint
me with.
               Oh! Sir, said he, as soon as his Concern
suffered him to speak, Marcomire has discovered

your Escape, and the Means by which it was pro-cured:
One of those in whom Urinoe confided,
has betrayed it to him; and the beauteous Sy-dimiris
is likely to feel the most terrible Effects
of his Displeasure: He has confined her to her
Chamber, and vows to sacrifice her Life to the
Honour of his Family; which he says, she
has stained; and he loads that admirable Lady
with so many Reproaches, that it is thought,
her Grief for such undeserved Calumnies will
occasion her Death.
               Scarce had he finished these cruel Words,
when I, who all the time he had been speaking,
beheld him with a dying Eye, sunk down at
his Feet in a Swoon; which continued so long,
that he began to think me quite dead: How-ever
I at last opened my Eyes; but it was only
to pour forth a River of Tears, and to utter
Complaints, which might have moved the most
obdurate Heart.
               After having a long time tormented myself
in weeping and complaining, I at last took a
Resolution, which afforded me some Alleviation
of my Grief; and the faithful Toxares, seeing
me a little composed, left me to myself, with
a Promise to return soon, and acquaint me with
what passed further in the Palace of Marcomire.
               
               As soon as he was gone, I rose from my Bed;
and, dressing myself in those Cloaths I wore
when I was taken Prisoner, I went to the Pa-lace
of Marcomire; and, demanding to see him,
I was told he was in the Apartment of Sydimi-ris;
and, at my earnest Desire, they conducted
me thither.
               
                  

The Mischief I have done, replied Arabella,
blushing, and casting down her Eyes, was not
voluntary, I assure you: Yet I will not scruple
to repair it, if I can; tho', since my Power is
confined by certain unavoidable Laws, my En-deavours
may not haply have all the Success I
could wish.
               Well, but, dear Cousin, interrupted Miss
Glanville, tell me in plain English, what this
Mischief is, which you have done; and to what
Purpose you are going out this Morning?
               I am going to pay a Visit to Sir George Bell-mour,
replied Arabella; and I intreat you, fair
Cousin, to pardon me for robbing you of so
accomplished a Lover. I really always thought
he was in Love with you, till I was undeceiv-ed
by some Words he spoke Yesterday; and
a Letter I received from him last Night, in
which he has been bold enough to declare his
Passion to me, and, through the Apprehension
of my Anger, is this Moment dying with
Grief; and 'tis to reconcile him to Life, that
I have prevailed upon myself to make him a
Visit; in which charitable Design, as I said
before, I should be glad of your Company.
               Miss Glanville, who believed not a Word
Lady Bella had said, burst out a laughing, at a
Speech, that appeared to her so extremely false
and ridiculous.
               I see, said Arabella, you are of a Humour
to divert yourself with the Miseries of a de-spairing
Lover; and in this Particular, you
greatly resemble the fair and witty Doralisa,
who always jested at such Maladies as are oc-casioned
by Love: However, this Insensibility

When I entered the Room, I beheld that
incomparable Beauty stretched upon a Couch,
dissolved in Tears; and Urinoe upon her Knees,
before her, accompanying with her own, those
precious Drops which fell from the bright Eyes
of her Mistress.
               
                  Marcomire, who was walking furiously about
the Room, exclaiming with the utmost Vio-lence
against that fair Sufferer, did not observe
my Entrance; so that I had an Opportunity of
going towards Sydimiris, who, lifting up her
Eyes to look upon me, gave a loud Shriek;
and, by a Look of extreme Anguish, let me
understand, how great her Apprehensions were
upon my Account.
               I am come, Madam, said I, to perform
Part of the Promise I made you, and by dying,
to prove your Innocence; and, freeing you from
the Reproaches you suffer on my Account, I
shall have the Happiness to convince you, that
my Life is infinitely less dear to me, than your
Tranquillity. Sydimiris, who hearkened to
me with great Emotion, was going to make
some Answer, when Marcomire, alarmed by
his Sister's Shriek, came towards us, and, view-ing
me at first with Astonishment, and then
with a Smile of Cruelty and Revenge,
               Is it possible, said he, that I behold my de-signed
Murderer again in my Power?
               I am in thy Power, said I, because I am
willing to be so; and came voluntarily to put
myself into your Hands, to free that excellent
Lady from the Imputation you have laid on her:
Know, Marcomire, that it is to myself alone
I owed my Liberty, which I would still pre-serve

against all the Forces thou couldst bring to
deprive me of it; and this Sword, which left
thee Life enough to threaten mine, would haply
once more put yours in Danger, were I not re-strained
by a powerful Consideration, which
leaves me not the Liberty of even wishing you
ill.
               Ah! Dissembler, said Marcomire, in a Rage,
think not to impose upon me by thy counter-feited
Mildness: Thou art my Prisoner once
more, and I shall take care to prevent your
escaping a Second time.
               I am not your Prisoner, replied I, while I
possess this Sword, which has already defended
me against greater Numbers than you have here
to oppose me; but, continued I, throwing down
my Sword at Sydimiris's Feet, I resign my Li-berty
to restore that Lady to your good Opi-nion,
and to free her from those base Aspersions
thou hast unjustly loaded her with, upon my
Account.
               It matters not, said the brutal Brother, taking
up my Sword, whether thou hast resigned, or
I have deprived thee of Liberty; but since thou
art in my Power, thou shall feel all the Effects
of my Resentment: Take him away, pursued
he to some of his People; put him into the worst
Dungeon you can find; and let him be guarded
carefully, upon Pain of Death, if he again
escapes.
               With these Words, several Men offered to
lead me out of the Room; but I repulsed them
with Disdain; and, making a low Reverence to
Sydimiris, whose Countenance expressed the
Extremes of Fear and Anguish, I followed my

Conductors to the Prison allotted for me; which,
hideous as it was, I contemplated with a secret
Pleasure, since I had by that Action, which
had brought me into it, given a Testimony of
my Love for the adorable Sydimiris.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In which it will be seen, that the Lady is
as generous as her Lover.
               
               I Passed some Days in this Confinement, mel-ancholy
enough: My Ignorance of the
Destiny of Sydimiris gave me more Pain than
the Sense of my own Misfortunes; and one
Evening, when I was more then usually dis-quieted,
one of my Guard entered my Prison,
and, giving me a Letter, retired, without speak-ing
a Word: I opened this Letter with Preci-pitation,
and, by the Light of a Lamp which
was allowed me, I read the following Words.
               
                  
                     
                        Sydimiris, To the most generous Bellmour.
                     
                     IT is not enough to tell you, that the Method
you took to free me from my Brother's Se-verity,
has filled me with the utmost Esteem
and Admiration. So generous an Action merits
a greater Acknowlegement, and I will make no
Scruple to confess, that my Heart is most sen-sibly
touched by it: Yes, Bellmour, I have re-ceived
this glorious Testimony of your Affec-tion
with such a Gratitude, as you yourself
could have wished to inspire me with; and it

shall not be long, before you will have a con-vincing
Proof of the Effect it has had upon the
Spirit of
                     
                        Sydimiris.
                     
                  
               
               This Letter, Madam, pursued Sir George,
being wholly calculated to make me hope
that I was not hated by the Divine Sydimiris;
and that she meditated something in my Favour;
I resigned myself up to the most delightful Ex-pectations.
               What! cried I, transported with the Ex-cess
of my Joy: Does the most admirable Sy-dimiris
condescend to assure me, that I have
touched her Heart? And does she promise
me, that I shall receive some convincing Proof
of her Acknowlegement?
               Ah! too happy, and too fortunate Bellmour, to
what a glorious Destiny hast thou been re-served!
And how oughtest thou to adore these
Fetters, that have procured thee the Esteem
of the Divine Sydimiris!—
               Such, Madam, were the Apprehensions,
which the Billet I had received inspired me
with. I continually flattered myself with the
most pleasing Hopes; and during Three Weeks
longer, in which I heard no more from Sydi-miris,
my Imagination, was wholly filled with
those sweet Thoughts, which her Letter had
made me entertain.
               At length, on the Evening of a Day which
I had wholly spent in reading over Sydimiris's
Letter; and interpreting the Sense of it a thou-sand
different Ways, but all agreeable to my
ardent Wishes; I saw the sage Urinoe enter my

Prison, accompanied by Toxares, whom I had
not seen during my last Confinement. Wholly
transported at the Sight of these Two Friends,
and not doubting but they had brought me the
most agreeable News, I ran towards them; and,
throwing my self at Urinoe's Feet, I begged her,
in an Ecstacy of Joy, to acquaint me with Sy-dimiris's
Commands.
               
                  Urinoe, in some Confusion at this Action,
intreated me to rise. 'Tis fit, cried I, in a
Transport I could not master, that in this
Posture I should receive the Knowlege of that
Felicity Sydimiris has had the Goodness to
promise me. Urinoe sighed at these Words;
and, beholding me with a Look of Compassion
and Tenderness,
               Would to God, said she, that all I have to
say, were as agreeable, as the first News I have
to tell you; which is, that you are free, and at
Liberty to leave the Town this Moment! Sy-dimiris,
continued she, has bought your Free-dom,
at the Expence of her own; and, to de-liver
you from her Brother's Chains, she has
put on others, haply more cruel than those
you have worn: In fine, she has married a Man,
whom she detested, to procure your Liberty;
her Brother having granted it to her upon that
Condition alone.
               Scarce had Urinoe finished these Words, when
I fell, without Sense or Motion, at her Feet.
Toxares and she, who had foreseen what might
happen, having provided themselves with Cor-dials
necessary to restore me, brought me to
myself with infinite Trouble.
               
                  

Cruel! said I to them, with a Tone and
Look, which witnessed the Excess of my
Despair, Why have you hindered me from
dying, at once to prevent the thousand Deaths
I shall suffer from my Grief? Is this the Con-firmation
of those glorious Hopes Sydimiris had
permitted me to entertain? Is this that Proof
of the Acknowlegements I was to expect? And
is it by throwing herself into the Arms of my
Rival, that she repays those Obligations she
thinks she owes me?
               Ah! inhuman Sydimiris! was it to make
my Despair more poignant, that thou flatterest
me with such a Prospect of Happiness? And
was it necessary, to the Grandeur of thy Nup-tials,
that my Life should be the Sacrifice?
               But, how unjust am I, cried I, repenting in
an Instant of those injurious Suspicions; How
unjust am I, to accuse the Divine Sydimiris of
Inhumanity? Was it not to give me Freedom,
that she bestowed herself upon a Man she
hates? And has she not made herself miserable
for ever, to procure me a fansied Happiness?
               Ah! if it be so, what a Wretch am I? I,
who have been the only Cause of that Misery,
to which she has doomed herself? Ah! Liberty!
pursued I, how I detest thee, since purchased
by the Misfortune of Sydimiris! And how far
more sweet and glorious were those Chains,
which I wore for her sake!
               My Sighs and Tears leaving me no longer
the Power of Speech, I sunk down on my Bed,
oppress'd with a mortal Grief.
               
                  Urinoe and Toxares drew near to comfort me,

and said all that sensible and discreet Persons
could think of to alleviate my Despair.
               Though I have heard that Sydimiris is mar-ried,
replied I, without dying immediately;
yet do not imagine, that I will suffer this odious
Life to continue long. If Sorrow do not quickly
dispatch me, I will seek Death by other Means;
for since Sydimiris is lost, I have no more Busi-ness
in the World.
               The charitable Urinoe and Toxares endea-voured
in vain to divert me from this sad Re-solution,
when Urinoe, finding all their Reason-ings
ineffectual, drew a Letter out of her Pocket,
and, presenting it to me, I had Orders, said
she, not to let this Letter be delivered to you,
till you had left the Town; but the Despair,
to which I see you reduced, does, I conceive,
dispense with my rigorous Observation of those
Directions.
               While Urinoe was speaking, I opened this
Letter trembling, and found it as follows.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Containing an Incident full as probable as
any in Scudery's Romances.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Sydimiris, To Bellmour.
                     
                     IF that Proof of my Gratitude, which I pro-mised
to give you, fall short of your Ex-pectations;
blame not the Defect of my Will,
but the Rigour of my Destiny: It was by this

only Way I could give you Liberty; nor is it
too dearly bought by the Loss of all my Hap-piness,
if you receive it as you ought: Had I
been allowed to follow my own Inclinations,
there is no Man in the World I would have
preferred to yourself. I owe this Confession to
the Remembrance of your Affection, of which
you gave me so generous an Instance; and the
Use I expect you will make of it, is, to console
you under a Misfortune, which is common to
us both; though I haply have most Reason to
complain, since I could not be just to you,
without being cruel at the same time, or con-fer
a Benefit, without loading you with a Mis-fortune.
If the Sacrifice I have made of myself
for your sake, gives me any Claim to the Con-tinuance
of your Love, I command you, by
the Power it gives me over you, to live, and
not add to the Miseries of my Condition, the
Grief of being the Cause of your Death. Re-member,
I will look upon your Disobedience,
as an Act of the most cruel Ingratitude; and
your Compliance with this Request shall ever
be esteemed, as the dearest Mark you can give
of that Passion you have borne to the unfor-tunate
                     
                        Sydimiris.
                     
                  
               
               Ah! Sydimiris, cried I, having read this
Letter, more cruel in your Kindness than Se-verity!
After having deprived me of yourself,
do you forbid me to die; and expose me by so
rigorous a Command to Ills infinitely more
hard and painful than Death?
               Yes, pursued I, after a little Pause; yes, Sy-dimiris,
                  

thou shalt be obeyed; we will not dye,
since thou hast commanded us to live; and,
notwithstanding the Tortures to which thou
condemnest us, we will obey this Command;
and give thee a glorious Proof of our present
Submission, by enduring that Life, which the
Loss of thee has rendered truly wretched.
               
                  Urinoe and Toxares, somewhat reassured, by
the Resolution I had taken, exhorted me by all
the Persuasions, Friendship could put in their
Mouths, to persevere in it; and, Urinoe bid-ding
me Farewel, I endeavoured to prevail upon
her to procure me a Sight of Sydimiris once
more, or at least to bear a Letter from me to
her; but she refused both these Requests so
obstinately, telling me, Sydimiris would neither
consent to the one nor the other, that I was oblig-ed
to be contented with the Promise she made
me, to represent my Affliction in a true Light
to her Mistress; and to assure her, that nothing
but her absolute Commands could have hin-dered
me from dying. Then, taking leave of
me with much Tenderness, she went out of
tbe Prison, leaving Toxares with me, who as-sisted
me to dress, and conducted me out of
that miserable Place, where I had passed so many
sad, and also joyful Hours. At a Gate to which
he brought me, I found a Horse waiting; and,
having embraced this faithful Confidant, with
many Expressions of Gratitude, I bestowed a
Ring of some Value upon him to remember me
by; and, mounting my Horse, with a breaking
Heart, I took the first Road which presented
itself to my Eyes, and galloped away, without
knowing whither I went. I rode the whole

Night, so totally engrossed by my Despair, that
I did not perceive my Horse was so tired, it
could hardly carry me a Step farther: At last
the poor Beast fell down under me, so that I
was obliged to dismount; and, looking about
me, perceived I was in a Forest, without see-ing
the least Appearance of any Habitation.
               The Wilderness, and Solitude of the Place,
flattered my Despair, and while my Horse was
feeding upon what Grass he could find, I wan-dered
about: The Morning just breaking, gave
me Light enough to direct my Steps. Chance
at last conducted me to a Cave, which seemed
to have been the Residence of some Hermit, or
unfortunate Lover like myself. It was dug at
the Side of a Rock, the Entrance to it thick
set with Bushes, which hid it from View. I
descended by a few Steps cut rudely enough,
and was convinced, it had formerly served for
a Habitation for some religious or melan-choly
Person; for there were Seats of Turf
raised on each Side of it, a kind of Bed com-posed
of dried Leaves and Rushes, and a Hole
made artificially at the Top, to admit the Light.
               While I considered this Place attentively,
I all at once took up a Resolution, inspired by
my Despair; which was, to continue there,
and indulge my Melancholy in a Retirement
so fitted for my Purpose.
               Giving my Horse therefore Liberty to go
where he pleased, and hanging up my Arms
upon a Tree near my Cave, I took Possession
of this solitary Mansion, with a gloomy Kind
of Satisfaction, and devoted all my Hours to
the Contemplation of my Misfortunes.
               
                  

            HENRIETTA.
            By the AUTHOR of THE FEMALE QUIXOTE.
            IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.
            LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. MDCCLVIII.
         
         
            

            HENRIETTA. BOOK THE FIRST.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Which introduces our Heroine to the Acquaintance of the Reader in no very advantageous Situation.
               
               ABOUT the middle of July, 17, when the Windsor stage-coach with the accustomed number of passengers was proceeding on its way to London, a young woman genteely dressed, with a small parcel tied up in her handkerchief, hastily bolted from the shelter of a large tree near the road; and, call-ing to the coachman to stop for a moment, asked him, if he could let her have a place? The man, although he well knew his vehicle was already sufficiently crouded, yet being de-sirous of appropriating this supernumerary fare to himself, replied, that he did not doubt but he could find room for her; and, jumping off his box, begged the company to sit close, and give the young woman a place.
               
                  

and indeed, when unseasonably exerted, it is contemptible; but it was plain that lady Man-ning did not think meanly of the fortuitous ad-vantage of being well-born, because she envied those who possessed that advantage; and tho' the daughter of a soap-boiler herself, she was extremely fond of being thought to have an-cestors; and it was to gratify her pride, that her husband, who was a rich citizen, by trade a brewer, got himself knighted, that, toge-ther with a very large jointure, he might leave his wife the title of lady.
               
               "Surely," interrupted miss Woodby,
this woman had no good intentions when she in-vited you to her house; it is impossible that such low creatures can have any notion of friendship or generosity.
               
               "You have guessed truly," replied miss Cour-teney;
it was to gratify her pride, to have the daughter of a gentleman subjected to her ca-price, and dependent on her bounty, that made her so solicitous of having me with her; but although I did not make these reflections im-mediately, yet I was so disgusted by this first conversation, that I could not promise myself any great happiness in such society.
               
               
                  Her daughter was now introduced to me, a tall aukward thing about seventeen: she was

an heiress; and being taught to believe that riches give birth, beauty, wit, and every de-sirable quality, she held every one in contempt who was not possessed of this advantage, and because she had it herself, she supposed she had all the others.
               
               
                  Whatever documents were given her, they were always introduced with—Consider, miss, what a fortune you are— a young lady of your fortune.— How was it possible for a girl thus tutored, not to derive insolence from the con-sideration of her fortune?
               
               
                  The governess, who had the care of this young lady, was not very likely to enlarge her notions— Her only recommendation for such a trust was, that she could jabber corrupted French without either sense or grammar, and miss was taught to parler françoise in a broad provincial dialect; for this governess had never seen Paris, and perhaps had never been out of the little village where she was born and bred, and conversed only with peasants, till she came to England to teach language and fine breed-ing to a great heiress. It was very natural for lady Manning to make such a choice, who doubtless thought it a great distinction to have a foreigner for governess to her daughter.
               
               
                  
"Nay, my dear," interrupted miss Woodby,
lady Manning in this particular does not differ from many persons of the first quality, who commit the education of their daughters to low vulgar creatures, merely because they are French; creatures that in Paris, or in any of the chief cities in the provinces, would not be thought qualified for a chamber-maid to a woman of any fashion, yet when driven into England on account of their religion, as they all pretend, though perhaps it is for want of bread in their own country, derive such dis-tinction from their flimsy sacks, their pow-dered hair, and their speaking French, that they are thought the fittest persons in the world to form the manners of young girls of quality. How absurd should we think it in a French woman of quality to entertain an aukward Yorkshire girl with a coarse clownish accent, as English governess to her daughter, to teach her the language, and cor-rect her pronunciation? and yet not one in twenty of the Mademoiselles in the houses of our nobility and our French boarding-schools, are better qualified for such an office.—But I beg pardon, my dear, for interrupting you so long: I long to hear what sort of a life you lived in this rich despicable family.
               
               
                  
"Truly," said miss Courteney,
it was not very agreeable, when lady Manning and I were alone, she used to entertain me with an ac-count of her forefathers; she reckoned up among them half a dozen sheriffs, three lord-mayors, and a long train of aldermen. She lamented the death of her husband most pathetically; for if he had lived two years longer, he would have been elected lord-mayor, and she would have lived in the Man-sion-house, and been queen of the city— Her own words.
               
               
                  When we were at table and the servants attending, she used to turn the discourse upon the misfortunes of my father, lament the sad condition to which my mother and I were re-duced by his death, express great anxiety about my brother, and enter into a minute discussion of our affairs.
               
               
                  When there was company present, she would take notice that I was melancholy, and tell me that I must not take misfortunes to heart, and then sigh as if she was extremely affected with them herself; by which she recommended me to her visiters as an object of compassion, and never failed by that means to produce some instance of neglect towards

me; so powerfully did that consideration ope-rate upon most minds.
               
               
                  She would sharply reprehend her daughter for any supposed want of civility to me, and pass over in silence any real one; telling her that if miss Courteney had not a fortune, yet she was a gentlewoman as well as herself, and that no body should be despised for being poor.
               
               
                  Such were the continued mortifications that I was obliged to endure from this generous benefactress: yet I ought not to call them mortifications, because they only excited my contempt; about that time I received a letter from my brother, in which he informed me that he was going to travel with a young English nobleman, whose governor had died suddenly at Leyden, and whom he was appointed to suc-ceed upon a very advantageous footing, on account of his birth, he desired me to draw upon him for what money I had occasion for.
               
               
                  I received these insults with the more in-difference, as I knew I could put an end to them when I pleased, by quitting lady Man-ning's house, which I could now do without any inconvenience to myself; and foreseeing that this indelicacy in her treatment of me, must necessarily end in something too coarse

for me to dissemble my resentment, I was willing to stay till she shewed herself in her true colours, which would be my justification whenever I quitted her.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Wherein family-pride awakens those natural affec-tions which family-pride had suppressed.
               
               
                  IT was not long before I had this opportu-nity. She desired me one day to walk with her in the garden, having something to com-municate to me greatly to my advantage; and, after a profound silence of about ten minutes, she looked archly at me, and asked me if I could guess what she had been doing for me? Indeed I cannot. Madam, replied I. Well then I will tell you, said she, nothing less, I assure you, than providing you a husband. Indeed! said I, laughing, and pray, madam, who is this intended husband? Come, come, said she gravely, before I tell you who he is, you must promise me to make no silly objec-tions; such as age, not being a fine gentleman, and the like. The person I have in my eye for you is a sober staid man, and blessed with means to support you handsomely, without

depending upon any body. That indeed is something, replied I; but who is this person, Madam? I have a good mind, said she, to tantalize you a little, by keeping you in sus-pence;—but in short the person I mean is honest Mr. Vellum.
               
               
                  Although I expected some very absurd and impertinent proposal, yet my imagination had never reached any thing so riciculous as this Mr. Vellum; for I had had his history from himself some time before. He had been taken by her father out of a parish-school, because he understood writing and accounts, to keep his books for him. Upon his young mistress's marriage, he was advanced to be a clerk in her husband's office; and here, having scraped up a little money, he made some successful ventures in trade, and had acquired about two thousand pounds. After Sir John's death, my lady made him her steward, with a sallary of fifty pounds a-year; and he was in this ho-nourable and lucrative post, when she proposed him as a husband for me.
               
               
                  My surprise was succeeded by a strong in-clination to laugh, which, indeed, I took no pains to suppress; and pray madam, said I, has this grave personage expressed any good liking to me?
               
               
                  

                  I hope you are not jesting, said she.—Why, did you expect me to be serious, replied I, upon such a proposal?
               
               
                  Such a proposal miss! repeated lady Man-ning colouring: if my daughter was in your circumstances, I should not be sorry such a proposal was made to her. Very likely madam, returned I, and it might be more proper than to Mr. Courteney's daughter, and the niece of the earl of —
               
               
                  This may look like vanity, my dear miss Woodby; but I confess I was excessively shocked at her levelling me with her daugh-ter, when riches were out of the question; for I was contented to allow her all the supe-riority she could derive from them. Lady Manning made me a smarter answer, and de-livered with more calmness than I expected from her.
               
               
                  If the earl of—, said she, behaved more like an uncle to you, miss, it would be oftener remembered that you are his niece; but, as it is, I do not know whether it may not be an advantage to you, to have it forgot; for there are very few gentlemen of small fortunes who would choose an indigent woman of quality for a wife.
               
               
                  

                  I hope however, madam, said I, that none but a gentleman will presume to offer himself to me; and I shall take care not to justify my uncle's neglect, by encouraging any improper address.—You are very much in the right, miss, said lady Manning, one unfortunate marriage in a family is enough.
               
               
                  'Tis well, madam, replied I, bursting into tears, you mean my father's, no doubt; but it was no otherwise unfortunate than that it had not the sanction of my grand-father's consent; my mother's excellencies justified his choice; and she might have had a fortune too, though not equal to what he might have expected, if it had not been trusted in the hands of a vil-lain, who broke to leave his own children fortunes, as many other villains have done.
               
               
                  This last hint threw lady Manning into some confusion; for it was suspected that her grand-father, who was a corn-factor, had done the like: and, whether it was that she was afraid of my speaking still plainer, or that she was really concerned for having given me such just reason to complain of her, she thought fit to beg my pardon for what was past, and assured me, that whatever I might think of her, she was unalterably my friend.
               
               
                  

                  In my first emotions of resentment, I had resolved to write to Mr. Bale, and acquaint him with the treatment I had met with, which I knew would bring him immediately to my relief: but I considered that my leaving lady Manning in disgust might have disagreeable consequences; for she would not fail to repre-sent every thing in such a manner as to make me appear in the wrong, and the world seldom espouses the part of the oppressed, because they who oppress have that on their side which is sure to exculpate them, and that is riches: besides, the summer was now almost past, and she talked of going soon to London, where I could take an opportunity of leaving her without any noise, and of putting myself immediately under my guardian's protection; but I was delivered from this disagreeable si-tuation sooner than I expected, and by means which I had then no reason to hope for.
               
               
                  Lady Manning was desirous of spending a few weeks at Bath before she returned to London. A lady happened to be there a that time, who, I afterwards learned, was my great aunt by my father's side, and had fol-lowed the example of every branch of his fa-mily, in taking no notice of him after his mar-riage.
               
               
                  
"What do you mean?" said a jolly fat woman, with a face as red as scarlet,
Have you not got your usual number of passengers? Do you think we will be stifled with heat to put money into your pocket?
                  There is room enough for such a slender young body as this,
said the coachman,
if you would but sit closer.
               
               "Sit closer!" repeated the dame, and, spread-ing her cloaths,
Don't you see we are crouded to death: how dare you pretend to impose another passenger upon us, when your coach is already full?
               
               "Well," said a tall lean woman, who sat next her,
This is the first time I ever tra-velled in a stage-coach, and truly I am sick of it already. There is no bearing the in-sults one is exposed to in these carriages. Prithee, young woman,
pursued she, with an air of great contempt,
Go about your bu-siness, you see there is no room for you— And do you, fellow, get on your box, and drive on.
               
               "Fellow me! no fellows," said the coach-man, in a surly tone,
I won't drive till I please. Who are you, pray, that takes so much upon you to order me?
               
               
                  

                  This lady, lady Manning became ac-quainted with; and not knowing the relation in which she stood to me, she began one day to exclaim against the pride and folly of people in low circumstances, who expect to be con-sidered on account of their birth, producing me as an instance, and relating how I had re-fused an honest man whom she had proposed to me for a husband, because he was not a gentleman, repeating my own words with a sneer; and therefore—Not a proper match for Mr. Courteney's daughter.
                  
               
               
                  This being the first time she had named me, lady Meadows (for it was her) cried out in some astonishment, what, madam, is that pretty young lady (so she was pleased to say) that I saw with you once in the rooms, Mr. Courteney's daughter?
               
               
                  Lady Manning answering in the affirmative —good heaven! said lady Meadows, and have I lived to hear one of my family spoken of with such contempt?
               
               "One of your family, madam! interrupted "lady Manning, surprised.
               
                  Yes, said lady Meadows, one of my family, who has done you too much honour to accept of an obligation from you; how could you presume to propose your scound
                        •
                     el steward for

husband to my cousin? but I will take her out of your hands immediately; you shall be paid for her board; my nephew's daughter shall not lie under an obligation to any upstart 
                        •
                     it.
               
               
                  It is not to be doubted that lady Manning replied with great bittterness; but lady Mea-dows, from whom I afterwards had these par-ticulars, was in too much emotion to listen to her. She immediately quittted the wa
                        •
                     , for they were on the Parade; and getting 
                        
                      her chariot, told lady Manning, that she was going to her lodgings to fetch me away.
               
               
                  Thus, my dear miss Woodby, did I recover a relation, a friend, a benefactress, in a wo-man, who for many years, had had no inter-course with my father, and disclaimed him, as the rest of his relations had done, on account of his marriage: she whose resentment could not be softened by time; whose compassion could not be awakened by distress; she who had silenced the pleadings of nature, yet lis-tened to the voice of pride; and from a sense of the affront that had been offered her family, in the husband proposed to me, she did all that a better motive could have suggested her to do.
               
               
                  You may imagine I was greatly surprised, when a servant informed me, that lady Mea-dows

was at the door in her chariot, and de-sired I would come to her. I had often heard my father mention this aunt of his, from whom, before his marriage, he had great ex-pectations. I went down stairs in much con-fusion of mind, not knowing what this sum-mons could mean, yet presaging some good; and as soon as I appeared, lady Meadows let down the glass, and desired me to come into the chariot. Her footman instantly opening the door, I got in, and placed myself by her, expecting when she would speak, and anx-iously longing for an explanation.
               
               
                  Lady Meadows gazed at me in silence, du-ring some moments; then taking my hand, My dear, said she in a tender accent, you are very like your father. Poor Ned! added she with some emotion, he was not kindly used. —The tears streamed from my eyes at this mention of my father. I observed lady Mea-dows was greatly affected. Oh nature! thought I, why were thy tender feelings suppressed so long? Don't weep my dear, said she, I will be both father and mother to you.
               
               
                  Had I been in another place, I should have thrown myself at her feet, to express my grati-tude for this affectionate promise. I could not speak at that moment; I took her hand,

kissed it, and wet it with my tears. She kindly wiped my eyes with her own handkerchief; then looking again in my face, as if with plea-sure, you are like your mother too, I suppose, said she: I never saw her, but I have heard that she was very handsome.
               
               
                  This obliging manner of mentioning my mother, which I so little expected from her, quite subdued me. My dear, said she what is past cannot be helped; you are my daughter now; you shall be no longer obliged to lady Manning. — That wom
                        •
                     n, pursued she, rising in her temper as she spoke, has herself told me the insolence of her treat-ment of you; she then gave me an account of what had passed upon the Parade, as I have already related to you.
               
               
                  Lady Manning thought to have injured me in your opinion, said I, and she has made me happy, by awakening your tenderness for me: I now forgive her for all her insults.
               
               
                  But I never will forgive her, interrupted lady Meadows.—As soon as we come to my lodgings, you shall send for your cloaths, and never more enter her doors.
               
               
                  I was very unwilling to part with lady Man-ning in this manner, and pressed my aunt to allow me to go and take leave of her civilly;

but she positively refused, and I found she could not endure the least contradiction, which is indeed one of her foibles. I therefore contented myself with writing to her, and ac-quainted her with lady Meadows's resolution in my favour; I made the best apology I could for leaving her so suddenly, and ex-pressed some concern at the misunderstand-ing there was between lady Meadows and her, which made it impossible for me to wait on her.
               
               
                  Politeness, my dear, is sometimes a great tax upon sincerity. Lady Manning had cer-tainly treated me very ill, and in strict justice I was not obliged to shew any respect to a woman who had violated all the laws of hos-pitality with regard to me; but custom de-cides arbitrarily in these cases; and persons in a certain condition of life, make a science of hating one another with all the good breeding and complaisance imaginable.
               
               
                  Lady Manning, according to this rule, re-turned a civil answer to my letter, wished me all happiness, and wherever she went, let loose all the asperity of her tongue against me. One calumny propagated by her hurt me more than all the rest: she confidently reported that I had sacrificed my conscience to my interest;

and that upon my aunt's promising to settle her whole fortune upon me at her death, I had turned Roman catholick: for lady Mea-dows had been perverted to that religion by her husband, and, like all proselytes, was ex-tremely bigotted to her new principles.
               
               
                  I thought it became me to discountenance this report as much as possible; therefore I was more regular than ever in my attendance at church: and although my aunt, after we came to London, would often have engaged me to go to mass with her, intending no doubt to work me to her purpose by degrees; yet I constantly and steddily refused to gratify her in this particular, though in every other I studied to oblige her as much as possible. She would often engage me in argument upon the subject of religion, which I gene-rally strove to evade; and when I found that would not do, I defended myself with great courage, and with so much success, that she would tell me with an air, half smiling, ha
                        •
                      angry, that I was too hard for her, and that she would consign me over to her chap-lain.
               
               
                  This chaplain, whose name is Danvers, is a priest of the order of the Jesuits: he had been recommended to lady Meadows by her

late husband, whose memory she adored; and this powerful interest, joined to the jesuit's in-sinuating manners, acquired him so great credit with lady Meadows, that she governed herself wholly by his advice; and that the great work of her salvation might be per-fected, and her every word and action be under his direction, he lived in the house with her, where he ruled in a most arbitrary manner; his absolute empire over the con-science of my lady, rendering his dominion over all that had any dependence on her as uncontroled as he could desire.
               
               Here Henrietta stopped, observing her friend to look at her watch, which produced an ex-clamation that the reader will find in the fol-lowing chapter.
            
            
               

               CHAP. III.
               
                  Which introduces a jesuit to the acquaintance of the reader.
               
               "OH! my dear," cried miss Woodby,
I am in despair to find it is so late, I must leave you now; but I am so impatient to hear the rest of your story, that if you will give me leave, I will breakfast with you to-morrow, and as soon as my eager curiosity is satisfied, we will go together to Mrs. Egret's.
               
               She then desired a chair might be sent for;
and in the mean time, said she, we will step into the shop, I will make a little purchase on purpose to see your landlady, whom you seem to dislike so much.
               
               "Indeed I do not like her," replied Hen-rietta, "and yet she is mighty civil." "Well," said miss Woodby, tripping down stairs,
I'll give you my opinion of her when I have studied her a little.
               
               Miss Courtency was following her into the shop, when perceiving the young gentleman, who was there the day before, in discourse with Mrs. Eccles, she pulled miss Woodby by the

sleeve, whispering,
Don't go in now, there is somebody with her.
"Indeed, but I will," replied miss Woodby, who saw the glimpse of a laced coat, for which she had always a violent passion, "and so shall you likewise."
               Saying this, she pulled miss Courteney in, and, swimming up to Mrs. Eccles, bid her with a lively air show her some ribbons and blond 
                     •
                  laces.
               The young gentleman, as soon as the ladies appeared, made them a profound bow; and, fixing his eyes on Henrietta's face, seemed to contemplate it with astonishment and delight.
               Mean time miss Woodby was playing over a thousand fantastick airs, and uttering as many pretty absurdities, which she had heard admired coming from the mouths of beauties, without reflecting that she herself was no beauty—Mrs. Eccles perceived her foible immediately, and took occasion, when she was showing her some new-fashioned caps, to tell her, that such a one would suit the air of her face; that this coloured ribbon was most proper to shew the lustre of her eyes; observed that she had wonderful fine hair, and begged to know who cut it.
               Henrietta, a little in pain for her friend, to whom personal compliments were by no means proper, endeavoured to relieve the confusion

she supposed she was under, by diverting her at-tention to something else, and asked her opinion of some Dresden work that was lying before them. But miss Woodby had no leisure to an-swer her; for the gentleman, conceiving that it was easier to introduce some conversation to her than to miss Courteney, whose mingled mo-desty and dignity struck him with awe, addressed a trifling question to miss Woodby, which she answered with such an affected sprightliness, as encouraged him to talk to her with the famili-arity of an old acquaintance.
               Miss Woodby was excessively delighted with his address to her, and played off all the 
                     •
                  l-lery of eyes, air, and wit upon him,—
                     •
                  opy was it for the young gentleman, who courage-ously bore all her attacks, that this she was given from two little grey eyes, over which her forehead hung like a precipice; and that this form, which was thrown into a thousand dif-ferent attitudes to strike him, was so dist
                     •
                  ted by nature as to leave little more for affectation to do.
               The chair had been waiting half an hour without miss Woodby's perceiving it, when Henrietta, who was not at all pleased with the figure her friend made, told her, smiling,
that she would not let her stay any longer,

                  Who am I, you saucy Jack-a-napes, said the lady, a person that—but I shall not demean myself so much as to tell you who I am: it is my misfortune to be stuffed up in a stage-coach at present—what I have never been used to, I assure you.
               
               "Good lack-a-day!" said the fat gentle-woman, with a sneer,
A great misfortune truly— I would have you to know, madam, your betters ride in stage-coaches. Here's a coil indeed with such would-be gentry.
               
               "Good woman," said the other, with an affected calmness,
Pray don't direct your im-pertinent discourse to me, I have nothing to say to you.
               
               "No more a good woman than yourself," said the plump lady, with a face doubly inflamed with rage; "I scorn your words."
               "Very likely;" said a grave man, who sat on the opposite side,
but I wish it was possi-ble to make room for the young gentle-woman
— "Ah! God bless your honour,"
said the coachman, I thought you could not find in your heart to let such a pretty young woman as this walk.
               
               "Pretty!" exclaimed the haughty lady—
You are a fine judge of beauty indeed— but I will not submit to be crouded, fellow: so

for fear she should by that means be disap-pointed of her company at breakfast the next day.
               
               "I vow, my dear, you are in the right," cried miss Woodby,
to send me away; for my aunt is waiting supper for me— I am a giddy creature.
— She then desired Mrs. Ec-cles to put up the things she had bought; for, in the gaiety of her heart, she had bought a great many. Mrs. Eccles obeyed, telling her she hoped she should have the pleasure of serving so agreeable a lady again.
               The gentleman would hand her into her chair, which miss Woodby accepted with a very gal-lant air, after she had assured miss Courteney aloud, that she would be with her in the morn-ing, and told her in a whisper that her landlady was a very pretty behaved woman.
               Henrietta went up to her chamber directly, to the great disappointment of the young gen-tleman, who, finding there was no probability of seeing her again that night, went away dis-burthened of a heart which he had left with the charming stranger.
               She was now summoned to supper by Mrs. Eccles, who was full of praises of the young lady her visiter.
This has been a lucky day, to me, said she, for I have let my first floor,

at a very good price, considering the season of the year.
I am glad of it," said the young lady.
That is very obliging of you, my dear miss,
said Mrs. Eccles,
and you may still have the use of the dining-room when you have company; for my lord wil be seldom at home in the day, these lodgings are only to sleep in. But how do you like him? Is he not a mighty agreeable man? Dear soul! not a bit of pride in him—
               
               
                  Do you mean the gentleman I saw in the shop?
said miss Courteney. "Yes," re-turned Mrs. Eccles,
he is a lord, I assure you.
"Well," said miss Courteney,
I am glad you are not to lose one lodger with-out getting another, for I must leave you to-morrow.
"How!" replied Mrs. Eccles, with an altered countenance,
I hope you are only in jest.
                  Upon my word I am in earnest,
said miss Courteney.
I am sorry for it, madam,
resumed she,
but this is very short notice.
               
               Henrietta was a little surprised at the peevish-ness with which she spoke these last words, so dif-ferent from her usual complaisance: but she would not seem to take notice of it, and only told her, that it was not her design to stay more than a few days at this end of the town, having

affairs to transact in the city, which would oblige her for her own convenience to take lodgings there.
               Mrs. Eccles appeared satisfied with this an-swer, though a cloud hung upon her brow during the whole time they were at supper, which miss Courteney shortened as much as possible, and retired to her chamber, with new prejudices against her landlady, that made her rejoice in the prospect of getting away the next day.
               Miss Woodby came according to her promise to breakfast, in a world of spirits, and had scarce taken a seat, when she asked after the charming fellow who entertained her so agreeably in the shop.
               Henrietta told her, she saw no more of him;
for the moment you was gone, said she, I went up stairs; but really, my dear, I won-der you seemed so pleased with his conversa-tion, methought it was very silly and trifling.
               
               "Oh!" exclaimed miss Woodby,
there is an inexpressible charm in the trifling chat of a pretty sensible fellow, when we know he submits to it only to please us women.
               
               "Truly," said miss Courteney,
your sex is not obliged to you for that compliment. Must a man then talk nonsense to be acceptable to

us.
"Lord, how grave you are! my dear," said miss Woodby—
why don't you know that I am the veriest coquet in nature, and take an infinite pleasure in making a wise man look and talk like a fool.
               
               "A coquet, my dear!" interrupted Henrietta, surprised, "no, surely." "Indeed but I am," replied miss Woodby;
and I verily think! should not be in the least concerned to see a hundred men dying of love for me.
                  In-deed!
said miss Courteney.
Yes, in-deed,
repeated the other;
but why that stare of astonishment? are these notions 
                        •
                     o new to you?
"Why, no—" hesitated miss Courteney (whose astonishment arose from the contemplation of the figure which uttered all this extravagance)
I have somewhere met in my course of reading with such fantastical notions, but I cannot say that I ever thought I should hear them avowed by a young lady of your good sense.
                  Oh! your servant for that compliment,
returned miss Woodby, bow-ing;
but on the article of vanity we are all fools.—But come, my dear, make your tea, and then resume your story; for I die with impatience to hear it.
               
               "I wish you would excuse me," said Hen-rietta,
till I am got to Mrs. Egret's, for I shall

not be easy till I am out of this house.
"Why have you such a dislike to this house?" said miss Woodby,
I protest I think your landlady a mighty civil, obliging woman.
"Well, I don't like her," replied Henrietta,
she has let her first floor all on a sudden to the gentleman we saw in the shop.
                  And how does that affect you?
interrupted miss Woodby.
               Henrietta blushed at this question; she was not willing to own that she thought there was some design in his coming, and expected her friend would have made that inference herself; but finding she did not, she endeavoured to di-vert her attention from the hint she had dropped, by saying she had set her heart upon going to Mrs. Egret's, and had told Mrs. Eccles that she was to leave her to-day.
               "That was very imprudently done of you," said miss Woodby,
before you knew whether Mrs. Egret could accommodate you with lodgings; but own the truth now,
pursued 
                     •
                  e,
did you not put yourself into a flutter upon hearing the gentleman had taken lodg-ings here?
               
               
                  Why, I cannot help saying I was startled at it,
replied Henrietta,
and the more when I heard he was a man of quality; for

surely these lodgings are much too mean for a person of that rank.
               
               "Is he a man of quality?" exclaimed miss Woodby—
Oh! the dear creature—I pro-test I am quite in love with him now; I do at on a man of quality— And pray why should his coming fright you away.—Ah! my dear,
said she, smiling archly,
had I not reason for saying a moment ago, that on the article of vanity we are all fools? Now are you ready to imagine here is a plot between this young nobleman and Mrs. Eccles against your fair self. Poor lady,
pursued she, laughing,
this presumptuous knight will certainly carry you away.
               
               "You are in a gay humour to-day," said miss Courteney, blushing,
but raillery a-part, it imports me greatly not to be known: this lord, as Mrs. Eccles says he is, will no doubt have a great many persons coming after him; I may be seen and discovered, and, if you knew what I have to dread in that case, I am sure you would think it reasonable for me to be anxious to get out of this house.
               
               
                  You will be in more danger of a discovery at Mrs. Egret's,
said miss Woodby;
he
                        •
                      house is much larger than this, and she very seldom without people of fashion in it.

But I can keep in my chamber,
said Hen-rietta.
And what hinders you from doing so here,
said miss Woodby—
Ah! it is as I suspected; you are certainly apprehensive of being conveyed to some island in an immense lake.
               
               "But my dear miss Woodby," said Hen-rietta, laughing,
why, have you changed your mind about my going to Mrs. Egret's?
"I have not changed my mind," replied miss Woodby;
I am ready to do what I pro-mised, but it is my opinion that if Mrs. Egret cannot furnish you with a lodging, you will be very safe here, and I will be with you as 
                        
                      often as I can.
"Ah, my dear," said miss Courteney, mimicking the tone she had used to 
                     •
                  er;
but come write a line to Mrs. Egret to know if she has a single room to spare, and I shall be satisfied.
               
               Miss Woodby immediately complied with 
                     •
                  r request, and a porter was dispatched to St. 
                     •
                  mes's-street, who soon returned with a billet 
                     •
                  om Mrs. Egret to miss Woodby, expressing 
                     •
                  r concern that she could not accommodate her 
                     •
                  end.
               Well," said Henrietta, when she heard this, I find I must be contented to stay here a few days longer; but remember I claim your pro-mise

to be with me as often as you can." "That you may depend upon," said miss Woodby;
and now I claim your's to finish your history, I am impatient to hear how you came off with this doughty chaplain.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which our heroine engages herself in a w
                        •
                     y unequal contest.
               
               "I Must confess," said miss Cour
                     •
                  ency, re-suming her narrative,
that I had no in-clination to engage in a religious dispute with a man whose learning and abilities gave him so many advantages over me; therefore when-ever he gave the conversation that 
                        •
                     n. I ge-nerally took refuge in silence, not being will-ing to hurt a cause I had so much at heart, by defending it weakly.
               
               
                  However I was often drawn in to answer by some apparent absurdity advanced by him, which it seemed mighty easy to refute. On these occasions Mr. Danvers would listen to me with wonderful attention, observe the most minute exactness in his reply, as if what I had urged had indeed great force: nay,

he would sometimes seem a little prest by my arguments; pause for a few moments, as if he found it necessary to collect all his strength against so potent an adversary; and after a well-turned compliment on my understand-ing, he would resume the argument, in which he never failed to puzzle, though he could not convince me; but always concluded with a declaration that I was too hard for him, and it was well he had the best side of the argu-ment, for nothing but truth could stand a-gainst such subtilty of reasoning.
               
               
                  These praises always left me in a very good disposition to renew the subject whenever an opportunity offered. I began to be extremely fond of disputing with the chaplain; and, in-stead of shunning it, as I used to do, I even invited his opposition.
               
               
                  I have heard it observed that vanity cheats many a woman out of her honour, I am sure it was well nigh cheating me out of my reli-gion; for this jesuit by his insidious praises had given me such a confidence in my talent of reasoning, that I began to believe if he did not make a proselyte of me, I should cer-tainly make one of him; and, in my eager pursuit of victory, I sometimes engaged my-self

beyond my strength, and received such checks, that if my faith was not overthrown, yet it was strangely staggered: but some dis-gust which I took to the manners of the chap-lain preserved me from the poison of his doc-trine, and made me lose all my relish for arguing with him.
               
               
                  My aunt, who was certainly very desirous of my conversion, was much pleased with her chaplain's zeal to forward so great a work; and that she might give no inter-ruption to our discourse, she would often leave us alone for several hours together.
               
               
                  At such times, the jesuit would be very lavish of his compliments and praises; of which my person would even come in for a share— He would gaze on my face till he lost the chain of his discourse, and, by his inattention to what he was saying, gave me many advantages over him; and often, while he was pursuing his argument with great warmth, he would lay his hand on mine, hold it for several minutes together, and press it so violently, that I could hardly help cry-ing out.
               
               
                  All this, however, would not have startled me; but one day, taking occasion upon some-thing I had said to break into an exclamation

you and your pretty passenger may ride on the coach-box, if you please.
               
               "Nay, since you come to that," says the fat gentlewoman,
I am resolved you shall not have your own way— The young lady may be as good as you; and she shall not be obliged to ride on the coach-box— So open the door, coachman,
said she, shoving her antagonist at the same time with all her force—"Here is room enough."
               A young gentlewoman in a riding-habit, who sat on the same side, but next the window, de-clared that she was willing to give part of her seat to the stranger; and begged the haughty lady to yield. "Poh," said the rosy matron,
don't stand begging and praying her; since you are on my side, we will be too hard for her, I warrant you.
Saying this, she put one of her huge arms round the young woman's waist; and thus reinforced, shoved her neigh-bour so forcibly against the other window, that she cried out with pain and vexation.
               The young lady without, who had been the occasion of this contest, and who had hitherto stood silent, with her hat over her eyes, alarmed by the screams of her foe, raised her head; and in a tone of voice so sweet, as immediately fixed the attention of the whole company, in-treated

of surprise, at my prodigious understanding, he kissed my hand in a kind of rapture; and having once taken this liberty, he repeated it several times, to my great confusion and sur-prise.
               
               
                  These are suspicions, my dear, which, against persons of a certain character, one dare not even avow to one's self. I was shocked, yet would not venture to examine why; I could never endure to be alone with him, yet never asked myself the reason; my eyes, as it were, mechanically avoided his; his civilities were odious to me. If he enquired after my health, I answered him coldly, without know-ing I did so; and when he launched into any of his usual praises, I was downright rude to him, yet scarce perceived it myself.
               
               
                  I now so carefully shunned being alone with him, that notwithstanding he sought op-portunities of engaging me in private, which heightened my disgust, yet he never could find any. This conduct, if he had any guilt in his heart, must certainly give him cause to think I had detected it; and indeed I soon found, by my aunt's altered behaviour, that he was endeavouring to undermine me in her affection.
               
               
                  

                  The little peevishness I observed in her to-wards me, I imputed at first to her chagrin, at my having disappointed her wishes in not becoming a convert to that religion she pro-fessed; but I soon found that she had been made to conceive strange notions of me. She objected to the gaiety of my disposition; she did not like that crowd of lovers, as she phrased it, that followed me, and were en-couraged by my coquet airs, and the pleasure I shewed in being admired.
               
               
                  It is certain, that the report of the fortune my aunt designed for me, procured me ad-dresses from several men, whom as she did not approve, so neither did I encourage; having, in reality, none of that sort of vanity which is gratified by a great many pretenders of this kind, nor did I feel the least partiality to any one of them; so that I told her it would give me no uneasiness if she forbid their visits for the future, which, since I found they were disagreeable to her, I would have done myself, if I had thought it became me to take that li-berty in her house. This declaration would not satisfy my aunt: she had further views; I must marry, and she must choose a husband for me, without leaving me in an affair that so

nearly concerned my happiness, even a nega-tive voice.
               
               
                  I have no doubt but that the person she pitched upon was recommended to her by the chaplain; he was a Roman catholic baronet, had a good estate, was not much above sixty years of age, his person just not horrible, and he was not quite a fool. This was the man whom my aunt proposed to me, or rather commanded me to accept; for he had mo-desty enough not to try to engage my affec-tions, till he had secured her consent, and was admitted in form to make his addresses to me.
               
               
                  My aunt indeed allowed that there was some disproportion in our years; but then he had a good estate, and I was wholly dependent upon her; his person, she acknowledged, was not very amiable, but he was a baronet, and could give me a title; to be sure, she said, he was not a man of bright parts, but he would make a good settlement on me; and concluded with assuring me, that my chearful consent would greatly endear me to her, which I should find by the disposition she would make in her will.
               
               
                  My aunt, having thus anticipated every objection I could make, and, in her opinion,

fully answered them all, I thought it would be to no purpose to dispute with her on points already decided; I therefore contented my-self with declaring, that I could not like Sir Isaac Darby (for that was his name); that I should be miserable, if I married him; that I was extremely happy in my present situation, and had no wish to change it.
               
               
                  Lady Meadows, I perceived, was a little offended at this so positive a declaration; but, I had nothing for it but steadiness. I expected, said she, more compliance from that sweet-ness I have been fond of supposing in your temper, and from your good sense, a greater attention to your own interest. I assured her, that it was and ever should be my sincerest endeavour to avoid offending her; that I would admit no offer but such as she should approve; and that I would guard my heart against any preference which was not au-thorised by her; more than this I told her was not in my power to promise, for no considera-tion of interest could prevail upon me to give my hand to a man, whom it was impossible for me either to love or esteem.
               
               
                  Finding she listened to me patiently, I urged every argument my imagination could furnish me with, to prove to her that such an engage-ment,

entered into upon pecuniary motives only, could not be happy, and might be very miserable. I begged she would not think of disposing of me in marriage, till I seemed less satisfied with my present happy lot; and that, by giving me no superior duties in domestic life to fulfil, she might entitle herself to all my undivided cares, affection, and assiduity.
               
               
                  My aunt seemed affected with what I said: she told me she had no intention of forcing my inclination; that, loving me so well as she did, it was natural for her to wish to see me settled; that Sir Isaac Darby was a very ad-vantageous offer; she recommended to me to consider well what I refused, and to conquer my unreasonable dislike of him, if possible.
               
               
                  If it were possible, madam, replied I, your command would make me attempt it, but— No more buts now, Henrietta, interrupted my aunt—Sir Isaac dines here to-day; re-member I expect you will treat him civilly at least, since he has so great a regard for you.
               
               
                  I smiled, courtesied, and went out of the where this long conversation had been hold; for I heard the chaplain's step in my aunt's dressing-room; and this being the hour when he generally joined us, I chose to avoid seeing him then, for fear he should prevail upon her

to exact something more than civility from me to the odious wretch, who had thus bartered for me without my consent.
               
               
                  I did not appear in the dining-room till dinner was ready to be served; my antiquated lover approached with a janty air, and a sliding bow; and O! don't you pity me, my dear, kissed my hand, as he led me to my seat. Nothing but the respect I owed my aunt could have hindered me from laughing, at this ridiculous display of gallantry in the old man; for age has no claim to our reverence, if not accompanied by those qualities from whence it derives its worth. Wisdom, gra-vity, experience, the triumph of reason over passions, prejudice, and folly: all these we expect to find in fulness of years, and these make its wrinkles not only respectable but even lovely.
               
               
                  In Sir Isaac Darby, age was contemptible as well as unlovely; he wanted to be young, in spite of time; he talked and laughed aloud; he strutted about the room; he adjusted his bag, for he was drest up to five and twenty; he hummed a tune: I sat staring with astonish-ment at him. When we were placed at table, I found myself opposite to him; and observing that he chewed his meat with great difficulty,

for want of teeth, I was resolved to mortify him, by letting him perceive that I observed it, looking at him several times with a kind of sensibility for this so unavoidable a misfortune.
               
               
                  From what had passed between my aunt and I in the morning, I had no reason to ima-gine that Sir Isaac would be treated as a de-clared and authorised lover; but some time after dinner was over, Mr. Danvers withdrew, and my aunt, upon some trifling pretence, following him, I was left alone with the old baronet. I would instantly have quitted the room; but, remembring that my aunt had re-quired civility of me at least, I resolved not to affront him, by leaving him to himself; and since I was obliged to stay, I would draw some amusement from the ridiculous scene be-fore me.
               
               
                  I know not whether it was from any particu-lar archness in my looks just then (for I had composed my countenance to a kind of forced gravity) or whether the old man was at a loss in what manner he should form his address; but it is certain, that all his confidence seemed now, for the first time, to forsake him, and he sat silent during several minutes, stealing a glance at me every now and then; while I, with a formal air, played my fan, and in-creased

his confusion by my silence. At length he quitted his own chair for that which my aunt had sat in, and which was next me; and drawing it still nearer to me, he made a mo-tion to take my hand, which I withdrew as hastily as if a snake had touched it.
               
               
                  This action a little disconcerted him; but taking courage again, after a preluding hem, he began, Charming miss Courteney, I don't doubt but lady Meadows has informed you of the violence of my—Here an unlucky cough interrupted his speech, and held him so long, that he grew black in the face; his endeavours to suppress it having, as I believe, almost choaked him. I rose up in a seeming 
                        •
                     ight, as if I had designed to call for assistance; but finding his cough had ceased, I sat down again at a greater distance than before.
               
               
                  I fancy the town air does not agree with you, sir, said I, it is certainly very bad for asthmatical disorders.
               
               
                  Oh, madam! said he, this is no asthma. I got a slight cold the other night at Spring-Gardens; for we staid very late, and the ground was damp: but I came off better than any of my companions, two or three of whom are still laid up with colds. But tell me, dear miss Courteney, did you receive favourably

the declaration your aunt made in my name? may I hope, or am I doomed to despair? whined out the superannuated enamorato, with an hideous ogle, which he designed for a lan-guish.
               
               
                  Oh, good sir! replied I, excessively shocked at his folly, these Arcadian strains do not be-come your wisdom and gravity. My aunt did mention your proposals to me, but, I cannot accept them; I have no inclination to change my condition.
               
               
                  How admirably this pretty seriousness sits on those sweet features! said the wretch, looking confidently at me, without being in the least mortified with my rebuke. But my dear miss Courteney, you must change your mind—indeed you must—and your condition too, my fair one.
               
               "Perhaps I may, sir, said I.
               "Oh, that charming perhaps! said he, it re-stores "me to life.
               
                  Was there ever any thing so provoking, my dear? I protest I could hardly help abus-ing the ridiculous old man.
               
               
                  I really think, sir, said I, looking at him with infinite contempt, that my seriousness would become your age, as well as my youth; but, pursued I, rising, to put an end to all

your hopes, be pleased to know, that I am determined never to give my hand till I can give my heart with it; for I have no no-tion of being perjured at the altar, and of vowing to love, honour and obey, when it is impossible for me to do either.
               
               
                  I went out of the room when I had said these words, leaving the baronet to mumble the ends of his fingers with his gums; for he affected to bite his nails, as some per-sons who really have teeth, do, when they are angry.
               
               
                  I met my aunt as I was going to my own chamber: What, Henrietta! said she, have you left sir Isaac alone?— I suppose you have treated him rudely; but come, you must re-turn with me— I will, if you insist upon it, madam, said I, but I had much rather be excused— Indeed! said my aunt, looking a little angrily on me, and with that grave face too, but I shall not insist upon it, miss, and so you may go up to your own room if you please.
               
               
                  Although I was very glad to be at liberty to retire, yet my aunt's permission was given in such a manner that I saw she was offended with me for desiring it. I had experienced

them not to quarrel upon her account: it was indeed, she said, of great consequence to her to be admitted, but she would not con-tinue to desire it, since her request had pro-duced so much uneasiness among them.
               The passengers who occupied the other side of the coach were two men and a woman big with child; which circumstance had made it impossible for the men to offer her a seat with them, for fear of incommoding the pregnant woman. But the youngest of the men having now got a glimpse of the stranger's face, declared that the ladies might make themselves easy, for he would resign his seat; adding, that he was extremely glad he had an opportunity of obliging such a handsome lady. He then jumped out of the coach, and taking the stranger's hand to help her in, stared confidently under her hat, which put her into a little confusion: however she thanked him very politely, and accepted his offer; but not without expressing some con-cern for the manner in which he would dispose of himself.
               "Oh! madam," said the coachman,
the gentleman may sit upon the box with me, and he will have the pleasure of viewing the beau-tiful prospects all the way we go.
—
I shall see none so beautiful,
said the young fellow,

                     

the obstinacy of her temper on several occa-sions; and I was convinced that if she set her heart upon marrying me to the baronet, she would use her utmost endeavours to carry her point, and the loss of her favour might pro-bably be the consequence of her disappoint-ment.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Containing an account of some difficulties our he-roine was involved in, arising from an old ex-ploded notion, that interest ought not to be the sole consideration in marriage.
               
               
                  FULL of these melancholy reflections, I resolved to write to Mr. Bale, acquaint him with what had passed, and intreat his advice in the uneasy and perplexed state of my mind. Not that I had the least intention of being governed by it, if he recommended to me compliance with my aunt's commands in favour of the baronet; but this I was well assured, from his good sense and natural rec-titude of mind, he would not do, since it could never be supposed that such a man could be my choice; but I was willing to stand clear in his opinion, and pay him that deference,

that was due to the quality of guardian which he had so kindly assumed.
               
               
                  I had been writing near three hours, for I had given him a circumstantial detail of every thing that had passed with regard to the ba-ronet, whose character I treated with great contempt; but what was worse, my aunt herself did not escape some satirical strokes of my pen for her ready concurrence with the old man's proposals; and although I men-tioned her (as it was my duty) with all ima-ginable love and respect, yet I could not help humorously raillying upon some of her notions, which were really odd enough, and I placed them in the most glaring light.
               
               
                  The prodigious length of my letter first gave me notice that I had been a long time thus employed; and, looking at my watch, I found it was past our usual hour for tea, and wondered that I had not been summoned down stairs. I therefore made haste to con-clude my letter, that I might send it to the post, when my aunt unfortunately entered the room. I started up from my chair when I saw her; and, hastily crushing the letter all in my hand, I put it into my pocket, not without betraying some signs of confu-sion.
               
               
                  

                  So, Henrietta, said my aunt, have I caught you? Caught me! madam, said I, con-sidering whether she might not have been looking over my shoulder while I was writ-ing so saucily about her; for guilt like love makes every thing seem possible that we fear. Yes, said she, have you not been writing? Nay, don't deny it, pursued she (for I hesi-tated and knew not what to say, left she should desire to see my letter) it is no won-der that poor sir Isaac Darby was rejected with so much scorn, when there is a fa-voured lover with whom you correspond privately.
               
               
                  Bless me, madam, cried I, who has told you so? I correspond privately with a fa-voured lover!— This is some cruel calumny invented by an enemy to deprive me of your good opinion. Well, said my aunt, shew me the letter you conveyed so hastily into your pocket upon my appearance, and then I shall know what to think.
               
               
                  You never, madam, replied I, used to de-sire to see my letters; nor would you now, but in consequence of some suspicion very un-favourable to me. That suspicion, inter-rupted my aunt, whatever it is, will be greatly

strengthened by your refusing to shew me what you have been writing.
               
               
                  Surely, madam, replied I, that is not just, I may have been writing to Mr. Bale, or to my brother. To your brother, said my aunt, I am certain you was not writing, because you have not heard from him for se-veral months, and don't know how to direct to him (which indeed was but too true). It is possible that you were writing to Mr. Bale; but why refuse to shew me your letter? you can have no transactions with him that I ought not to be acquainted with: but I am persuaded that letter was not designed for Mr. Bale; and there needs no more to convince me that you are carrying on a private, and therefore an improper correspondence, than your thus obstinately refusing to shew it me.
               
               
                  My aunt had reason for what she said: nothing was more easy, if I was really inno-cent, than to shew her the letter, which would remove her suspicions; but this, as I had managed that fatal letter, it was impos-sible for me to do. By not shewing it, I confirmed those suspicions she had so unjustly conceived, which might indeed have disagree-able consequences; but by shewing it, I was

sure to incur her resentment for the liberties I had taken with her.
               
               
                  How did I that moment inwardly regret my vanity, which had suffered me to railly the faults of a person on whom I so abso-lutely depended, merely to display my wit. I was so vexed at the dilemma to which I had reduced myself, that I burst into tears.
               
               
                  Oh! I see how it is, said my aunt, keep your letter, Henrietta, I am convinced suf-ficiently. She hurried out of my chamber at these words. Shocked to the soul at having thus incurred the imputation of entertaining a secret lover, I went after her, resolving in that first emotion to shew her the letter, and rather be thought ungrateful to her, than guilty of an imprudence so disadvantageous to my character; but she was already at the bottom of the stairs, and I had time to make new reflections which prevented my former purpose.
               
               
                  I considered that since there was no foun-dation for her fears that I listened to a private address, I might easily find means to unde-ceive her, and justify myself; but if I shewed her a letter, in which she was mentioned with so great freedom, I might possibly never be able to remove those ill impressions of me

which she would doubtless receive, and I should be all my life branded for ingratitude.
               
               
                  I was so terrified at this thought, that I re-solved to put it out of my power to expo
                        •
                      myself to such a misfortune by destroying the fatal letter, which I did with a precipitation that left no time for second thoughts. When this was over, I expected to have found my-self more calm and easy, but it was quite otherwise. I had given foundation to be-lieve that I was engaged in a love-intrigue; for surely all clandestine addresses may be termed so, since there is too much mystery, contrivance, and little arts, necessary to them, not to give great pain to a delicate mind. I burst into tears at the reflection. My aunt's woman, who had a very tender regard for me, came into my chamber, and, finding me so disordered, begged to know what had happened.
               
               
                  I related every thing that had passed be-tween my aunt and I, but did not own to all the little freedoms I had taken with her in my letter; yet said enough to convince her, that I could not well show it to my aunt.
               
               
                  Mrs. White, for that was her name, was very much concerned for my situation: she told me, that her lady and Mr. Danvers were

in close conference. It is certainly he, said she, who has infused these suspicions into my lady, which, by this unfortunate circum-stance of the letter, are now confirmed: she gave me such plain hints of the chaplain's selfish dispositions and designs, that it seemed highly probable he would spare no artifices to lessen my aunt's affection for me; for, since he had failed in making me a convert, which perhaps might have answered other views, he was desirous of keeping my aunt entirely to himself, and so manage her conscience, which he had the direction of, as that holy mother-church and he might divide her spoils.
               
               
                  All this considered, my condition seemed so dangerous, that I begged Mrs. White to send a porter with a message from me to Mr. Bale, desiring to see him; for I resolved to regulate my conduct on this occasion wholly by his advice. She left me to do what I had desired her; and I remained alone in my chamber till nine o'clock, at which time I was summoned to supper.
               
               
                  I found only my aunt and Mr. Danvers: I was a little confused; for knowing what sus-picions I laboured under in my aunt's mind, I thought I had the air of a guilty person, and

I felt that I blushed, and blushed the more for that reason.
               
               
                  My aunt looked very coldly upon me; Mr. Danvers looked like one that was very much concerned that all was not well between us: my aunt scarce spoke three words during supper; it was not my part surely to talk much; and Mr. Danvers accommodated himself to the present temper of my aunt; so that this was a very gloomy meal.
               
               
                  When the cloth was removed, I was going to withdraw, for it seemed as if my presence was a restraint upon my aunt; but I consi-dered that such a step being unusual, would imply a consciousness of something wrong in me, and that being innocent, it was my part to seck an explanation. I therefore addressed myself to my aunt, and begged she would give me an opportunity of clearing myself, by test-ing me who had poisoned her mind with sus-picions to my prejudice.
               
               
                  The chaplain was about to leave the room upon my entering on this subject. There is no necessity, sir, said I, for your r
                        •
                     g I dare say the cause of my aunt's displeasure against me is no secret to you. My aunt has been told that I receive addresses from some man in private, and that I correspond with

him; I declare this to be absolutely false, and I beg to know from whom you had your infor-mation, madam, said I, again directing my-self to her, that I may refuse this calumny; I am very confident the person who has thus ma-liciously injured me, will not dare to maintain the falshood to my face.
               
               
                  Whether the chaplain thought this was meant for him, I know not; but although he had continued standing, as if he intended to leave us to ourselves, yet I had no sooner uttered these last words than he resumed his seat im-mediately, as if he would shew me he was not in the least affected by them; but I observed that he fixed his eyes upon my aunt, and ex-pected her answer with some emotion.
               
               
                  Before I comply with your condition, said my aunt, do you, Henrietta, agree to mine; let me see that letter you wrote to-day. I looked at the chaplain; I saw an alteration in his countenance, he was evidently more com-posed. Oh! thought I, sighing, how great would my triumph be, if I had this letter to show, and could show it without fear!
               
               
                  You hesitate, Henrietta, pursued my aunt, why, if that letter was not to a lover, why do you refuse to produce it? I declare, madam, said I, upon my word and honour, that the

letter was to Mr. Bale— Well, let me see it, said my aunt, and I shall be satisfied— I can-not show it to you, madam, replied I, in a faultering accent (for I dreaded the inference that would be drawn from what I was going to confess) I have torn it. Well, said my aunt, with a calmness that cost her some pains to maintain; and why did you fear it▪ it was not written to be torn, that is certain— But I will answer for you, niece, you tore it that I might not see it; and why might I not see it, if it was to Mr. Bale— Again I p
                        •
                     st, said I, that it was to him; but I did not chuse to let you see it, it was a long letter, full of impertinences: you would have thought I was very free in my observations on some particular persons, more free than became me perhaps—You might have been offended, and I tore it to prevent your seeing it.
               
               
                  My aunt looked down, paused, and seemed not wholly dissatisfied with my manner of ac-counting for the reluctance I shewed to deliver my letter to her; but before she would declare herself, it was necessary she should consult her oracle, and that could not be done before me. She therefore put an end to the conver-sation, by ringing the bell for her woman. I attended her to her chamber, at the door of
as what they who remain in the coach will behold.
               
               The fair stranger now blushed more than before, and being willing to avoid any farther speeches of this nature, she hastily got into the coach, thanked the young man a second time, who having seen her seated, placed himself by the coachman on the box, and they proceeded on their journey.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The commencement of a violent friendship between two young ladies, which has the usual consequences, a communication of secrets, by which the reader is let into part of Henrietta's story.
               
               A Profound silence now prevailed among the company in the coach; the eyes of all were fastened upon the fair stranger, who ap-peared wholly insensible of the scrutinizing looks of her fellow-travellers. Something within herself seemed to engross all her thoughts, and although by her eyes being constantly turned to-wards the windows of the coach, it might be imagined the passing objects drew her atten-tion, yet their fixed looks too plainly indicated that they were beheld without observation. Her

which she bade me good night, telling me, she would talk further with me in the morn-ing.
               
               
                  I endeavoured to make Mrs. White com-prehend, by a look I gave her unobserved, that I wished to speak to her; and according-ly she came to me, after my aunt was in bed, and delivered the answer the porter had brought from Mr. Bale's; he was out of town, but expected back in a week or two, was what the servants told him.
               
               
                  Mrs. White repeated her offers of service to me, but dropped some expressions that shewed she would be glad to be assured that I really had no secret engagement which might justify my aunt's concern.
               
               
                  These doubts hinted with great respect, were so far from being resented by me, that I conceived the better opinion of her discretion, and confided absolutely in her sincerity. I made her quite easy with regard to the subject of her fears; and she repaid this condescension with the kindest assurances of attachment to me and care of my interests.
               
               
                  I went to bed, full of hope that I had in part removed my aunt's suspicions, and re-lying on my innocence, I was persuaded I should soon restore myself to her good opinion;

but innocence is not always a security to its possessor, because malice attains its ends by arts, which a good mind cannot conceive, and there-fore is unable to guard against.
               
               
                  Mrs. White informed me in a whisper, as I was going into my aunt's dressing-room next morning, where we always breakfasted, that her lady and the chaplain had been talking together for half an hour. I drew no favour-able omen from this intelligence, nor from my aunt's looks, which were very cold and constrained.
               
               
                  When breakfast was over, and Mr. Dan-vers had withdrawn, I expected she would enter into some conversation with me on the subject of the letter; but finding she talked of different things, I took occasion to mention it myself, and begged to know if she had any doubts still remaining in her mind.
               
               
                  Surely, replied my aunt, you think I am a person that can be very easily imposed upon. Then you are resolved, madam, said I, with some peevishness (for indeed I was horridly vexed to find her so strongly prejudiced) to believe I encourage a clandestine address, notwithstanding every appearance to the con-trary.
               
               
                  

                  No indeed, interrupted my aunt, I am not so unreasonable, miss; it is because there are very strong appearances against you, that I am forced to believe what you would not have me—that letter, Henrietta—but no more on this subject at present, I am going to my house near Windsor-forest to-morrow; we shall there have leisure enough to talk over this affair, and there I shall open my mind freely to you. I courtisied and was silent.
               
               
                  My aunt took me with her to pay some morning visits, and seemed to be in very good humour; but her words, that she would open her mind freely to me at Windsor, gave me a great deal of anxiety. I did not doubt but I was to be prest again on the subject of sir Isaac Darby, and I was prepared for an obstinate resistance; but I was apprehensive that this resistance to my aunt's will, meet-ing with the unaccountable suspicions she had entertained, would infallibly ruin me with her. O my brother! thought I, why are you not here to countenance and protect me; or why have you so long neglected me, as to leave me in suspence whether I have a brother or not!
               
               
                  This thought, and several others no less painful, spread an air of pensiveness and me-lancholy

on my countenance, which my aunt, as I perceived, by some hints that dropped from her, interpreted to my disadvantage. In short, my dear, she imputed my pensive-ness to the concern I was under at leaving town, as I could not expect to have many op-portunities of seeing at Windsor this lover that had possession of my heart.
               
               
                  You cannot imagine, miss Woodby, how much I suffered in being obliged to restrain my indignation at being thus treated: to have a phantom of a lover conjured up to 
                        
                      me with, and to combat suspicions which had not the least foundation, but in prejudice and caprice, against which plain truth and reason were very unequal arms: for how should rea-son remove what would never have been ad-mitted, if reason had not been first 
                        
                      a
                        •
                      Nothing was ever more improbable than that I should have a secret lover: I never went
                        •
                      where without my aunt; her visitors were mine; I could see no body without her know-ledge: how was this engagement formed? But her chaplain had doubtless assured her, that I had a secret engagement, and she pious-ly believed him, in contradiction to her own judgment: this was one of those cases that re-quired an implicit faith; and in matters of

faith, you know, Roman catholicks are not permitted to exercise their reason.
               
               
                  We set out next morning for Windsor, the chaplain and my aunt's woman being in the coach, the conversation was wholly upon in-different things. After dinner was over, my aunt took me into her closet, and entered into a long discourse, which it would tire you to repeat— but the substance of it was my un-happy situation, when she took me out of the hands of lady Manning— her tenderness for me; the great things she designed to do for me, nothing less than making me her sole heir; the folly of marrying for love, exem-plified in my father's marriage; her fears that I was going to throw myself away on some young fop, who would make me miserable; sir Isaac Darby's generous passion for me, his great estate, the handsome settlements he pro-posed to make; and lastly, the pleasure I would give her, by suiting in this case my in-clinations to my interest.
               
               
                  To all this I answered very particularly; I acknowledged she had shewn a parental ten-derness for me, and I had paid her, and ever would pay her, I said, the duty and obedience due from a child to a parent: that in the ar-ticle of marriage, my natural parents would

certainly have allowed me a negative voice, which was all I claimed now, since I was ab-solutely resolved not only never to marry with-out her consent, but not to admit of any ad-dress which she disapproved. I begged her never to propose sir Isaac Darby to me again, because my heart wholly rejected him; tho' at the same time I protested (as I might well do) that my affections were entirely disengaged.
               
               
                  All your asseverations, replied my aunt (who had listened to me with many signs of impatience) signify nothing without you many sir Isaac Darby; and by that only shall I be convinced that your head does not run upon some wild showy fellow, who will make your heart ake.
               
               
                  Here (continued she) is a baronet of an an-cient family, a large estate, of good morals not disagreeable in his person— but what is person in a man? who loves you, who will make you a large jointure, who gives you a title, place, equipage, all that a prudent sen-sible woman can desire, and you refuse him; grant that he is older than you, he has the more wisdom— O my dear, how difficult it was for me to forbear laughing here; but you are not in love with him— let me tell you, Henrietta, that is not a plea for a young

woman of delicacy—What, is it not possible for you to make a good wife to an honest gen-tleman, without bringing with you all that romantick passion which forces girls to jump out of windows to get to their fellows; and, for the sake of a man who possibly a few weeks before was an absolute stranger to them, break through every tie of natural affection, and, to be a wife, be contented to be neither daughter, sister, or niece.
               
               
                  I was going to speak— My aunt in a pe-remptory manner laid her hand on my mouth. I will not hear a word more, said she, on this subject; if you refuse to give your hand to sir Isaac, I know what I am to think—I give you two days to consider of it. I have hitherto treated you as my own child; if you com-ply you shall find me a mother, if not I am only your aunt; and you know how some who stand in that degree of relation to you be-have. This was pretty plain, my dear: I was so shocked that I suffered my aunt to go out of the closet without making any answer; and retired to my own chamber to weep in free-dom.
               
            
            
               

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In which our heroine is very reasonably alarmed.
               
               
                  IT was indeed true that my father's family took no notice of me, notwithstanding the applications that had been made to them; and when my aunt Meadows introduced me at my uncle's the earl of—, I was received so coldly by him and his lady, that I inly re-solved never to expose myself to such a mor-tification again, and my aunt entered so far into my just resentment as never to press me to make them a second visit.
               
               
                  My brother was abroad; if living he neg-lected me; and perhaps I had no brother; for how else could I account for so long a silence in one who seemed to have such tender affections? I had no resource but in Mr. Bale's friendship, and he was at this time unluckily at too great a distance to be of any use to me I saw plainly that I must either accept sir Isaa
                        •
                      Darby's hand, or be thrown back into m
                        •
                      former indigence and dependence—Dreadfu
                        •
                     
                     

alternative!— But the man considered, was there room to pause long?
               
               
                  My imagination suggested to me every pos-sible ill consequence of the loss of my aunt's favour, but weighed against the misery of such a marriage, they all seemed light—Yet would you think it, my dear, amidst the many real evils I had reason to apprehend by disobliging my aunt, one trifling circumstance dwelt strongest upon my mind, and that was the occasion of triumph I should give to lady Manning, who would exult over my fallen expectations and return to indigence. I was ashamed of my own weakness when I found this thought capable of giving me so much pain; and in the contemplation of greater mis-fortunes which were likely to be my lot, I sought to blunt my sense of these lesser ones which were the necessary consequences of them.
               
               
                  Towards evening Mrs. White threw her-self in my way, as I was walking pensive in the garden. She told me that my aunt was full of hopes that I would comply: that sir Isaac was to be invited to-morrow; and that it was expected the generosity of his proposals with regard to settlements, the rich presents of jewels which he would offer, and his reso-lution

to agree to every thing I desired, would make such an impression on my mind, as to induce me to give a free and willing consent. Mrs. White added, that since my aunt was so determined upon concluding this match, she wished I could conquer my aversion to it; for she feared that my absolute refusal would so irritate her, that she might be easily per-suaded to take some violent resolution against me; and there is one, said she, who will spare no pains to bring that to pass.
               
               
                  I replied, that nothing which could befal me from the loss of my aunt's favour, was to be dreaded so much as being the wise of sir Isaac Darby; and that my resolution was fixed. Mrs. White sighed, shrugged her shoulders, and hastened from me for fear of being ob-served, seeming, as I thought, to believe my case desperate.
               
               
                  When she was gone, I considered that if I accepted of the two days my aunt had given me to come to a resolution, I should be ex-posed during that time to the odious courtship of sir Isaac, whose presence was, it seems, judged necessary to influence me; I therefore determined to declare myself immediately, and plunge at once into the distresses that awaited me.
               
               
                  

person, though full of charms, and the easy gracefulness of her air, impressed less respect for her on the minds of the women, than the ele-gance of her morning-dress, which they were now at leisure to consider. Her gown was a white sprig'd muslin, extremely fine, through which shone a rich blue Mantua silk petticoat: her cap, handkerchief, and ruffles were trimmed with fine Brussels lace: her apron had a broad border round it of Dresden work; and a white lutestring hat shaded her charming face, which she was solicitous to conceal from view.
               The melancholy with which she seemed op-pressed, conciliated to her the good will of her female fellow-travellers, though from very dif-ferent sentiments. The haughty lady, who had refused to let her have a place in the coach, found her envy and ill-nature insensibly subside, by the consideration that this stranger was pro-bably more unhappy than herself.
               The lusty matron, pleased that by insisting upon receiving her, she had conferred an obli-gation on one who appeared to be of a rank above her own, enjoyed her present superiority, and pitied her from the overflowings of gratified pride.
               The young lady in the riding-habit, whose vanity had been a little mortified at seeing her-self

                  I left the garden instantly, and went in search of my aunt; as soon as I entered the room where she was, she laid down a book she had been reading, and looked earnestly at me, seeming, by my countenance on which I be-lieve was impressed the agitation of my mind, to expect something extraordinary.
               
               
                  You have indulged me, madam, said I, with two days to consider of your proposal with re-gard to sir Isaac Darby; but so long a time is not necessary: were any thing less at stake than the future happiness of my life, you should find me incapable of opposing your will; but in this case it is not possible for me to obey you. Judge of my aversion to that man, when I pro-test to you, that if death or his hand was an alternative that I must chuse, I would with-out hesitation prefer death as the lesser hard-ship.
               
               
                  This determined speech seemed to surprise my aunt, though I think she had no reason to expect I could ever be prevailed upon to marry sir Isaac.
               
               
                  You are an undone girl, said she, after a pause of near three minutes; I believe your father's folly is hereditary to you—I have done my duty—Your obstinacy be upon your own head.
               
               
                  

                  I confess I was greatly affected with her calm resentment, so likely to be lasting: I burst into tears; she went out of the room, I followed her into another, where Mr. Dan-vers was sitting. As soon as I perceived him, I hastily withdrew, for I was not willing to be seen by him in that state of dejection— I re-tired to my own room, and there; after I had relieved my mind by another flood of tears, I endeavoured to soften my own apprehensions of what might be the effects of having dis-obliged the only relation who would own me, and collected all my fortitude to enable me to bear the worst that could happen. But that worst, my dear, proved so terrible to my frighted imagination, that to avoid it, I have taken a very imprudent and dangerous step, and whither it will lead me, Heaven knows; for my heart forebodes some fatal consequence from it.
               
               "Lord bless me!" said miss Woodby,
after escaping such an odious husband as sir Isaac, was any thing worse to be feared!
               
               "Ah!" cried miss Courteney;
but it was not certain whether I should escape him; for if my aunt's scheme had taken place, I had every thing to fear.
                  What could your aunt's scheme be?
said miss Woodby, impa-tiently.

"Mr. Danvers's rather," said miss Courteney, "and its being his made it more "formidable.
               
                  My aunt seemed so easy and chearful at supper, and spoke to me so kindly, that all my gloomy apprehensions vanished, and I was happy in the thought that I should pre-serve her favour without becoming the wife of sir Isaac Darby; but I was soon undeceived. Mrs. White tapp'd at my door, after she had put my aunt to bed; I let her in, and, in a rapture of joy, I told her how favourably my aunt seemed disposed, and that I should no longer be persecuted about the odious baronet. O miss! said she, I am afraid this calm fore-tels a storm. A storm, repeated I, what do you mean?
               
               
                  I always dreaded, said she, that Mr. Dan-vers would use his power with my lady to your disadvantage; but who could have imagined that he would prevail upon her to send you to France, and lock you up in a nunnery?
               
               
                  How! exclaimed I, almost breathless with terror and surprise—Confine me in a nun-nery! Is it possible—How came you to know this?
               
               
                  By the strangest chance in the world, re-plied Mrs. White. I am not used to listen,

I scorn it; but some words that fell from the chaplain, alarmed me on your account, and I resolved, if possible, to know what he was driving at. This evening, pursued she, I went to my lady to take her directions about some laces I was making up for her. I found the chaplain with her: they seemed to be in deep discourse; and my lady, as if angry at being interrupted, bid me, in a hasty manner, come to her another time. I went away immediately; and just as I shu
                        •
                      the door, I heard the chaplain say, Depend upon it, madam, there is no other way to preserve her from ruin. Certainly, thought I to myself, this must concern miss Courteney; I put my ear to the key-hole, and heard my lady an-swer, But shall I not be called a 
                        
                      sending my niece to a convent con
                        •
                     y to her inclinations?
               
               
                  The chaplain made a long speech, which I could not distinctly hear; but he told her she must make a sacrifice of such idle censures to God; that it was her duty to endeavour to save a soul; that you were in a state of per-dition; and oh, my dear miss! but that I cannot believe, he assured her you would throw yourself away upon the idle fellow

(those were his words) that you were in love with, if not prevented by bolts and bars.
               
               
                  In the end my lady seemed determined, and they consulted together about the means they should use, to entrap you into a convent. My lady proposed making a tour to Paris, by way of amusement, to take you with her, and leave you in some monastery. Mr. Dan-vers, I found, objected to that; he desired she would leave the affair wholly to his manage-ment, and said he would think of some expe-dient that would be less troublesome to her. I did not stay to hear any more; for I was apprehensive of some of the servants coming that way, and discovering me at so mean a trick as listening.
               
               
                  Good God! cried I, what shall I do? what shall I do? repeated I passionately, in the anguish of my mind. My guardian is not in town! to whom shall I apply for advice and assistance in this extremity? I may be hurried away to this horrid confinement, when I least expect it.
               
               
                  That is impossible, said Mrs. White; fore-warned forearmed, as the saying is. Since you know what is intended against you, you must be upon your guard; you cannot be car-ried away against your will.
               
               
                  

                  Mrs. White did not appear to me to have a very just sense of the danger I was exposed to; for what will not bigotry attempt! I was glad therefore when she left me to my own re-flections; which she did, after begging me to be composed, and not to discover the manner in which I came by the intelligence she had given me.
               
               
                  The latter part of her injunction I faith-fully promised to perform; but, oh! my dear miss Woodby, how was it possible for me to be composed amidst such dreadful apprehen-sions?—To be locked up in a gloomy mo-nastery, perhaps for ever, exposed to the per-secutions of superstitious zeal: but, this was not the worst of my fears — To be con-signed over, perhaps, to the care of a wolf in sheep's cloathing, who had already shocked my delicacy with freedoms, that, proceeding from such a man, in such a character, might well awaken the most frightful suspicions.
               
               "Truly," said miss Woodby,
that seemed to be the worst part of your danger; for I don't like this jesuit at all, every thing may be dreaded from a hypocrite: but, as to the being shut up in a convent, there is no great matter in it. Such beauty as yours would have soon engaged some adventurous knight in your

cause, who would have scaled the walls to have delivered you—Oh, what a charming adventure! I protest I would submit to a few months confinement in such a place, for the pleasure of being delivered from it in so gallant a manner.
               
               "Sure you are not in earnest," said Henrietta. "Indeed but I am," replied miss Woodby. "Well," resumed miss Courteney,
you have very whimsical notions; but I assure you none of these entered into my head: the loss of li-berty seemed to me so frightful a misfortune, that I was almost distracted with the idea of it.
               
               
                  The first thought that occurred to me, and which indeed was the most natural, was to prevent my aunt from carrying her designs into execution, by leaving her. I might well imagine she would use violence to detain me, if I attempted it openly; therefore it was ne-cessary to steal myself away, and this has the air of an adventure you must own; but as I had no confident in this design, no gallant youth to assist me in my escape, and did not even make use of a ladder of ropes, or en-danger breaking my neck, I am afraid this adventure is not in a taste high enough for you.
               
               
                  
"Oh, you are rallying me!" said miss Wood-by;
but I long to know how you escaped; no confident! how could you manage so arduous an undertaking by yourself?
               
               "With great ease, I assure you," said miss Courteney;
and I don't think you will allow it to be an escape, when I tell you I walked peaceably out of a door, not without some tre-pidation however, which arose less from the fear of a pursuit, than the consciousness that I was taking a step which every young woman of delicacy will if possible avoid.
               
               
                  As I have already told you, I instantly re-solved upon leaving my aunt; but where should I seek an asylum? Mr. Bale, whose protec-tion I might have requested with honour, was not in town; my brother was abroad; none of my father's relations would receive me; I had no acquaintances but such as were my aunt's, to whom any application would have been very improper, as I should have found very strong prejudices to combat with; it be-ing a received maxim among persons of a certain age, that young people are always in the wrong; besides, one seldom meets with any one who has not that littleness, of soul which is mistaken for prudence, and teaches that it is not safe to meddle with other peo-ple's

affairs, which narrow notion prevents many a good office, many a kind interposition; so that we seem to live only for ourselves.
               
               
                  My perplexed mind could suggest no better expedient to me, than to seize the first oppor-tunity that offered to go to London, and there conceal myself in a private lodging till Mr. Bale's return, who I doubted not would take me under his protection. Before I had fixed upon this resolution, great part of the night was wasted; so that I lay later than usual the next morning. When I went down to break-fast, I found my aunt dressed, and her coach ordered. She took notice that my eyes looked heavy; I told her I had a violent headach, which indeed was true: she said it was a cold, and bid me keep myself warm.
               
               
                  I am going to Richmond, added she, it will be late before I return to dinner; there-fore let the cook get you a chicken when you chuse to dine, and don't walk out to increase your cold.
               
               
                  My heart leaped so when I found I was to be left at home, that I was afraid my emotion was visible in my countenance. My aunt however did not observe it; for, apparently, she had no suspicion that I knew any thing of her design to send me to a convent: and

therefore she could not possibly guess my in-tention to leave her. But she certainly over-acted her part, all on a sudden to drop her fa-vourite scheme, the marrying me to sir Isaac Darby; and when I might reasonably expect that my obstinate refusal to comply with her desires, would create some coldness in her to-wards me, to find her not only free from all resentment, but even particularly kind and obliging. Sure this was sufficient to raise doubts in my mind, that something more than ordinary was at the bottom of all this af-fability.
               
               
                  It often happens that cunning over-reaches itself; for it seldom hits a medium, and gene-rally does too much or too little. My aunt's behaviour would have led me to suspect that some design was forming against me; but if it had not been for Mrs. White's information, I should never have been able to discover what it was, for my own penetration would have gone no further than to suggest, that some scheme was laid to bring about my marriage with sir Isaac Darby; but this fear would have been sufficient to have winged my flight, so that the arts my aunt made use of to lull me into security, proved the very foundation of my doubts.
               
               
                  

associated in a journey with persons whom she conceived to be very unfit company for her, thought herself very happy in the acquisition of so genteel a fellow-traveller; and as she had not deign'd to open her mouth before, from an opinion of the meanness of her company, she now made herself amends for her silence, by addressing a profusion of civil speeches to the fair stranger, who replied to every thing she said with extreme politeness, but with an all that showed her heart was not at ease.
               The passengers being set down at different places, miss Courteney, for that was the name of our fair adventurer, remained alone with the young lady in the coach. This circumstance seemed to rouze her from a deep revery, in which she had been wholly absorbed during the last half hour; and looking earnestly at her companion, "Ah! madam, said she," in a most affecting accent, "and when am I to lose you?" "I shall leave you in a few minutes," said the lady;
for I am going no farther than Ham-mersmith.
"Lord bless me!" said miss Cour-teney, listing up her fine eyes swimming in tears,
What shall I do? what will become of me?
               
               This exclamation gave great surprize to the other lady, who from several circumstances had

                  I had a new palpitation of the heart when I saw the chaplain follow my aunt into the coach. Sure! thought I, Heaven approves of my design to get away, since so many cir-cumstances concur to make it practicable. It was natural, my dear, as my religion was in danger from the persecutions preparing for me, to think Heaven interested in the success of my intended escape.
               
               
                  There is certainly something very pleasing in supposing one's self the peculiar care of Providence on certain occasions. A Roman catholick would have made little less than a miracle of so favourable a concurrence of cir-cumstances. However I suppressed this rising sally of spiritual vanity, and employed my thoughts in contriving how to get to town with convenience and safety, without expecting any supernatural assistance.
               
               Here miss Woodby broke in upon the fair nar-rater, with an exclamation that will be found in the following chapter.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which Henrietta concludes her history.
               
               "OH! my dear," interrupted miss Wood-by, laughing,
you have given an ex-cellent name to a species of folly, which at once excites one's laughter and indignation. I know an old lady who is a constant fre-quenter of the chapel in Oxford-road, that has arrived to such a heighth of spiritual va-nity as you justly term it, that she 
                        •
                     ies Providence is perpetually exerting itself in mi-racles for her preservation, and that her most inconsiderable actions are under the imme-diate direction of Heaven; for she will tell you with surprising meekness and humility, that unworthy as she is, she is in high favour with God; if she happens to stumble against a stone without falling, she says, with a smile of conscious satisfaction, To be sure God is very good to me. According to her, God acts by partial, not by general laws. And should it cease raining immediately before she is to go out, either to church or a visit, it is all one, she supposes that Providence is at that

moment at work for her, and has cleared the skies that she may walk with conveniency; for she cannot always purchase a coach or a chair, half of her little income being appro-priated to the preachers, from whose doctrine she has imbibed these self-flattering ideas.
               
               "Oh!" said miss Courteney, laughing,
you have heightened the colouring of this picture exceedingly.
               
               "Upon my word I have not," said miss Woodby,
and— but that I am not willing to interrupt your story so long, I could give you an hundred proofs of this odd species of pride; for I assure you, my dear, the haughtiest beauty in the drawing-room, amidst a croud of adorers and in the fullest display of airs and graces, has not half the vanity of one of these saints of Whitefield's or Wesley's creation.
               
               "I really pity the poor woman you men-tioned,"
said Henrietta;
she appears to me to be very far from attaining to any degree of perfection: for may it not be supposed that this unreasonable confidence will lead her to neglect many duties very es-sential to a good christian? For I have heard it observed, that the preachers of that sect chiefly declaim against fashionable sollies; and, according to them, to dress with ele-gance

to go to a play or an opera, or to make one at a party of cards, are mortal sins; mean time poor morals are wholly neglected, and superstition is made an equivalent for a vir-tuous life.
               
               "Yet a writer," replied miss Woodby,
who is greatly admired by our sex, and who in his works pays court to all religious, ca
                        •
                     
                     -ing himself so evenly amidst them, that it is hard to distinguish to which he most inclines, has introduced these modern saints reclaiming a woman who had led a very vicious life, and doing more than all the best orthodox divines had done; and he has not thrown away his compliment: I dare say this numerous 
                        
                      has bought up an impression of his book, and is not the third edition upon the title page a very good return to it? Oh! my dear, there is no vanity like the vanity of some authors: it is not to be doubted but if there were 
                        
                      men enough in the kingdom to add a unit more to the account of those editions, but we should find him introducing the alcoran, mak-ing proselytes from luxury.— But how have we wandered from your story— You are still at Windsor — I long to hear the rest.
               
               
                  
"I assure you, my dear," said miss Cour-tency, sighing,
I have not been sorry for this little interruption; it has given some relief to my mind; for I know not how it is, but the recollection of this period is painful to me; and yet under the same terrors, and with the same apprehensions, I should certainly act again as I have done. I think I told you that Mr. Danvers went in the coach with my aunt; a circumstance with which I had reason to be rejoiced, as it greatly facilitated my escape. I was still lingering over the tea-table, uncer-tain in what manner I should perform my little journey, when Mrs. White came into the room: she was apprehensive that I should be uneasy at my aunt's and the chaplain's excur-sion together, as supposing it was to settle something relating to their scheme; and there-fore made haste to inform me, that my aunt had been summoned to Richmond, by a mes-sage from a Roman catholick friend of her's, who was dangerously ill there, and desired to see her, together with Mr. Danvers, who was her ghostly father, as they term it.
               
               
                  Mrs. White continued to talk to me on the subject of my aunt's design, while I was con-sidering whether it would be proper to make her the confident of my intended flight to Lon-don,

and engage her to procure me some ve-hicle to carry me thither. But it was possible she might not approve of my leaving my aunt so suddenly, in which case I should find it dif-ficult to get away: besides, I did not think it reasonable to involve her in the consequences of my flight, by making her privy to it; and that the only way to enable her to justify her-self to my aunt was not to make her guilty. I therefore resolved to steal out of the house, and go as far as I could on foot, not doubt-ing but chance would throw some carriage in my way, in which I might finish my journey; and, to gain all the time I could, I told Mrs. White, that my anxiety had hindered me from sleeping all night; that I was not well, and would go to my chamber and try to get some repose, desiring her not to disturb me.
               
               
                  Having thus got four hours at least before me, I resolved to write a short letter to my aunt before I went. In this letter I told her, that having accidentally discovered her inten-tion of sending me to a convent abroad, my terrors of such a confinement had forced me to throw myself under the protection of Mr. Bale; that I hoped, through his mediation, to convince her I had been guilty of no impru-dences which could merit such severe treat-ment

as a punishment, and was not so un-settled in my religion as to be perverted by that or any other means. I begged her to believe, that except in that article, and in marrying contrary to my inclinations, I would pay her the same obedience as to a parent; but that I would rather submit to the lowest state of po-verty, than marry a man whom I could nei-ther love or esteem; or change the religion in which I was bred, and with which I was en-tirely satisfied. I concluded with earnestly intreating to be restored to her good opinion, which I assured her I would always endeavour to deserve.
               
               
                  Having scaled and directed this letter, I put it into one of my dressing-boxes, not doubt-ing but as soon as I was missing, every thing that belonged to me would be searched for letters, in hopes of further discoveries. I next tied up some linen in a handkerchief, and with an aking heart, sallied out of my cham-ber, and crossed a passage-room which had steps leading to the garden. As soon as I had got out of the back-door, which opened into the forest, I concluded myself safe from disco-very, and mended my pace; having no dif-ficulty in finding my way, because I pursued

the road which I had often traversed in a coach or a chaise.
               
               
                  You will easily imagine my mind was full of melancholy reflections, and indeed so en-tirely was I engrossed by them for near an hour, that I did not perceive I was tired, till I grew so faint I was hardly able to move a step far-ther. I had now got into the open road, and it being about the time when I might expect to see some of the stage-coaches from Wind-sor pass that way, I sat down under the shade of a large tree, at some distance from the road, impatiently wishing for the sight. All this time I had not been alarmed with the fear of meeting with any insult, for I had seen no one from whom I could apprehend any such thing; but I had scarce enjoyed this com-fortable shelter three minutes, when I per-ceived two ill looking fellows, as I thought them, making towards me with all the speed they were able. I started up in inconceivable terror, looking round me to see if any help was near if they should assault me, when I fortunately discovered the stage-coach; and being now eased of my fears, I resumed my station, till it was come near enough for me to speak to the driver. The two fellows who had given me such a terrible alarm, stopped

short upon seeing the coach, and I really be-lieve I had an escape from them.
               
               
                  I called out to the coachman as soon as he could hear me. You know, my dear, the difficulties I found in getting admission. Little did those good women, who refused it, ima-gine that to avoid a slight inconvenience to themselves, they were consigning me over to the greatest distress imaginable.
               
               "Wretches!" exclaimed miss Woodby,
I cannot think of them without detestation; but, my dear (pursued she) did not you won-der to see a person of any figure in a stage-coach? As for you, I soon discovered there was something extraordinary in your case: but what did you think of me with such com-pany, and in such an equipage?
               
               "Indeed, my dear," said miss Courteney,
at that time a stage-coach appeared to me a most desirable vehicle, and I had not then the least notion of its being a mean one; so greatly do our opinions of things alter with our cir-cumstances and situations: besides, a difficulty then occurred to my thoughts, which, amidst the hurry and precipitation with which I quitted my aunt's house, had not been sufficiently at-tended to before, and that was how I should dispose of myself for a few days, till Mr. Bale's

return; for it was necessary I should conceal myself with great care, having so much to ap-prehend from my aunt's bigotry and preju-dices, and the (perhaps) interested officiousness of her chaplain.
               
               
                  Under what strange disadvantages had I lodgings to seek for! by an assumed name, with an immediate occasion for them; and no recommendation to any particular house, which I could be sure was a reputable one. Your politeness, and the unexpected offer of your friendship, encouraged me to commu-nicate my distress to you, and to intreat your assistance; and I must still regret the 
                        •
                     lucky mistake that brought me hither instead of M
                        •
                     s. Egret's. And now, my dear, you have my whole story before you. Have I not been very unfortunate? and am I not in a men dreadful situation? But what it chiefly con-cerns me to know, does your judgment acquit me of imprudence and folly in this pr
                        •
                     pi
                        •
                     te flight from my aunt, to whom I owed so many benefits, and on whom I depended 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      support?
               
               "Approve your flight!" cried miss Woodby;
Yes certainly, child: who would not fly from a bigot, a priest, and an old hideous

conceived there was some mystery in her case. "You seem uneasy," said she to miss Courteney,
pray let me know if it be in my power to serve you.
               
               This kind request had such an effect on the tender heart of miss Courteney, that she burst into tears, and for a few moments was unable to answer; when the lady pressing her to speak freely, "I am an unhappy creature, madam, said she, sighing;
and am flying from the only person in the world upon whom I have any de-pendence. I will make no scruple to trust you with my secret. Did you ever hear of lady Meadows,
pursued she,
the widow of Sir John Meadows?
               
               "I know a lady who is acquainted with her," said the other,
she is a woman of fashion and fortune.
               
               "Lady Meadows is my relation," resumed miss Courteney;
she took me, a poor helpless orphan, under her protection, and during some time treated me with the tenderness of a mo-ther. Within these few weeks I have unhap-pily lost her favour, not by any fault of mine, I assure you, for I have always loved and re-verenced her. Nothing should have obliged me to take this step, which has no doubt an

lover? I protest I would in your case have done the same thing.
                  Well, that is some comfort,
replied miss Courteney;
but every body will not think as you do; and to a mind of any delicacy, s
                        •
                      nothing is so shocking as to have a reputation to defend; and the step I have taken will no doubt expose me to many unfavourable censures.
               
               "And do you imagine," said miss Woodby,
that with a form so pleasing, and an under-standing so distinguished, you will be exempted from the tax that envy is sure to levy upon merit? Don't you know what the most sen-sible of all poets says:

                        "Envy will merit as it's shade pursue,
                        "And like a shadow proves the substance "true.
                     
Take my word for it, it is no great compli-ment we pay to persons, when we tell them that all the world speaks well of them; for those who are remarkable for any shining qua-lities will be more envied than admired, and frequently more calumniated than praised. But, child,
pursued the volatile miss Wood-by, assuming a sprightly air,
how do you in-tend to dispose of yourself to-day; it is late: I must go home to dress.
               
               
                  
"Dispose of myself," repeated miss Courte-ney,
even in this solitary chamber; for am determined, since I must stay here a day or two longer, to be as little with my landlady a
                        •
                      possible.
               
               Miss Woodby then fluttered down stairs, fol-lowed by her fair friend, who took that oppor-tunity to tell Mrs. Eccles, that she should not leave her so suddenly as she had imagined, which was very agreeable news to the millenor; who had no other objection to her beautiful lodger, but her extreme reserve, which did not at all suit her purposes.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Containing nothing either new or extraordinary.
               
               MISS Courteney, after having traversed her chamber several times in great rest-lessness of mind, at length resolved to take a hackney coach and drive to Mr. Bale's, supposing she should know from his clerks or servants the exact time when he was expected home; at least they could give her a direction where to write to him, and it would be some comfort to acquaint him with her situation, and have his advice.
               
                  
She had no sooner formed this design than she hastened to put it in execution; and having made a slight alteration in her dress, she went down to Mrs. Eccles, and desired her to send her maid for a coach, telling her she was obliged to go into the city upon business, and desired her not to wait for her at dinner. Mrs. Eccles insisted upon waiting till four o'clock at least, and at-tended her to the door, less out of complaisance than to hear where she ordered the coachman to drive; for the enquietude, irresolution, and pensiveness, which she discovered in her fair lodger, extremely heightened her curiosity to know her affairs.
               Henrietta, though she did not suspect the motive of her officiousness, yet not thinking it proper to let her know where she was going, only bid the coachman drive to St. Paul's church-yard, and when there, she gave him a fuller di-rection. Alas! sighed she, when the coach stopped before the great gates of her guardian's house, were the hospitable master of this man-sion at home, here should I find a secure asy-lum.
               As soon as a servant appeared, she asked if Mr. Bale was at home, that she might with greater propriety introduce her farther enquiries; but was most agreeably surprised to hear him an-swer

her in the affirmative, while he opened the coach-door: however, she ordered the coach-man to wait, and then followed the servant, who introduced her into a large parlour, and retired to acquaint his master with her being there.
               Immediately a young gentleman, of an en-gaging appearance, entered the room, and de-sired to know her commands. Henrietta see-ing, instead of her guardian, a young man whom she was quite a stranger to, blushed at first, 
                     
                   a more painful sense of her disappointment soon spread a paleness over her fair face.
               "Is not Mr. Bale at home, sir?" said she, in an accent that shewed her concern,
my business was with him?
               
               "My father, madam," said the young gen-tleman,
is in Holland, from whence I c
                        •
                     me myself but lately; he has affairs to settle there which will detain him three or four weeks. But cannot I serve you, madam,
added he; his voice becoming insensibly softer while he gazed on a form which it was not possible to be-hold without some sensibility.
Pray let me know, it will give me great pleasure if I can be in the least degree useful to you.
               
               "I shall be obliged to you, sir," replied miss Courteney,
if you will forward a letter from

me to Mr. Bale. It is a great unhappiness to me that he is abroad at this time: he is my guardian, and at present I have need of his advice and assistance.
               
               "Pardon me, madam," said young Mr. Bale, "is not your name Courteney." "It is sir," replied she.
               "Dear miss," said he, looking on her with a tender sympathy;
I wish my father was at home, since you wish so—And yet, perhaps, all parents are alike,
added he, after a pause and sighing,
they are too apt to imagine that happiness consists in riches. But are you in a place of safety, miss— Are you sure you are in no danger of being discovered? I wish it was in my power to offer you an asy-lum—but—
               
               "Bless me, sir! interrupted Henrietta, in great astonishment,
you seem to be perfectly well acquainted with my situation.
               
               "Yes, madam," said Mr. Bale,
I know something of your affairs, and from my soul I approve of your courage and resolution. A gentleman, named Danvers, was here yester-day to enquire for you; your aunt's chaplain, is he not?
               
               "Yes, sir," replied miss Courteney,
and my persecutor— but what did he say? I

suppose he represented me in strange co-lours.
               
               "You need only to be seen, madam," said Mr. Bale,
to undeceive the most prejudiced: yet what he said was not disadvantageous to you, unless,
added he, with a soft smile, "you think it a fault to have a tender heart."
               "Ah! the wretch," interrupted miss Cour-teney, not able to contain her indignation;
I see he has been propagating falshoods inju-rious to my reputation; after having poisoned the mind of my aunt with suspicions that were the cause of my losing her affection, he is en-deavouring to deprive me of every friend I have in the world— But this, sir, is the plain truth: he suggested, as I have no reason to doubt, a preposterous match for me to my aunt; I rejected it; he found means to per-suade my aunt, that I listened privately to the addresses of some man who was an improper match for me. My aunt, in order to prevent my ruin, as she supposed, insisted upon my ac-cepting the husband she had chosen for me; and, upon my obstinate refusal, was prevailed upon by her chaplain to resolve to confine me in a nunnery abroad. I had intelligence of this design, and I secretly left my aunt's house, to prevent her executing it; but I

am so far from having any secret engage-ment, that if I could be sure my aunt would not pursue her scheme of entrapping me in a convent, I would instantly return and bind myself by the most solemn oaths never to marry any one whom she does not approve.
               
               "You see, sir," proceeded miss Courteney,
what need I have of your father's assistance; he is my only friend and protector; through his mediation I might expect to be restored to the good opinion of my aunt.
               
               "Well, madam," said Mr. Bale,
if you will write to him, I will take care of your letter; and if it be ready to-morrow, I will attend you myself for it; I hope you have no objection to my knowing where you are: in my father's absence I shall be proud to act as your guardian; though he has had the hap-piness of knowing you longer, yet his con-cern for your interest cannot be greater than mine. Shall I wait on you to-morrow morn-ing, miss?
added he. Henrietta, by his manner of urging this request, and his fre-quently casting his eye towards the door, as if afraid of some interruption, concluding that she detained him from business of more im-portance, rose up immediately, and, giving him a direction to her lodgings by the name

of Benson, told him, she would have her letter ready; but asked if it would not come safe in-closed to him by the penny-post, being unwil-ling, she said, to give him the trouble of coming for it.
               "I beg, madam," said he, as he took her hand to lead her to the coach,
that you will believe I can have no greater pleasure than that of serving you. It is necessary that I should have an opportunity of talking to you at leisure, that I may know how I can be far-ther useful to you.
               
               Having helped her into the coach, be bowed low, and retired hastily, with such an expression of tender concern on his countenance as any woman, less free from vanity than miss Courte-ney, would not have failed to observe; but she making no other reflections on his behaviour, than that he was more polite than persons usually are who are bred up to business, congratulated herself on having sound a friend, through whom she could securely correspond with her guardian, and receive his advice, so that she might now consider herself as being under his immediate care and direction, though absent; a circum-stance that greatly alleviated her uneasiness.
               Mrs. Eccles, who had waited dinner for her longer than had been agreed on, expressed great

pleasure at seeing her look so chearful.
To be sure (said she) you have heard some unex-pected good news, I am heartily glad of it— Well, now I hope you will have more spirits.
Henrietta smiled, but made no answer; for an ingenuous mind can only evade indiscreet curio-sity by silence.
               The cloth was scarce removed, when the young lord, who had now taken possession of his apartment in Mrs. Eccles's house, came into the parlour. Henrietta immediately rose up to re-tire to her own chamber, when he starting back, and standing at the door as if to obstruct her passage,
I came (said he) Mrs. Eccles, to beg you would make me a dish of coffee; but since my presence drives this young lady away, I will go up stairs again.
               
               "Oh, by no means, my lord," said Mrs. Eccles,
I am sure miss Benson will not let you think so. You are not going, miss, are you?
added she, turning to Henrietta.
               "I have letters to write," said the young lady, "that will take me up the whole afternoon."
               "Well," said my lord,
I will drink no coffee then; for unless you stay, miss, I shall be persuaded that my coming has driven you away. Let me intreat you,
pursued he, entering and leading her to a chair,
to allow

me the pleasure of drinking a dish of coffee with you; you will have time enough after-wards to write your letters.
               
               Miss Courteney, who was willing to avoid the appearance of singularity, sat down again, tho' with some reluctance, telling his lordship that she would not be the means of disappointing him of his coffee; but that she must insist upon be-ing permitted to withdraw in half an hour, hav-ing business of consequence upon her hands.
               The young nobleman gave little attention to what she said, but gazed on her with an ear-nestness that threw her into some confusion. The milliner going out of the room to give or-ders about the coffee, he began in most vehe-ment language to declare a passion for her, and called in the assistance of poetry, to express his admiration of her charms.
               Henrietta, who in her own character would have treated this manner of address with ridicule and contempt, thought it became her, in her present circumstances, to resent it seriously; therefore rising, with some signs of indignation, she told him, that since his lordship thought proper to entertain her with such kind of dis-course, she would immediately retire. My lord, who saw she was angry in good earnest, was excessively afraid of her leaving him; there-fore

appearance of ingratitude, but the fear of being forced to marry a man I hate.
               
               "O heavens! my dear creature," exclaimed the lady,
What do you tell me! were you upon the point of being forced to a detested match?
"I was, madam," replied miss Cour-teney;
and to this hard lot was I doomed by her to whom I owe all my past happiness, and from whom I expected all the future.
               
               
                  You have obliged me excessively by this unreserved confidence,
interrupted the lady;
and you shall find me not unworthy of it. From this moment I swear to you an invio-lable attachment. Sure there is nothing so transporting as friendship and mutual confi-dence. Yon won my heart the moment I saw you. I have formed a hundred violent friendships, but one accident or other al-ways dissolved them in a short time. There are very few persons that are capable of a violent friendship; at least I never could find one that answered my ideas of that sort of en-gagement. Have not you been often disap-pointed? tell me, my dear: I dare say you have. Your sentiments, I believe, are as delicate as mine upon this head. I am charmed, I am ravished with this meeting. Who would have imagined that by chance,

taking her hand, which he forcibly held, till he had sealed a vow upon it with his lips, that he would not say another word to offend her, he brought her back to her seat, which, upon see-ing Mrs. Eccles enter, she resumed.
               The conversation then took another turn; but Henrietta was too much chagrined to mix in it with any degree of chearfulness: besides, the party seemed to her to be but ill assorted, a no-bleman, a milliner, and a young woman in ob-scure circumstances. Her delicacy was shocked, and all the politeness she was mistress of was scarce sufficient to hinder her from shewing how much she was displeased with herself and her company.
               As soon as the tea-equipage was removed, she looked at her watch; and seeming apprehensive that she should not have time enough to write her letters, she withdrew with such precipitation, that they had no opportunity to solicit her longer stay.
               "This is a strange girl," said the young lord, throwing himself into his chair, from whence he had risen to return the hasty compliment she made at her departure,
but divinely handsome; who can she be? I vow to Gad I believe I shall be in love with her in earnest: have you made no discovery yet, Mrs. Eccles,
pur-sued

he;
there is certainly some mystery in the case, and a love-mystery it must be; for women are not even faithful to their own se-crets, unless an amour is the business, and then they are impenetrable.
               
               "Your lordship may be sure," said Mrs. Ec-cles,
that I have spared no pains to discover who she is; but she is excessively reserved, and talks so little, that there is no probability of intrapping her: yet, I think there is one way, by which your curiosity may be satisfied. Your lordship has seen a gay slighty lady with her, of whom she is very fond.
               
               "What, that ugly creature!" said my lord,
that fastened upon me in your shop; do you mean her? is miss Benson fond of that thing?
               
               "Oh! very fond," replied Mrs. Eccles.
They were shut up together four hours thi
                        •
                      very morning.
               
               "Then depend upon it she is the confident," said his lordship.
Oh! I guess your scheme, you would have me bribe her.
               
               "Bribe her, my lord," repeated Mrs. Ec-cles;
she seems to be a woman of 
                        •
                     me fashion. I dare say you would affront her extremely, by offering her a bribe.
               
               "I am very sure," interrupted his lordship,
that she will not be able to resist the bribe I shall

offer her: I will flatter her, my dear Mrs. Ec-cles, till I not only become master of all her friend's secrets, but even her own; but how shall I get an opportunity of talking to her alone?
               
               "I will engage," said Mrs. Eccles,
that it will not be long before she is here again; and, if your lordship should happen to be below when she comes, I fancy you would not find it difficult to detain her a little while from her friend.
               
               "Well," said my lord,
I leave it to you to manage this interview for me: when I know who this miss Benson is, I can make my ap-proaches accordingly; but when do you ex-pect her down stairs again?
                  Not till sup-per-time,
said Mrs. Eccles;
she is never weary of being alone.
                  Ah, that is a bad sign!
said he,
I doubt I have a rival—Well I will look in upon you at ten o'clock; per-haps I may find her with you.
               
               Mrs. Eccles assuring him she would engage her till that time, if possible. He went away hum-ming an opera-air, but with less vacuity of thought than usual, miss Benson being so much in his head, that, if he had been accustomed to reflexion, he would have concluded she was in his heart also, and that he was in love with her in earnest.
               
                  
Henrietta in the mean time was employed in writing her letter to Mr. Bale, to whom she gave a faithful account of all that had happened to her, and earnestly intreated his good offices towards effecting a reconciliation between her aunt and her. The inconveniencies she saw her-self exposed to in her present situation made her so desirous of this happy event, that her letter was almost a continued repetition of solicitations for that purpose. She begged him, in case he did not return to England, to write to her aunt, and endeavour to soften her, assuring him that she pretended to no greater liberty than what an obedient daughter might expect from a parent; being resolved to obey her will in every thing, provided she might not be compelled to marry the old baronet, nor confined in a nunnery with a view to the change of her religion.
               She expressed her satisfaction in the polite behaviour of his son to her, whom she would consider, she said, as her guardian in his absence, and would take no step without his advice and concurrence.
               She had finished her letter long before the milliner's usual hour of supper; but being re-solved to go down no more that evening, she spread letters and papers upon the table, as if she still continued extremely busy. Mrs. Eccles,

upon entering her chamber to know if she was ready for supper, found her with the pen still in her hand; and was a good deal mortified to hear her say, That, having dined so late, she would not sup that night, but would finish her letters before she went to bed.
               Mrs. Eccles did not think proper to press her; for her extreme reserve inspired her with a kind of awe, that made her cautious of giving her the least disgust; and Henrietta taking leave of her at her chamber-door for the night, she went away in great concern for the disappointment his lordship would meet with.
               It was indeed a very mortifying disappointment to him; for his impatience to see miss Courteney had brought him back much sooner than he had intended, and Mrs. Eccles, when she came down stairs, found him already in her parlour. When he heard the young lady's resolution, not to appear again that night, he took an uncere-monious leave of his complaisant landlady, and joined his company again at White's, wonder-ing to find himself in so ill an humour, on so slight an occasion, and that dice and Burgundy were scarce sufficient to call off his thoughts from this coy unknown, whom yet he did not despair of gaining.
            
            
               

               CHAP. IX.
               
                  A very short chapter.
               
               HEnrietta, upon her coming down next morning to breakfast, was informed by Mrs. Eccles, that a gentleman had been en-quiring for her that morning; but, hearing she was not up, had left word that he would call again. She did not doubt but it was Mr. Bale, and was a little confused that his punctuality should so much exceed her's in an affair that immediately concerned her; but the truth was, the young merchant's impatience to see her had outstripped time, and he came much ear-lier than she had reason to expect him.
               She retired immediately after breakfast, de-siring that the gentleman might be shown up stairs when he came again; for Mrs. Eccles, at her request, had made a small alteration in her apartment, and put her bed in an adjoining closet, that she might with more propriety re-ceive a visit in her own room.
               She was scarce got up stairs, when Mr. Bale was introduced: she apologised for the trouble he had in calling twice; and delivering him he
                     •
                  
                  

letter, recommended it to his care with extreme earnestness, assuring him, she should be very unhappy till she had an answer. She then en-quired more particularly concerning the visit Mr. Danvers had made him, anxious to collect from what he said what impression her flight had made upon her aunt.
               "I will not flatter you, miss," said Mr. Bale.
Lady Meadows is extremely enraged— Mr. Danvers mentioned nothing of a design to put you into a convent; but owned that your aunt had a very advantageous match in view for you, which you rejected—and—
               
               "Pray go on, sir," said Henrietta, observing that he hesitated.
               "Your aunt will have it," madam, pursued he,
that your affections are engaged—I can-not believe that a young lady of your good sense would make an improper choice— I should be very glad to be able to convince my father that nothing of this kind is the case— Excuse me, miss, I am very anxious for your happiness; it would give me infinite joy to find that your aunt is mistaken.
               
               
                  My aunt has no reason, sir, for her suspi-cions,
replied Henrietta;
but if my affec-tions were engaged, why should she think I

had made an improper choice?
"Ah! miss—" eagerly interrupted Mr. Bale.
               "I hope, sir," said miss Courteney, gravely▪
                  you will believe me, when I declare that my aunt's fears are without foundation: it con-cerns me greatly that your father should not entertain the same idle suspicions; and, were he here, I am sure I could convince him.
               
               "Dear miss," interrupted Mr. Bale,
I can-not suffer you to go on; do not imagine that I am not convinced. I had doubts, but you will excuse them; my great concern for your happiness was the cause—Rely upon me, I beg you; I will take care my father shall not be prejudiced, and till his return I am your guardian.
               
               Henrietta, upon a little reflection, was more pleased than offended at the doubts he so can-didly acknowledged; in so young a man, such plainness and sincerity were far more agreeable than the refinements of compliment and flat-tery, and more suitable to the cha
                     •
                  r in which he desired to be considered, and in which she did consider him. She thanked him fo
                     •
                   a solicitude, which she said was so advantageous to her; and to shew him that she wished to give him all imaginable satisfaction with regard to

her conduct, she entered into a particular detail of the situation she had been in with her aunt, whose views with regard to her, she explained: she slightly touched upon the character of the chaplain, and imputed to his great influence over her aunt, the rash and severe resolutions she had taken against her.
               She was proceeding to justify herself for hav-ing left her aunt's house; when Mr. Bale in-terrupted her with some emotion:
every rea-sonable person, miss (said he) that knows your motives for taking this step, will not only hold you excused, but will even ap-plaud you for not sacrificing yourself to riches.
               
               "I am sure," said Henrietta,
my aunt would hear reason, were it not for that invi-dious chaplain, who fills her with suspicions, and animates her resentment. Oh, that Mr. Bale was come!
               
               "I hope," said the young merchant,
that we shall see him shortly; but in the mean time, miss, let me know how I can be useful to you: do you like your present lodgings? are the people such as you approve? Let me know if you have any inclination to remove, and I will endeavour to settle you some-where that will be agreeable to my father; I suppose

you would have no objection to lodging with an acquaintance of his, and where you will be near him.
               
               "No, certainly," said miss Courteney,
it would be highly agreeable to me.
                  Well, miss,
said Mr. Bale, rising,
I will wait on you again in a day or two: but perhaps you have occasion for money, I have brought some with me; pray do not put yourself to any inconveniency, but draw for what sums you have occasion.
               
               "The trifle, sir," said Henrietta, blushing,
that is in your father's hands, will not admit of my drawing very largely; however, I will venture to take up twenty pounds, because I have occasion to purchase some trifling things; for all my cloaths are at my aunt's, and I am in great hopes she will not send them after me: that would look indeed,
said she, sigh-ing,
as if I must never expect to return a-gain; and I am resolved not to send for them, that it may appear I do expect and wish it.
               
               Mr. Bale, upon hearing this, pressed her to take forty guineas; but she said, twenty would do, having some money by her. He then took leave of her, with a promise to see her again soon; and left her greatly pleased with his friend-ly

            THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
            
               BOOK I.
               
                  CHAP. I. Which introduces our heroine to the acquaintance of the reader in no very advantageous situation. Page 1
               
               
                  CHAP. II. The commencement of a violent friendship between two young ladies, which has the usual consequences,

and in a stage-coach, I should have found what I have so earnestly sought for these three months, a person with whom I could contract a violent friendship, such as minds like our's are only capable of feeling.
               
               
                  I am extremely obliged to you, madam, for your good opinion,
said miss, Courteney;
I hope I shall never be so unfortunate as to for-feit it; indeed I have reason to think that in my present distressed situation, a friend is a blessing sent from heaven.
               
               "Well! but my dear Clelia," said this flighty lady,
you have not told me all your story— I call you Clelia, because you know it is so like common acquaintance to address one an-other by the title of Miss such a one— Ro-mantick names give a spirit to the corres-pondence between such friends as you and I are; but perhaps you may like another name better than Clelia; though I think that is a mighty pretty one, so soft and gliding, Clelia, Clelia— tell me do you like it, my dear?
               
               "Call me what you please," said miss Cour-teney, smiling a little at the singularity of her new friend; "but my name is Courteney."
               "Courteney is a very pretty sirname," said the lady;
I hope it is not disgraced with any

behaviour, and with the prospect of being soon with persons less obnoxious to her than Mrs. Eccles.
               She had scarcely deposited her money in her desk, when miss Woodby bolted into the room with her usual robust liveliness. Indeed her spirits were particularly exhilarated that day, having had the dear delight of conversing an whole hour with a beau, who said the civilest things to her imaginable; a piece of good for-tune she did not often meet with, and for which, though her vanity did not suffer her to find it out, she was wholly indebted to her fair friend, the beau being no other than the young lord who lodged in the house, with whom she had been engaged in conversation great part of the time that Mr. Bale was with miss Courteney. And if the reader is curious to know what passed be-tween them, he will be fully informed in the next chapter.
            
            
               

               CHAP. X.
               
                  Which gives the reader a specimen of female friendship.
               
               MR. Bale had been about half an hour with miss Courteney, when miss Woodby came to pay her a morning visit. As soon as Mrs. Eccles saw a chair set her down at the door, she flew up stairs to acquaint her noble lodger with her arrival; he instantly followed her down, and, meeting miss Woodby at the bottom of the stairs, affected a joyful surprise at his good fortune in seeing her so unexpectedly again.
               "The lady you are going to visit," said he,
is engaged with company, I believe; but I am resolved you shall not go away,
pursued he, taking her hand and leading her into the parlour,
I was so charmed with your conver-sation the first time I saw you, that it is not probable I will lose this opportunity of renew-ing our acquaintance.
               
               "Oh! your lordship is very obliging," said miss Woodby, suffering herself to be led into the parlour, while her transport at finding her-self

treated with so much gallantry, and her passionate desire of pleasing, threw her into such ridiculous affectation, that every limb and feature was distorted. Compliment, to which she was very little used, acted like strong li-quors upon a weak head, she became so intoxi-cated that she hardly knew what she did, which, joined to a natural aukwardness, pro-duced the most absurd blunders in her beha-viour; so that, endeavouring to trip with a lively motion to her seat, she overturned a light mahogany table that was in her way, and heard the crash of the china that was on it with very little emotion: the pleasure of shewing herself to the greatest advantage, absolutely engrossing her; and so unseasonably did she return his lord-ship's polite bow, when he had seated her in her chair, that their foreheads struck against each o-ther with a force like the concussion of two rocks; but this accident, no more than the former, dis-turbed miss Woodby's enjoyment of her present happiness; and, wholly insensible to the pain of her forehead, she immediately entered into conversation with his lordship, asking him, with the liveliest air imaginable, if he had been at Ranelagh last night; never once making the least reflection upon what he had told her of her friend's being engaged with company, which,

as she knew her situation, might well have raised her curiosity.
               The beau told her, he was not there;
but you and miss Benson were, I suppose,
added he.
               
                  Now your lordship mentions miss Ben-son,
said she (without answering his question)
pray tell me how you like her; is she not very handsome?
               
               "Yes," replied my lord,
she is handsome; but,
added he, looking full at her,
she wants a certain lady's agreeable vivacity.
               
               "Oh! your servant, my lord," said miss Woodby, making the application immediately;
but really, as your lordship observes, she wants vivacity; there is something heavy and lumpish in her.
               
               "Yet she is genteel," said my lord.
Oh! extremely genteel,
cried miss Woodby;
but does not your lordship think she is rather too tall? being so slender as she is, does not that heighth give her a certain aukwardness?— But I really think she has one of the finest complexions in the world!
               
               "Has she not rather too much bloom," said my lord. "Why, yes," replied miss Woodby,
I think her complexion wants delicacy; but

no objection can be made to her eyes, you must own, except that they are rather too large, and roll about heavily.
               
               "Upon the whole," said my lord,
miss Benson is tolerable; but I perceive you are extremely fond of her by your partiality.
               
               "Oh, my lord," said miss Woodby,
we are the greatest friends in the world; I con-ceived a violent friendship for her the first mo-ment I saw her— You cannot imagine how ardent my friendships are.
               
               "That is bad news for your lover," said my lord;
for, love and friendship (the wise say) exclude each other; but I hope miss Ben-son makes a proper return to so much affec-tion.
               
               
                  Oh! we are united in the strongest bands of friendship,
said miss Woodby;
the dear creature has not a thought that she conceals from me: and though I have not been ac-quainted with her a week, she has intrusted me with all her affairs.
               
               "Indeed!" said my lord,
not acquainted a week, and so communicative: are you sure, my dear miss Woodby, that this young lady is not a little silly.
               
               
                  
"I cannot say," replied miss Woodby,
that her understanding is the best in the world; but she has a very good heart.
               
               "Your own is very good, I do not doubt," said my lord,
which leads you to make so fa-vourable a judgment of another's—However, as she has laid open her affairs to you, you may, from the conduct she has avowed, col-lect your opinion of her.
               
               "Very true," said miss Woodby;
and I do assure your lordship, that I cannot help ap-proving of her conduct, because her motives were certainly just: though the ill-judging world may perhaps condemn her for running away from her aunt; and, from her hiding herself in a lodging, assuming another name, and such little circumstances, may take occa-sion to censure her, yet I am persuaded in my own mind that she is blameless.
               
               "Benson is not her name then," said my lord, affecting great indifference.
Oh, no my lord,
said miss Woodby,
her name i
                        •
                      Courteney.— But bless me— what have 
                        •
                      done! I hope, my lord, you will he secret I did not intend to tell your lordship mi
                        •
                      Benson's true name— I would not for th
                        •
                      world violate that friendship I have vow
                        •
                      to her.
               
               
                  
"Depend upon it, madam;" said my lord,
I will be secret as the grave. It is of no con-sequence to me to know her name; I shall never think of it again— But to be sure the poor girl is to be pitied— And so she ran away from her aunt; who is her aunt, pray?
               
               "Her aunt's name is Meadows," said miss Woodby,
lady Meadows; do you know her?
               
               "Not I," said my lord, throwing himself into a careless posture, and humming an air as if his attention was wholly disengaged; when suddenly turning again to miss Woodby with a smile—
               
                  Why (said he) should not you and I be as good friends as miss Benson and you are; our acquaintance is not of a much shorter date, and perhaps commenced nearly in the same manner?
               
               "I protest," said miss Woodby,
and so it did; for I first saw your lordship in Mrs. Ec-cles's shop, and I happened to meet miss Benson in a stage-coach about four days ago.
               
               "And there your acquaintance began?" said my lord;
you have improved it well since, if she has really been ingenuous enough to let

you into the true state of her affairs. I sup-pose there is a lover in the case.
               
               "A lover there certainly is," said miss Woodby;
but he was of her aunt's chusing; and it is from this lover she fled.
               
               "O brave girl!" said my lord;
but is she not fled to a lover of her own chusing?
"No, I believe not," said miss Woodby.
               "Well," said my lord,
I fancy she has de-ceived you, and that the gentleman who is with her now is her lover; he is a plain sort of man, Mrs. Eccles says, and looks like a merchant.
               
               "Oh!" said miss Woodby,
it is Mr. Bale her guardian, I suppose.
                  But this is a young man,
said my lord."
Then per-haps it is her brother,
said miss Woodby,
who was abroad with a nobleman, and is now returned.
               
               "I think I hear him coming down stairs," said my lord,
I have a mind to see him, as he goes out.
Saying this, he bowed and ran into the shop, leaving miss Woodby a little confused at his abrupt departure; and now, for the first time, she reflected that she had been indiscreet, and revealed too much of her friend's situation: but being incapable of taking any great interest in the concerns of another, thi
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
               
               
                  
Mr. Bale asked her pardon for not having consulted her before on that subject; but said, that by still continuing the name of Benson, she would be more secure from the search her aunt might make for her.
               Alas! sir," said miss Courteney,
I am afraid my aunt is too much offended to be at any pains to find me out—I am more ap-prehensive of the contrivances of Mr. Dan-vers; he no doubt has strong reasons for putting her upon such harsh measures. While I was alone and unprotected, I thought it necessary to conceal myself, since it was not impossible but I might have been forced away; but I am sure no such attempt will be made, when it is known that I am under my guar-dian's protection. I think therefore this gen-tlewoman ought to be acquainted with my name. I would avoid as much as possible the appearance of mystery. I shall never recol-lect, without pain, the sad necessity that has reduced me to it.
               
               "It will not be prudent," said Mr. Bale,
to alter our measures now: I have called you miss Benson; the discovery of your true name will come with more propriety from my father, when he has accommodated matters between your aunt and you: we may expect a letter

from him in a day or two, in which he will probably fix the time of his return. In the mean while I hope you will find yourself agreeably situated here— I have agreed for your board and lodging.
               
               "At a moderate price, I hope," said miss Courteney,
my circumstances do not entitle me to great expence.
                  I have taken care of that,
said Mr. Bale. Mrs. Willis coming in that moment, he recommended miss Cour-teney to her care, promising, when he heard from his father, to come immediately with the news. He then took his leave, and Mrs. Willis conducted her fair lodger to another parlour, where the cloth was laid for dinner, and intro-duced two pretty children to her, a boy and a girl, with whom the young lady was extremely pleased.
               There was in the countenance of this woman so much sweetness and complacency, and such an unaffected politeness in her behaviour, that Henrietta found herself insensibly disposed to like her, and was pleased to hear her 
                     ••
                  ll naturally into an account of herself with a frankness and simplicity that denoted the goodness of her heart▪
               
               From what she said, miss Courteney collected that she had made a marriage of choic
                     •
                   rather than of prudence, and that industry ha
                     •
                  
                  

odious vulgar christian name, such as Molly, or Betty, or the like.
               
               
                  I was christened Henrietta, after my mo-ther,
said miss Courteney.
Henrietta is well enough—returned the other; but positively, my dear, you must assume the name of Cle-lia when you write to me; for we must cor-respond every hour—Oh! what a ravishing pleasure is it to indulge the overflowings of one's heart upon paper! Remember to call me Celinda in your letters; and in all our private conversations, we shall have a thou-sand secrets to communicate to each other. But I am impatient to know all your story; it must needs be very romantick and pretty.
               
               "Alas!" said the charming Henrietta,
this is no time to relate my misfortunes; we are entered into Hammersmith, and there you say you must leave me: give me your advice, dear madam, as to the manner in which I must dispose of myself.
               
               "Dear madam," repeated the lady—
is that the style then you resolve to use; have you forgot that we have contracted a violent friend-ship, and that I am your Celinda, and you my Clelia.
               
               "I beg your pardon," said Henrietta;
I did not think of that name: well then, dear Ce-linda,

supplied the place of fortune: She found she was under great obligations to the elder Mr. Bale, who had settled her husband in an advantageous way at Leghorn, where he acted as his factor, and had enabled her to furnish that large house, in a very genteel manner, for the reception of such merchants as came from abroad, and were by him recommended to lodge with her. Her extreme tenderness for her husband, which had hurried her to Leghorn upon hearing that he was ill, that she might have the satisfaction of attending him herself, and her anxiety for her children, which brought her back as soon as he was recovered, that she might re-assume her care of them, were qualities which won her the esteem of miss Courteney. She marked with what becoming reserve she slightly touched upon her family and connections, which were very genteel, and by which Henrietta accounted for the easy politeness of her manners and beha-viour, so seldom found in persons of her rank.
               The young lady then turned the discourse upon her guardian's son, whose character she was desirous of being acquainted with. Mrs. Willis told her, that he was a sober diligent young man, and though the heir of immense riches, yet applied himself to business with as much industry as if he had had his fortune to

make: that he had for several years transacted his father's business in Holland, from whence he was but lately returned; and that he traded largely for himself.
               
                  Before I went to Leghorn (added she) there was some talk of his being to be married to the daughter of a very rich citizen; but since my return, which was about a week ago, I have heard nothing of it, not having seen Mr. Bale till the day that he came to tell me I should be so happy as to have you, madam, for my lodger.
               
               Miss Courteney having passed this day more agreeably than she had done any since she had left her aunt, was at night conducted by Mrs. Willis to a genteel apartment, consisting of a bed-chamber and dressing-room. She dismissed the maid whom Mrs. Willis ordered to attend and undress her; and being greatly fatigued for want of rest the preceding night, lost all 
                     •
                  er cares, her anxieties, and resentments, in the sweet oblivion of a calm and uninterrupted sleep.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The history still advances.
               
               HEnrietta, though an early riser, and though she rose next morning earlier than usual, yet found, upon her going down, Mrs. Willis had waited breakfast for her some time.
               As soon as the tea-equipage was removed, she retired to leave Mrs. Willis at liberty to go about her domestick affairs; and, when alone, was again assaulted with all those cruel reflec-tions which had almost incessantly filled her mind since her flight from her aunt. Among these, miss Woodby's treachery suggested none of the least painful: she was ashamed of her credulity, of her ill-placed confidence; indigna-tion for the shocking treatment she had met with from her succeeded. She was upon the point of sitting down to write to her, and to express the deepest resentment of her malice and trea-chery; when, recollecting the extreme levity of that young woman's temper, her ridiculous affectation, her folly, and insensibility, she thought it would ill become her to make serious remonstrances to one who only merited con-tempt;

that by taking no further notice of her, that contempt would be best expressed, and her own consciousness of the part she had acted would account for it.
               While she was thus ruminating, Mrs. Willis's maid introduced two porters bringing in a large trunk to her apartment. They delivered her the key sealed up, and a letter from Mr. Bale, in which he informed her, he would wait on her that afternoon.
               She opened the trunk trembling; it contained all her cloaths, linen, and all the trinkets her aunt had given her. She searched eagerly in it to see if there was a letter for her; but finding none, she threw herself into a chair, and burst into a flood of tears.
               While her aunt retained her cloaths, she had formed a feeble hope that she was anxious for her return, and would facilitate it, by assuring Mr. Bale, that she would no more press her to the hated marriage, nor think of con
                     •
                  ining her in a convent; but now what could she conclude, but that she had abandoned her for ever, and that a reconciliation was not to be expected. The most gloomy prospects offered themselves to her view, poverty, dependence, neglect; but what was worse than all, the loss perhaps of reputation. How should she be able to excuse

herself to the world for her late action? the world which judges actions only by their success: and when it beheld her unhappy and reduced to indigence, would not fail to conclude her guilty.
               In these melancholy apprehensions did she wear away the hours till summoned to dinner by Mrs. Willis, who, with tender concern, per-ceived that she was afflicted, but would not dis-cover that she perceived it; and used her utmost endeavours to amuse her, yet without any appa-rent solicitude, lest it should alarm her sensi-bility with a fear that her uneasiness was ob-served.
               Mr. Bale came according to his promise in the afternoon: his arrival gave almost as much sa-tisfaction to Mrs. Willis, as to her fair anxious lodger, from a hope that it would produce some comfort to her. The young merchant instantly discovered that Henrietta had been weeping; and, as soon as Mrs. Willis withdrew, he ten-derly approached her, and taking her hand, asked her if any thing new had happened to give her disturbance? Henrietta replied with a hasty question,
Have you any message for me from my aunt, sir?
               
               "I cannot say I have a message for you, miss," answered Mr. Bale;
your aunt has indeed

wrote to me.
"May I not see her letter?" asked miss Courteney again, eagerly.
To be sure,
said he, taking it out of his pocket, and presenting it to her,
I wish it was con-ceived in more favourable terms.
Miss Cour-tency read it trembling, and found it as fol-lows:

                     
                        
                           SIR,
                        
                        I HAVE given directions that every thing which belongs to that unhappy girl my niece should be sent to you, that if you know where she is, they may be conveyed to her. She has, by her scandalously running away from me, ruined her own character, and brought asper-sions upon mine; since even those who con-demn her most, will likewise blame me, as if I had acted unkindly towards her.
                        May the loss of my affection be the least of her misfortunes; though the worst that can possibly happen are likely to be the punishment of her ingratitude and folly.
                     
                  
               
               Henrietta returned the letter to Mr. Bale with a sigh.
I have indeed (said she) irrecoverably lost her affection: but, sir, it is fit my aunt should know where I am, and that I solicited your protection as soon as I could. This will

preserve me from some of those unfavourable suspicions which she mentions so severely. I will write to her instantly.
               
               "Oh! no, by no means," said Mr. Bale,
I think it will be best for me to make a visit to lady Meadows, and tell her, that you are under my care, and that I have placed you here.
               
               "And will you take the trouble to go to Windsor, sir," said miss Courtency, extremely delighted with this expedient.
I would go any where,
said Mr. Bale,
to serve you. Pray make yourself easy.
               
               "I shall be easier," said miss Courteney,
when my aunt knows that this scandalous run-away is under proper protection, and is ac-countable for all her actions to your father. Perhaps she may relent when she is convinced I am not so indiscreet as she imagined, and that I had no other motive for leaving her but the fear of being confined in a convent. If you find my aunt absolutely resolved not to be re-conciled to me, I must then consider how to dispose of myself in a way more suitable to my circumstances.
               
               "Remember, miss," said Mr. Bale, with some emotion,
that you are under my care— I hope you will take no resolutions without acquaint-ing me.
"No, certainly," replied Hen-rietta—

                     
but, sir, I have no fortune; I am lodged, attended, and treated, as if I had a very considerable one. This expence I shall not be willing to support a great while longer, it will break in too much upon that trifling sum, which was put into your father's hands, for my brother's use as well as mine. Heaven knows (said she, sighing) whether he is alive; if he is, he will probably need it; if he is not, it will go but a very little way in supporting me in the manner in which I now live.
               
               While Henrietta was speaking in this manner, Mr. Bale seemed ready to interrupt her several times, but checked himself as if upon better re-collection; when she was silent, he walked about the room, musing; then suddenly turning to-wards her,
               
                  These considerations, miss (said he) ought at least to be postponed till my father's return, and I think you may rely upon his prudence: he will certainly take care that your expences shall not exceed your income; in placing you here, I have done what I thought would be agreeable to him.
               
               Henrietta, observing that he was in some con-fusion, was concerned that she had spoke so freely, being apprehensive that he understood what she had said as a distrust of his prudence. She there-fore

told him, that if he found her aunt impla-cable, she would be extremely well satisfied to continue with Mrs. Willis as long as Mr. Bale should think it necessary.
               This assurance satisfied the young merchant, who left her with a promise to see lady Meadows the next day, and to wait on her as soon as pos-sible, with an account of the success of his visit.
               She passed this interval in a state of anxiety and suspence, that doubled every hour. As soon as she saw Mr. Bale again, she endeavoured to read in his countenance, before he spoke, the news he had brought her.
               "Well, miss (said he) I have seen your aunt." He paused; and Henrietta, in a saltering accent, begged him to tell her in one word, whether he had succeeded or not?
               
                  Indeed I have not (said he) lady Meadows seems resolved never to forgive you for running away from her; but don't despair, my father may have more weight with her.
                  It is at least some comfort (said she) that she knows I am under your protection.
                  I have a letter from my father,
said Mr. Bale,
he has got the gout in his right hand; he dic-tated it to one of his clerks, and therefore speaks with reserve of you. He desires me to tell you, that he hopes to be in London in

three weeks at farthest, when he will use his utmost endeavours to reconcile you to your aunt; and, in the mean time, recommends you most affectionately to my care.
               
               This account of her guardian's kind concern for her, gave some relief to the depressed spirits of miss Courteney, who, although she had not flattered herself with any hope from the young merchant's mediation with her aunt, was as much shocked at the confirmation of her continued displeasure, as if she had not expected it. How-ever, she expressed a grateful sense of his ser-vices, and disposed herself to wait with patience for the arrival of Mr. Bale, who alone could d
                     •
                  
                  termine her destiny.
            
            
               

what would you advise me to do? I am going to London, there to conceal myself from the search that lady Meadows will doubt-less make for me when she hears I have left her house: all my hope of a reconciliation with her is through the interposition of a friend. I have a brother, who has been abroad these ten years, and whom I every day expect to hear is arrived; but I dare not show myself to any of lady Meadows's acquaintance, lest I should be hurried back, and sacrificed to what she calls my interest. I know so little of the town, that I am afraid I may take up my residence in an improper house, among people where my honour, or at least my re-putation, may be in danger. Direct me, dear madam— My dear Celinda, I would say, direct me what to do in this dreadful di-lemma.
Here she paused, anxiously expect-ing the answer of her new friend, which will be found in the following chapter.
            
            
               

               CHAP. XIV.
               
                  Containing several mysterious circumstances.
               
               HEnrietta had been about a fortnight in the house of Mrs. Willis, whose good sense and polite behaviour had entirely won her esteem, when, on a sudden, she became reserv-ed and thoughtful, and often failed in those little attentions which mark respect, and an extreme willingness to oblige. She, who had avoided the least appearance of curiosity to know more of her affairs than what she pleased to disclose, now asked questions with an inquisitive air, and seemed to seek for occasions of collecting a fuller knowledge of her from her conversation.
               Henrietta had insisted upon her being made acquainted with her true name and circum-stances, from the time that Mr. Bale had ac-knowledged to her aunt that she was under his care, which had produced no other alteration in Mrs. Willis than rather an increase of respect towards her, which she conceived due to her birth.
               The young lady, whose extreme sensibility was not the least of her misfortunes, observed her

increasing coldness, and suffered great uneasi-ness. She had willingly indulged a tenderness and esteem for her; and was concerned to find from her altered behaviour, that either she had failed in her endeavours to acquire the friendship of Mrs. Willis, or that the woman whom she had conceived so good an opinion of, was in reality not deserving of hers.
               However, she was determined not to let Mr. Bale perceive that she was dissatisfied with her behaviour; and she continued to live with her in the same easy manner as formerly, notwithstanding the coldness and constraint with which she was now treated.
               Mr. Bale scarce ever failed to call and see her once a day; but one day he returned about an hour after he had been with her, and told her he had just received letters from his father, in which he acquainted him that Mrs. Willis would in a few days have several foreign merchants in her house, whom he had recommended to lodge with her; and that, his stay in Holland being protracted for some time longer, he thought it would not be proper for miss Courteney to reside with Mrs. Willis till his return, as her house would be full of men.
               "My father," added Mr. Bale,
desires me to ask you, miss, whether you have any objection

to go into the country for a few weeks. He has a distant relation, a widow, who lives at Hampstead, with whom he says he will be glad to find you at his return; he begs you will excuse his not writing to you, having the gout still in his hand, and desires me to assure you of his tenderest concern for your welfare.
               
               A week before, Henrietta would have thought it a misfortune to have left Mrs. Willis to go into any other lodging; but she was so piqued by her behaviour, that she heard this news without any uneasiness, and told Mr. Bale she would implicitly follow her guardian's direc-tions.
               He said he would conduct her to his cousin's himself; and took leave of her, after he had de-sired her to be ready for her little journey the next day.
               Mrs. Willis came up to her apartment soon after Mr. Bale went away.
I hear I am soon to lose you, miss,
said she, entering. "Yes," replied miss Courteney cooly,
such is my guardian's pleasure; but,
added she smiling,
you will not miss me; you will have other company.
"Other company!" repeated Mrs. Willis.
               "Mr. Bale tells me," said miss Courteney,
that your house will be full soon; some gen-tlemen

recommended by his father will be here.
               
               "It is strange," said Mrs. Willis,
that I should know nothing of it; have you had a letter from your guardian, miss?
               
               "No," replied miss Courteney;
but his son has heard from him—But,
pursued she, after a little pause,
it is strange, as you say, that you should not know you are to have new lodgers.
               
               Mrs. Willis looked at her attentively, as she spoke these words, "May I ask you, miss," said she, "the cause of your sudden removal?"
               "I know of none," replied miss Courteney;
but that, my guardian thinks it will not be proper for me to stay among so many gentle-men as will shortly be your lodgers.
               
               
                  I wish there had been a better reason than that,
said Mrs. Willis;
for I am very sure I am to have no lodgers recommended by the elder Mr. Bale, otherwise I should have known it.
               
               "Has not his son told you so?" asked miss Courteney, in great confusion of thought.
               "He told me nothing," replied Mrs. Willis, "but that you are to leave me to-morrow."
               "Lord bless me," cried the young lady, in great emotion, "what can this mean!"
               
                  
"Suffer me," said Mrs. Willis, looking on her with tenderness and concern,
to ask you a few questions: when you know my motives, I am sure you will not think that it is an imper-tinent curiosity which makes me take this li-berty, but my anxiety for you.
               
               "Dear madam," interrupted miss Courteney,
ask me what you please: you alarm me ex-cessively.
               
               "I would not alarm you," said Mrs. Willis;
but I will own to you that I have fears, nay more that I have had doubts; but I see I have been to blame with regard to the latter: has Mr. Bale shewn you his father's letters, miss?
               
               "Shewn them to me!" repeated Henrietta,
no—but sure—dear Mrs. Willis explain your-self—I am ready to sink with the apprehen-sions you have raised in my mind.
               
               "Compose yourself, my dear," said Mrs. Willis, drawing her chair nearer to her, and taking her hand tenderly.
I mean you well; be assured I do: and now I will tell you all that has been upon my mind for several days past. Never did I imagine that I should en-tertain unfavourable suspicions of the son of my benefactor; but indeed, my dear miss,

I am afraid he has not acted ingenuously by you.
               
               That moment a loud knocking at the door interrupted Mrs. Willis. She started from her chair. "Who can this be?" said she in some surprise; "I will go and see." She ran hastily out of the room; but returning again instantly, "Possibly," said she,
it may be Mr. Bale: remember, miss, that it is my advice to you not to leave my house, if he should desire you, at least till you have heard what I have to say.
               
               She uttered these words with extreme earnest-ness and concern, and went immediately down stairs, leaving Henrietta in an agony of doubt, anxiety, and astonishment.
               Her surprise kept her motionless in her chair, till she was roused by the voice of a woman upon the stairs that led to her apartment, whom she heard say, with great haughtiness of accent,
No, there is no occasion for that ceremony; I shall go in without introduction, I assure you.
               
               She suddenly started from her chair, and was going towards the door, when she saw it 
                     •
                  ung open with some violence, and a lady of a 
                     
                   disagreeable figure but richly dressed, and in the utmost extremity of the fashion, appear at the entrance.
               
                  
Miss Courteney, recovering a little from her surprise, looked at the lady, in order to recol-lect whether she had ever seen her before; but being wholly unacquainted with her features, and observing that she stood still and gazed at her without speaking, she concluded the visit could not be designed for her.
               "I fancy, madam," said she, approaching her,
you are mistaken; I am not the person you seek.
               
               "No, madam," returned the lady with an "emphasis, "I am not mistaken;" then throw-ing herself haughtily into a chair,
I shall not ask your leave,
said she, with a malignant smile,
to sit down in this apartment; I may take that liberty with what belongs to Mr. Bale—Do you know me pray, madam.
                  
               
               "Not I, truly," replied miss Courteney, indignation at this insolent treatment having banished her former terror and surprise, and seat-ing herself, with a careless air, just opposite to her,
Pray let me know what is your busi-ness with me,
said she.
               "Port creature!" said the stranger, affecting contempt, while her lips quivered with rage, and her whole frame seemed convulsed with the violence of her emotions:
What! you would

have me understand you to be a woman of fortune, would you not?—Upon my word,
said she, looking round her,
this is a very handsome apartment. Your dressing-room, forsooth! You have your forms, no doubt, and receive company in your dressing-room in a morning. A very genteel dishabi
                        •
                      too; and your face varnished over so nicely!— Who would not conclude that white and re
                        •
                      to be natural?
               
               "You are come here to insult me, I find," said Henrietta, her fine face glowing with in-dignation.—
I cannot imagine what cause I have given you for this strange rudeness. I never, as I can remember, ever saw you be-fore; and insist upon your quitting my apart-ment. You can have no business with me, I am sure.
               
               "Indeed but I have, minx," said the stranger, with the pale rage of a fury;
and my business is to turn you out of this apartment: my for-tune shall not be wasted in supporting such wretches.
               
               "Your fortune!" cried miss Courteney, in astonishment:
What have I to do with 
                        
                      or your fortune?—Who are you?
               
               
                  
This moment Mrs. Willis entered the room: "Excuse me, ladies," said she;
I heard high words between you.
               
               "Ladies!" interrupted the stranger:
how dare you, woman, join me with such a crea-ture?—What business have you to intrude?
               
               "Madam," replied Mrs. Willis,
I came to inform this young lady, my boarder, who you are: she does not know you.—Miss, this is young Mr. Bale's lady.
               
               "What!" cried Henrietta, in the utmost astonishment, "is Mr. Bale married?"
               "Oh—you are surprised then," said the lady, with a sneer:
disappointed too, perhaps.— You had the confidence, I suppose, to think he would have married you one of these days!—Tell me, you wicked thing, did he ever give you such hopes?—Oh I could tear his eyes out!
said she, rising, and walking about the room like one frantick, while the enormous length of her negligee swept the room, like the train of a tragedy-queen.—
A wretch, to use me thus! me, who has brought him such a fortune! But I'll be revenged: he shall never have a quiet moment. I'll make him know what it is to slight a woman of virtue.
               
               
                  
All this time Henrietta continued silent, rooted in her chair, and with difficulty restrained the anguish of her heart from rising to her eyes, lest this outrageous woman of virtue should exult in her distress, yet she saw that she was betrayed; that Mr. Bale had acted weakly, if not basely▪ her reputation was ruined, yet she would not stoop so low as to enter into any justification of her-self to a woman who had treated her so cruelly, upon a bare suspicion. The pride of affronted virtue came to her aid, against that torrent of overwhelming grief, which had for some mo-ments absorbed all her faculties: she rose from her chair, and approaching Mrs. Bale,
               "The error you are in," said she,
would have moved my compassion, had you treated me with less insolence. I scorn to undeceive you.—Go, learn from your husband who I am; and blush, if you can, for the injurious language you have given a person as much your superior by birth, as in that virtue perhaps of which you boast, and which has not with-held you from such indecent transports of jea-lousy, as it would become a virtuous woman to suppress.
               
               The superiority with which she spoke, the dignity of her air and manner, struck her mean-souled adversary with such awe, that she con-tinued

               CHAP. III.
               
                  Which illustrates an observation of Rochefoucault's, that in the misfortunes of our friends there is al-ways something that does not displease us.
               
               "I Protest, my dearest Clelia," said the lady,
your fears are very natural upon this oc-casion. I should in your situation be almost distracted. Even our parents' watchful cares are hardly sufficient to guard us against the attempts of insolent men: how much more then are those attempts to be dreaded, when we are left defenceless and exposed. Believe me, my dear, I sympathize truly with you in this misfortune. Good Heaven! I think I should die with apprehension were I in your case.
               
               "Dont terrify me," said miss Courteney, trembling.
I have taken an imprudent step, but I must make the best of it now: Provi-dence, I hope, will be my guard.
               
               "I would not terrify you, my dear," said the lady;
but I must repeat, that were I in your case, I think my fears would dictract me. Thank Heaven? I am protected by watchful parents, cautious relations, and prudent friends;

silent for some moments, with her hag-gard looks fixed on her. Envy, at the view of so lovely a form, added new stings to her rage and jealousy. At length, she poured forth a torrent of reproaches, with such eagernese of malice, that her words were scarce intelligible.
               "I am not used to scolding," said miss Courteney, calmly, retiring towards her bed-chamber,
and you, Mrs. Bale, seem to be an excellent scold.
               
               The lady, provoked at this appellation, em-ployed the coarsest language imaginable to ex-press her resentment of the injury; but miss Courteney took shelter in her bedchamber, the door of which she double-locked.
               "Insolent trollop," said Mrs. Bale, raising her voice that she might hear her,
call me scold! I scorn your words, you saucy, impu-dent, audacious hussy: I never could scold in my life—no, you dirty puss:—I am a woman of breeding; I am none of your beggarly quality: I had forty thousand pounds to my portion, you proud paultry minx.—Scold! call me a scold—
               
               "Pray, madam, compose yourself," said Mrs. Willis,
and do me the favour to walk down into my parlour.—Here is some mis-take.

I am pretty certain you have i
                        •
                     d this young lady by your suspicions.
               
               "Young lady!" interrupted Mrs. Bale,
What makes her a lady?—A fine world it is, now-adays, when beggars are called ladies. I would fain know what fortune she has to put her upon a footing with ladies.
               
               "I know nothing of her fortune, madam," said Mrs. Willis.
               "Fortune! poor wretch!" said Mrs. Bale:
a few paultry hundreds.—Such ladies▪ Sup-pose her grandfather was an earl, has she a fortune? answer me that.
               
               "I don't know, really," replied Mrs. Willis. "Well then," said Mrs. Bale,
why do you give her a title she has no right to? But why do I talk to you, vile wretch? you are my husband's confident.
               
               This thought renewed all her rage, and she loaded Mrs. Willis with such shocking in
                     •
                  
                  -tives, that the poor woman could not refrain from tears.
               "Your husband's father, madam," said she,
has been a generous benefactor to me: I con-sider that, and will be patient under you
                        •
                      abuse.
               
               The word abuse was such a charge upon th
                     •
                   lady's want of breeding, that she called M
                     •
                  
                  

Willis a hundred saucy jades, for daring to say that she was capable of abusing any body; and having almost exhausted her spirits with the violence of her passions, and finding that Mrs. Willis sat silent, and took no further notice of what she said, she flounced out of the room, declaring, that her father-in-law should know that she acted as procuress for his son, and that she should return to her rags and poverty again.
               Mrs. Willis thought her behaviour dispensed with her from treating her with that respect, which she would have otherwise paid to Mr. Bale's daughter-in-law, and therefore did not offer to wait on her down stairs, but rung the bell for somebody to attend her, and, locking the door after her, she tapped gently at miss Courteney's chamber-door, telling her, that Mrs. Bale was gone.
               Who is this fury?" said the young lady, as she came out.
You have been treated very ill by her, Mrs. Willis, I am sorry for it.
                  And I am sorry for what you have suffered, my dear miss,
replied Mrs. Willis;
but Mr. Bale is to blame for it all. I am now sure you are entirely innocent.
               
               "Innocent!" repeated miss Courteney, with a sigh —
How low am I fallen, when that

could ever be doubted! But Mrs. Willis, you knew, it seems, that Mr. Bale was married, I am surprised you never mentioned his wife to me.
               
               "And are you not surprised, miss," said Mr. Willis,
that Mr. Bale never mentioned he
                        •
                      to you?
               
               "To be sure that was very strange," repiled Henrietta, "what could he mean by it!"
               "Ah! miss," said Mrs. Willis,
a very little reflection on Mr. Bale's behaviour might have informed you that he was in love with you.
               
               "In love with me!" cried Henrietta, blush-ing with shame and resentment.
               "Yes," said Mrs. Willis,
in love with you; if that can be called love, which seeks the ruin of its object. I saw it in his looks, his words, cautious as they were, his whole behaviour shewed it but too plainly.
               
               "And this man married too!" cried Hen-rietta, lifting up her eyes.
To what have
                        •
                     , by one rash step, reduced myself! But still, Mrs. Willis, my first difficulty 
                        
                     , why did you avoid speaking of his wife to me?
               
               "Hear me, my dear, with patience," inter-rupted Mrs. Willis,
I shall be very f
                        •
                     e; but my plainness ought not to offend you, s
                        •
                     e

it is a mark of my sincerity.
Mrs. Willis paused here a moment, and then proceeded, as will be sound in the following chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  In which those circumstances are partly ex-plained.
               
               
                  YOU may remember I told you, soon after you came here, that before I went to Leghorn, I heard Mr. Bale was courting the daughter of a rich citizen; I had been re-turned but three or four days, when he came to me to know if I could accommodate a young lady, a ward of his father's, with lodging and board; to which I readily con-sented.
               
               
                  It is no flattery, miss, to tell you, that when I saw you, I was charmed with your person and behaviour: your beauty, and Mr. Bale's extreme assiduity, made it seem highly probable that he loved you. I set myself to examine his behaviour, and the observations I made on it confirmed my suspicions. I had then heard nothing of his being married, having upon my return been so taken up with

my domestick affairs, that I had no leisure to make or receive visits, from which I could re-ceive any information concerning what had happened in my absence.
               
               
                  I was a little surprised to find that you had been introduced to me under a feigned name, and that you were not called Benson, but Courteney. However, I made no reflections upon that circumstance, till, about t
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     s afterwards, I accidentally heard that Mr. Bale had been married two months; then it was, that in my astonishment at his so contiously avoiding any mention of his wife, I was led to reflect upon what you yourself had informed me of your situation, your flight from your friends; Mr. Bale's apparent tenderness for you awakened suspicions: I own it disadvan-tageous to you.
               
               
                  I waited impatiently for the ho
                        •
                      of Mr. Bale's visiting you, and the moment I saw him wished him joy on his marriage, expressing my surprise that I should not have heard of that event from himself. He coloured, and seemed in great confusion; and, after a little pause, Have you said any thing of it to miss Courteney? said he.
               
               
                  
"I replied that I had heard the news but an "hour before, and had not seen you since.
               
                  You will oblige me (said he) if you will not mention it to her— I stared— My wife (continued he) is the most unreasonable wo-man in the world; she has taken it into her head to be horribly jealous of me, though we have been married so short a time— It was a match (and he sighed) of my father's making — but I assure you I am very un-happy.
               
               
                  I am sorry for it, sir (interrupted I) but what reasons have you for concealing from miss Courteney that you are married?
               
               
                  It is a sad thing, Mrs. Willis (said he) when a man is not master in his own family. I hope that is not your case, sir, answered I. Indeed but it is, he replied. Miss Courte-ney, you know, is agreeable. Oh! very agreeable, said I. My wife is of such an un-accountable humour (resumed he) that I durst not offer miss Courteney, though my father is her guardian, an asylum in my house, till her relations were reconciled to her, lest I should be teazed with jealousy and suspi-cions.
               
               
                  

                  I am persuaded, sir (said I) that miss Cour-teney has too much good sense to take 
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     iss that you did not invite her to your house as things were circumstanced. She has more reason to be displeased at your concealing your marriage from her, which every body knows, and which she would soon know if she lived less retired.
               
               
                  Let me intreat you, Mrs. Willis (said he) not to mention it to miss Courteney. I would not upon any account that she should know I am married, yet could not offer her an apart-ment in my house.
               
               
                  Indeed, sir (said I, smiling) you make 
                        
                      matter of more consequence than you need to do; miss Courteney will not consider it as any slight to her.
               
               
                  She must either think herself slighted (re-sumed he, with quickness) by my not invis
                        •
                      her, or she will divine the reason, which would be worse; for in that case, her delicacy is so extreme, that she would never allow me to see her.
               
               
                  Ah, thought I, is it so! He perceived he had almost betrayed himself; and changed the discourse, asking me many questions about my husband, whose diligence and fidelity he highly extolled, dropping hints of designs in his sa-vour;

and indeed it is in his power to be of great service to him.
               
               "But I had no satisfaction," pursued Mrs. Willis,
in what he said; for, to my appre-hension, it appeared as if he sought to bribe me into a concurrence with his designs, what-ever they were. Therefore I sat silent, and I believe discovered by my looks, that I did not like his proceedings; for he rose up, and, with an air of some resentment, said,
               
               
                  That his father would be in town in a few days, and would then dispose of you properly; and that in the mean time he must insist upon my being silent with regard to his marriage, since it would throw him into great confusion if you knew it; and added, that he thought he might reasonably expect this instance of my complaisance.
               
               
                  I told him that I was very glad to hear his father would be in town so soon, and would take the young lady under his own care: that since he desired it, I would not be the first to acquaint you with his marriage; I owned his reasons appeared to me very whimsical: but that it was not my business to be impertinently curious; and that I should concern myself no farther about it.
               
               
                  

                  He seemed pleased with this indifference, and went up stairs to see you. I had already taken my resolution, my dear miss Courteney, which was to write to his father, and ac-quaint him with the whole transaction. I was willing to leave the young gentleman in a false security, that he might not suspect my design, and take measures to render it useless; and not being sure how far even you might be trusted, for my suspicions of you, though weakened, were not yet removed, I thought it best to say nothing that could alarm you, till I had received the old gentleman's advice how to act; but my measures were broke by Mr. Bale's resolving to take you from my house.
               
               
                  He came into the parlour to me to-day, be-fore you saw him, and told me, that he had directions from his father to send you into the country, because he did not expect to return for some time yet, and he did not approve of your residing in London till he came.
               
               
                  You may easily imagine, miss, that I was not satisfied with the cause he assigned for this sudden resolution. I was now alarmed for you; and judged it necessary to acquaint you imme-diately with Mr. Bale's being married, that

yet hardly thus can I think myself secure from these enterprising wretches the men.
               
               This young lady had indeed a stronger pro-tector than, all these, which she did not mention, or perhaps was insensible of; and that was the extreme disagreeableness of her whole person. Her features, it is true, could not be called ir-regular, because; few faces were ever distin-guished with a set more uniformly bad. Her complexion, which was a composition of green and yellow, was marvelously well suited to her features. Nor was it possible to make any invi-dious comparisons between her face and her shape, since it was hard to decide which was worse.
               Miss Courteney, who had burst into tears, occasioned by her reflections on her own help-less situation, compared with the advantages her friend enjoyed, and which she had so often-tatiously enumerated, was upon the point of so-liciting her advice again; when the lady joy-fully exclaimed,
Oh! there is my aunt's house, my dear Clelia, we must part imme-diately.
               
               "Sure," said Henrietta, sighing,
you will not leave me till you have advised me what to do.
               
               
                  

you might not fall ignorantly into his snares. I began with asking you questions, to which the openness and simplicity of your answers convinced me that you were imposed upon greatly by Mr. Bale. I was going to explain myself clearly, when Mrs. Bale's arrival in-terrupted me. You know with what earnest-ness I intreated you not to leave my house; I was apprehensive that he was come to hurry you away, and I trembled for the danger to which you were exposed.
               
               
                  When I left you, I met Mrs. Bale upon the stairs; and, not knowing her, I asked, who it was she desired to see? The young woman that lodges with you, said she, in a tone of voice that surprised me. I told her, I would go and acquaint you that there was a lady wanted to speak to you: but she rushed by me, saying, there is no need of that ce-remony, I shall introduce myself.
               
               
                  Her behaviour recalling to my mind what Mr. Bale had said of his wife's jealousy, I suspected this was the lady; and, to be as-sured, I enquired of a servant, who attended her, who she was. The moment I knew it was really her, I flew up stairs, being full of concern for you; for I saw a storm in her

countenance, and dreaded the consequence— The poor young man is indeed plagued with a jealous wife; and in that particular he told the truth. But, my dear miss, I see plainly that the mystery he has made of his connexi-ons with you has rouzed her suspicions.
               
               
                  It is all an incomprehensible mystery to me,
said Henrietta, sighing:
Mr. Bale has certainly deceived me, for what purposes I know not; but I know that I will never see him again, but in the presence of his father, to have this dark affair cleared up.
               
               
                  But, my dear Mrs. Willis, how shall I ex-press what my heart feels for you, who have shewn so tender a regard for my honour and quiet— How miserable might I have been, had you been less good—I am sure I may rely upon your prudence— Advise me then what to do: you know my story; you see my present situation— I have no friend, no pro-tector.
               
               "My dear miss," interrupted Mrs. Willis,
there is but one thing for you to do, and that is, to return to your aunt.
               
               "How can I appear before her?" said Hen-rietta,
after having so greatly disobliged her

by my flight; a flight which has had such dis-graceful consequences. Besides, do not the same motives that obliged me to leave her, still subsist? and are they not equally strong against my returning?
               
               "I would not pain you, my dear miss," said Mrs. Willis,
with the recollection of a past error, were it not to make it useful to you in your present circumstances— Warned as you were of your aunt's designs, it was impossible to carry them into execution without your concurrence: your flight therefore was not necessary, and, if not necessary, surely it was highly imprudent; and, in my opinion, can only be repaired by a voluntary return.— Need I tell a young lady of your delicacy, that imputations, however unjust, fully, if they do not stain a character. Do you think this woman's frantic jealousy will be silent? how can you otherwise prove the falshood of her assertions, than by returning to your aunt, and making yourself accountable to her for all your actions? Nothing can be more un-fortunate for youth and beauty, than to be left to its own guidance and discretion. The world seldom attributes too much prudence to youth: however regular our conduct may be in that

gay time of life, it is supposed to be owing to the care and attention of our parents or rela-tions, rather than to our own circumspection. Can a young woman, who voluntarily sets herself free from that restraint, hope to escape unfavourable censures, when those who owe it to chance only that they are not subjected to any control, suffer perhaps in the opinion of the world, because they are possessed of a liberty which they may make an improper use of?
               
               
                  You see, my dear, to what inconveniencies you have been exposed: these are the neces-sary consequences of your unprotected state; there is no doubt but you would repel every attempt to the prejudice of your honour: but does not modesty, if not virtue, suffer by such attempts? and can you acquit yourself of im-prudence, when you reflect that you have thrown yourself into a situation which renders you liable to them?
               
               "It was indeed," said Henrietta, who, by her blushes and confusion, acknowledged the strength of her reasons,
imprudence to throw myself into this situation, but it would be guilt to continue in it. Oh! that I had had such a friend as you to advise with at Windsor, I

should never have taken a step, which I blush to think of now. I will return to my aunt, Mrs. Willis, I will throw myself upon her mercy; and if I must be made a sacrifice of —
               
               
                  Indeed, my dear (interrupted Mrs. Willis) these fears are groundless: you cannot possibly be married against your consent; and you have it always in your power to refuse. As for the convent, you cannot be cheated into it, that is certain, since you know she had such a design, and may guard against it.
               
               
                  But suppose (said miss Courteney) that she should not receive me again; Mr. Bale found her inexorable.
               
               "Ah! my dear," replied Mrs. Willis, shaking her head,
Mr. Bale was not a fit person to be trusted with such a negociation: but, how-ever that may be, I am sure, when your aunt knows in what manner he has acted, and the reasons you have to distrust him, she will think it necessary to take you out of his hands. Your return to her will remove her suspicions against you, and convince her that it was from a sudden impulse of fear only, that you left her; and that you had no desire of

disposing of yourself contrary to her inclina-tions.
               
               
                  But I have one savour to beg of you (said miss Courteney) and that is, that you will go along with me to my aunt; resentment may shut her ears to all that I can say to her, but I think, she cannot resist your pleas, urged with that good sense you possess in so high a de-gree.
               
               
                  Doubt not, my dear (said Mrs. Willis) but I am ready to do you any service in my power.
               
               "What hinders us then from going directly?" cried Henrietta, eagerly;
we can get a post-chaise, and —
               
               
                  The day is too far advanced (replied Mrs. Willis) we will, if you please, set out early to-morrow morning, I will take care to have a post-chaise in readiness; in the mean time you may depend upon being secure from any disagreeable visits here, neither Mr. Bale nor his fury of a wife shall see you, unless you de-sire they should.
               
               
                  Notwithstanding the treatment she gave me (said miss Courteney) I would rather see her than him; but you may well imagine, Mrs. Willis, that I do not wish to see either of them.
               
               
                  

                  Make yourself easy, my dear (said Mrs. Willis) you shall meet with no insult of any kind in my house.
               
               Henrietta embraced her with tears of grati-tude, which the good woman returned with a parental tenderness, and then left her to give the necessary directions for their little journey the next day.
            
            END of VOL. I.
         
      
   

"Lord! my dear," said the other,
one young creature is not qualified to give another ad-vice upon such occasions. I wish it was in my power to give you proper advice; you know I have vowed to you an inviolable friendship.
And, —
               Here the coachman, as he had been direct-ed, stopped before a large handsome house; and a well-dressed footman immediately ap-pearing, came forwards to open the coach-door.
               "Hear me one word," cried miss Courteney, perceiving this tender friend was actually going to leave her without any farther solicitude for her safety —
upon the strength of that invio-lable friendship you have vowed to me, I will venture to ask a favour of you: it is, pursued she, that you will recommend me to some person of your acquaintance in London, who may direct me to a decent house, where I can remain in safety till my brother's arrival.
               
               "I vow this is a lucky thought," said the lady;
I believe I can serve you, my dear Clelia; but you must step in with me to my aunt's. John,
said she to the servant,
is my aunt at home.
The man told her his lady was just gone to take an airing.
               
                  
"That's well," said the lady;
we shall have an opportunity to settle this matter: but, my dear Clelia, I think it will be best to discharge the coach, the fellow possibly will not wait. I'll send my aunt's servant to take a place for you in the Hammersmith stage, which I know does not set out this half hour.
               
               Henrietta readily complied, overjoyed that she had really found a sincere friend in the person of this whimsical lady; who, having led her into a large well-furnished parlour, ordered some tea to be brought, and then told her, that she would give her a letter to her millener, who was a very good sort of a woman, and where she might depend upon being absolutely safe.
               "When I was last in town," pursued she,
which was about three weeks ago, her first floor was empty; and in this season of the year, I believe she will let it to you for two guineas a week.
               
               "A single room will do for me," said miss Courteney;
my circumstances do not entitle me to magnificent lodgings, and my business is to keep myself private.
               
               "Well, well, my dear, be that as you please," 
                     •
                  aid the other;
I will write the letter with-out mentioning what lodgings you require.
                  

Saying this, she called for pens and paper; and having wrote the following billet, gave it to miss Courteney for her perusal.
               
                  
                     
                        Dear Mrs. EGRET,
                     
                     THE lady who will deliver you this, is one for whom I have the most violent friend-ship imaginable. You know how ardent my friendships are; but I think I never had any so firmly rooted as this, though our acquaint-ance commenced but a few hours ago. This dear friend having desired me to recommend her to some person to lodge with, I thought of you, knowing you can accommodate her with genteel apartments.I am, dear Mrs Egret,
                     
                        Your humble servant, E. WOODBY.
                     
                  
               
               Henrietta having read the letter, returned it again into the hands of her friend, grate-fully acknowledging the favour, although she had some objections to it; for she did not ap-prove of the words genteel apartments, being resolved not to exceed a very moderate price: but she rightly conceived that miss Woodby ra-ther listened to her own pride than her conve-niency,

by throwing in that circumstance, and therefore took no notice of it.
               The letter being sealed and directed, miss Courteney carefully deposited it in her pocket, and the two ladies were preparing to drink their tea, when the footman entered, and said the stage-coach was just going off: our fair traveller in-stantly rose up, and took leave of her friend, who having prevailed upon her to drink a glass of sack and water, since she was disappointed of her tea, parted with her with an affectionate em-brace, and a promise that she would see her in town very shortly.
               Miss Courteney finding only one passenger in the coach, who was a grave elderly woman, she resumed her journey with some kind of chearful-ness, having thus happily got over her appre-hensions of falling into bad company, where chance might have directed her to lodge.
            
            
               

               CHAP. IV.
               
                  In which our heroine, through inattention, falls into the very difficulty she had taken such pains to avoid.
               
               BUT this cessation from uneasiness did not last long: for the mind which can fasten with violence but upon one circumstance of dis-tress at a time, and being suddenly relieved from that, is sensible of a calm, which, compared with its former feelings, may be called pleasure, yet soon selects another object to engross its attention, and fixes on it with equal anxiety and sollicitude. Thus it fared with our lovely heroine, whose others cares had all been swallowed up in re-flections on the danger to which her honour was exposed. Eased of these apprehensions by the good offices of miss Woodby, she was happy for a few moments, till the consequences of her flight rush'd full upon her mind: lady Meadows's favour irrecoverable; her fortune ruined; her reputation blasted. This last thought, which, from the delicacy of her sentiments, gave her the deepest regret, dwelt most upon her mind; and forgetting that she was not alone, she clasped

a communication of secrets, by which the reader is let into part of Henrietta's story. p. 6
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Which illustrates an observation of Rochefoucault's, that in the misfortunes of our friends there is always something that does not displease us. p. 14.
               
               
                  CHAP. IV. In which our heroine, through inattention, falls into the very difficulty she had taken such pains to avoid. p. 20
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Which contains nothing but very common occur-rences. p. 27
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. In which miss Woodby again makes her appearance. p. 33
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. In which Henrietta relates the story of her parents, introductory to her own. p. 40
               
               
                  

her hands together in a violent emotion, and burst into tears.
               The old gentlewoman, who had been eyeing her very attentively, not a little surprised at the seriousness that appeared in the looks and beha-viour of so young a creature, eagerly asked her, What was the matter?
               Henrietta, rouzed by this question, which, (so absent had she been) first informed her she was observed, wiped her eyes, and composing her countenance, said she was often low-spi-rited.
               "Don't tell me of low spirits," said the old 
                     •
                  entlewoman,
such young bodies as you are not low-spirited for nothing. What! I war-rant you, there is a sweetheart in the case.
               
               "Oh! no, madam," said miss Courteney, 
                     •
                  ushing, "no sweetheart, I assure you."
               "No, really," resumed she;
well then, I suppose you have lost a friend.
               
               "I have indeed lost a friend," said the young 
                     •
                  dy; hoping that acknowledgment would put 
                     
                   end to the questions of her fellow-traveller.
               "Indeed!" said the old woman; "and this friend — is it a father, or mother, or sister, or —
               All, all," interrupted miss Courteney; burst-
                  
                     •
                  g again into tears.
               
                  
"How all?" repeated the old woman.
Have you just now lost all these relations?
               
               
                  I lost them all in losing that friend, ma-dam,
said Henrietta; vexed that her sensibi-lity, wakened by such questions, had made her too little guarded in her expressions.
               "Oh, Oh, I understand you, child," said the good gentlewomen:
this person, I don't ask you whether it was a man or woman, was to you both father and mother. Well; and so I suppose you have just heard of the death of this good friend, and are going to town on that occasion.
               
               Miss Courteney finding that the inquisitive temper of her fellow-traveller was likely to lead her into a discovery of her situation, chose ra-ther to be silent than violate truth, by feigning circumstances, to deceive her; and, fortunately for her, she was prevented from suffering more disagreeable interrogatories, by the coach sud-denly stopping at an inn in Piccadilly, where it put up.
               The old gentlewoman, however, at parting, asked her what part of the town she was going to, and offered, if it was in her way, to accom-pany her; but Henrietta evaded the question and the offer, by telling her, that she should take a chair. The coachman accordingly called one

for her, which she entered immediately; and being asked by the chairman where she would please to be carried? she recollected with great confusion, that miss Woodby had not told her where her millener lived.
               She now sought for the letter, hoping there was a full direction upon that. But what was her grief and perplexity, when she found the superscription contained only these words
For Mrs. Egret.
"Good Heaven!" exclaimed 
                     •
                  he fair unfortunate, "what shall I do now?
               The chairman repeating his question; she told him that she had forgot a direction, and asked him, if he knew where Mrs. Egret, a millener, 
                     •
                  ved? The fellow replied in the negative; but added, that he would enquire. He accordingly 
                     •
                  epped into the nearest shop, which was a ha-
                  
                     •
                  erdasher's, and making a small blunder in the 
                     •
                  ame, which the person he spoke to mistook for 
                     •
                  ccles, he was told, that the millener he en-quired for lived in Charles street.
               The fellow returned extremely pleased with 
                     •
                  is success, and relieved the young lady from her 
                     •
                  xiety, who bid him carry her directly to 
                     •
                  harles street; and she soon found herself at the 
                     •
                  or of a millener's shop, where she discharged 
                     •
                  r chairmen; and entering, asked a young
"How all?" repeated the old woman.
Have you just now lost all these relations?
               
               
                  I lost them all in losing that friend, ma-dam,
said Henrietta; vexed that her sensibi-lity, wakened by such questions, had made her too little guarded in her expressions.
               "Oh, Oh, I understand you, child," said the good gentlewomen:
this person, I don't ask you whether it was a man or woman, was to you both father and mother. Well; and so I suppose you have just heard of the death of this good friend, and are going to town on that occasion.
               
               Miss Courteney finding that the inquisitive temper of her fellow-traveller was likely to lead her into a discovery of her situation, chose ra-ther to be silent than violate truth, by feigning circumstances, to deceive her; and, fortunately for her, she was prevented from suffering more disagreeable interrogatories, by the coach sud-denly stopping at an inn in Piccadilly, where it put up.
               The old gentlewoman, however, at parting, asked her what part of the town she was going to, and offered, if it was in her way, to accom-pany her; but Henrietta evaded the question and the offer, by telling her, that she should take a chair. The coachman accordingly called one

for her, which she entered immediately; and being asked by the chairman where she would please to be carried? she recollected with great confusion, that miss Woodby had not told her where her millener lived.
               She now sought for the letter, hoping there was a full direction upon that. But what was her grief and perplexity, when she found the superscription contained only these words
For Mrs. Egret.
"Good Heaven!" exclaimed 
                     •
                  he fair unfortunate, "what shall I do now?
               The chairman repeating his question; she told him that she had forgot a direction, and asked him, if he knew where Mrs. Egret, a millener, 
                     •
                  ved? The fellow replied in the negative; but added, that he would enquire. He accordingly 
                     •
                  epped into the nearest shop, which was a ha-
                  
                     •
                  erdasher's, and making a small blunder in the 
                     •
                  ame, which the person he spoke to mistook for 
                     •
                  ccles, he was told, that the millener he en-quired for lived in Charles street.
               The fellow returned extremely pleased with 
                     •
                  is success, and relieved the young lady from her 
                     •
                  xiety, who bid him carry her directly to 
                     •
                  harles street; and she soon found herself at the 
                     •
                  or of a millener's shop, where she discharged 
                     •
                  r chairmen; and entering, asked a young

woman, whom she saw at work, if her mistress was at home?
               The girl desired her to walk into a parlour, where she was met by an agreeable well-dressed woman, who received her with great politeness, and desired to know her commands.
               "I have a letter for you," said Henrietta, putting it into her hands,
from a young lady, a customer of your's, the contents will ac-quaint you with my business.
               
               The millener took the letter, and having read it, returned it again with a smile, saying,
She was not the person to whom it was ad-dressed.
               
               "No! madam," said miss Courteney, exces-sively surprised, "Is not your name Egret?
               "My name is Eccles, madam," said the millener. "Bless me!" cried miss Courteney,
the chairmen have made a mistake: I bid one of them enquire where Mrs. Egret, a millener, lived, and he was directed hither. I shall be obliged to you, pursued Henrietta, if you will let your maid call a chair.
               
               "To be sure, madam," said the millener;
but do you not know where this Mrs. Egret lives?
               
               
                  I have unfortunately forgot to get a direc-tion,
returned the young lady;
but I hope you can inform me.
               
               
                  
"I wish I could, madam," said the millener; "but really I know no such person as Mrs. Egret."
Surely I am the most unfortunate creature in the world!
cried Henrietta.
               "I hope not, madam," said Mrs. Eccles, with a look of great complacency:
there are more persons, besides Mrs. Egret, who would be glad to accommodate you with lodgings. I wish mine were good enough for you.
               
               "Oh! I dare say they are good enough," re-plied miss Courteney;
but I was recommended to Mrs. Egret, and—
                  Pray, madam, walk up, and look at my first floor,
said Mrs. Eccles; and, without waiting for any reply, im-mediately led the way.
               Henrietta followed in such perplexity of mind, that she hardly knew what she did; and, while the officious millener led her from room to room, expatiating at large upon the conveniencies, miss Courteney continued silent, revolving in her thoughts the dilemma to which she was re-duced.
               The evening was so far advanced, that she could not think of going in quest of Mrs. Egret, of whom she could get no information here; yet she was not able to resolve upon taking lodg-ings in the house of a person, to whom she was an absolute stranger: a misfortune which she had

vainly endeavoured to avoid by the application she had made to miss Woodby.
               
                  I am afraid you don't like this apartment, madam,
said Mrs. Eccles; who observed her look pensive and uneasy.
I have no objec-tion to it,
said miss Courteney;
but that it is rather too good. I do not propose to go to a high price; a bedchamber and the use of a parlour will be sufficient for me.
               
               The millener looked a little dissatisfied at these words, but told her she could accommodate her with a large handsome bedchamber up two pair of stairs, but added, that she had no other parlour than that which she kept for her own use.
               Miss Courteney desired to see the room, which was indeed very handsome and convenient; and the millener perceiving she liked it, told her, that she should be welcome to the use of the dining-room till her first floor was let.
               The young lady thought this an obliging proposal; and being pleased with the woman's countenance and behaviour, ventured to make an agreement with her, and every thing being settled upon very easy terms,
there is but one difficulty remaining,
said she, with an en-gaging smile,
and that I know not how we shall get over; we are strangers to each other.
               
               
                  
"Oh, madam," interrupted Mrs. Eccles,
though it is not my custom to take in lodgers without having a character, yet I can have no scruple with regard to a lady of your ap-pearance. As for me, I have 
                        •
                     ed a great many years in this neighbourhood, and am not afraid of having my character enquired into.
               
               She spoke this with a little warmth, which made Henrietta imagine she expected the same degree of confidence she had shown: so making a merit of necessity, she appeared very well satis-fied, and immediately took possession of her new apartment.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Which contains nothing but very common occurrences.
               
               MRS. Eccles being summoned into her shop by a customer, miss Courteney desired her to send up pen, ink, and paper, being resolved to write to miss Woodby that night, and ac-quaint her with the disappointment she had met with. The maid soon appeared with candles and all the materials for writing; delivering at the same time her mistress's compliments to the

young lady, and a request that she would fa-vour her with her company to supper. Miss Courteney promised to wait on her, provided she was alone; and, sitting down, wrote the fol-lowing letter to her new friend.
               
                  
                     YOU will no doubt, my dear miss Woodby, be both surprised and grieved to know that your kind intentions have been frustrated; and that by forgetting to give me a direction, your recommendation to Mrs. Egret has proved use-less to me. By a mistake of the chairman, who I desired to enquire where Mrs. Egret lived, I was brought to another millener's, and she not being able to direct me where to find her, I am obliged to take up my lodging with a stranger. It was my apprehensions of what has befallen me, that induced me to trust you with my secret, a secret of the highest importance to me; and most generously did you repay my confidence by your ready assist-ance. It was my ill fortune which ordered it so, that I should not profit by your kindness. However, my gratitude is equally engaged, and since I observe nothing disagreeable in the behaviour of the person in whose house I now am, I shall endeavour to make myself easy here till I hear from you. I long to see you,

                  CHAP. VIII. In which Henrietta continues her history. p. 51
               
               
                  CHAP. IX. The story continued. p. 64
               
               
                  CHAP. X. A farther continuation of her story. p. 71
               
            
            
               BOOK II.
               
                  CHAP. I. In which Henrietta enters upon her own story, and shews, that to confer benefits, is not always a proof of benevolence. p. 85
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Wherein family-pride awaken those natural affec-tions which family-pride had suppressed. p. 94
               
               

to tell you my unhappy story, to have your compassion, or rather to be justified by your approbation of what I have been compelled by circumstances to do. Oh! my dear miss, how unhappy is that mind, which, with right in-tentions, feels a consciousness of something wrong in its resolutions! Direct for me by the name of Benson, at Mrs. Eccles's, millener, in Charles street. Adieu. I sign the pretty name you gave me.
                     
                        CLELIA.
                     
                  
               
               Henrietta had just sealed her letter, when somebody tapp'd at her door; she opened it im-mediately, and, seeing Mrs. Eccles, asked her pardon for not waiting on her before. Mrs. Eccles told her, that her little supper being ready, she came to see if she was at leisure.
               Miss Courteney found the cloth laid in the parlour, and an elegant supper was served up. Mrs. Eccles did not fail to apologize frequently for the meanness of her entertainment, and was gratified with as many assurances from her fair guest, that no apology was necessary. During the repast, Mrs. Eccles entertained her with an account of the newest fashions, the most ce-lebrated performers of the opera and playhouses, little pieces or scandal, and the like topicks of

conversation, which Henrietta had often heard discussed among her more polite acquaintance, and indeed almost the only ones that engage the attention during the recess of the card-table.
               The millener then turning the discourse to the accident that procured her so agreeable a lodger, artfully pursued her hints till the young lady found herself obliged to satisfy in some degree her cu-riosity concerning her situation.
               Though she was naturally communicative, even to a fault; yet she did not think proper to disclose herself farther, than to tell her, that she had been obliged to come to London upon some affairs of consequence, which could not be settled till the arrival of her brother, who was every day expected from his travels.
               This account was so near the truth, that miss Courteney, in the simplicity of her own heart, thought it could not fail of being believed. How-ever, the millener, who knew the world very well, conceived there was something extraor-dinary in the case— nothing less than a love-intrigue: nor did this suspicion give her any un-easiness. She was one of those convenient per-sons with whom a lady, upon paying a certain sum of money, might lie-in privately, and be properly attended. She made no scruple of ac-commodating with lodgings a young wife, whose

husband, for certain family reasons, visits her only now and then; and as she generally sound her account in such sort of lodgers, she seldom de-sired, and indeed was seldom encumbered with any other.
               The youth, beauty, and elegance of miss Courteney, the introductory letter so oddly con-ceived, her apparent perplexity and concern upon her disappointment of the lodgings she had ex-pected, raised suspicions, which the story she now heard, confirmed; and not doubting but this af-fair would prove beneficial to her, she exerted her utmost endeavours to please her fair lodger, and engage her to an entire confidence.
               When the clock struck eleven, Henrietta rose up in order to retire to her own chamber, to which Mrs. Eccles officiously attended her; having taken leave of her at the door, she bolted it on the in-side, and, after recommending herself to the protection of Heaven, went to bed, but not to rest. A thousand disquietudes kept her waking till the morning, when she sunk into a slumber that lasted till eleven o'clock.
               As soon as she opened her eyes, she was in-formed, by the strong light in her chamber, that the morning was far advanced; and, finding by her watch, which lay on a chair near her bed-side, how much she had exceeded her usual time (for

she was a very early riser) she hurried on her cloaths, and went down stairs, being extremely anxious to get her letter sent to miss Woodby: she went directly into the shop, supposing she should find Mrs. Eccles there; but was exces-sively surprised to hear from the apprentice, that her mistress was not yet up.
               "I suppose," said miss Courteney,
she rested no better than myself last night, which was the cause of my lying so late this morning.
               
               "La! ma'am," replied the girl,
my mis-tress is never up before eleven or twelve.
"Indeed!" said the young lady, dissembling her concern at a circumstance which gave her no favourable opinion of her landlady.
But, madam,
added the girl,
you may have your breakfast whenever you please to order it.
She then called the maid, whom miss Courteney ordered to fetch a porter, being de-termined to have her letter delivered into miss Woodby's own hands, if possible. A porter was soon found, who undertook to carry the letter to Hammersmith as directed, and this affair being dispatched, Henrietta ordered some coffee for her breakfast, and retired to her own chamber.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VI.
               
                  In which miss Woodby again makes her appearance.
               
               IN about a quarter of an hour, Mrs. Eccles appeared, in a long loose linen sack, being her morning dress, and insisted upon miss Cour-teney's breakfasting with her; who at length consented, having agreed to pay at the rate of a guinea a week for her board, during the time she stayed, which she inly determined should not be long.
               After the tea-things were removed, she went into the shop to make a purchase of some rib-bons and gloves; and while she was amusing herself with looking over a great variety of fa-shionable trifles, which the apprentice offici-ously shewed her, a young gentleman, who had been attracted by her appearance, came into the shop, and asked to look at some Dresden ruffles. Henrietta, blushing at the earnestness with which he gazed on her, retired immediately, telling Mrs. Eccles, as she passed through the parlour, that there was a gentleman in the shop. The millener, upon this information, lifted up her hands mechanically to her head to adjust her hair,

and hastened to attend her customer; while her fair lodger, taking a book that lay in the window, went to her own apartment, with an intention to amuse herself with reading till the long'd-for return of her messenger.
               The book however, which was a volume of the new Atalantis, did not suit her taste; she threw it away, and abandoned herself to her own me-lancholy reflections, which were at length inter-rupted by her landlady, who entered the room with a smiling air, telling her, she had had a very good customer.
               "I am glad of it," said Henrietta.
               "Truly," said Mrs. Eccles,
I believe I am obliged to your fair face for my good luck this morning.
"How!—" returned the young lady, with a countenance graver than before.
               "Nay, never wonder at it," said Mrs. Eccles,"
the gentleman laid out twelve guineas with me; but I don't believe he wanted the things he bought. You were the loadstone,
added she smartly,
that drew him into the shop. —He asked me a hundred questions about you.
               
               "I am sorry for it," said miss Courteney, "I wish I had not been in the shop."
And why sorry, pray,
resumed Mrs. Eccles,
I warrant you are sorry you are handsome too—

However, I have another thing to tell you, to increase your sorrow, and that is, that you have certainly made a conquest of this fine spark; and, to overwhelm you with afflic-tion,
pursued she, laughing,
I verily be-lieve he is a man of quality.
               
               "Do you know him then," said miss Cour-teney; who could not help smiling a little at her vivacity.
               
                  I only judge by his appearance and man-ners,
replied Mrs. Eccles,
that he is a man of rank; but I dare say, we shall hear more from him.
"Sure— Mrs. Eccles!" interrupted miss Courteney, with some emo-tion.
               "Nay, nay, child," exclaimed Mrs. Eccles,
don't put yourself into a flurry; I don't know that I shall ever see him again— But, pray what book have you got here?
                  One I found in your parlour,
said miss Courteney. "Oh, I see what it is," cried Mrs. Eccles, opening it;
it is a charming pretty book. If you love reading, miss, I can furnish you with books; I have a very pretty collection— I should be glad to see your collection,
said the young lady, who was apprehensive of her re-newing a conversation that had been very dis-agreeable to her.
               
                  
Mrs. Eccles immediately led her into a little room on the same floor, and opening a closet, in which there were about two dozen books ranged on a shelf, she bid her take her choice, for there was variety enough.
               Henrietta soon examined the so much boasted collection, which she found chiefly consisted of novels and plays. "Well," said Mrs. Eccles,
how do you like my books? are they not prettily chosen?
               
               "I assure you," replied she, taking down one,
you chose very well when you chose this; for it is one of the most exquisite pieces of humour in our language.
                  I knew you would approve of my taste,
said Mrs. Eccles,
but what have you got?— O! the Adven-tures of Joseph Andrews — Yes; that is a very pretty book, to be sure!— but there is Mrs. Haywood's Novels, did you ever read them?— Oh! they are the finest love-sick, passionate stories; I assure you, you'll like them vastly: pray, take a volume of Haywood upon my recommendation.
"Excuse me," said Henrietta,
I am very well satisfied with what I have; I have read this book three times already, and yet I assure you, I shall begin it again with as much eagerness and de-light as I did at first.
               
               
                  
"Well, as you please," said Mrs. Eccles, leaving her at the door of her own chamber,
I won't disturb you till dinner is ready.
               
               Miss Courteney sat down to her book, which agreeably engaged her attention, till she was in-terrupted with the pleasing news of her porter's being returned: she flew down stairs; he deli-vered her a letter, the seal of which she eagerly broke, and found it as follows.
               
                  
                     CELINDA to her dearest CLELIA.
                     NO words can describe the excess of my grief at the news of your disappointment: but, my dear, how was it possible for your chair-men to mistake the house so egregiously— not know where Mrs. Egret lived!— Foolish fel-lows! she is one of the greatest milleners in town, and employed by persons of the first rank. But don't be uneasy, I shall see you this afternoon: your messenger found me pre-paring to set out for town with my aunt— Adieu, my Clelia, and believe me with the most unparallel'd affection, ever your's,
                     
                        CELINDA.
                     
                  
               
               The hopes of seeing her friend, and being settled in more agreeable lodgings, gave Hen-rietta

such a flow of spirits, that when she was summoned to dinner by her landlady, she ap-peared less reserved than usual, and even kept up the conversation with some kind of chearful-ness. Mrs. Eccles, finding her in so good a humour, introduced the subject which ran most in her head—The fine young gentleman, who had been her customer in the morning, was praised in raptures of admiration— so genteel, so well bred— such sparkling eyes, such an air of distinction— Every now and then exclaim-ing—
Well, you have certainly made a con-quest of him— we shall see him again, never fear— he'll find his way here again, I warrant him.
               
               Miss Courteney, to put an end to this dis-course, told her landlady, that she expected a lady to drink tea with her that afternoon; Mrs. Eccles immediately gave orders for the dining-room to be put in order, and thither miss Cour-teney retired in expectation of her visiter. At six o'clock a footman's rap at the door anounced the arrival of miss Woodby; Henrietta ran to the head of the stairs to receive her.
               "O Heavens! my dear creature" cried miss Woodby,
What trouble have I been in upon your account!— but even the disquiets of friendship are pleasing; I would not be insen-sible

a communication of secrets, by which the reader is let into part of Henrietta's story. p. 6
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Which illustrates an observation of Rochefoucault's, that in the misfortunes of our friends there is always something that does not displease us. p. 14.
               
               
                  CHAP. IV. In which our heroine, through inattention, falls into the very difficulty she had taken such pains to avoid. p. 20
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Which contains nothing but very common occur-rences. p. 27
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. In which miss Woodby again makes her appearance. p. 33
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. In which Henrietta relates the story of her parents, introductory to her own. p. 40
               
               
                  

of that charming passion, nor without an object of it for the world.
               
               Miss Courteney thanked her in very obliging terms, while her sentimental friend adjusted her dress in the glass, and then throwing herself into a chair, declared that she was all impatience to hear her history.
               "Permit me," said miss Courteney,
to in-form you first, that I am not easy here, I do not greatly like my landlady, and I wish I could remove this very night.
Miss Woodby told her it was impossible, because she had not yet seen Mrs. Egret, but that she would go to her in the morning, and prepare her for her coming. Henrietta, being now at ease, com-plied with her friend's request, and began her little history in this manner.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VII.
               
                  In which Henrietta relates the story of her parents, introductory to her own.
               
               
                  IT is no wonder, my dear miss Woodby, that at these early years I am precipitated into distresses and dangers; my very birth was a misfortune to my parents, and intailed upon them those miseries which began by their unhappy passion.
               
               
                  My father was the youngest of three bro-thers, but so great a favourite of his father the earl of —, that it was thought he would make his fortune very considerable, having a very large estate, and a very lucrative employ-ment, out of which he every year laid by large sums to provide for his younger sons, of whom my father, as I have already said, was the best beloved.
               
               
                  It happened one day, that the widow of an officer in the army came to solicit the earl's interest towards getting her a pension. She was accompanied by her daughter, a young woman about sixteen years of age, and who must at that time have been exquisitely handsome, since, after a long series of trou-bles,

and in an age more advanced, she ap-peared to me one of the most beautiful women in the world.
               
               
                  The widow, by a certain method of per-suasion which operates powerfully on the do-mesticks of men in place, got her petition sent up to the earl. It imported that her husband, after having served near fifty years in the army, had obtained leave to sell his commis-sion for the benefit of his wife and child; that the money arising from it had been de-posited in the hands of an agent who had broke a few months afterwards, by which unhappy accident all the money was lost, and this loss had so greatly affected the old gentle-man, that he died a few weeks afterwards, leaving his wife and child wholly unprovided for, and made wretched by those very means that were calculated to secure them a gen-teel subsistence, since by the sale of her hus-band's commission, the widow was no longer intitled to a pension, which however she hoped to obtain, in consideration of his long ser-vices, and the peculiar circumstances of her misfortune.
               
               
                  The widow, who knew it was in this no-bleman's power to put her immediately upon the list of pensions, conceived great hopes of

the success of her application, when, after waiting two hours in the hall, she was or-dered to atttend his lordship in his li-brary.
               
               
                  The nobleman received her with civility enough; but his first words destroyed those expectations with which she had flattered her-self.
               
               
                  I am sorry it is not in my power to do you any service, said he; your husband sold out, therefore you have no right to the pension. I pity your misfortune; but in this case there is nothing to be done.
               
               
                  The widow was a woman of sense and breeding: she was sensible that the earl paid no regard to her plea, otherwise he would not have urged that as an argument against granting her petition, without which no peti-tion would have been necessary: intreaties she found would be fruitless, therefore she would not descend to the meanness of a sup-pliant, but curtsy'd in silent anguish, and withdrew.
               
               
                  My father, who was present at this scene, and who had beheld the decent sorrow of the mother with reverence, the innocent beauty of the daughter with tender admiration, im-pelled by an emotion which yet he knew not

the cause of, hastily followed them, and of-fered his hand to the widow to lead her down stairs.
               
               
                  She, who from a natural dignity of senti-ment, had been enabled to endure the super-cilious behaviour of the father without be-traying any signs of discomposure, burst into tears at this instance of unexpected attention and respect in the son.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney, as he led her down stairs, had his eyes incessantly turned towards the young lady, who followed blushing to see herself so earnestly beheld. He found they had not a coach waiting for them, he or-dered a servant to call one; and in the mean time desired they would walk into a parlour, where he took occasion to express his concern to the widow for the disappointment she had met with; but assured her, that he would employ his good offices in her favour, and from the influence he had over his father, hoped he should succeed. He then desired to know where he might wait upon her, in case he had any good news to bring her.
               
               
                  The widow, charmed with his politeness, astonished at his kindness, and full of hope and pleasing expectation, gave him a direction in writing, which she had brought with her.
               
               
                  

                  Mr. Courteney received it, bowing low, as if she had conferred a favour on him; a favour it was indeed, for, by this time, he was lost in love for the charming daughter, whose looks discovered such soft sensibility of her situation, such conscious dignity, which misfortune could not impair; such calm resig-nation, as if, superior to her woes, that her beauty seemed her least perfection; and he was more captivated by the graces of her mind that shone out in her person, than with her lovely person itself.
               
               
                  The coach was now come; he sighed when he took leave of them, rivetting his eyes on the young charmer, who modestly looked down, unable to bear his ardent glances. Again be assured the widow of his services; and, suddenly recollecting himself, he put a purse into her hand, begging her to accept that trifle as an earnest of his friendship.
               
               
                  The lady was so much surprised at his be-haviour, that she was at a loss in what manner to answer him; and, before she could form any, she found herself in the coach, to which he had accompanied her with great respect. When the coach drove from the door, she exa-mined the contents of the purse, and found five and twenty guineas in it: a present, which, if it

had been less, would have mortified her pride, and, being so considerable, alarmed her pru-dence. She recollected every circumstance of the young gentleman's behaviour, and all con-tributed to persuade her, that he was actuated by some motive more forcible than mere com-passion.
               
               
                  She remembered that she had caught him gazing earnestly at her daughter; she reproach-ed herself for taking her with her, for accept-ing the money, for giving a direction. She dreaded the consequence of having exposed her child to the attempts of a young man formed to please, and by his rank and fortune enabled to pursue every method that could gratify his passions. She began now to be solicitous about the effect such uncommon generosity had on the mind of her daughter. She asked her what she thought of the gentleman who so kindly interested himself in their affairs, notwithstanding the cruel denial his father had given?
               
               
                  Miss, whose gratitude had with difficulty been restrained from rising from her heart to her tongue, eagerly seized this opportunity to praise their benefactor. Her expressions were so lively, she showed so tender a sensibility of his kindness, such a blushing approbation

of his person and manners, that the good widow thought proper to check her vivacity by a little reproof, and attributed all the re-spect he had shown them to his natural polite-ness, and his offers of service, and the present he had forced on her, to a sudden sally of compassion which young unexperienced per-sons are liable to. However, her apprehen-sions were now increased; and when Mr. Courteney came to see her, in consequence of his promise, which was two days after wards, she had already taken her resolution.
               
               
                  She took care that her daughter should not be in the way when he sent up his name; and notwithstanding the politeness with which he accosted her, she observed that he was dis-appointed, and that his eyes involuntarily sought out an object which he more wished to see than her.
               
               
                  I don't know whether these little particu-lars may not seem tedious to you, my dear miss Woodby; but I have often heard my mother repeat them with delight; declaring that these first tokens of my father's affection for her made so deep an impression on her heart, fluctuating, as it then was, between hope and fear, that she ever retained the most lively remembrance of them, and could never

relate them without feeling in some degree the same pleasing emotions with which she was at that time agitated.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney began the conversation with assuring the widow, that he had been mindful of her affairs; that his solicitations had not yet indeed had the desired effect; but that he hoped shortly to bring her better news. The widow thanked him with great politeness for his kind interposition in her favour, which she declared would always have a claim to her sincerest gratitude, whether he succeeded or not in his applications. She then drew the purse out of her pocket, and putting it respect-fully into his hands, told him, that not being in any immediate necessity, she begged he would not take it ill if she declined accepting a present which would lay her under an unre-turnable obligation.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney blushed with surprize and disappoimment— but the dignity with which she looked and spoke, making it impossible for him to press her any farther, he received the money back again with a low bow, apo-logizing at the same time for the liberty he had taken.
               
               
                  The widow, seeing him disconcerted, po-litely recommended her interests to him; and

Mr. Courteney, charmed that she would allow him to be her friend on any terms, retired with a promise that he would take as much care of them as of his own.
               
               "This interview," continued Henrietta,
confirmed the widow in her suspicions, that her daughter was not indifferent to their new benefactor— He had observed her scrupulous reserve with regard to the young beauty, and hoped to remove it by affecting a total neg-lect of her; so that he did not even enquire how she did.— Whatever is done with de-sign is always overdone: the widow was per-suaded that a man of Mr. Courteney's good breeding would not have passed over one of the common forms of politeness, but to an-swer some secret purpose. Her vigilance in-creased in proportion to her fears; and al-though he made her several visits under pre-tence of enquiring more minutely into the circumstances of her case, yet he never was so fortunate as to find her daughter with her.
               
               
                  This conduct, while it stimulated his pas-sion, gave him a high opinion of the virtue and prudence of her, who, in such unhappy circumstances, showed such extreme attention to the honour and reputation of her child Hitherto he had not been at the trouble to

                  CHAP. VIII. In which Henrietta continues her history. p. 51
               
               
                  CHAP. IX. The story continued. p. 64
               
               
                  CHAP. X. A farther continuation of her story. p. 71
               
            
            
               BOOK II.
               
                  CHAP. I. In which Henrietta enters upon her own story, and shews, that to confer benefits, is not always a proof of benevolence. p. 85
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Wherein family-pride awaken those natural affec-tions which family-pride had suppressed. p. 94
               
               

examine his own views and designs upon this young beauty. Hurried away by the violence of his passion, he had assiduously sought op-portunities of seeing and conversing with her; but the difficulties he met with made him look into his own heart, that he might know if he was still sufficient master of it to give over a pursuit which was likely to prove fruitless.
               
               
                  Amazed to find that what he took for a transient inclination, was a passion immove-ably fixed; that he had formed resolutions, when he believed he had only entertained de-sires; that the whole happiness and misery of his life was in the power of a young woman, destitute of friends, fortune, hopes and expec-tations, and rich only in beauty and virtue— for virtuous he was sure she must be, under the care of so wise and prudent a mother. He was alarmed at his own condition; dreaded the consequences of a passion so placed as that it could never procure the sanction of his fa-ther's consent, and resolved never more to ex-pose himself to the danger of seeing her.
               
               
                  However, he did not fail to solicit his fa-ther very earnestly in behalf of the unfortunate widow. The carl, who had taken notice of his officious respect the day she was introduced to him, and attributed it rather to the beauty

of the daughter than any sentiment of com-passion, began to be uneasy at his so frequently pressing him on that subject, and forbad him to mention it any more.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney was obliged to be silent, lest he should confirm those suspicions which he saw his father had conceived; and finding his mind in a very uneasy state, he hoped that, by removing himself to a greater distance from the object he loved, he should remove the thoughts of her likewise; he obtained his fa-ther's content to his retiring for a few weeks to their seat in the country, under pretence of a slight indisposition; but he could not re-solve to go without endeavouring once more to force a present upon the widow, which might prevent her being exposed to any distress during his absence.
               
               
                  He therefore wrote to her, and acquaint-ing her with the ill success of his mediation with his father, expressed the highest concern for it, and assured her that nothing could al-leviate it but her acceptance of the bank note which he inclosed, and which was for fifty pounds: he told her, he was going into the country, that she might not suppose he had any design of inducing her by such a present

to admit his visits; and concluded with as-suring her, that she might at all times com-mand his services, and rely on his friend-ship.
               
               
                  He did not send away this letter till he was ready to take horse; and being now more composed, from the belief that he had silenced the scruples of this good woman, and secured her and her lovely daughter from any imme-diate necessity, he pursued his journey— full of pleasing reflections on the disinterestedness of his love.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  In which Henrietta continues her history.
               
               
                  ABSENCE (says a certain writer) in-creases violent passions, and cures mo-derate ones; just as the wind extinguishes a small flame, while it makes a great one burn more fiercely. Mr. Courteney's passion was of this kind; he had loved with violence from the moment he began to love. In vain he had recourse to books, to company, to field sports, and rural amusements; it was not pos-sible for him to call off his thoughts a moment from that object from whom he fled with such

care. Two months he wore away in a con-stant perturbation of mind, still flattering him-self that he was nearer his cure, while his dis-ease gathered strength every day.
               
               
                  It happened that one evening he fell into company with some officers, whose regiment was quartered in that part of the country; and one of them mentioned colonel Carlton, and the unhappy situation his widow and daughter were left in.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney, rouzed to attention by that name so dear to him, pretended to be wholly ignorant of those ladies case, that be might indulge himself in the pleasure of talking 
                        
                      her he loved.
               
               
                  The officer gave him a circumstantial de-tail of what he knew as well as himself; con-cluding with many commendations of Mrs. Carlton's good sense, prudence, and virtue; and such rapturous praises of the young lady's beauty and uncommon qualifications at such early years, that Mr. Courteney, for the first time sensible of the tortures of jealousy, could with difficulty conceal his emotions.
               
               
                  You speak so feelingly, said a gentleman i
                        •
                      company, of this young lady's perfections, that I fancy you are in love with her: come, he
                        •
                      is her health; is it to be a match▪
                  
               
               
                  

                  I should be but too happy in such a wife, replied the officer; but she deserves a better husband: it is not for a poor lieutenant, added he, smiling, to marry for love; but if I was a man of fortune, I would prefer miss Carl-ton to all the women I have ever seen.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney afterwards declared that he suffered inconceivable anguish during this con-versation. He quitted the company with some precipitation; and when he was at liberty to reflect, he reproached himself a thousand times for his folly in leaving such a treasure for an-other to obtain. Every man he thought would look upon miss Carlton with the same eyes as that young officer; and among them might not one be found blest with a fortune to make her happy, and above all narrow con-siderations which could hinder him from mak-ing himself so?
               
               
                  Resolutions are easily formed when the heart suggests them. Mr. Courteney, who had so long fluctuated between his passion and his prudence, was, by the fear of losing what he loved, determined in an instant to put it past the possibility of losing her. His father's anger, which at first appeared so formidable to him, was now considered as a trifle that would be easily got over: he was not going

to introduce any stale mistress into a noble family, nor to give a comedian or singer for a sister to his sisters, and a daughter to his mo-ther; alliances so much in fashion with the present race of nobility and people of fortune: in miss Carlton he should marry birth, beauty, virtue, every perfection but riches, but un-happily that, in the estimation of his father, was worth them all.
               
               
                  His fortune indeed was undetermined; it might be great, it might be very inconsidera-ble, since it depended upon the will of his father. His father would never consent to his marriage with miss Carlton; but though dis-obliged, yet loving him as he did, was it likely that he would always continue inexorable! Besides he had a certain, though a remote pro-spect of a good estate, to which he was to succeed at the death of a relation, who was old, and had been married twenty years without having ever had a child.
               
               
                  Should he find it impossible to reconcile his father to his marriage, yet he was secure at least of a genteel provision; but with such ex-cellencies as miss Carlton was possessed of, how could it be imagined that she should not in time conciliate his father's affections, and make him approve of his choice?
               
               
                  

                  There is no logick, my dear miss Woodby, like the logick of the heart. Mr. Courteney, as is usual on such occasions, having taken his resolution before he reasoned upon the matter, reasoned afterwards in such a manner as to be soon persuaded his resolution was right.
               
               
                  Early the next morning he ordered his horses to be made ready, and he returned to London with all imaginable expedition. He alighted at the house of a friend, where he dis-missed his servants and horses, and then taking a hackney coach, was driven to the street in which Mrs. Carlton lived. Upon stopping at the house, and enquiring for Mrs. Carlton, he was told that she had left it five weeks ago, and being greatly indisposed, had taken lodg-ings at Chelsea for the air.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney, who now thought every moment an age till he saw miss Carlton, and acquainted her with his passion and his honourable intentions, procured as full a di-rection as could be given him; but notwith-standing his impatience to be with his mis-tress, he obeyed the dictates of his duty, in first going home to pay his respects to his father.
               
               
                  

                  The earl received him a little coldly; an expression of displeasure was on his counte-nance, which however wore off by degrees, as he enquired concerning his health, his studies and amusements, during his absence. At length seeming to recollect something, he went to his cabinet, took out a letter, the seal of which had been broke, and delivered it into his son's hand, assuming the same angry coun-tenance as before.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney, not able to imagine what all this meant, opened the letter hastily, and found it was from Mrs. Carlton, dated the very day of his departure, and in it was in-closed the bank note he had sent: the purpo
                        •
                      of her letter was to refuse in a genteel but steady manner all pecuniary assistance from him; however she thanked him for his 
                        •
                     i-lities, and acknowledged herself greatly obliged to him.
               
               
                  When Mr. Courteney had read this letter, which he did with much confusion, the ear
                        •
                      asked him sternly, what was his design by en-gaging in such a commerce? You are in love with the daughter, added he, no doubt —but if you corrupt her, you are not an ho-nest man; if you marry her, you are no longer my son.
               
               
                  

                  He left him as he pronounced these words; and Mr. Courteney, who, while he beheld it at a distance, thought his father's displeasure might be borne with, was overwhelmed with the first effects of it, and relapsed into all his for-mer doubts, anxiety, and irresolution.
               
               
                  He retired to his own chamber to consider on what he ought to do; but unable to bear the cruel war which such contrary interests, such opposite wishes, such perplexed designs, raised in his mind, he hurried out of the house to lose reflection in a variety of objects, and took his way to the Park.
               
               
                  He walked down the Mall, it was crouded with company which did not in the least en-gage his attention; he continued his walk, and, finding himself at Buckingham-gate, his steps mechanically pursued the road that led to Chelsea.
               
               
                  As soon as he saw himself near the place where his mistress resided, all other thoughts were absorbed in the transporting reflection, that he should see her within a few moments; his father's threats were forgot, the loss of his savour filled him with no uneasy apprehen-sions. To how many revolutions is the hu-man mind subject, when passion has assumed the reins of government which reason ought

to hold! Mr. Courteney had almost imper-ceptibly to himself resumed his first design of offering his hand to miss Carlton.
               
               
                  With very little difficulty he found out the house where her mother and she lodged; the door was opened to him by a girl, who, upon his enquiring if Mrs. Carlton was at home, told him she was sick in bed, and, showing him into a little parlour, ran up stairs to ac-quaint miss, as he supposed, that a gentleman was there.
               
               
                  In a few minutes a venerable old woman appeared, who had so fixed a concern upon her countenance, that Mr. Courteney, shift-ing his thoughts from the illness of the mo-ther to the apprehension of some possible mis-fortune to the daughter, for love if it hopes all, fears all likewise, asked her with great emo-tion, if any thing extraordinary had happened to the ladies?
               
               
                  The good woman, pleased with his solici-tude, which she thought promised some re-lief, told him plainly, that Mrs. Carlton was in the utmost distress; that she had been ill several weeks; that she had not been able to procure proper advice; and added she, burst-ing into tears, she has even wanted common necessaries.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. III. Which introduces a jesuit to the acquaintance of the reader. p. 106
               
               
                  CHAP. IV. In which our heroine engages herself in a very un-equal contest. p. 116
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Containing an account of some difficulties our he-roine was involved in, arising from an old ex-ploded notion, that interest ought not to be the sole consideration in marriage. p. 129
               
               
                  CHAP. VI. In which our heroine is very reasonably alarmed. p. 146
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. In which Henrietta concludes her history. p. 160
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Containing nothing either new or extraordinary. p. 170
               
               
                  

                  O my God! exclaimed Mr. Courteney, with a deep sigh; but miss—what is become of miss? Alas! sir, replied the old woman, the dear child is almost dead with fatigue and grief; she has watched by her mother these ten nights successively, there is no persuading her to quit her for a moment. I left her in an agony of sorrow, for it is believed poor Mrs. Carlton cannot live three days.
               
               
                  Conduct me to her, cried Mr. Courteney eagerly; I may possibly be able to comfort her; let me see her, I conjure you, imme-diately.
               
               
                  Stay a moment, sir, said the old woman, stopping him, for he was making towards the door; I will go up first and inform the ladies. There is no occasion for that, said Mr. Cour-teney, Mrs. Carlton knows me very well; she will not I am sure be sorry to see me, I have something to say to her.
               
               
                  The good woman, seeing his obstinacy, permitted him to follow her up stairs; she gently opened the chamber-door, and, ap-proaching the bed where the sick lady lay, told her there was a friend of her's, who de-sired to see her. Mr. Courteney entered that moment, and beheld a sight which called for

more fortitude than he was at that time po-sessed of to support without tears.
               
               
                  Mrs. Carlton lay extended on her bed, sup-ported by a heighth of cushions to facilitate her breathing, which she seemed to do with great difficulty. Death appeared in her lan-guid countenance; and an expression of the tender anguish of a mother for the child whom she was so soon to leave exposed to the insults of a barbarous world, mixed with the pious resignation of a christian, was impressed in every line of it.
               
               
                  Her daughter was kneeling at the bed-side, and held one of her mother's hands, which she was bending over in an agony of grief: upon hearing what the old woman said, she raised her head; and, directing her stream-ing eyes to the place where Mr. Courteney stood, showed him a face pale, emaciated, but lovely still; at sight of him a faint blush overspread her cheeks. It is Mr. Courteney, my dear mamma, said she.
               
               
                  Oh! sir, said Mrs. Carlton, perceiving him, you are very good to seek out affliction thus. I shall shortly be past all my cares; but what will become of this poor helpless orphan? The tears that streamed from her eyes prevented her further utterance.
               
               
                  

                  Mr. Courteney threw himself on his knees at the bed-side, and almost sobbing with the violence of his emotions at this affecting lan-guage, Oh! madam, said he, What must you not have suffered? why would you not accept what little assistance it was in my power to offer you. I know your delicate scruples— I come to beg you will give yourself a right to all my future services— I have something to communicate to you— But, added he, look-ing at the old woman who had introduced him, we are not alone.
               
               
                  Speak freely, sir, said Mrs. Carlton, this good woman is my daughter's nurse; she knows all my affairs; I am much indebted to her kindness and affection for my child.
               
               
                  What I have to say, proceeded Mr. Cour-teney, relates to that dear, that lovely daugh-ter: I loved her from the first moment I saw her; such innocence, such beauty, could not suggest any impure desire. As soon as I knew the force of my passion, which absence first made me know, I fixed its purpose. Permit me to offer her my hand; I cannot be happy without her.
               
               
                  What do you say, sir? said Mrs. Carlton, excessively surprised: would you marry my daughter? But after a little pause, No, pur-sued

she, this can never be, your father will not consent to it.
               
               
                  I own freely to you, madam, said Mr. Courteney, that I have no hopes of gaining my father's consent; but when the affai
                        •
                      i
                        •
                      irretrievable, he will be softened, I am sure he will. Let not this scruple hinder you from giving your daughter a protector. Surely, said Mrs. Carlton, lifting up her eyes, the hand of Providence is here; and it would be im-pious to oppose its will. You have my con-sent, sir, said she to Mr. Courteney; would it pleased God that you had his also, whom it is your duty to consult on this occasion, and to obey if you can.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney assured her he would solicit his father's consent; but that he could not be happy without miss Carlton, and was already determined.
               
               
                  That young lady had retired into another room at the beginning of this discourse, in perturbations which may be better imagined than described. Mr. Courteney, by her mo-ther's permission, attended her: he approached her with a timidity, which, the inequality of their circumstances considered, may seem sur-prising; but those who know the nature of a sincere and violent passion, will easily account

for it. For fear, says an elegant writer, al-ways accompanies love when it is great, as flames burn highest when they tremble most. He took her hand, and kissing it respectfully, told her that Mrs. Carlton had begun his feli-city, by permitting him to offer himself to her acceptance as a husband, but that she only could complete it by her consent.
               
               
                  Miss Carlton blushed, turned pale, and blushed again: at length she replied, that she had no other will than her mother's. But this offer, added she, in an accent that expressed at once her surprise and grati-tude, is so generous, so unexpected, so un-hoped for— The last words seemed to escape her; she blushed more than before. Mr. Courteney took in all their tender meaning: he kissed her hand again in a rapture of joy, and was beginning to make her some passionate declarations, when they heard the nurse cry-ing out for help.
               
               
                  Surprise and joy at what had so lately happened, operated so powerfully on Mrs. Carlton's almost exhausted spirits, that she had fallen into a fainting fit. Miss Carlton eagerly flew to her assistance, Mr. Courteney followed her with an anxious concern. As soon as she recovered, he told her he would instantly re-turn

to London and dispatch a physician to attend her, and would be with her again the next evening.
               
               
                  He took a tender farewel of his mistre
                        •
                      and calling the nurse aside, gave her twenty guineas to provide whatever was wanting, and hastened back to London.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The story continued.
               
               
                  MR. Courteney's first care was to send a physician to the sick lady; and that performed, he deliberated in what manner he should acquaint his father with his intention. He knew him too well to hope for his con-sent to his marriage with miss Ca
                        •
                     n, and he had not courage enough to stand the re-proaches of a parent, whom he was predeter-mined to disobey. He chose therefore o
                        •
                      write to him, supposing he should, when un-awed by his presence, be able to find argu-ments strong enough to make some impression on his mind, and to plead his excuse.
               
               
                  As he dreaded extremely a private inter-view with his father, he was glad to find at

his return home, that a great deal of company was expected that evening; he did not ap-pear till they were all met, having purposely wasted a good deal of time in dressing. The earl was still ruffled with what had passed be-fore between him and his son; and Mr. Cour-teney observed that his looks and behaviour were less kind than usual.
               
               
                  As soon as he retired to his apartment, in-stead of going to bed, he sat down to compose a letter to his father. He began with the highest expressions of grief for having by an ir-resistable impulse engaged his affections with-out his concurrence; he justified his choice by every argument that love could suggest in fa-vour of the beloved object: he implored the continuance of his father's affection; and promised in every future action the most per-fect submission and obedience.
               
               
                  This difficult task performed, he found his mind much easier and composed, as if in rea-lity he had obtained the pardon he had soli-cited, and now resigned himself to all the pleasing reveries of successful love.
               
               
                  After a few hours rest, he rose under pre-tence of going out to ride; and, leaving orders with a servant to deliver his letter to

his father at his hour of dressing, he went im-mediately to the Commons, procured a li-cence, and flew to Chelsea; he found Mrs. Carlton much worse than when he left her; yet joy at seeing him again seemed to give her new life and spirits. She called him to he
                        •
                      bed-side; he acquainted her with what he had done; she had some scruples, but the fear of leaving her daughter destitute overbalanced them all.
               
               
                  I am dying, said she, pressing his hand; the physician you sent was too sincere to flatter me. I die contented, since I leave my child under your protection. Let the ceremony be performed in my presence; after that is over I shall have no farther business with the world. Miss Carlton, drowned in tears, and almost sinking under the violence of her grief, was with diffi-culty persuaded to give her hand to her lover at so shocking a time; but her dy-ing mother conjured her to give her that last satisfaction.— A clergyman was in-stantly provided by the faithful nurse: the clerk acted as father to the weeping bride; and Mr. Courteney's servant and the good nurse were witnesses. — Never sure was there a more melancholy wedding — the

bridegroom's joy was checked by simpathis-ing concern—the bride's tender sensibility lost in agonising woe—the service was performed with the solemn sadness of a funeral.
               
               
                  As soon as it was over, Mrs. Carlton col-lected all her remaining strength and spirits, to pronounce a blessing on the new-wedded pair; and straining her daughter with a weak em-brace, declared that she was now easy, and should die in peace. Mr. Courteney made a genteel present to the clergyman and the clerk, and dismissed them: he took an affec-tionate leave of Mrs. Carlton, who desired to be left to her private devotions; and earnestly recommending his bride to the care of her nurse, he went back to town with a resolution to declare his marriage to his father; his senti-ments being too delicate and his notions of honour too just to permit him on any consi-deration of interest to conceal the engagements he had entered into, and suffer the woman whom he thought worthy to be his wife to live under a doubtful character.
               
               
                  On his return home he found his letter had been delivered to the earl. His mother, be-ing informed of his arrival, sent for him to her dressing-room, where he found her in tears. She told him that his father had been in the

most violent transports of anger, upon receiv-ing his letter; and she conjured him, 
                        
                      he valued her peace, to proceed no farther in a design that must inevitably be his ruin.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney sighed, and was preparing to answer her, when the earl himself entered the room: the impression of his first 
                        
                      was still visible on his countenance. As soon 
                        
                      he saw his son, he poured a torrent of re-proaches on him, inveighing against his meanness and ingratitude; then suddenly, and with great vehemence, uttered the most dread-ful imprecations on him, if he followed the dictates of his despicably-placed passion, and married a beggar.
               
               
                  Oh, hold my lord! cried Mr. Courteney, throwing himself at his feet; curse 
                        •
                     e not, for I am already married. The 
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     ost mad with rage at this confession, spurned him rudely with his foot, and flung out of the room, declaring that he renounced him for ever.
               
               
                  Mr. Courteney, slung with indignation at this treatment, rose up, and uttered some words of resentment, when his attention was called off from the affront he had suffered, by the condition in which he observed his mother, who, from surprise and terror, had swooned,

                  CHAP. IX. A very short chapter. p. 184
               
               
                  CHAP. X. Which gives the reader a specimen of female friend-ship. p. 190
               
               
                  CHAP. XI. In which our heroine is in great distress. p. 198
               
               
                  CHAP. XII. In which the history goes forward. p. 207
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII. The history still advances. p. 221
               
               
                  CHAP. XIV. Containing several mysterious circumstances. p. 229
               
               
                  CHAP. XV. In which those circumstances are partly explained. p. 243
               
            
         
         
            

and lay motionless on the couch, where she had thrown herself. Mr. Courteney, exces-sively shocked at this sight, rung the bell for her woman, while he applied himself to give her all the assistance he was able. As soon as he saw her recovering, he staid not to increase her disorder by his presence, but retired to his apartment; and after he had taken all the money he had in his cabinet, he left that house that was now become dreadful to him, and went to the lodgings of a young gentleman who had been his fellow-student at college, and whom he had reason to believe his friend, if friendship can be acquired by confering obligations.
               
               
                  To this young gentleman he unloaded his heart, but found not the consolation he ex-pected. He expressed the utmost astonishment and concern for his indiscreet marriage; and, instead of offering him any advice in his per-plexed situation, or consoling him, oppressed as he was by the displeasure of his father, ma-nifested in so contemptuous a manner, he maintained that the earl's anger was just and reasonable, and exclaimed at his imprudence in ruining himself for a woman.
               
               
                  Before the mischief was done, remonstrances might have been seasonable; but nothing

could be more unkind than to insist upon an error which was already committed, and could not be repaired. Mr. Courteney was at first surprised at this behaviour in a man who had always shewn so deep a sense of his kindness, and professed the most tender friendship for him: but he had still temper enough left to consider, that most people follow their own interests, and are at one time grateful for their convenience, and at another ungrateful for the same reason.
               
               
                  He left him without taking any notice of the disgust he had conceived; and after he had hired lodgings for the reception of his wife, he hastened to Chelsea, where he ar-rived time enough to moderate the first agonies of her grief for the loss of her mother, who had expired a few moments before.
               
               
                  Having given directions concerning the fu-neral, he forced Mrs. Courteney out of that mournful house, and carried her to London, applying himself with the tenderest assiduity to alleviate the sense of her loss, all his own just causes of uneasiness being forgot, and his anxiety for the melancholy future lost in his contemplation of the happy present: so true it is that wedded-love supplies the want of every other blessing in life; and as no condi-tion

can be truly happy without it, so none can be absolutely miserable with it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  A farther continuation of her story.
               
               
                  IN the mean time Mr. Courteney corres-ponded privately with his mother, whose gentle nature had, with little difficulty, been softened into a forgiveness of her son's impru-dent marriage; but all her endeavours to re-concile the earl to it had proved ineffectual. He continued inexorable, and peremptorily commanded her never to mention that undu-tiful son to him more, whom he reprobated for ever.
               
               
                  The countess durst not hazard an interview with her son, while his father's resentment continued unappeased; but she allowed him two hundred a year out of her pin-money, and upon this moderate income they lived with more happiness than is often to be found in the highest affluence.
—
               "And why not," interrupted miss Woodby here,
a cottage, with the person we love, is 
                        
                      to be prefered to a palace with one to whom

interest and not affection has joined us. I know I could be contented to keep sh
                        •
                      with the man I loved. Speak truth, my d
                        •
                      Clelia, would you not like to be a shop
                        •
                     
                     -ess? O, what a delightful employ 
                        
                      watch a few harmless sheep! to wa
                        •
                      groves and fields, or lie reclined upon the flowery margin of some murmuring 
                        
                      and listen to the plaintive voice of the night-ingale, or the tender faithful vows of some lovely and beloved shepherd!
               
               "What a romantic picture," said mi
                     •
                   Courteney laughing,
have you drawn! It is a mighty pretty one it must be confessed, but it is not at all like. I remember, when I was about fourteen, I had the same notions of shepherds and shepherdesses; but I was soon cured. I happened to be at the house of a country gentleman, who managed a large farm of his own; one of the servants say-ing something about the shepherd, my heart danced at the sound. My imagination re-presented to me such a pretty figure as we see on the stage in the dramatic pastoral en-tertainment of Damon and Phillida, in a fine green habit, all bedizened with ribbons, a neat crook, and a garland of flowers. I begged to be permitted to go into the fields to

see the shepherd, and eagerly enquired if there were no shepherdesses likewise; but how was I disappointed!—The shepherd was an old man in a ragged waistcoat, and so miserably sun-burnt, that he might have been taken for a mu-latto: the shepherdess looked like a witch; she was sitting under a hedge, mending old stock-ings, with a straw hive on her head, and a tatter'd garment on, of as many colours as there were patches in it. How diverting it would have been to have heard this ena-mour'd swain sigh out soft things to this lovely nymph!
               
               "Oh! ridiculous," cried miss Woodby—
I am sick at the very thought; but, my dear Clelia, go on, I beseech you, with your story.
               
               "I have not come to my own story yet," said miss Courteney;
all that you have heard has been only an introduction to it; and I have given you the history of my parents in the words, as near as I can remember, of my mother; for she loved scribbling, and com-mitted the principal incidents of her life to paper, which for my instruction she per-mitted me to read: I say instruction, for she was a woman of fine understanding and deep thinking, and she had interspersed through

her little narrative many beautiful and just re-flections, and many observations and useful maxims, which her reading, which was very comprehensive, and her experience furnished her with.
               
               "Proceed, my dear Clelia," said miss Wood-by, observing Henrietta paused here,
I am impatient to hear more.
"If you please," said miss Courteney, "we will drink tea first."
I have just two hours and a half to stay with you,
replied miss Woodby, looking at her "watch;
if I am at home by nine o'clock, which is my aunt's hour for supper, it will do.
Henrietta then ordered tea, which was soon dispatched, and she resumed her story in this manner.
               
                  My father, who was very desirous of con-ciliating at least his elder brother's affections, wrote to him, he being now upon his travels, and gave him an account of his marriage; but his letter, though conceived in the most tender and respectful terms, produced a cruel and supercilious answer, which not only took away all hope of his proving a mediator be-tween him and his father, but convinced him that he had in him no longer a friend or bro-ther.
               
               
                  

                  His affairs were in this desperate situation when my mother became pregnant; a distant relation of my father's now took an interest in this event, and being very rich and ambitious of making a family, he declared that if the child was a son, he would adopt him and make him his heir. You may imagine this design was received with great joy; the old gentle-man was very assiduous in his visits to my mo-ther during her pregnancy, and seemed ex-tremely happy in the thoughts of perpetuating his name; an ambition very common to per-sons of low extraction, who, by industry and thrift, have risen to great riches: for he was only by marriage a relation to my father, and had been too much neglected on account of the meanness of his original. But all these flattering expectations were destroyed by my birth, which I had reason to say proved a mis-fortune to my parents. The capricious old man was so greatly chagrined at his disap-pointment, that he transferred all his favours to another cousin, who was so lucky as to present him with a son to succeed to his for-tune, and continue his obscure name to pos-terity.
               
               
                  My brother's birth happened a year after-wards, and unfortunately for him a year too

late. My father still continued to draw his whole income from the bounty of his mother, who was a constant but fruitless mediator in his behalf: her death, which happened about three years after his marriage, was an irrepa-rable loss to him; for it was not improbable but the lenient hand of time, which weakens the force of every passion, joined to her tender solicitations, might have effected a reconcilia-tion between his father and him; but this hope was now no more: the countess be-queathed my father all the money she had saved, which was but a very small sum; for she had always given with a liberal hand to the poor, though with so little ostentation, that it was supposed she had saved some thousands out of her pin-money, for she was less expen-sive than any other woman of her rank in Eng-land; but it was not till after my father's mar-riage, that she began to save, and then only for him.
               
               
                  Six hundred pounds was all that was found in her cabinet, which some months after her decease was paid to my father with every cir-cumstance of contempt.
               
               
                  These repeated calamities were so far from lessening the love of my father and mother, that they seemed to redouble their tenderness;

seeking in each other that happiness which for-tune denied them, and which they were always sure to find in their own virtue and mutual af-fection.
               
               
                  My father, who had had a very liberal edu-cation, employed the greatest part of his time in the instruction of his children: under his tuition I acquired the French and Italian lan-guages; by my mother I was taught every useful accomplishment for a young woman in my situation; nor did my father's narrow cir-cumstances hinder him from procuring me those which were suitable to my birth. My brother had no other tutor but this excellent father, who qualified him for a university; and at fourteen years of age he was sent to that of Leyden, and I have never seen him since.
               
               
                  In the mean time the earl my grandfather, who still continued inexorable, was taken off suddenly by an apoplectick fit; and having never altered his will, which he made imme-diately after the marriage of my father, he found he was cut off with a shilling. This stroke, as it was always expected, was less sensibly felt than another which immediately followed it. That relation, to whose estate my father was to succeed, having buried his wife, married a young woman, who, in a year

afterwards brought him a son to inherit his for-tune.
               
               
                  My father, now seeing no prospect of any provision for his children, fell into a deep me-lancholy: he had by the interest of some of his friends, obtained a place which brought him in between three and four hundred a year; but out of this it was impossible to save much. The uneasiness of mind which he laboured under, corrupted his blood; he was seized with a decay which carried him off in a few months, and deprived his wife of the best hus-band, his children of the best father that ever was.
               
               
                  In his last illness he had wrote to his bro-ther, and recommended his helpless family to his compassion; but that nobleman, whose avarice was his strongest passion, and whose resentment against his brother was kept up by the arts of his wife; her family, though noble, being very poor, and therefore depend-ent upon him, took no other notice of my father's last request, than to send my mo-ther a bank bill for an hundred pounds; de-claring at the same time that it was all the assistance she must ever expect from him; and with this heroick act of generosity, he silenced

            
               Just published, (By the same AUTHOR) PHILANDER, A DRAMATIC PASTORAL.
            [Price one Shilling.]
         
      
      
         
            

the soft pleadings of nature, and persuaded him-self that he had done his duty.
               
               
                  My mother, being young with child when my father died, miscarried; and by that acci-dent, together with her continual grief, she fell into a languishing illness, which threatened a short period to her days. Five hundred pounds was all that my father left: from this small sum a widow and two children were to draw their future subsistence. What a me-lancholy prospect! However my brother, who was then about seventeen, had made such great proficiency in learning, that, notwith-standing his youth, he was recommended by the professors of the university to have the care of some English youths who studied there, which afforded him a decent subsistence.
               
               
                  My mother having placed four hundred and fifty pounds in the hands of a rich merchant, who had been a friend of my father's, and gave her very good interest for it, she disposed of all her furniture, and with the money arising from the sale, set out with me for Bath, the waters being prescribed to her by her physician.
               
               
                  Not being able to support the expence of living in the town, she took lodgings in a plea-sant village, about three miles distemper from it; and here, feeling her distemper daily gain-ing

ground, she prepared for death, with a re-signation that was only interrupted by her anxiety for me.
               
               
                  It was not indeed easy to form any plan for my future subsistence, which would not sub-ject me to a situation very unfit for my birth. Had my brother been provided for, she would have made no scruple of sinking that small sum that was left, into an annuity for my life, which with economy might support me above necessity and dependence. She wrote to my brother, and desired his advice with regard to me. My brother, as if he had entered into her views, in his answer conjured her to have no solicitude about him, since, with the edu-cation he had received, he could not fail of supporting himself in the character of a gen-tleman, but to dispose of that money in any manner which might be most for my advan-tage.
               
               
                  My mother shed tears of tender satisfaction over this letter, so full of duty to her, and af-fection for me; but the more generous and disinterested her son showed himself, the less was she capable of taking a resolution, which, if any disappointment happened to him, must leave him without any resource.
               
               
                  

                  You may be sure, my dear miss Woodby, I was not very forward to fix her purpose; for I could not bear the thought of being the only person, in our little distressed family, to whom a subsistence was secured. While my mother was thus fluctuating, she was visited in her re-tirement by lady Manning, a widow lady of a very plentiful fortune, with whom she had been in some degree of intimacy during the life of my father.
               
               
                  This lady showed great fondness for me; and my mother imparting to her her difficul-ties with regard to settling me, lady Manning begged her to make herself quite easy, for that she would take me under her own care.
               
               
                  Miss Courteney, said she, will do me ho-nour by accepting my house for an asylum, and I and my daughter will think ourselves happy in such an agreeable companion. My mother was extremely pleased with this offer; and lady Manning pressed me to go with her to London, for which place she was to set out in a few days.
               
               
                  I was so much shocked at the proposal of leaving my mother in the dangerous condition she was judged to be, that I did not receive lady Manning's offer with that sense of her in-tended kindness which she doubtless expected;

and when my mother, wholly governed by the consideration of my interest, urged me to go with lady Manning, I burst into a vio-lent passion of tears, vehemently protesting that I would never leave her; and lamenting her causeless distrust of my affection in sup-posing that I could be prevailed upon, by any prospect of advantage to myself, to separate from her.
               
               
                  I observed lady Manning redened at these words, which she understood as a reproach for her making so improper a proposal, and which I really desired she should: for I was highly disgusted with her want of delicacy, in desiring me to leave my mother, and her be-lieving it possible that I could consent.
               
               
                  I saw pleasure in my mother's eyes at this artless expression of my tenderness for her; but at the same time I thought I could per-ceive by the turn of her countenance that she was apprehensive I had disobliged lady Man-ning: therefore I endeavoured to remove her fears by the strongest assurances of gratitude to that lady. She received those assurances with a little superciliousness at first, but that pre-sently wore off; and at parting she renewed her professions of friendship to my mother, and promises of a parent's care of me.
               
               
                  

                  She left Bath three days afterwards, so that we did not see her again, which made my mo-ther a little uneasy; but we had soon a very kind letter from her, in which she repeated all her former offers, and expressed great tender-ness for me.
               
               
                  At her return from London, she passed through Bath in her way to her country-seat; and, finding my mother much worse, she re-doubled her professions of affection for me, and was so lavish in her promises, that she left her quite easy on my account. Indeed, notwith-standing what I have suffered from lady Man-ning, I shall ever think myself obliged to her for contributing so greatly towards that compo-sure of mind which my mother felt, from the time that she thought me secure of an asylum, till it would suit with my brother's circum-stances to take me under his own care.
               
               
                  I will not, my dear miss Woodby, enlarge upon the last three months of my mother's life, which was spent in a constant preparation for her end. Indeed the innocence of her manners, and the unfeigned piety that shone through her conduct, made her whole life one conti-nued preparation for that awful moment, so dreadful to the wicked; so full of peace, con-fidence, and holy joy to the good. In fine, I

lost this excellent mother, and my bleeding heart still feels her loss.
               
               The tears, which at this tender remembrance ran from miss Courteney's eyes, made a pathe-tick pause in her relation; but recovering her-self, she proceeded, as will be found in the fol-lowing Book.
            
         
         
            

            HENRIETTA. BOOK THE SECOND.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  In which Henrietta enters upon her own story, and shews, that to confer benefits, is not always a proof of benevolence.
               
               "THE worthy merchant," resumed miss Courteney,
whom I mentioned to you, had the goodness to come to Bath, upon the news of my mother's extreme danger. He arrived time enough to receive her last intreaties, that he would continue his friendship to me. I was then entered into my twentieth year, and chose him for my guar-dian; he would have taken me with him to his house, but my promise being engaged to lady Manning, I was obliged to decline his obliging offer.
               
               
                  

                  I wrote her an account of my mother's death; Mr. Bale, so was the merchant called, would not return to town till he saw me safely disposed of.
               
               
                  About three days after I had wrote to lady Manning, I received a letter from her, which was brought by one of her servants; in which, after the usual compliments of condolance, she desired I would set out immediately with the person whom she had sent to attend me. My guardian, for so I used now to call Mr. Bale, coming in, I told him I must prepare to be gone immediately, and gave him lady Manning's letter to read.
               
               
                  How are you to go, miss? said he, after he had looked over the letter. As I never doubted but lady Manning had sent her post-chaise or chariot for me, I told him I supposed there was a carriage come with the messenger.
               
               
                  O yes, replied Mr. Bale, there is a very good pillion, and you are to ride behind the footman, I took notice of the equipage as I came in, but I shall not permit you to per-form a journey of thirty miles in that manner: therefore, miss, I would have you send a letter to the lady by her messenger, and inform her that your guardian will convey you safe to her seat.
               
               
                  

                  I was as much pleased with this kind atten-tion in Mr. Bale, as I was shocked and sur-prised at the ungenteel manner in which lady Manning had sent for me: however I con-cealed my thoughts of it, and wrote such a letter as my guardian desired me. The next morning at eight o'clock, a post-chaise was ready at the door, and, Mr. Bale attending; all my cloaths had been packed up the night before, and we set out immediately.
               
               
                  Lady Manning received us very politely, and detained Mr. Bale to dinner. I thought I could observe something forced in the respect she seemed to pay me; and I was particularly disgusted with her using the words Your guar-dian every moment, as if in derision of the title I had to one.
               
               
                  When Mr. Bale went away, he took an opportunity to speak to me apart, and made me promise him, if I should have any reason to be displeased with my situation, that I would write to him plainly, and he would come him-self and fetch me away. This tender solici-tude in the good old man affected me very sensibly, and I could not help shedding tears when I saw him drive away.
               
               
                  Lady Manning was extremely inquisitive about his connexion with me, and asked me a

great many questions. I am very glad, said she, your affairs are in the hands of so wise a man; for surely he who can raise a large estate out of nothing, as has been the case with Mr. Bale, must needs be a very wise man, and I don't doubt but he will manage your fortune to the best advantage.
               
               
                  I was greatly displeased with the first part of this speech, and particularly with the manner in which the word Fortune was drauled out.
               
               "The poor trifle I have, madam, replied I, "does not deserve to be termed a fortune.
               
                  I assure you, said she, it was very kind in a man of Mr. Bale's substance to trouble himself with such inconsiderable matters; and it is a great thing for you to be permitted to call such a man guardian.
               
               
                  Very true, madam, replied I, with some warmth; and I believe Mr. Bale thinks it no discredit to be called so by a child of Mr. Cour-teney's, whatever her fortune may be.
               
               
                  I observed lady Manning to reden at this reply, which at that time surprised me, and I could not conceive the reason of it; but I soon found that it was a mortal crime in her eyes to pretend to derive any advantage from birth. There was nothing which she seemed to hold in greater contempt than family-pride,
