"The immediate Object of the Inquiry now depending before the Commons of Great Britain is Whether Sir Wm Howe is a Man of Capacity & has ably conducted The American War."
"This Question is of very little consequence to the Publick & may be decided in any Way without affecting the State otherwise than by promoting or defeating the Purpose of Party."
"The Inquiry however has led to Questions of more Moment."
"1st How far the State has a Right to Employ the Ordinary means of War in order to Suppress a Rebellion which has outlived all the Grievances from which it was Supposed to Arise, & how far his officers have already Abused these means."
"And What Prospect  remains to Great Britain of being able to effect a Reunion with Her Colonies."
"As to the 1st Question. It is not easily conceived how Subjects in Arms against Their Sovereign & in Alliance with his ennemys, should be entitled to more favour than the Subjects of a Forreign Prince at War upon some problematical Questions of State."
"The Subjects of a forreign Prince involved in a War by their Sovereign may not have incurred any personal Guilt by that Circumstance And it is not Lawfull to Distress them except so far as that is allowed in order to Disstress the State to which they belong."
"But Subjects in Rebellion incurr a Personal Guilt & may be disstressed not only in order to disstress their Community but likewise in order to Punish Their Crime."
"When a Controversy nevertheless, whatever may have been its origin,  has been brought to the ordinary Issue of War. It must be conducted according to the Rules of War least Innocent Subjects employed against Rebels & Criminals shoud be exposed by Retaliation to Suffer what Justice permits to be inflicted on Rebels & Criminals Alone."
"War is supposed to permit Reprisals, Circumvention, Force, Bloodshed Slaughter & a Variety of means that may be employd to force an Ennemy to Justice."
"In the use of these means however the operations of War are limited with a View to the End, & to the just measure of Hostilitys that may be necessary to Obtain it."
"No Act of Hostility not even the smallest Molestation to the Person against whom it is employed is Lawfull Except so far it is necessary to prevent a Wrong, or  to redress an Injury."
"The Principle from which the Rules of War are derived is. That a Person apprehending wrong may defend himself at the Expence & Hazard, and if necessary even by the Suffering & Destruction of the Party who wrongs him."
"And the Source of the Limitation is likewise Obvious: That he is not to do harm wantonly nor beyond what is necessary to preserve or recover his Right."
"The first & most ordinary Species of Hostilitys in case an ennemy persist in the Wrong, Are seizing his Person & Effects or His Territory & in case of Resistance, Military Execution & Slaughter."
"1st — A Party Aggrieved has a right to make War at the Expence of His Ennemy, And therefore has a Right that [xxx] is never Contested, to raise Contributions, to exact  Supplys of every Sort, as far as they are Necessary to Support, the War or as far as they tend by distressing the Ennemy to compell the Ennemy to Justice."
"Armys on the Territory of an Ennemy sometimes Spare the Countrey from a Consideration of Safety & Expedience to themselves."
"It is expedient to Protect a Countrey in which an Army is to make is the Seat of War, in order to enjoy its Resources which might be exhausted at once if the Countrey was laid Waste or exposed to Rapin."
"An Army endeavours to Avail itself of the Resources of an Ennemys Countrey either by Exacting regular & Measured Contributions under a perfect Security to the Persons & remaining Property of those who pay those Contributions."
"Or by means Still more Mild by requiring the Ordinary Supply of the Camp at a Marketable & Reasonable Price. "
"If the reasonable dem[and] whether of a free Contribu  or Marketable Supply a[re] refused it is undoubtedly Lawfull to Exact Complyance under Pain or Military Execution. And Countreys in the Power of an Ennemy for the most part are so well apprised of what they have to Expect that they never refuse such Contributions or Supplys."
"2 — Every Person that is Found in Arms is Supposed to Resist & may be proceeded against accordingly. And Every House from which Hostilitys are Committed may be destroyd & is accordingly destroyed to deterr the Peasant from Practices that Approach to assassination & hurt particular persons without affecting the General Cause."
"3 — An Army being to Withdraw from a Countrey or being to leave it to be occupied by an ennemy may if Expedient not only break up high Ways  demolish Bridges. Fell Timber. Destroy Forrage Provisions, & every Species of accommodation that would facilitate the operations of An Ennemy. This is Practised by Armys on the own Territory of a Friend & the Right was never Questioned on that of an Ennemy."
"When a Party at War is to Abandon a Possession that may be instantly turned against him by an Ennemy, it is undoubtedly lawfull to consult his own Safety by destroying Such Possession."
"Thus not only Arsenals & Magazines with their Contents of Arms Amunition stores and Provisions. Not only Fortresses Docks & Harbours but Sea Ports of any description [xxx] Towns & Villages are destroyed when they are likely to become a dangerous Accession of Force to an Ennemy."
"And the Party who persists in the Wrong so  long as to render those or Other Acts of Hostility necessary against him has no one to Blame but himself."
"If The Party whose Right is withheld from him, abstain, upon Considerations of Humanity or Prudence, from such Severitys; this conduct depends upon his own Choice & cannot be exacted from him by any Strict Rule of Justice."
"On the Contrary Justice to the Cause in which he is engaged may frequently make it necessary for him to proceed so far."
"These Maxims of War have not been practised much less Abused in the general Conduct of the American War."
"Accidental outrages take place without making any Part in the Plans or Systems of Hostilitys."
"The Plan of the War seems to have been formed upon an Idea that we  were engaged in a Contest with our Brethren to be reclaimed by the mildest Possible Methods, That their Armys were to be defeated but their Persons and Property Spared. No contributions were exacted, No Markets were forced, The Peasant lived undisturbed within Reach of our Guns Cannon & denyed us that Relief & those Supplys which a Single discharge could have forced, or Amply punished him for refusing."
"Must Great Britain forego every Right that is not to be recovered upon such Maxims of Lenity or rather Timidity as these?—If so Every Obstinate Ennemy or Rebel may forever with hold her Rights."
"But the American Rebels must not be flatterd."
"Every Species of War that is lawfull against an ordinary Ennemy is lawfull against them. "
"And as the Passions of men are more Violent in Civil and Domestic than in Forreign Wars, The Obstinate American Rebel who professes to throw himself into the Scale of France, against his own Countrey, has more Severitys to dread from his Injured Countrey than any Forreign Ennemy would have to dread in the result of an Ordinary War."
"The Congress now Usurping the Government in America & Violently restraining the People from returning to their Allegiance & Duty, Intend the deepest Wound that ever was aimed at Great Britain, and appea to be Animated with peculiar Sentiments of Animosity & Rancour."
"The Consequences of their Pretensions to Independence, Are the Dissmemberment of the British Empire by a Separation of the whole Continent of North America from the  Crown of Great Britain: The Consequent Exclusion of Great Britain from the Naval Resources which she had with so much Care Studyed to acquire with so much care on the Other Side of the Atlantic. Her Exclusion in time of War time   at least from the Parts of the Atlantic sic become precarious & insecure, & consequently the Danger of her Possession in the West East Indies become equally precarious Insecure, & or a Ready Prey to her Ennemys. And last of all the Eventual transferance of all the Maritime advantages now Enjoyed by Great Britain to Her Ennemys."
"Whoever therefore sees nothing to be regretd in the Contest now Subsisting with the Rebels in America & in its Consequences, besides  the hardships likely to be Suffered by the American Rebel in Carrying to its full Completion this System of Wrong & Injustice to this Countrey & whoever feels not the wrong the[re]by intended & actually impending to Great Britain: is not, in his Heart, a British Subject but an Alien & an Ennemy."
"When it is considered That, if in case the Ennemys of Great Britain whether forreign or Domestic Prevail in this Quarrel, Our Countrey still will be Stript of Possessions [xxx] improved with so much Care; will be deprived of the expected Returns from thence, & reduced to this Single Island, with Towns going to decay And Inhabitants Perishing for want of their former Resources: With a People Enured to Wealth disused to the Virtues,  required what might to Support them in Poverty; & in no Condition to Strugle with the difficulties of so new a Situation; No longer able to mantain such Fleets & Armys for the Defence of her Coasts & therefore an Easy Prey to any forreign Ennemy."
"When it is considered, that these are the Evils which we are now Striving to Avert: The Person who now affects to Weep for over the temporary Sufferings which the Americans may now draw on themselves by persisting in this Rebellion, will, it is hoped, change the Object of his Fears or Confess himself to be an Ennemy not a Friend to Great Britain."
"This Idle Inquiry has likewise been directed to Cloud the Prospect of Great Britain in Her endeavours to recover  Her Interest in the American Colonies."
"Her Difficulties are Exaggerated; Her Forces & her Resources are depreciated & Vilifyed; in order to Support a Character for Ability in the Officer who has been Employed in this Service. And The Empire of Great Britain must be dissmembered rather than we must Suppose any Defect in the Capacity of our General [xxx] who certainly might rise in our Esteem as much by the diffidence which in the world Modesty inspires as by any Pretences to Ability & Superiour Genius but from his failure hitherto to Restore America to its Duty the Obvious Consequence, I hope, is not despair of our Countreys Cause but farther & some different change of Plan exertion."
"We must Protect & Support our Friends on that Continent, [xxx] & dissarm our Ennemies."
"We must Put our Friends in Possession of Civil Government & reserve the effects of Military Government for our Military dissorders & Severitys our Ennemys."
"I do not say mean to insinuate that the Reverse has hitherto been done, experience is not necessary to condemn The Idea Such Proceedings whether real or Supposed."
"The Force of Arms is ever but a small part in the great operations of State to restore & to heal a Wounded Community."
"The Force of Wisdom & of Justice the Sense of Mutual Interest, directing the Arms that are to be employed against a desperate Faction that has usurped usurping the Government of North America, may soon do more than has yet appeared to be Practised. The mere Military Move has hitherto performed however much though supposed above Censure have been able to Accomplish."
