Edinburgh Novr 7th 
1769



My Dear Sir

I was made very happy last night by seeing your name on some covers directed to me & as I suppose you knew the Contents It is with great pleasure I hasten to give you my thoughts on the Subject. If Mr Wilkes had been contented to pass through Parliament inobserved I should have been averse to move his expulsion for the Prudential reasons with which This Speech concludes. But as he himself dared the house to enter on the consideration of his Subject, How was it possible for the house of commons to avoid declaring that he was or was not an infamous person unworthy of a share in the Legislature of his Countrey. On such occasions The Populace are to be told that The house of commons is not to be governed by the consideration of their disspleasure: but that they are to be Governed by the decisions of The House. 

The Whole Arguments of this Speech proceed upon false Suppositions a misstake of the Spirit of our Constitution and indeed of what is Possible in the Nature of things. The House of Commons is addressed as a Court of Justice & expulsion is treated as the Punishment of a Crime. In Our Constitution the Legislature & Judicature are carefully Separated, except in appeals to the House of Lords. But the several Branch[e]s of the Legislature must have the Power to Suspend all Jurisdiction and all execution of the Law whenever this Power is necessary for its own defence. It is in The Capacity of a Branch of the Legislature acting in its own defence that The House of Commons decides concerning the Priviledges Elections & Qualifications of its own members. When Acting in this Capacity the House of Commons has no Superior No Lawgiver no Equal. Its Duty requires that it should Effectually repell every attack and remove every Danger; that it should preserve every Priviledge & this with or Without Precedent, according as the case is new or otherwise  And according as the former proceedings of Parliament in such cases have been wise or Otherwise.

This I shall be told is supposing a Disscretionary Power in the House of Commons. I know how Odious the name of Disscretionary Power is. Our Constitution abhors it in the King or Courts of Justice except when acting in their own defence. It abhors it Likewise in either house of Parliament except where they concur with The King in some Act of Legislature or in the Defence of their own Priviledges and Separate Rights. But in all these Instances Disscretionary Powers are necessary in the Nature of things & no Government ever coud proceed without them. What is our Security against the abuse of such Powers in any branch of the Legislature. This abuse may be supposed to affect some other Branch of the Legislature. In this case the Security arises from the Collateral Power that is invaded & qualified to defend itself. But the Special abuse now apprehended is the encroachment of the house of commons on the general Rights of the People. Can any one imagine that  This Constitution coud have existed so long, if the security against this abuse had been derived solely from forms & Precedents. If forms and Precedents coud give this Security why are we at pains to send Representatives from all the different Parts of The Kingdom, why have we so carefully Specifyed their qualifications but in order that they might be men of Like Passions and Like Interests with ourselves. To continue the Language of Scripture our Security is that they are bone of our Bone & flesh of our flesh. That they cannot tear a bit of our flesh without tearing their own with it. This is what The Constitution means when it says that we are safe under the Protection of our own Representatives. If it be aledged that the Safety or the Authority of the Commons in any case [xxx] is in danger. This Alegation must be dissproved, or the necessary measures must be taken to remove the danger. How absurd woud it be to say that  these objects the safety or Authority of the commons must be given up because there is no Precedent according to which  they can be defended. With humble Submission therefore to the Able Speaker I must Insist that he ought to have shown that neither the Authority nor the Dignity of the Commons had been attacked in the case of Wilkes. Or if he confessed that they were attacked, his denial of former effectual precedents to guide the house; only proved the necessity of having Recourse to something new. He has reasoned with great Power and Elocution upon the same Supposition of a Judicial Tryal Against Punishing Mr Wilkes twice for the same offence &c. Does our Constitution then say that expulsion from the house of commons is a Punishment? What was it in those times of our Constitution when the Duties of Parliament were considered as a Burden? Is Mr Wilkes to be Punished only by putting him in the same Situation with every Gentleman in this Kingdom except a few hundreds that Sit in Parliament. The Courts of Justice have Punished Mr Wilkes And Our Constitution Says that he cannot  be tryed repeatedly nor by different courts for the same offence. He coud not therefore be tryed Judicially by the House of Commons: but it having appeared from his Tryal & Condemnation elsewhere & from the undenyed grounds assumed in the Motion; that he was an Infamous Person. The house expelled him. He was not Punished but declared unworthy of a share in the Legislature of this Kingdom, And this expulsion  [xxx] xxx of an Infamous person when moved or stirred by himself or any other I humbly think was necessary in order to Mantain The Authority and the Dignity of the Commons of Great Britain. I confess I am Surprised to hear any body alledge a dangerous precedent in this Case as if the House woud be led to do wrong hereafter by doing right now: An Unjust Action is always a bad precedent. Even a just Action performed by improper persons is a bad Precedent Likewise. But a Proper Action proceeding from the Proper Authority Cannot be a bad precedent merely because it is alledged there is no prior example to be followed  in the performance of it. This however is the Stress of this Speakers Argument. I do not conceive what he can gain by quoting the example of Mr Walpole: If the act of Corruption he mentions were true The House did right in expelling Mr Walpole And their the Successors did wrong in ever admitting him to sit in Parliament. If we consider the use which he afterwards made of his great Power I think we need not be affraid to say that this Nation coud have well disspensed with his Services. The first Resolution however with respect to him was held to be final & his Constituents did what the Constituents of Mr Wilkes must [xxx] apprehend for the Preservation of the Constitution be obliged to do: they must acquiesce in the Resolution of the Commons.

I allow that this Contest has brought on a dangerous Crisis & think it the more so perhaps for being at a distance from the Scene. But was this Crisis to be Avoided by giving way to the Pretensions of an Infamous Person Supported by a deluded Populace. I apprehend  for my own Part that if the Authority of Parliament and of the Government in all its Parts is not Properly Supported the State will be in the utmost danger. Our Constitution knows of no Authority but that of King Lords & Commons but we are now fostering a fourth Power in the State, That of the Populace of London, and at the time in which they are become most Corrupted we are inviting them to a share in the Government.

I know not the Present Ministers nor am qualifyed to Judge of the Rolls of Parliament but this I am sure of, that it is the Interest of Every Person Possessed of any Property or consideration in the Kingdom to Suspend their personal dissputes untill they have taught the mob of London not to Interpose. If the present Ministers were bad & the Present Parliament ill chosen I woud neither dissolve nor dissplace them, when such an Action must necessarily lay the foundation of Popular Pretensions ruinous to order & Government. I have heard with  some degree of Affliction that you had embarked with the opposition on the present occasion. I shoud not have regreted most assuredly your Opposing the Measures of a Minister on any Particular occasion. But if I understand the Term opposition, it is joining with a Party who are engaged in disstressing the Government in all Possible ways, who will allow no body to differ from them in any point whatever Nor to serve the Public in any office but in Conjunction with themselves. With this meaning in my head if I had been at London I shoud have prostrated myself at your feet to have hindered your forming any such Connections. But perhaps the Report is false. There are Views I am sure more worthy of your Understanding & of your heart. It is to try whether a Neutral Interest can be formed by men of Property & Family to Ward off the Evils with which the  Constitution is threatned in the Ishue of a Contest between Mobs & Military Power: for I tremble at the Thought of its coming to that without any body at hand to insist for the Constitution. Our Government is said by Mr Montesquieu and others to be perfect. They only think of the dangers to Liberty that come from The Crown. They do not consider the dangers to Liberty that come from the Populace. The Habeas Corpus & the Tryal by Juries bind up the hands of the King: but unless The Riot Laws are amended there are a thousand hands for one let loose. These reformations cannot be made untill our Present Gamblers for Power are made to feel that they cannot rise upon the shoulders of the Mob. I have written all this in great haste in hopes of Pardon for Inaccuracys & in confidence that one point will be well understood my meaning and Intention  towards yourself. If I had been at London & within reach of knowing your sentiments as they arose I make no doubt but you woud have carryed me along with you as you always did here. But I write in the Dark & without knowing Particulars. Believe me to be

My Dear Sr 
your most affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







P.S. I cannot have done. The apprehension thrown out in this Speech that on the supposition that the House of Commons were to judge of the worthyness or unworthyness of persons to have a share in the Legislature of their Country: they woud become Electors is extremely groundless. In the first place the house of commons does not exist untill it is chosen by the People. In the next place persons so chosen act by their Majority. They may go wrong in Particular  Instances but never to any extent that is dangerous to the Rights of the People for they themselves are people & can have no rights when those of the people are given up. If it be said that they may sell their own rights and those of the People the Constitution on this supposition is undone & I am sure that the freeholders of Middlesex will not save it by chusing infamous persons to serve in Parliament, nor the Gamblers for Power by supporting them in that choice.

Bankhead Decr 1st 
1769



My Dear Sir

I wrote a few days ago a short apology for my apprehensions of the London Mob. It is not the courage but the Cowardice of them & their opponents I Dread. Recollect & you will find that cowardice has raised & Perpetuated more Military Governments than ever courage did. Sylla is the only man since the Beginning of the World that ever had the Courage to lay down a Military Government at the head of which he had offended. If you drive a Coward to the wall he is more dangerous than a brave man in another Situation.

Having been bussy all the week with my affairs at College I came here to pass a night & find myself engaged in the affairs of the Nation. I threatned to differ from you about the test of well constituted Government, about the fact in our own constitution, & tho I might agree with you about its differ disstemper to differ nevertheless about the Remedy: but as I have not your letter by me must write at Random and  shall be very glad not to differ from you at all.

In speaking of well constituted Government I must define Arbitrary Power which you seem to think inconsistent with it. This is not a Power exempted from the obligations of Justice nor a Power that can make wrong right or right wrong. There is no such Power neither in heaven above nor on the Earth beneath. But an Arbitrary Power is that which may determine itself according to the Special[i]tys of every Particular case having no rule prescribed to it nor being accountable to any Other Power. Now the test of well constituted government is not the want of such a Power: but the committing of it to the safest hands. A Government without Supreme unaccountable or Arbitrary Power is as inconceivable as a circle without a Circumference. The Government of France is not well constituted because Arbitrary Power is committed to a very unsafe hand, that of the King who has a Partial Interest to Support & who sacrifices the Wellfare of the people to this Interest. But the Government of Great Britain is well constituted because it commits Arbitrary Power to King Lords & Commons, who according to the constitution in its sound State comprehend all the Interests in the Kingdom which ought to be reconciled in every particular case before any resolution can be agreed to by all these three members of our Sovereignty.

Now as to the fact in our constitution. King Lords & Commons have Arbitrary Power. And they have made a Good use of it. In the first place they have divested themselves of the exercise of this very Power as far as is consistent with their Supremacy. They coud not delegate Legislation without ceasing to be Supreme; but they have delegated Jurisdiction & the execution of the Law to Judges & officers of the Crown to whom they have Prescribed Rules & who are accountable to themselves for the Observance of those Rules. So much that every Subject knows as far as the Nature of Government will Permit the Rule according to which he is to be governed. In the next place they have enacted in general very good Laws & have interposed their Supreme & Arbitrary Power by Bills of Attainder &c only in extraordinary cases, & for the most part with good Effect to the Publick.  When you acknowledge that King Lords and commons Jointly are the Supreme Power in this constitution: you have acknowledged that each of them separately is Supreme in what is required to its own defence. I do not ask what their proceedings have been in matters of this sort the supposition of a Power is the supposition of a right to defend that Power. Let the Commons be attacked in the Priviledge of any member, in the improper nomination of any member, they cannot hold their share of the Supreme Power if they cannot repell that attack without being accountable to any other Power whatever. If they must have the Authority of a Statute for what they do: they cannot defend themselves without the Consent of King & Lords: Let the King or Lords then be the Invaders, as may well be supposed, & the Commons are undone. The Lords determine who are their own Constituent members & so do the commons. In this they are not jointly but each separately the Supreme Legislature the Supreme Judicature & the Supreme executive Power. Their  History will prove; considering the frailty of human Nature, that their separate as well as joint Powers have not been abused. Their Subjects have been the freest & securest Subjects on Earth. They act by the Majority & the Majority can have no interest in groundless oppressions that might one day reach any of themselves.

Now for the disstemper. The Majority of The Commons are under Influence of administration. And may abuse their Power to pay their Court. Granted.

What is the Remedy? A Farther extension of the Remedy that has been already in Part applied. All officers of the Revenue are already excluded from the House of Commons. Exclude if you will every other placed or Pensioned Man whatever. Or of this be too much let the Secretarys of State. The Boards of Treasury. Admiralty and Trade &c have each their single Representative in Parliament & no more. Give the Countys a greater Representation & the Burroughs less. Let the People take care whom they chuse. They are  concerned not to bestow unworthily a Power that in the Nature of things must be Arbitrary because there is no superior to give it Law nor to call it to account. It is the Spirit of our constitution that Members of Parliament shoud be well chosen but that being chosen they shoud be Masters. How absurd it woud be to name an Abeter with full powers without minding whether he were an honest man or a knave & then talk of Limiting his Power when there is nobody to controul or direct him. I woud fain think I do not differ from you in my notion of the Remedy Altho you talked of a Statute to restrain the Powers of the Commons. Which I think is either inconsistent with our constitution & woud either be neglected or have a bad effect: but the first it woud most certainly be. Let your Virtuous opposition Speak. I know what they will chuse when it is in their option when it is in their to hurt administration without doing good to the Public or to do good to the Public without  hurting Administration. I shoud be very sorry to see men all of one mind in Parliament: but either this manner of Party or the State itself I am perswaded cannot last. How can a State Subsist when every one out of Pension or place and even some that are in think themselves entitled to disstress it. I am perswaded that Sr George Saville & you cannot be serious in apprehending that the expulsion of Mr Wilkes is a bad precedent for you. I shoud think it a very bad precedent for you if such men were allowed to sit in the house. The Power of expulsion has never been so much abused by the house as to merit any notice in human affairs. Till now it has been in my memory never exerted at all & yet the Majority has always been on the Side of Administration and opposition has always been troublesome. Why shoud the Majority expell they are already Masters. Why shoud the most corrupted of the Majority chuse to expell, it woud only serve to Lessen their own Consideration & to bring down the Price of their Votes which is always highest when Partys are nearest Equality. 

Such men as Sr George Saville and you never were since the World Began expelled from any National Assembly or Senate except when there were Sentrys at the door to keep them out. The London mob may soon make it necessary to have sentrys in a certain Lobby to keep themselves out what farther use may be made of those Semtrys I know not. A Popular Party in the house having the Majority within & the Cry without may proceed to the fury of mere Party expulsions: but a Corrupt Minister will be glad to sneak through with his Majority & will surely avoid the odium of expelling any worthy man when by the very supposition of a majority he can go on without any such measure.

Since writing the Above I have returned to Edr & have read over your Letter with great pleasure. I think the difference between us may be reduced to the following points. You seem to deny the Supremacy of the house of Commons in matters of their own right Establishment. This Supremacy I hold to be as  well ascertained to the commons, as The Supremacy of all the Three orders is in matters that concern all three. The Practice of the Commons has been uniformly agreeable to this right of Supremacy & without that Practice in the Reigns of James & Charles they woud have ceased to exist.

You seem to think that this power to expell and disqualify is matter of new Pretension: but it has been exercised when occasion offered and never questioned till now.

You seem to think that a Supreme Power altho it cannot receive the Law from any other Power may nevertheless prescribe Rules to itself & cease to be Arbitrary. This I think a deception of words. A Persons own Rule is but his Resolution which he may keep or neglect at Pleasure unless there be some other to whom he must render Acc't.

If there be any Power so constituted as not to be subject to render Account, Care must be taken with whom that Power is  entrusted it is vain to employ ineffectual Rules. You will say perhaps that my Remedy mentioned above is impracticable. I am sure that in this Reign something very considerable in that way might have been obtained. If Gentlemen in Opposition had chosen to do any Good. You observe that Parliament men are not Bone of our Bone &c That is not the fault of the Constitution: but of their constituents, here the Remedy recurs again.

You insist that Expulsion from Parliament is to be considered as the Punishment of a Crime. Be it so. But it is still of such Crimes considered as rendering a person unworthy of Parliamentary Trust. I never knew a Person unworthy of that trust today become Worthy tommorrow. I am a Farmer if I had turned a fellow out of my barn for theft, I surely woud have a right to turn him out not only once but every time he attempted to come into it again. You observe that if the Character of Wilkes had not been infamous  the people woud have been unanimous on his Side. Most certainly if his Character had not been so I in particular woud never have thought that the House of commons did right in expelling him. It is hard in matters of Judgement to make people accountable for their actions & their motives too. If the action was right we must in Political matters put up with any motive or presume the Proper one.

As to the Resentment of People here to Mr Wilkes, if he deserved their Notice he woud certainly merit the other. There are some english Gentlemen established here & in the way of Preferment, if any body were to revile their Countrey in order to injure them I believe he woud be more detested here than Mr Wilkes ever was. If I know my own heart I shoud feel more indignation than ever my contempt of Wilkes Suffered me to feel in his case. The Reception his Scurrilitys found was inpitious not Provoking. When we find that the State is brought into some danger by such unworthy fools this is Provoking and Alarming too. 

I am a little piqued you shoud Suppose I thought the London Mob terrible in War. I know that they will fly from sharp shot but I know likewise that not only the Mob but the very Women & Whores at London may make Military Government appear Necessary to those who ought to prevent Military Government if they are encouraged & cannot be governed without it. I ought not tox have said any thing of the Riot Law without having read it, but in its Effects it does not appear to have been very Powerful where it was applied: Innocent and respectable people were attacked in the streets and in their houses & these crimes passed unpunished. In a Countrey where a fellow cant take a few shillings on the high way without being hanged.

I regret with the Deepest concern that you have not some Active hand in the administration. Government needs hands that can drive with resolution & stop short of extremes. I am glad of your opinion of some in Power: but the Party that wish for confusion & trouble are Strong & yet this may be a great Session. Pardon so much

yours Adam Ferguson