T H E

MO RAL ITi
STA GE-P LAYS

s E R I o tlS .
SERIOts.Lt
CON SID'E REDI

. 1 -

E D I.N B U R'G H:'
(Printed i the year M,DCC,LVIL

{Price Sixpence.)

THE-
MORALITY

0 F

STrA. GE-PL A r

SERIOUSLY CO NSIDERED.
N\ TOTHING can be more alarming, to

every well-wisher to true religion,
than to find disputes arising among

its Profeflbrs, which may end in divisions and
animofities hurtful to the spirit of religion it-
self. People who begin such disputes have
much to answer for, unless they have fuffi-
.cieat reason for what they do. It is well-
known, that the people of this country are
well disposed, fober and religious; that they
are ready to take every public offence much
to heart, and, as far as their disapprobation
will operate, that they firenuoufly contribute
to remove it. We ihould therefore beware
of trifling with their honest zeal, or of ma-
king them waste, against obje&s of a harm-
ges or indifferent nature, that oppofitior,

, -A " which

2

which should be all employed against real
vices and corruptions. Mistakes in this arti-
cle are attended with many ill consequences;
they mislead our apprehensions of duty; they
create ill-will, and become a source of ground-
less antipathy between persons, who should
entertain sentiments of kindness and charity
towards one another. I am sorry that there
should be any appearances of. this 'kind a-
mongft us at present, and would think myself
very happy in contributing to remove them.
We are alarmed with an imputation of irre-
ligion, which is cast upon the entertainments
of the Theatre; and it may be apprehended,
that persons who liften to this charge will
think very unfavourably, if not with some
degree of antipathy, of their neighbours, who
continue to take any part in' such entertain-
ments. I hope that no person would chufe
to bear the imputation of hating his brother
without a cause, and that every well-difpofed
person will be glad to hear'any observations
which may help us to form a right judgment
of one another.

The Stage has subsisted i n Britain about

two hundred years; it has been during this
period the entertainment of people of diftin-
tion, and of others too, who were enabled
to partake of it. Whether it has corrupted
our people in any degree, is a question not
easily determined. I am inclined to believe,
that, confidering the mixture of 'good aml

bad

[3]

bad men which are to be found in every age,
the people of this island are not inferior tothofe
of any other age or country whatever. This
will be a presumption, that, if Plays area
poison, it is at least but flow in its operations.
Another observation which I will make by the
way, is, that however the Stage may have
corrupted our people, the manners of the
people have so far prevailed, as, in some re-
speds, to have reformed the Stage. On this
head we may come to a sure conclusion, be-
cause we may compare Plays that were ad-
mitted during some part of this.period, with
those which are now chiefly in repute. In
making this comparison it will appear, that a
certain degree of indecency and licentiousness
once permitted, is now rejected, and that
Plays more pure, and of a better moral ten-
dency are either chosen from our antient stock,.
or that these qualities at leait are expeded
from every Writer of the present age. We
cannot be too anxious in forwarding this re-
formation, when it is in any degree incom-
pleat.. But I am sensible that it is in vain to
speak in this manner, whilit an opinion re-
mains, that the very name- and .form of a
Play is offensive and pernicious. I confess
that I am at a loss fully to account to myself
for the prevalence of such an opinion. It is
not derived from Scripture ; for I cannot re-
collet any thing like a warning against the
Stage, either in the.Old or N.ew.Teftament.

~t--~
, "Our

[ 4 1

Our Saviour, who appeared at a time when'
Plays were in .high repute in different parts of
the Roman Empire, fays nothing to warn us,
of their immorality; The Apostle Paul, in.
writing his Epistle to the Romans, amidst va-
rious inftrudions and cautions which he gives,
is silent on the subjet of Plays, which were
then in high repute amongit the people he
was writing to. In preaching at Athens, the
fame Apostle expressly quotes a sentence from
one of the Greek Poets, Ads xvii. 28.;
For in him we live, and move, and have our.
being; .as certain of yocro wn Poets have laid.
This is a very sublime expression, and beauti-
fully applied by the Apostle, as will appear
on consulting the context. It shows that he
was fenfible.of the inftrudions and good im-,
pressions which we may receive from poetry,
and was direded, by that Spirit which sup-
ported him in his Minifiry, to apply it so pro-
perly to those purposes. Nor is this the only
proof he has given of an esteem for .good
performances of this nature. He has, in the
firit Epistle to the Corinthians, xv. 33.
inserted into the sacred text a line from a
Greek Play, which now fubifits: Be not de-
ceived, evil communications corrupt good. man-
ners.- Who does not fee that such sentiments,
and such inftructions.muft be improving to
mankind, wherever they are.found, whether
in prose discourse, or in a Play ? And, if£ the
whole strain of a Play is framed to this ,pur-.

: pose,

'[ 5 ]

pose, it surely deserves esteem 'and encou-
ragement from every well disposed person,
who has the means of filling up his vacant
hours with such entertainments.. I am sorry
that any person should have overlooked this
consideration, or given reins to a headlong
zeal against the Stage, so unlike the wisdom
and discernment of the holy:Apoftle, whom
we have quoted. The Stage indeed may be
abufed,.and so may the wisest inltitutions-of
mankind: Religion itself can hardly be pre.
served from corruption.: The Papifis, and o-
ther Secaries, daily misapply the doctrinesof
Scripture, to serve their own unlawful pur-
poses. The pulpit, in the possession of eve-
ry -party, into which Christians are unhappi.
ly divided, has often ;rung with other founds
than those of the Gospel of peace, and put
us in mind, that when the 'best things fall.
into the hands of corrupt men, then the
wisest and most sacred institutions may susser
some abuse :. But this will furnish no argu-
ment against any subjea which is fobabuled.
I flould be sorry to offer any apology for a.
buses which may have appeared on the Stage:
I hope that every audience, in our times, will
have judgment and severity enough to reject
examples of this nature: But I cannot admit
any such abuse, as a valid argument against
.the Stage in general. We do not prohibit
-the use of food and drink, because some men
abuse them to excefi.; nor do we forbid all

relaxation

[ 6]

relaxation from business, because some un-
happy persons do mischief in their sports:
Neither should we condemn every poetical
composition, intended for the Stage, because
some Writings of this kind have been found
faulty and licentious. People, who are ac-
quainted with performances of this nature, are
sensible that a number of grave, moral and
edifying pieces, would, by such an undiftin-
guiflhing ruin, be loft to mankind.. The
Authors of such works have been esteemed
worthy of great praise, and have been thought
to bear a considerable part in promoting the
interest of virtue. We cannot doubt of this,
when we find any degree of regard paid to
them in Holy Writ; and what we have ob-
served to this purpose above, is fuflicient to
conned their defence with the honour of
Scripture itself. This is more than apology
sufficient for endeavouring to show, that such
performances may not only be innocent; but
be of great benefit to mankind. I am fenfi-
ble that persons who need much information
on this head, may likewise need to be told
what is the nature of a Play; and I will
now give some notion of it, that every per-
son, if possible, may be enabled to judge for
himself.

Plays are of two kinds, called Tragedy and

Comedy; the one represents the aAions of
common life, and compositions of this na.
ture have been the most liable to abuse; be-

cause

['. 7

cause wit and ridicule are sometimes found to
be petulant, and the familiarity of this style
is more easily mixed with indecencies: But
the perfection of Comedy consists in exposing
to just ridicule the follies and absurd vices of
ordinary men ; where it fails in this purpose,
the abuse is manifest, and will be condemned
by every judicious audience. Tragedy, on
the other hand, is serious, grave and majestic;
it represents the acions of great men, and
their conduc chiefly on great and interesting
occasions, their struggles in difficult and di-
stressing situations, where the sentiments they
express raise admiration or pity, and where
the very faults they commit become so many
warnings to the fpedator. Every Tragedy
therefore contains a story, and may convey
inftruaion in the fame manner with a parable
or fable; it differs only in the form, and not
in the effect. In' a Parable, the story is re-
lated; in Tragedy, the subject is expressed by
some action and conversation which is repre-
sented, and we are left to colled the story
from the speeches of the persons concerned
in it. In a Parable, we wait for the moral
till the story is concluded, when the whole
appears to have been an illustration of some
moral precept; in a good Tragedy, we have
a continued moral from beginning to end;
the charaters, the sentiments, and the obfer-
vations, which come from the persons who
speak, are calculated to move and instruCt us;

and

[8]

and we are deeply engaged by such re'prefen-
tations, because we take part with amiable
characers, and become anxious about the e-
vent. It mufft appear strange, to fay, that
every story, parable or fable, either in the
form of narration, or in that of a Tragedy,
must be a wrong thing in itself. One story,
indeed, however told, may be dull, tiresome,
and leave bad impressions ; but another story,
we all know, may be agreeable, entertaining,
and leave the best impressions on the hearts
of the hearers. We cannot therefore con-
demn the story represented in any Tragedy,
till we know of what kind it is, till we know
whether it tends to leave good imprefions or
bad ones, in the minds of the hearers. If it
is found to leave good impressions, it fllould
certainly be commended, and highly deserves
the countenance which the Apostle Paulhath
given to such works, altho' written even by
Heathens. In order to ifow in what manner
a tender and affecting flory improves the
heart, and firengthens every good disposition,
I Mhall confider the history of Jofepb and his
cruel brothers in that view. We find: the el-
der brothers moved with envy and malice a-
gainft an innocent child, because he had his
father's affection, and was diftinguifihed by
forebodings of Divine favour. They refol-
ved to ihed his blood, when he came to them
alone, in the defart'; but being diverted from
this cruel purpose, they fold him- as a Slave

to

[ 9 ]

to strangers who were passing thro' the wil-
dernefs. -Every humane person, who reads
this piece of history, will be moved at, the
distress of the innocent sufferer, and will feel
.a horror at the cruelty of the brothers. Here
then we may observe, that companion for the
distressed, and indignation at the wicked, are
the best dispositions which men can entertain;
and that every story which leaves such im-
pressions must be very edifying and inftrucdive
to good men. The remaining part of this
history is very beautiful, and we cannot help
confidering it. yofepb was preserve'd, and,
by the, Divine favour, came to a station of
honour and great power. Famine obliged
his brothers to seek relief in that country
where he was become a ruler. When they
appeared before him, he disguised the first
emotion of his foul, under an afpedt of feve-
rity.. He.queftioned them about his father's
condition; and, when mention was.made of
his younger brother, who had no ihare in
the cruel offence committed against him, he
discovered an earnest desire to fee him. When,
at last, he declared himself to be their brother
yofeph, they were firuck with remorse and
terror: But he repaid their former cruelties -
with a generous forgiveness; he relieved their
distress; he saw again his aged father; and,
paid the duty of a grateful child. :Whilst
we are attending to a story of this kind, it
nouriihes.every good disposition of the heart,

B and

[ o1 ]

and we are the better prepared by it to as a
noble, generous and compassionate part to-
wards our fellow-creatures. If we can imi-
tate such circumstances in the story of a Tra-
gedy, we may presume that the effect will
be similar; and it must appear strange, to
find any Tragedy censured, before we pre-
tend to ihow that it fails in this point. The
fubje& we are now upon has been brought in
question, on occasion of the Tragedy of
DOUGLAS; and no person sure can judge of
that performance, who is not acquainted with
the conduct of the story on which it is built.
But, if any person has proceeded so far, from
a general disapprobation of the Stage, I am
persuaded, that a few reflexions upon the re.
presentations of this performance, would be
sufficient to reconcile him to it. It was well
received by every audience, and seemed to
make a deep impression., The sentiments it
excites are those of admiration of virtue, com-
passion to the distressed, and indignation a-
gainft the wicked cause of their sufferings.
In every story of distress, which is not mere-
ly accidental, wicked characters must appear,
as well as good ones; for we cannot impute
injury and cruelty to any other but the wic-
ked: Their appearance however improves the
mind, by softering our aversion to wicked-
ness, in the fame degree as the view of ami-
able characters heightens our love of virtue,
by engaging-our hearts in its behalf. Hence

the

[ xT ]

the generosity of Yofeph, and the wickedness
of his brothers, are equal matter of improve-
ment and edification to our minds.

When the Tragedy of Douglas becomes yet

more public, it will appear to have a tendency
similar to this. The designs of one person are
painted in such colours of hateful depravity,
as to become a necessary object of detestation.
The mistakes of another awaken our caution,
and become a lesson of prudence. The ge-
nerous and elevated mind of a third, warm.
and exalt our sentiments; and that person, on
whom the chief difirefs of this story falls,
moves to compassion, and proves at last a
warning against rash and fatal despair. Agree-
able to this ihort representation, the perform-
ance has found a favourable reception with
the public, and given proof how far grave
and serious compositions may engage the
minds of men, and convey inftrucion under
the shew of amusement. It has likewise had
the ordinary testimony of distinguished me-
rit; it has struck out some sparks of envy and
spite. This kind of fire, we may believe, is
seldom extint, but it only flames upon ex-
traordinary occasions, when any remarkable
rherit, or a rising fame is to be consumed.
People who carried it in their breast, have
paid their duty regularly to every good Wri-
ter in every age; in so much that their at-
tendance is now required to compleat his ho-
nours: Their silence therefore would have.

been

[ 2 ]

been the severest blow they could have struck
at the Author of Douglas. I think very diffe-
rently indeed of those who are sincerely an-
xious for the interest of religion, and who
censure every Writer of a Play, because they
apprehend somewhat immoral and-offenfive in
the very nature of the Stage. I refpeA the
intentions of such, however I may think them.,
mistaken in this particular, and fatter myself;
that, whilst .we agree in condemning any par-
ticular abuses which may have place on the
Stage, we shall likewise be of one mind in
applauding whatever will contribute to render
the amusements of that place inoffensive and
inftruclive. This is the only point I have la-
boured in this Paper, and only plead against
an opinion which would place all Theatrical
performances upon the fame level. With
the people who are likely to oppose me, the
very name of a Play implies somewhat crimi-
nal and immoral. A near view of the sub-
jedt should be sufficient to correc this appre-
henfion; but, whilst any refpetable autho-
rity continues in favour of it, we can scarcely
expet to remove it entirely. The authority
of the Christian Church is fuppofed'by some
to be clearly on that fide of the question:
But will any body fay, that the Christian
Church has invariably discouraged good Plays.
In the times of our Saviour and his Apostles,
the purest times of the Christian Church, no
such marks of disapprobation appear. . The.

Fathers

t I3 ]

Fathers of the Church, whose authority
is probably referred to on this occasion, ought
surely to have very little credit with us on
their own account: A great part of the fu-
perftition of the Church of Rome is derived
from their inventions; and we have already
totally rejeted the authority of them and
thoir Oral Traditions, when we reformed the
corruptions of the Popish Church. We may
however, in charity, allow, that they might
have had some reason for their opposition to
Stage-Plays. Christianity, in their times, was
firuggling for a full establishment; and they
thought that Stage-Plays, being of Heathen
composition, and having frequent reference to
Pagan Divinity, might recal the minds of
men to their former superstition. We have
reason to believe, that, if Plays of a Chriltian
firain had appeared, they would have met
with no opposition from the friends of Chri-
ftianity: For Gregory Nazianzen, a Father
of the Church, and a person of great piety,
endeavoured to supplant Heathen Plays, by
introducing one which he wrote himself, on
the most interefling subjec of our religion,
And we must so far confess that he acted a
wife paif: For, when corrupt performances
re admitted.on the Stage, the best thing we
an do is to reject them, and- supply their
lace with compositions more favourable -o
he important concerns of religion and mo-
ality. If the Plays on our Stage have not.

hitherto

' 4 ]

hitherto been altogether pure, . we have cer-
tainly been unlucky in the long silence we
have kept on that fubje&; and doubly un-
lucky in breaking out with our censure, at a
time when one very successful attempt was
made to supply the Stage with a Play, which
might contribute to its reformation. The
Popish Clergy, we know, exclaimed against
the Stage, when it took part with the Re-
formers, and helped to overturn their own
power: For it is well known, that Plays
were acted at the Reformation, which very
much helped on that work, by exposing the
vices and absurdities of the Popish Clergy: It
is no wonder therefore that they were ene-
mies to the Stage; but we cannot surely have
any resentment to the Stage in our days, be-
cause it formerly offended the Popish Clergy
in promoting the Reformation.

When we come to confider the law and

doctrine of our Church with refpe& to Stage-
Plays, it will appear that the censure which
performances of this nature now meet with,
doth not arise from any law, statute or efta-
blifhed dotrine in this Church. We may e-
ven venture to affirm, that the prejudice to
Plays in general is of late origin. The only
adC of this Church relating to Stage-Plays,
which I have ever heard' quoted, is an ad of
the Assembly which met in the year 1574.
An act in the following terms. * " That no

" Comedies
» Vid. Petrie's Church History.

[. IS

Comedies or Tragedies or such Plays should
"be made on any subjec of canonical Scrip-

tures, nor on the Sabbath Day. If any Mi-
"nifler be the Writer of such a Play, he
" shall be deprived of his Minifiry: As for

Plays of another subjeA, they also should
"be examined before they be propounded
"publickly." This at of Assembly, we fee,
supposes that Plays are allowable, and that
Ministers may write Plays on the subjet of
any history, which is not taken from canoni-
cal Scripture. So far the practice is agreeable
to the laws of this established Church, and it
is not pretended that there is any other eccle-
fiaffical law now in being with refped to
Stage-Plays. We hear indeed of certain Pro-
ceedings of the Preibytery of Edinburgh about
thirty years ago, when they published an ad-
monition to discourage the Stage. We would
willingly believe, for the honour of the dead,
that they took this ftep in opposition to some
faulty and immoral Plays which were then
aded, and that they would have been loth to
discourage performances of a better tendency,
which might promise a reformation of such
abuses. Their example, at any rate, is no
law; and to follow them without examinati-
on would imply a concefion of infallibility,
which they never laid claim to. It is needless
to mention the names of Clergymen of un-
questioned reputation in the Christian Church,
who have written Plays for the Stage . or to

mention

[ 16

mention how frequent it is to confider a right
taste and judgment in such performances, as
an accomplishment necessary to every man of
letters, whether Clergyman or layman. Such
authorities can be but of little avail after we
have had the subjed itself before us, and an
opportunity of judging for ourselves. I shall
therefore go on to take another view of the
Stage, and confider some inconveniencies
which are supposed to attend it. Few things
of human concern are free from inconveni-
encies; we need not therefore be furprized,
that some are apprehended to belong to the
Stage. We may fufpe& that Theatrical En-
tertainments engage the minds at least of our
youth too much, and carry them away from
other fubjeds of attention, which make a part
either of their bufinefsor their education. This
suspicion is equally well grounded with refped
to every other amusement: For people who
are disposed to be idle, will easily find avocati-
ons f-om business; and the Stage has one pe-
culiar advantage, its being the amusement only
of a stated time, and not always at hand to
tempt people who are idly disposed. This
obiedtion goes upon a supposition that persons
of all tempers run with equal eagerness to the
amusements of the Stage; they differ however
greatly from one another in this particular,
and they who are the most captivated with
them, acquire a degree of coolness and indif-
ference from time and familiarity. We may

venture

[ 17 ]

venture to ask whether knowledge, whether
industry and commerce have declined in this
City since the Play-house was first opened
here. It will be owned that they have rather
increased. We may 'appeal to persons who
have the care of the education of youth in o-
ther places, whether they would not gladly
fee their pupils come to the Theatre, and
mix with grave and decent company, if by
that means they could break up more dange-
rous meetings for low gaming and riot, where
youth have no good example to lead them,
and no restraint from a sense of decency or
shame. The Stage, I think, may well bear
a comparison with other amusements which
youth will devise for themselves, if they are
debarred from this. When we confider the
strain of those Plays which have met with the
most favourable reception from the public,
observations will occur to the honour of hu-
man nature; for they are Plays which excel
in moving companion, which interest an audi-
ence in behalf of amiable characters, which
give the proper applause to virtue, and treat
vice with ignominy and reproach. A trage-
dy, which fails in exciting these emotions, or
which would shock our favourable apprehen-
sions of virtue, would soon be rejected with
disgust. We may consult on this point an au-
thor, whom we hold in such esteem, that we
make our children read his works, almost as
early as their. catechism. He has observed, that

C a

r is }

a Play, tho' defective in ornament, and with-
out any affecation to please by pompous and
founding expression ; if it is furnished with
a iuft moral and true representation of nature,
will carry the preference with every audience
from more splendid and Ihowy performances.
When we fee an audience therefore in tears
for an objec of compassion, when we find
them affeated with the generous sentiments
which come from a virtuous character, deeply
engaged in wishes for the success of the good,
and for the difappoihtment of the wicked ; it
would scarcely occur that such an audience
could be better employed in an hour of lei-
sure. Whatever our peculiar occupations are,
virtue is the business of all, and we should not
be excluded from any place where it may be
learned. We know how few amusements
there are for which this plea can be offered:
It is well, we think, if they are innocent re-
laxations from business, we feldorn expec to
find them schools of morality. But were this
plea laid aside, we ought to make sure that o-
ther amusements, less favourable to.the habits
of business, may not come in the way of oir
youth; and that our pretended severity may
not prove the occasion of greater lidentiouf-
ness. It 'will be said that our youth maygo
too often to the Play-house. They may go
too often to any amusement; but we are as-
fured here that they can go no oftener than
plays are a&ed, which is by no means so fre,-

quent

[ '9 ]

quent, as other avocations from business may.
occur to them. As there is a danger that
youth may exceed in every amusement they
are given to, those amusements should be
most discouraged, in which the excess is most
dangerous. I will venture to fay that no place
of public resort, under the influence of decen-
cy, and in the pretence ofrefpedable persons,
can be so dangerous,as cabals which are form-
ed in secret, and apart from such influence.
If any abuses yet remain on our Stage, we
flhould not delay to reform them. But I have
mentioned these abuses so often, that some of
my readers will begin to have a very terrible
notion of them: However, I will venture to
inform them, that no abuse was ever admitted
on any Stage, but might pass for perfect de-
cency, when compared to what they may have
often heard at a gossiping, a merry-making,
or a meeting of young fellows. The Play-
house is frequented by people of both sexes,
whose rank, whose age and manners, are sus-
ficient to command refpet, and to bring de-
cency along with them into any place. It is
an uncommon compliment we pay them, in
supposing that our youth are corrupted in
their company; I should rather think, that,
confidering the nature of the entertainment,
and the refpet due to the company, we should
fee, with fatisfaftion, such fpedtacles become a
part in the amusements of our youth, and
hoSe that their idle hours would find there,

not

[ o20 ]

not only agreeable relaxation, but improve-
ment too.

It has, I understand, given offence of late,

that persons of grave and refpecfable chara-
der, were present at the representation of a
new tragedy, which they thought a good one.
Great part of this offence fiould be removed;
when we recollect that this, and many such
performances, have a tendency very favour-
able to sobriety and morality; for they must
be very dignified charaters indeed who must
keep at a distance, when the advancement of
virtue is in any degree concerned. Their
part of the censure, however, is put in a new
light. It is said, that altho' a pratice may
be innocent in itself, yet persons of grave
character ought to avoid it, because it gives
offence to other people; and being thought
immoral, their neighbour may by such an ex-
arrple, be Shaken and unlettled in what he
thinks his -own duty. We are infiruded to
this purpose in the eighth chapter of Pauls.
epistle to the Corinthians, where he confiders
the practice of eating meat, which had been
offered to idols. The reader will be pleated
to cbferve, that this inrirudion relates to adti-
ons, in their own nature indifferent, and can-
not be applied to any other. The Apostle ex-
plains it in the eighth verse in these words:

Meat commendeth us not to God: for nei-

" ther if we eat are we the better, neither if
" sve cat not are we the worse." He ends

the

[ 21 ]
the chapter with this conclusion; " Where-

fore, if meat make my brother offend,
I will eat no flesh while the world stand-

" eth, left I make my brother offend." If
the eatingof such meat had been criminal in
itself, he would have avoided, and forbid the
practice on that account. If on the contra-
ry it had been right, and a commendable'
pracice, he would -have embraced it, and
tiudied to correct the prejudice which any-
person might have entertained against it. For
his whole life was a continued course of op-
position to both Jews and Gentiles, where their
prejudices flood in need of correction. Let
us therefore apply the Apostle's inftrudCion and
example to the present question. Is it per-
fetly indifferent to a man whether he goes to
a play or no ? I Ihall suppose that it is. Is it
likewise indifferent-to the public what fort of
people compose the ordinary audience at our
Theatre? I believe it is not. The Manager
of every theatre must suit his entertainments
to the company, and if he is not supported by
the grave and the fober, he must suit him-
self to the licentious and profane. We know
that the language of the theatre, or any other
language whatever, may be employed either
to recommend virtue, or to insinuate folly and'
licentioufinefs. If licentious people alone fre-
quent this entertainment, they will perhaps
encourage what they like to hear. But per-
sons of fobiiety, and regard to virtue, would

make

[ 22 ]

make that entertainment form itself to a ve-
ry different frain, and give the whole a very
different influence on the manners of man-
kind. They would reject and condemn what
was exceptionable, they would promote and
encourage what was agreeable to found rea-
son, and favourable to virtue. Happily for
us, this is no new thing; for.the Play-house
has been. long. the retort of persons of both
sexes, who are the most scrupulous on the
point of reputation and decency ; and their
presence has, no doubt, contributed to reform
some abuses, which may have, at some times,
crept into the stage. Their pretence there-
fore has done a great service to mankind; and
if any person is prejudiced enough to think o-
therwife, 'tis high time he was undeceived.
The Apoftlejntfruts us to refrain from an
indifferent adtion, if it offend our brother;
but he has often commanded, and has flown
the example, to do good in the face of pre-
judice, and every such prejudice in time will
be correCted. We know that in every nati-
on there must be amusements and public-en-
tertainments, and the Stage has always made
one in every civilized and polished nation.
We cannot hope to abolish it; and if. we
could, we (hould only make way for the re-
turn of drunkenness, gaming, and rude ca-
bals, which the more decent conversation and
manners of civilized times,.have in a great
measure abolished. We flould not even pro-

pose

[ 23 3 -

pose to abolish an entertainment, which is
founded on the heft principles of human na-
ture, the love of virtue, and compassion to
the distressed: For who would ever go to a tra-
gedy, if he had not a heart formed to pity,
and a mind susceptible of the admiration due
to worthy characters. It is the duty of grave
and refpecable men to watch over an en-
tertainment of this kind, that it may not de-
viate from the good purposes which it is cal-
culated to serve.. What they do to' this pur-
pose, either in opposing the bad or promoting
the good, is' matter of duty, and their con-
dud in it is not to be regulated. by the opi-
nion of any person who is pleated to take of-
fence.

The slate of the poor has been- mienti6n-

ed, as a consideration which must render this
entertainment at present pernicious and crimi-
nal. We cannot be too.attentive to every cir-
cumftance which can affect the tfate of the
poor, in the difficulties 'which they are' now
threatened with; and we:-have reason to be-
lieve, that the Gentlemen of this country are
well disposed to take any measures which may
bethought proper for their relief.' How the
Theatre comes to be thought any hindrance
to such measures, we cannot easily apprehend.
The poor may be divided into: two classes;
those who are indigent, but fill in a conditi-
on to earn their bread by some fort of labour
or industry and tpof,:, on the other' hand,

who

[ 24 j

who, by reason of age or sickness, are unable
to earn any subsistence. It is remarkable, that
of late years more care has been taken than
formerly to provide for the poor, who are unfit
for any kind of labour. Poor-houses have been
built in many parishes, under the manage-
ment of the Gentlemen and people of sub-
stance, who have taxed themselves for that
purpose. It were cruel therefore to load the
body of our Gentlemen with an imputation of
neglec in this article, at a time when their
conduct deserves commendation. And it were
imprudent by such an imputation to encou-
rage any person able to work in the expecta-
tion that he may be idle, and yet receive gratui-
tous charities. If any person were rich enough
- for the undertaking, he could not possibly do
a more signal mischief to his country, than
that of maintaining the whole poor of Great
-Britain in idleness. It has pleated Providence,
for wife purposes, to place men in different
stations, and to bestow upon them different
degrees of wealth. Without this circumstance
there could be no subordination, no govern-
ment, no order, no industry. Every person
does good, and promotes the happiness.'s so-
ciety, by living agreeable to the rank in which
Providence has placed him. Whilst his gra-
tuitous charities relieve the poor who are uh-
able to work, his other expence becomes a
fund for the subsistence of the industrious;
nor. is it proper that, they Should expec, sub-

_~~~~~- . ~~fiftence

X s25

fifence upon .any other terms than those of
indufiry and sobriety. The money which the
rich expends is paid for the labour of the poor.
Different trades live upon the profits of fur-
nifhing his cloathing, his table, and his equi-
page. It is evident how many poor induftri-
ous people would starve, if he did not buy
the works which they furnish him. The ve-
ry money he lays out for amusement comes
at last into the hands of the poor, and-is paid
as the price of their labour. A part of it we
shall suppose is laid out for the amusements
of the Theatre, and the people who receive it
. there, are so many hands who distribute that
money among the industrious poor. Every
Player must be cloathed, maintained and lod-
ged: The money which he receives therefor
is paid at last to the fpinftrefs, the weaver, the
clothier, and other tradesmen who live by fur-
nifhing the ordinary necessaries of life. Whilit
fromn humanity we indulge the poor in their
flation, we ought from jutice to indulge the
wealthy in theirs, and to expect that they are
to go on agreeable to the habits of living
which belong to their station, and which in
effect are necessary to the order and good of
society, and to the maintenance of the poor.
If we shut up our places of entertainment,
and deprive people of diftindion of that so-
ciety and thofe.amufements which they have
a relish for, they must tire of living among
vs ;,and the few who yet remain will chufe

D to

[ 26 ]

to remove to another place, where they will
not meet with popular antipathy, on account
of their most commendable amusements. Thenr
indeed the money they expend would be loft
to the poor of their native country. This
and every other city would feel, in such a cafe,
that the residence of persons of fortune is ne-
ceffary to give any number oftradefinen, and
induitrious poor, the means of subsistence.
How hard'muft it appear then, to give any
encouragement to the poor to murmur against
a circumfiance from which their indufiry may
derive such advantage ? We may afk,who are
the most forward in this country to form cha-
ritable designs for the relief of the poor ? The
Gentlemen of this neighbourhood, I think,
have set the example; and they too who
were the readiest to thed tears, for the distress-
es represented in the Tragedy of Douglas,
have been the molt forward in compassion to
the poor, and in liberal designs for their re-
lief.

After all I muRf confers that one confidera-

tion remains, which muff renew my diffidence
on this point. A body of men refpetable for
their learning and gravity, who constitute a ju-
dicature in this city, have, without any ex-
ception, declared their disapprobation of the
Theatre in general ; and, to flow that no ex-
ception could be admitted, have taken the a-
larm, iufi when the Tragedy, which Ihave
had occasion to mention, was introduce4. I

cannot

[ 27 ]

cannot pretend to speak of their reasons for so
doing, until they are pleated to publish them;
but muff entertain great expectations of their
force, since they are sufficient to overpower
what has appeared on the opposite fide. Men
of gravity are above trifling with the mistakes
and misapprehensions of a people, and certain-
ly cannot long ly under any such imputation.
Men of learning need not be told, that part of
every liberal education consists, in learning to
difiinguifh between Theatrical performances
which are faulty, and those which have a
moral dignity and a good tendency; they
know that a good Tragedy has been in all ages
esteemed amongit the chief productions of
human ability; that the authors of such works
become more renowned with posterity than
the princes and monarchs of the earth. The
names of Buchanan and Milton are more re-
spe&ed than those of Henry and yames; and
the names of Cyrus and Xerxes are less cele-
brated than those of Sophocles and Euripides.
I am, from these considerations, the more in-
clined to believe, that reasons have occured a-
gainft the Stage, which will appear very ur-
gent when they are produced ; and cannot i-
magine, that objetions which ly against bad
Plays only are now all the objections they
have to plead againit a good one, which may
be confidered as an attempt to make the Stage
truly. useful and inftrudive.

This

[ 28 ]

This refpe&able .body of men have pased

a severe sentence against one of their num-
ber, for being present at this representation
we are speaking of. This likewise seems to
proceed from some powerful motive not fuffi-
ciently known: For they were not led to this
act of severity, in execution of any law or fta-
tute of this Church. It must have been one
of those extraordinary cafes where a difcreti-
onary power is necessary. Such a power in-
deed is not assumed by any court of judicature
in Europe, except one, which I will not name
on this occasion. It is happy for. us, that the
law of our Church has expressly forbid the
exercise of any. such arbitrary and dangerous
power. See Form of Process, cap. i. and 84.
where it is expressly enacted, " That nothing
,' be admitted by anyChurch-judicature as the
" ground of a process for censure but what
"has been declared censurable by the Word
" of God, or by some aA or universal custom
"of this National Church."- They were
perhaps led to a proceeding, in appearance
so little agreeable to the fundamental laws
of their own society, by a zeal to support the
laws of the State. People indeed are often
more fond of work which they devise for
themselves, than they are of any business as-
signed them by others. It does not however
appear, that they have done much honour to
the legisl.ature by their interposition on this oc-
caion. They have cast an imputation of im-

piety

[ 29 ]

piety upon an amusement which-the law for-
mally authorises in the Metropolis, which
Our GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN honours with
his prerence, and which the tnoft refpe&able
perons in the legislature of Great Britain
support by their countenance.

F I N ISI
