London July 12th 
1759



My Lord

I had notice from Mr Home by last Post that I was chosen Professor in the College of Edinburgh. Nothing coud happen more agreeable to me & it gives me great pleasure to think that I shall soon have an opportunity of thanking your Lordship in Person, to whose friendship alone I own that piece of good fortune. I shall be very happy if your Lordship continues to have satisfaction from that kind protection you have given me on this & former occasions.

I was to wait on Mr Fletcher this morning:but missed him, I shall go to receive his commands before I set out for Scotland which will be as soon as I can settle my little affairs here. The people here are not much alarmed with the French  Invasion even People who allow it practicable have no impression of its consequence. I am told that one Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland says; The French Minister at the Hague advised her not to go to England in a time of such confusion, or if she must go, offered her letters of recommendation to The Officers of the French Army. This piece of news your Lordship may not have heard from any other hand, Altho you will certainly hear that a Battle is expected in Westphalia. Prince Ferdinand is unwilling to pass the Weser, & has given it as his opinion that Hanover woud suffer more from the two Armys before an Action than it will lose by Contributions in case his Army is defeat.

I am With The greatest respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obliged & most humble 
Servant 
Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh Septr 10th 1759

Dear Sr

I am sorry to be Obliged to give you trouble a second time about my Affairs in the College: In treating about the Instruments which belonged to the Late Doctor Stuart I have been referred to Doctor Cuming who has engaged to bring that Affair to some conclusion by tomorrow. As there are likewise some Instruments which belong to the public, I am obliged to give you the trouble of making an application to My Lord Provost & Town Council, to have those instruments delivered to me by their Authority, together with Such an Inventory as may Ascertain the particulars committed to my care, & for which I or my heirs are hereafter to be accountable to the public.

I am Sr 
With great Respect 
your most obedient & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh August 13th 1759

Sr

I have not yet had access to the Rooms in the College, which are alloted to the use of the Natural Philosophy Class; because some Effects belonging to the executors of the Late Professor are still lodged there, & the Person to whose care they are committed is absent from Town. But being informed that those Rooms need reparation, I am Obliged to beg the favour you will apply to My Lord Provost &  The Town Council in order to have them visited, & the necessary repairs considered, in such time as that they may be compleated if possible before the meeting of College. Mr Cumming with whom I am to treat of what relates to the late incumbent & myself, is expected in Town this week, and that no time may be lost after his Arrival, I beg that you will be pleased to lay this request before the first meeting of Council & am Sir

your most faithful 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson

London July 12, 1759

Dear John

This great bussiness is effected at last and I who never had a home till now must prepare to go home to Edinburgh O Dulcia Verba

I was with David last night to perswade him to go with me and if I coud conclude any thing from his hesitation I woud have hopes of bringing him but the Vis inertiae which I am now to pay to so great a regard to is all against me, & tho he went so far as to say that he wished he was in Scotland to put and end to all consultation about it yet I doubt much of his moving, he is gone out of Town to Stuarts for some days, & his want of resolution perplexs me, for Stowe wants me to go down with him & I cannot ingage till I know of Davids motions, I believe it will be proper for me to let Stowe set out & tell David I will be dissappointed of a companion if he does not go. I cannot yet fix upon a time  for being at Berwick. I have the Bussiness of some days besides a Visit or two to the Countrey. Lord Bute Garrick whom I have not yet seen Dido etiam qui rusticat & magnos timet Lucinae labores sed [xxx] vanae credo formidines.

You seem to expect Vigorous measures upon the present Alarm. I dont know what a grain or two more of fear will do, but we do not seem to be in a hurry here with any thing that points at arming the Countrey. We trust to the Fleet while the season keeps moderate weather & will allow our Ships to ly on the Ennemys Coast: by September we expect troops from Gibraltar &c & those who are at Home compleated enough to repell a French embarkation. We are again in expectation of a Battle in Westphalia. One Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland was advised by the French Minister at the Hague not to go to England in this troublesome time or if she did he offered her letters of recommendation to Monsr Chevert . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

 of Carlyle's affair

Clerk as per last with more bussy with the affairs of the Nation than people to whom they are entrusted. I will writec when I know of my time for setting out if I go he will desire our meeting at his house & [shoud] be pleasant, but I must lose as little time as possible on the road.

Make my comp[liments] to Mr & Mrs Home.

I am Dear John 
Affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh Septr 14th 1759

Dear Sir

I am very much obliged to you for the trouble you took in writing me agreeable news, & I wish you joy of the Credit which such successes give to the Ministry among our Politicians. But I suspect you intended to Mortify Home & me who by the Conduct of the Admiralty are like to be dissappointed of our invasion which we both wished for, he to exhibit his Military Genius & I to practice my Philosophy which you may remember is the best calculated for invasions of any Philosophy now extant.

It seems plain that the French intended by Assembling their force to strike a blow in the Channel. And we are told here it has appeared by some papers taken from Marechal Contades that they had planned an Embarkation from the Weser & the Elb when they shoud become Masters of those Rivers, a stroke which woud have probably Surprised us in the North and  I make all the use of it I can here to horrify people who think we can be secure without a universal Militia but to no purpose, for Lord Littleton declared where he dined two days ago with the Provost that the only effectual way of serving our Countrey now was by helping to recruit his Majestys regular troops; which introduced great applause to your City Subscriptions & to the ingenuity of Poultney & Crawfurds double feathers.

Every measure seems to proceed on a Supposition that it is difficult to raise Men for the defence of the Island & those measures create difficultys. I wish by way of experiment that a King of this Countrey woud tell the people that he was threatened with a formidable Invasion, but that he was conscious of his Strength in the youth of Great Britain & desired they would give in their names in every Parish & County. You may easily figure what a list there woud be & what difficulty woud be found in reducing them to the necessary Numbers. I am affraid some of the Methods which are taken to defend us tend to make us not worth  defending. But this is perhaps more politics than you have time to read. I woud have troubled you sooner if any thing had occurred worth your Notice & if I had been less burried in Solids & fluids & Ratios. I like my Situation very well, & begin to admire Sr Isaac Newton as I did Homer & Montesquieu, but it is on Condition that he will let me go as soon as I become a tolerable Professor of Natural Philosophy. Home has been little here since I came, before he went last from Edinburgh he showed me a rough draught of the fifth Act which give me great pleasure but I am still affraid his Work is too great for his time. I have not heard from Robertson what he is meditating for the Subject of further Works; he probably declines being troubled with many opinions. The Wit and ingenuity of this place is still in a flourishing way, & with a few corrections, which however it is difficult to make, is probably the best place for Education in the Island. Ch:Townshend has got great Popularity here. Lord Littleton scarcely showed himself. I am D.r Sr

With the greatest 
Respect 
your most Obedient 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson