


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH, 

OR 

MEMOIR, 

OF 

LIEUTENANT-COLONEL 

PATRICK FERGUSON 



ORIGINALLY INTENDED FOR THE 



36titisf) Cnt^clopaeliia. 



ADAM FERGUSON, L.L.D. 

AVTHOR OF THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC ; ESSAY ON 
CIVIL SOCIETY; PRINCIPLES OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY, 
SfC. Si-c. ^C. 



EDINBURGH : 
PRINTED BY JOHN MOIR, 

ROYAL BANK CLOSE. 

18 17. 



Thefolloxtiing Biographical Sketch, or Memoir of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Ferguson, "was uritten by Dr Ferguson, for the purpose 
of being published in the Encyclopcedia Britannica ; but being 
considered by the Editor as too long for that xvork, and the Doc- 
tor declining to abridge it, it ivas not inserted, A few copies are 
nolo printed from the original sketch. 



Ferguson, Lieutenant-Colonel Patrick, 
was killed in the action at King's Mountain, South 
Carolina, 7th October 1 780. The esteem and affec- 
tion of his brother officers dictated the following 
Epitaph, which was inserted in the New York 
Gazette of 14th of February I78I : 

If an ardent thirst for military fame, 

a social and benevolent heart, 

an uncommon genius, 

a mind glowing with patriotic fire, 

replete with useful knowledge, 

and capable 

of persevering under difficulties 

where glory was in view, 

claim our admiration; 

the fate of 

MAJOR PATRICK FERGUSON*, 

WHO POSSESSED THESE AND OTHER VIRTUES 

IN AN EMINENT DEGREE, 

AND WHO FELL 

WARRING AGAINST DISCOBD, 

IRRESISTIBLY 

CLAIMS OUR TEARS. 



* Major Ferguson was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel soma 
time before liis death ;— a cii-cumstance which seems to have been unkaown to 
his brother officers at New Y«rk, 

A> 



MEMOIR OF 



Superior military genius is but rare among the 
gifts of nature ; and of those who are endowed with 
it, many are stopt short in the early stages of a 
profession of which they are forward to incur 
the dangers. Such as survive those dangers, and 
attain to eminent stations in the service of their 
country, are secure of their fame. For those who 
fall prematurely it is but fair, as often as they 
can be distinguished, to affix to their memory 
the marks of honour they covet, and for which 
the votaries of profit will not surely contend with 
them. 

If the young man who is the subject of the 
present article had escaped the dangers to which 
he was so often exposed, it is probable that the 
annals of his country would have spoken more fully 
for him. 

He was second son of James Ferguson, Esq. of 
Pitfour, one of the Senators of the College of Jus- 
tice, and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary in Scot- 
land, by Anne Murray, daughter of Alexander 
Lord Elibank ; and, with this descent, fortunately 
united in his own character, the calm judgment and 
exalted abilities of his father, with the vivacity and 
genius of his mother's family. 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 



Those who associate ferocity with the military 
character, will hardly believe in what degree a per- 
son so fond of the military life, was humane and 
compassionate to his enemies, as well as affection- 
ate and generous in his friendships. But these dis- 
positions, however in appearance little suited to 
war, are the appurtenances of great courage ; and 
bring along with them a passion for scenes of hard- 
ship and danger, in which magnanimity, in all its 
exertions, has the free'st scope. 

Whatever circumstances there may have been to 
be regretted, in the origin and progress of a war 
between Great Britain and her revolted colonies, 
there never was any service in which the officers of 
the British army appeared to more advantage. 
Diligent, obedient, indefatigable, and humane as 
well as brave, they generally prevailed in the for- 
tune of arms, and moved through the streets, villa- 
ges and farms of those who were in arms against 
them, as in the country of a friend ; a general cha- 
racter we are happy to prefix to the particulars 
which occur to be mentioned, relating to the per- 
?ion who is the subject of this article. 

He was born in the year 1744 ; and, having early 
chosen the life of a soldier, was sent to finish his 



MEMOIR OF 



education at a military academy in London, where 
he acquired the elements of fortification, gunnery, 
and other arts subservient to his intended profes- 
sion. Of these he afterwards pursued the study in 
real situations — in action as well as on paper ; 
and was sagacious, original, and inventive in the 
application of expedients to actual service. 

His first commission was purchased for him at 
the age of fourteen, in the Royal North British 
Dragoons ; and he gave, while yet a boy, many 
striking proofs of sensibility to the military charac- 
ter, and of his spirit in supporting it. Of these, 
which were indeed habitual to him, it may not be 
improper to mention two instances ; one in parti- 
cular, in Germany, when, not having completed 
his l6th year, being on horseback a few miles in 
front of the army, with another young officer of the 
same regiment, (Sir John Mitchell,) they fell in 
with a party of the enemies' hussars, and, finding 
it necessary to retire, were pursued. Ferguson, 
in passing a ditch, dropped one of his pistols ; but 
thinking it improper for an officer to return to camp 
with the loss of any of his arms, he re-leaped the 
ditch in the face of the enemy, and recovered his 
pistol. They halted, imputing probably his con- 
fidence to some support which he saw at hand, al- 



LIEUT.'COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. J) 

lowed him to repass the ditch, join his companion, 
and regain their camp undisturbed. 

The other happened at Paris some years after, 
with an officer in the French service, who spoke 
reproachfully in his presence of the British nation. 
This insult he not only resented on the spot, but 
surprised his antagonist next morning with a visit 
before he was out of bed " This is well, young 
" man," said the other : " I have paid such visits, — 
" seldom received them j but it is fair to tell 
" you that I am reputed one of the best swords- 
" men in France." — " That is not the question 
" now," said Ferguson : " You are in my debt, 
" let us find a fit place to settle our accounts." 
They accordingly went to the Boulevards toge- 
ther ; Ferguson considering how he might deprive 
this swordsman of the advantage of his superior 
skill, and the other regarding with security and 
contempt so young an antagonist. As soon as 
they had drawn, Ferguson rushed within his ad- 
versary's point, seized the hilt of his sword, and in 
the scuffle was so fortunate as to get possession of 
it. ** You are a brave fellow," said the other ; 
" and I shall certainly do you justice whenever 
" our affair is mentioned." 



10 MEMOIR OF 



He had scarcely finished his first campaign, 
when he was disabled by sickness ; and having 
been for some months confined under the care 
of the physicians and surgeons of the army*, was 
sent home when in a condition to be removed. His 
words, in a letter to his friend General Watson, 
some time after, are as follows : " I am now entire- 
" ly recovered, and might serve the next campaign 
" with ease, had not the fears of my parents prompt- 
" ed them to apply for an order for my joining the 
" light-troop ; by which means I am deprived, for 
" these many years to come, of the only chance of 
** getting a little insight into my profession." 

Being much at home from the year I762 to the 
year I768, he entered warmly into the question 
which was then agitated relating to the extension 
of the militia laws to Scotland. He saw no difficul- 
ty in combining the character of a soldier with that 
of a citizen, so far as was necessary for the defence of 
a country in which citizens enjoy such invaluable 
privileges; and some of the ablest and most intelli- 
gent publications which appeared in the public 
prints of the time, were of his writing. 



* The late Dr Armstrong, author of the celebrated poem of the Ai-t of Pre- 
serving Health, Sec. was then physician to the British forces in Germany, and 
formed upon that occasion the warmest friendship and affection for young Comet 
rERGBsoN, which continued to his death. 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 11 

In 1768 a company was purchased for him in the 
70th regiment of foot, then in the West Indies, and 
he soon after joined that part of it which was in 
Tobago, where he was of great service in quelHng 
very formidable insurrections of the negroes ; but 
after much distress in this situation from bad 
health, he went to North America, and returned 
to Great Britain in 1774s where he remained about 
two years. 

During this interval a dispute with the North 
American colonies was verging to a civil war ; and 
the boasted skill of the Americans in the use of the 
rifle, was held out as an object of terror to the 
British troops, whom it was said the American 
marksman could unofficer by lodging his ball from 
a distance, within the compass of the smallest mark. 

These rumours set Ferguson's invention to work 
on a new species of rifle, which he could load at 
the breech without the use of a rammer, and in 
such quick repetition as to fire seven times in a 
minute. The riflemen, in the meantime, might 
be stretched at full length on the ground, so as 
to have the cover of a parapet behind even a con- 
solidated mole-hill, or the least inequality of the 
earth's surface. 



12 MEMOIR OF 



The first exhibition of this invention was made 
before Lord Townsend, then master-general of the 
ordnance.* It was afterwards practised by some pri- 
vate men of the Guards at Windsor, that the King 
might have an opportunity of seeing its effects. 
When his Majesty was pleased to give orders for 
that purpose, a few men who had learned the use 
of the rifle were brought to perform in his pre- 
sence, but, being overawed, in their first attempts 
shot wide of the mark : *' They would not," said 



» The following account of this exhibition will be found in the Chronicle of 
the Annual Register for 1776, of date the 1st of June. 

" Some experiments were tried at Woolwich before Lord Viscount 
TowNSHKND, Lord Amherst, Generals Hervey and Desaguiliers, and a 
number of other officers, with a rifle giin, upon a new construction, by Captain 
Fergdson of the 70th regiment ; when that gentleman, under the disadvan- 
tages of a heavy rain and a high wind, performed the following fonr things, 
none of which had ever before been accomplished with any other small arms. 
1st, He fired dm-ing four or five minutes at a target, at 200 yards distance, at 
the rate of four shots each minute. 2dly, He fiied six shots in one minute. 
3dly, He fired four times per minute, advancing at the same time at the rate 
of four miles in the hour, ithly. He poured a bottle of water into the pan 
and barrel of the piece when loaded, so as to wet every grain of the powder, 
and in less than half a minute fired with her as well as ever, vrithout extract- 
ing the ball. He also hit the bull's eye at 100 yards, lying with his back on 
the ground ; and, notwithstanding the unequalness of the wind and wetness of 
the weather, he only missed the target three times during the whole course of 
the experiments. The captMQ has since taken out a patent for the said im- 
provements. " 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 13 



the captain, " be so embarrassed in presence of 
" your Majesty's enemies." 

Ferguson then took a rifle himself j and of nine 
shots which he fired at the distance of a hundred 
yards, put five balls into the bull's-eye of the target, 
and four within as many inches of it. Three of these 
shots were fired as he lay on his back, the other 
six standing erect. Being asked how often he could 
load and fire in a minute, he said seven times ; but 
added pleasantly, that he would not undertake 
in that time to knock down above five of his Ma- 
jesty's enemies. The recollection of which he was 
capable in the most arduous situations, gave him at 
all times the ease of an experienced courtier. 

He wished to be employed in the armaments 
which were then preparing for the continent of 
North America, and was accordingly indulged with 
instructions to the Commander-in-chief, to have a 
corps of volunteers draughted from the regiments 
on the American service, to have them armed in 
his own way, and put under his command. 

This commission was agreeable to him, chiefly 
because it gave him a species of separate command, 
and left him to conduct a corps which was formed 



U MEMOIR OF 



upon a principle different from that of the rest of 
the army. He gave a signal specimen of its services 
at the battle of Brandywine, when, being advanced 
in the front of the column commanded by General 
Knyphausen, and supported by the rangers under 
Colonel Wemys, he scoured the ground so effectual- 
ly that there was not a shot to annoy the column in 
its march. His merit on that occasion was acknow- 
ledged throughout the army, and fully stated in the 
reports of the day to the Commander-in-chief, by 
whose order the following letter was written to him 
by the Adjutant-general. 

" Head-quarters, IMi September Yjl'^7, 
" Sir, 
** The Commander-in-chief has received from 
" Lieutenant-general Knyphausen the most hon- 
" ourable report of your gallant and spirited be- 
" haviour in the engagement of the 11th, on which 
" his Excellency has commanded me to express his 
" acknowledgements to you, and to acquaint you, 
** Sir, that he shall with great satisfaction adopt any 
" plan that can be effected to put you in a situation 
" of remaining with the army under his command. 

" For the present, he has thought proper to in- 

" corporate the rifle corps into the light companies 

of the respective regiments. I am very happy 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 



" to be even the channel of so honourable a tes- 
" timony of your spmted conduct, and of that of 
" your late corps. And I am, Sir, with perfect 
" esteem and regard, 

" Your most obedient humble vServant, 

(Signed) " J. Paterson, Adjt. Gen^.*" 



^* Capt. Ferguson, 

" commanding 
" the Rifle Corps," 



His corps, though advanced immediately before, 
suffered considerably less than the rangers, from 
the advantage of being able, wherever they came 
under the enemy's fire, to use their arms as they 
lay on the ground. The rangers had seventeen 



* It was well known in the anny that the Commander-in-chief, Sir William 
Howe, had taken umbrage at the rifle corps having been formed without his 
being consulted. It was therefore perhaps not to be expected that he would ex- 
ert himself to support it. The use of which it had proved, to the great satisfac- 
tion of the army, seems to have prevented him from taking active steps to its 
prejudice, until Captain Ferguson was wounded at Brandywine; of which Sir 
William took advantage, and reduced the corps without consulting him. It 
seems extraordinai7, however, that Sir William should have carried his chagrin 
■ao far as to take no notice, in his official letter to the Secretaiy of State, of the 
•onduct of Captain Ferguson, and of the behaviour of the riflecorps in the ac- 
tion of Brandywine, notwithstanding he had given him the public thanks stat- 
ed above on the occasion. Upon that circumstance being discovered, when the 
Xondon Gazette, containing Sir William's official letter, arrived in America, 
Captain Fergusok sent a copy of these thanks to the Secretary of State. 



16 MEMOIR OF 



men killed, and Ferguson's corps only two men 
wounded, of whom he himself was one. 

^VTiile he lay with a part of his riflemen on the 
skirts of a wood, in the front of General Knyp- 
hausen's division of the army, the following 
circumstances happened, which he relates in a 
letter to a friend : " We had not lain long,'* 
he says, " when a rebel officer, remarkable 
" by a hussar dress, passed towards our army, 
" within a hundred yards of my right flank, 
** not perceiving us. He was followed by an- 
** other dressed in dark green, or blue, mounted 
" on a bay horse, with a remarkably large cock- 
<' ed hat. I ordered three good shots to steal 
'* near to them, and fire at them ; but the idea 
" disgusted me. I recalled the order. The hus- 
" sar, in returning, made a circuit, but the other 
" passed again within a hundred yards of us, upon 
«' which I advanced from the wood towards him. On 
" my calling, he stopped ; but, after looking at me, 
" proceeded. I again drew his attention, and made 
«' signs to him to stop, levelHng my piece at him, 
" but he slowly continued his way. As I was with- 
" in that distance at which, in the quickest firing, 
" I could have lodged half a dozen of balls in or 
" about him before he was out of my reach, I had 
<* only to determine j but it was not pleasant to fire 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 17 

" at the back of an inofFending individual, who 
" was acquitting himself very coolly of his duty j so 
" I let him alone. The day after I had been tel- 
" ling this story to some wounded officers who lay 
" in the same room with me, when one of our sur- 
" geons, who had been dressing the wounded rebel 
" officers, came in and told us they had been in- 
" forming him, that General Washington was all 
" the morning with the light troops, and only at- 
" tended by a French officer in a hussar dress, he 
** himself dressed and mounted in every point as 
" above described. I am not sorry that I did not 
" know at the time who it was. 

" Farther this deponent sayeth not, as his bones 
" were broke a few minutes after." He received 
a ball in his right arm, which so shattered the 
joint of the elbow as to render it doubtful whether 
amputation would not be necessary. He was for 
some months disabled from service, and, although 
he preserved his arm, never recovered the use of 
that joint ; but, with a spirit peculiar to himself, 
so assiduously practised the use of the sword and of 
the pen with his left, that he scarcely seemed to 
have incurred any change but a difference in his 
hand-writing. What mortified him most was, that 
during his confinement the rifle corps, deprived of 
its leader, was broke up, as mentioned in the above 



18 MEMOIR OF 



letter from the Adjutant-general, the rifles lodged 
in the store of spare arms, and the men returned to 
their respective regiments. 

As Ferguson was now no more than a mere vo- 
lunteer with the army, the regiment to which he 
belonged being stationed at Halifax in Nova Scotia, 
it was at the discretion t)f the Commander-in-chief 
whether he should be employed at all ; but every 
one concurred in favouring his pretensions, and in 
doing justice to his merit; and, what is uncommon, 
he shewed an ardour for distinction and eminence 
without exciting proportional envy. His brother 
officers ever mentioned him with esteem and kind- 
ness. One of them who kept a journal of the M^ar, 
observed of Ferguson, that, though careless of his 
own life to a fault, he was ever attentive to the means 
of preserving those under his command. Another 
who has had occasion to publish his eulogium to 
the world, among other expressions of esteem and 
regard, gives the following account of his charac- 
ter : 

" That in private life his humanity and bene- 
" volence were conspicuous, his friendship steady 
" and sincere. To a distinguished capacity for 
*' planning the greatest designs, he added the ar- 
" dour necessary to carry them into execution j his 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 19 



" talent for enterprize attracted the notice of the 
" whole army. Military tactics had been his early 
" and favourite study ; considered as a scholar, his 
" genius was solid, his comprehension clear, and 
" his erudition extensive. *" 

Ferguson was the friend of every man's merit, 
and had no enemy to his o\vn. His being employ- 
ed, though out of his turn, did not give offence to 
officers of the same rank with himself. In the au- 
tumn of 1778, he had the command of a detach- 
ment that embarked at New York, on board of a 
little squadron, consisting of the Zebra, the Vigilant, 
the Nautilus, some galHes and small armed ves- 
sels, under the command of Captain Collins of the 
Zebra. The troops under Captain Ferguson a- 
mounted to three hundred ; and their instructions 
were to destroy a nest of rebel privateers which in- 
fested the trade of New York, from Little Egg har- 
bour in the Jerseys. This small armament sailed from 
Sandyhook on the 30th of September, but, meet- 
ing with contrary winds, could not reach the port 
to which they were destined, though within half a 
day's sail, until the 5th October. During this inter- 
val the enemy, having had intelligence of their 
coming, put to sea with some of their larger vessels, 

* Mackenzie's Strictures. 



20 MEMOIR OF 



and removed others over the bar into shallow water. 
The latter, however, were burnt to the number 
often or twelve privateers, by Captain Collins, who 
got over the bar with his small craft, while the 
troops were employed in destroying their haunts 
and storehouses on shore. 

While Captain Collins lay in the harbour waiting 
for fresh orders, in consequence of the report he 
had made to his commander at New York, intelli- 
gence was brought by an officer who deserted from 
the enemy, that Polaski, an adventurer from Po- 
land, and reported to be the same who had carried 
off the person of his Polish Majesty with many cir- 
cumstances of audacity and cruelty, and now in the 
service of the American Congress, lay up the coun- 
try with three companies of foot, three troops of 
horse, and a detachment of artillery ; and that about 
a mile in his front, there was a gully, or creek, 
with a narrow bridge upon it, which he had ne- 
glected to occupy. This last circumstance encou- 
raged Captain Ferguson to hope that the enemy 
might be surprised, and, in any event, a retreat be 
secured by seizing the bridge. For this purpose he 
embarked with about two hundred and fifty of his 
detachment in boats, set off at eleven at night, and, 
after rowing about ten miles, landed at four in the 
morning within a mile of the pass which he was to 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 21 

seize. He left fifty men for its defence, and advan- 
cing rapidly, surprized Polaski before break of 
day, killed several officers, amongst whom were one 
lieutenant-colonel, one captain, one adjutant, and 
about fifty private men. * 



* This little enterprise is thus detailed in the London Gazette of 1st De- 
cember 1778. 

" Extract of a Letter /ro/ra General Sir Henry Clinton, Knight of the 
Bath, to Lord George Germaine, dated October 25, 1778. 

" In my letter of the 8th inst. I mentioned that my move into Jersey was 
partly to favour an expedition sent to Egg harbour. I have now the honour to 
inclose copies of two reports made to me by Captain Ferguson of the 70th re- 
giment, who commanded the troops employed upon that service, to wliich I beg 
leave to refer your Lordship for an account of its success, under direction of that 
Tei7 active and zealous officer. See Gazette for \st Report of lOtA October. 

" Report of Cajitain Ferguson of the 70th Regiment, to his Excellencif 
Sir Henry Clinton, dated Little Egg harbour, October 15, 1778. 

" Sir, 

" Since the letter which I had the honour of writing to you on the 10th in- 
stant, Captain Collins has received a letter from Admiral Gambier, signifying 
that the Admiral and you are both of opinion, that it is not safe for us to remain 
here, as the aimy is withdrawn from the Jerseys, and ordering our immediate 
return ; but as the wind still detained us, and we had infonnation by a captain 
and sLx men of Polaski's legion, who had deserted to us, that Mr Polaski had 
cantoned his corps, consisting of three companies of foot, three troops of horse, 
a. detachment of artillery, and one brass field-piece, within a mile of a bridge, 
which appeared to me easy to seize, and from thence to cover our retreat, I 
prevailed upon Captain Collins to enter into my design, and employ an idle 
day in an attempt that was to be made with safety, and with a probability of 
success. Accordingly , at eleven last night, 250 men were embarked, and, after 
rowing ten miles, landed at four this morning, within a mile of the defile, which 

c 



MEMOIR OF 



In the following spring, it was proposed to push 
the war from New York up the North River, and 
to dislodge the enemy from the posts of Stonypoint, 
and Ver Planks Neck, which they occupied upon 
that communication. When Sir Henry Clinton 



we happily secured, and, leaving 50 men for its defence, pushed forward upou 
the infantry of this legion, cantoned in three different houses, who are almost 
entirely cut to pieces. We numbered among their dead about 50, and several 
officers, among whom, we leani, are a lieutenant-colonel, a captain, and an 
adjutant. It being a night attack, little quarter could of course be given, so that 
there are only five prisoners. As a rebel Colonel Proctor was within two miles, 
with a corps of artilleiy, two brass twelve-pounders, one three-pounder, and the 
militia of the country, I thought it hazardous with 200 men, without artillery or 
support, to attempt any thing farther, particularly after Admiral Gambier's letter. 

" The rebels attempted to harass us in our retreat, but with great modesty, 
so that we returned at oui- leisure, and reimbarked in security. 

" The captain who has come over to us is a Frenchman, named Bromvilue. 
He and the deserters inform us, that Mr Polaski has, in public orders, lately 
directed no quarter to be given ; and it was therefore with particular satisfac- 
tion that the detachment marched against a man, capable of issuing an order, so 
unworthy of a gentleman, and a soldier. 

" It is but justice to inform you, Sir, that the officers and men, both British 
and Provincials, on this occasion, behaved in a manner to do themselves honour. 

" To the conduct and spuit of Captain Cox, Lieutenant Lyttleton, and 
Ensign Cotter, of the 50th regiment, and of Captain Peter Campbell of 
the 5d Jersey Volunteers, this little enterprise owes much of its success, as well 
as to the airangements of Captain Collins of the navy, and attention of Cap- 
lain Christian, who accompanied the embarkation. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 
(Signed) Pat. Ferguson, Capt. 70th Reg. 

P. S. The dispatch vessel not having got to sea last night, I am enabled to 
inform you, that our yesterday's loss consists of two men of the 5th, and one of 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 23 



moved upon this service, Captain Ferguson at the 
head of a detachment was advanced, as on former 
occasions, before the army, and became a busy ac- 
tor in the operations that followed. 

Stonj-point being surprised by a party of the 
kings troops, Ver Planks Neck was deserted, as no 
longer tenable under its exposure to the guns of 
the other. Colonel Webster and Captain Fergu- 
son being stationed at Ver Planks, Stonypoint was 
again surprised, and recovered by the enemy, its 
guns turned upon Ver Planks, and a heavy fire 
continued from thence, and from a galley which 
the enemy had brought to bear upon it. This at- 
tack, however, was firmly sustained by Colonel 
"Webster, until the galley being sunk by a shot 
from his battery, Stonypoint was again retaken 
upon a second march of Sir Henry Clinton to that 
quarter. It appearing that the facility with which 
this post had been so often taken and retaken, was 



tlie Provincials missing, and two of the 5th slightly wounded ; Ensign Camfbell 
«f the 2d Jersey Volunteers has received a stab through the thigh. 

" We had an opportunity of destroying part of the baggage and equipage of 
PoLASKi's legion, by burning their quarters ; but, as the houses belonged to some 
inoffensive Quakers, who, I am afraid, may have sufficiently suffered already in 
the confusion of a night's scramble, I know. Sir, you will think with us, that 
the injui7 to be thereby done to the enemy, would not have compensated for 
the sufferings of these innocent people. 

P. F. 



24. MEMOIR OF 



owing to a defect in the works, the charge of re- 
forming or supplying that defect was intrusted to 
Ferguson, — an appointment unusual, as he did 
not belong to the corps of engineers, who never- 
theless do not seem to have taken umbrage at it. 



That Ferguson, (who had by this time attained 
the rank of major,) might erect what works he 
thought proper, it was proposed that he should re- 
main in the defence of the place. Flattered with 
this opportunity to execute what he had often been 
meditating, he proceeded to realize some of his fa- 
vourite ideas ; and while he looked for an attack 
with all the anxiety of a person who waits the re- 
sult of an interesting experiment, he had the morti- 
fication to receive an order to evacuate Stonypoint, 
and join the army at New York, now destined to 
carry the war into a different quarter of the con- 
tinent. In a letter to a friend on that occasion, 
full of regret, he says, " Never did a fond mother 
" leave her favourite child with more reluctance 
" than I did that place." He had the consola- 
tion, however, of being promoted to the rank of 
Lieutenant-colonel in America, and the prospect of 
being employed with distinction in the operations 
which were then projected. 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 25 



When the fleet and transports, with the army on 
board, were about to sail from Sandyhook, they had 
orders, in case of separation, to rendezvous at Ty- 
bee in the province of Georgia ; at this place a 
small division of the army was put on shore, under 
the command of Major-general Pattison of the 
Royal Artillery, with orders to penetrate into South 
Carolina, that the attention of the enemy might be 
directed to him, whilst the fleet again put to sea, 
and appearing suddenly before Charlestown, should 
land the army without opposition near that place. 

Of the first division, Ferguson, with a detach- 
ment of regulars, and Major Cochrane, brother 
to the Earl of Dundonald, with some companies 
of the British Legion, made a part. These two 
officers were employed to reconoitre the country, 
clear it of enemies, and collect boats and waggons 
for the use of the main body that followed. In this 
service, they both co-operated with cordiality and 
spirit ; and as in their fates,* at no great interval of 
time, they equally became objects of public and 
private regret, it is impossible for a person in doing 



* Major Cochrane having been sent, by Sir Henry Clinton, to apprise 
Lord CoRNWALLis of his approach, by courage and perseverance reached 
York-town with the intelligence, when he soon after had his head carried oflf by 
a canon-ball, while standing by his Lordship's side. 



26 MEMOIR OF 



justice to the one, not to consider the other with 
like affection and esteem. 

Fortunati ambo, si, quid mea carmina possunt; 
Nulla dies unquam mefnori vos eximit sevo. * 

Having on this march from Georgia to South Ca- 
rolina taken different routes, they had each of them 
intelHgence of one Macpherson, who had assemb- 
led a body of rebels at his own plantation, nearly on 
that which the troops were to take on their march 
to Charlestown, and both at the same time formed 
a resolution to surprise this enemy. Ferguson ar- 
rived first, and finding that Macpherson had aban- 
doned the place, took possession of it. Major 
Cochrane arriving soon after in the night, and sup- 
posing the enemy still to be there, instantly pro- 
ceeded to force his way ; Ferguson, as usual at the 
head of his men, opposed this attack, and attempt- 
ing to parry a bayonet with his sword, received a 
thrust in the only arm of which he had any use ; 
but while he raised his voice, to encourage his men, 
he was known to his friend Major Cochrane, who 
immediately put a stop to the conflict. Ferguson 
called for the man who had wounded him, and giv- 
ing him a piece of money, commended his alacrity, 

* iEN. Lib. rx. T^-. 456. 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 27' 



saying, " We should have known our friends sooner 
" from their mode of attack." 

This wound for some time had an alarming ap- 
pearance, and, under the effects of the climate, 
threatened him with the loss of his other arm. In 
this state of it, however, it was necessary for him to 
continue his march, and he rode between two or- 
derly men who were appointed to attend him, while 
he himself, to have the command of his horse, was 
occasionally obliged to hold the reins of the bridle 
in his teeth. 

In a little time after he joined the army near 
Charlestown his wound took a more favourable 
turn, and he was soon in condition to take the field 
with his former activity. He was employed with 
Colonel Tarleton during the siege of Charlestown, 
in clearing the country of parties of the enemy, 
who attempted to straiten the quarters of the army; 
and, while on this service, falling in with one 
of their convoys, he took two hundred horses, forty 
waggons, all their baggage, spare arms, and ac- 
coutrements, with fifty prisoners, without the loss 
of a man.* 



* Letter dated Charlestown, 15th May 1780, Captain Fletcher's M. S. 
aecoimt of Colonel Fergtson. 



28 MEMOIR OF 



After the reduction of Charlestown, among the 
dispositions which were made to restore and pre- 
serve the province, it was proposed that the well 
affected should be armed in their own defence ; 
and Ferguson, who at this time held the rank of 
lieutenant-colonel in America, was appointed ma~ 
jor to the 71st regiment, on the British establish- 
ment, and entrusted with the charge of marshalling 
the militia over a great extent of the country ; a 
service for which he was particularly qualified, by 
his generous disposition and conciliating man- 
ners. 

In the proclamations he was intrusted to frame, 
the people of South Carolina were called upon by 
him to restore the civil government of their country, 
under the favourable conditions then offered by the 
King and Parliament of Great Britain. 

A numerous militia was accordingly soon enrol- 
led, being allowed to name officers for themselves ; 
and, as those officers were to act as civil magis- 
strates also, a caveat was entered against the choice 
of any person who was likely to abuse his trust, 
by withholding from any peaceable citizen that pro- 
tection to which he was entitled. 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 29 



Ferguson exercised his genius in devising a 
summary of the ordinary tactics, for the use of 
this militia; and had them divided in every dis- 
trict into two classes ; — one, of the young men, 
the single and unmarried, who should be ready 
to join the King's troops, to repel any enemy that 
might infest the province ; — another, of the aged 
and heads of families, who should be ready to 
unite in defending their own townships, habita- 
tions, and farms. In his progress among them he 
soon gained on their confidence, by the attention 
he paid to the interests of the well- affected, and by 
his humanity to the families of those who were in 
arms against him. ** We come not," he observed, 
" to make war on women and children," giving 
them money to relieve their distresses j but said, 
*' he hoped they would excuse him, if meeting 
*' with their husbands or brothers in the field, he 
** should use them a little more roughly*" 

Soon after the conduct of the war in that quarter 
had devolved upon Lord CornwalLis, a detach- 
ment of regulars, joined with a body of militia, 
under the command of Colonel Ferguson, was des- 
tined to cover the interior country, and the left 
flank of Lord Cornwallis's army on its march 
towards North Carolina and Virginia. 



30 MEMOIR OF 



Having advanced towards Ninety- six, about two 
hundred miles from Charlestown, acting with vigour 
and success against different bodies of the rebels, 
who remained to dispute the possession of the 
country with him, he had inteUigence from Colonel 
Brown, who commanded the King's forces at Au- 
gusta in Georgia, that a body of rebels, under the 
command of a Colonel Clarke, who had been re- 
cently repulsed in an attempt upon the post of 
Augusta, was retreating by the back settlements of 
Carolina. To this intelligence Colonel Brown 
added, that he himself meant to hang on the rear of 
this enemy, and that if Ferguson would cut across 
his route, he might be intercepted, and his party 
dispersed. As this service was perfectly consistent 
with that in which he was employed, Ferguson 
gave way to his usual ardour, and pushed with his 
detachment, composed of a few regulars and mili- 
tia, into Tryon county. 

In the meantime, numerous bodies of back set- 
tlers west of the Alleghany mountains, hitherto 
believed favourable to the British cause, were in 
arms, some of them with a view of seizing upon 
the presents intended for the Creek and Cherokee 
Indians, which they understood were but slightly 
guarded at Augusta, Others had assembled upon 
the alarm of enemies likely to visit them from South 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 31 



Carolina. These meeting with Colonel Clarke 
secured his retreat, and made it expedient for 
Brown to discontinue his pursuit and return to 
his station at Augusta, while Ferguson having no 
intelligence of that event, still continued the march 
undertaken at his request. The enemy which he 
now alone and unsupported was likely to encoun- 
ter, is described as follows by an officer who served 
the campaign in South Carolina : " A swarm of back- 
" wood's men, the wild and fierce inhabitants of 
'* Kentucky, and other settlements westward of the 
" mountains, under the Colonels Campbell and 
" Boon, with those of Helston, Powels Vally, 
" Barclay, Bottetourt, Augusta, and Fincastle, 
" under the Colonels Cleveland, Shelby, Sivier, 
*' Williams, Brand, and Lacy," had assembled 
suddenly and silently upon the report of a booty to 
be seized at Augusta. They were mounted on 
horseback, and by the rapidity of their motions 
well qualified to act by surprise.* 

When Ferguson had intelligence of Brown's 
retreat, and the appearance of a new enemy, he 
halted, with a view of returning to the parts of the 
country he had left. At the same time, he dis- 
patched a messenger to Lord Cornwallis, to inform 

* Vide IUmsay's RcTolution of Ajnerica, chap. 19. 



32 MEMOIR OF 



his Lordship of what had passed,— of the enemies 
he had to deal with, — and of the route he had taken 
to avoid them ; earnestly expressing his wish, 
that he might be enabled to cover a country in 
which there were so many well affected inhabitants ; 
adding, that for this purpose he should halt at King's 
Mountain, hoping that he might be there supported 
by a detachment from his Lordship, and saved the 
necessity of any further retreat. 

This letter having been intercepted, gave notice 
to the enemy of the place where Ferguson was to 
be found J and though a duplicate sent on the follow- 
ing day was received by Lord Cornwallis, it came 
too late to prevent the disaster which followed. 

The enemy having selected a body of chosen men, 
mounted on fleet horses, performed their march 
sooner than otherways could have been accom- 
plished. They were in number so superior to Fer- 
guson's detachment, and so well acquainted with 
all the approaches to his position, that they made 
arrangements to surround him and to cut off his 
retreat. 

On this sudden emergence Ferguson's detach- 
ment was immediately in arms, and rushing with 
the bayonet on the first body of the enemy that 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 33 



presented themselves, forced them to retire ; but 
while they gained this advantage in front, they 
were attacked on the flanks by a fresh enemy. To 
these also the regulars presented their bayonets, 
and repulsed the enemy in three several attacks. 
" As often as one of the American parties was 
" driven back," says Ramsay, the American his- 
torian, " another returned to their station. Re- 
" sistance on the part of Colonel Ferguson was in 
" vain ; but his unconquerable spirit refused to 
" surrender. After having repulsed a succession 
" of adversaries pouring in their fire from new di- 
*' rections, this distiguished officer received a mor- 
" tal wound." 

He had two horses killed under him, while he 
remained untouched himself j but he afterwards 
received a number of wounds, of which it is said 
any one was mortal, and, dropping from his horse, 
expired, while his foot yet bung in the stirrup. 

The spirit which thus refused to be subdued, be- 
ing now no more, the officer on whom the com- 
mand devolved, though brave and equal to the 
trust, was compelled to accept of quarter for him- 
self and the few men that remained under his com- 
mand, 



34> MEMOIR OF 



The first reports of Ferguson's death, though 
vague and uncertain, were received by his friends 
in the army as a matter to be hourly expected : 
" If not now,'* they said, *' it must be soon, in the 
" continual danger to which he exposes himself.'* 

He had estimated the part which became him 
to act, as the leader of such parties as were hither- 
to put under his command : in such services, he 
conceived, that he was not only to project what 
should be done, but to lead in the execution of 
it. His courage was considerate and calm. He 
says, in a letter to a friend, " I thank God more 
" for this than for all his other blessings, that in 
" every call of danger, or honour, I have felt 
" myself collected, and equal to the occasion." 
Anxious to reconcile his parents to the risks to 
which he was so frequently exposed, he makes the 
following observation : •* The length of our lives 
" is not at our own command, however much the 
" manner of them may be. If our Creator enable 
" us to act the part of men of honour, and to con- 
" duct ourselves with spirit, probity, and humani- 
" ty, the change to another world, whether now, 
" or fifty years hence, will not be for the worse." 

Of the millions who were born on the same day 
or year with Colonel Ferguson, the longest liver 



LIEUT.-COL. PATRICK FERGUSON. 



will die at no great interval of time, and none in a 
manner more worthy of the part which Providence 
had assigned him to act. 

The body lay stripped on the ground, while the 
men lately under his command, now prisoners of 
war, desired leave to bury his remains with what 
they termed the honours of a soldier's grave ; but 
this request, addressed to the recent feelings of a 
ferocity which resented the opposition even of the 
most generous enemy, was refused. This token 
of respect and affection, however, was paid to the 
deceased, by the inhabitants of a neighbouring vil- 
lage, who, having experienced his humanity, gave 
the body a decent interment in their own burying- 
ground. 

Having noted the respect and affection express- 
ed for Colonel Ferguson by his brother officers, in 
the epitaph prefixed to this memoir; the person who 
offers this imperfect sketch, hopes that he will be 
pardoned the ambition of erecting this monument 
also to his memory. 

THE END. 



J. Moir, Printer, 
Edinburgh, 1817. 



Of many Poetical Effusions that appeared in the Public Prints on 
the death of Lieut.-Colonel Ferguson, the following have been 
accidentally discovered since the foregoing Memoir was printed. 



TO THE MEMORY OF 

COLONEL PATRICK FERGUSON. 



Here Soldiers sighing o'er a Hero's grave, 

Tell how he fought and died. — Here Genius bends, 

Mourning the Patriot worth she could not save. 
While social Virtue weeps the best of Friends. 



Here bleeding Pity, viewing what is done. 
In silent woe laments her darling Son ; 
For ne'er a milder Warrior thus was laid — 
His generous breast no evil e'er repaid ; 
His heart no selfish passion ever felt. 
For THERE the chastest love of glory dwelt. 
His martial ardour tend'rest feelings crown'd, 
And, but too daring, not a fault was found. 
Let Honour pay the debt his actions claim ; 
Let Candour give to future time his Fame. 
Let grateful Britain, to her children just, 
With never-fading laurel shade his dust ; 
His gallant deeds her youthful Soldiers tell. 
Teach them, like Him, in glory to excel: 
For this he fought — For this, alas, he fell! 



APPENDIX. 



[FROM THE LONDON PAPERS.*] 

* 

Letter from Captain John Gottlieb Wruck, of the 
ship Anna and Jacobina, of Dantzick, to Johk 
Wilson Croa'er, Esq. Secretary to the Admiratty^ 
London, Dated FeterJicad, Qth Nov. 1811. 

SiRj — I request you will be pleased to lay before 
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, the fol- 
lowing statement, which I deem it incumbent upon 
me to give to them and to the world, injustice to the 
generous and great exertions of a British Captain 
and British seamen, in saving me and 27 of my crew 
and passengers from inevitable destruction in the 
late storm. On the 25th of October last, the ship 
Anna and Jacobina, of Dantzick, 600 tons burden, 
laden with wood and iron, of which I was com- 
mander, was overtaken with a tremendous hurri- 
cane on her voyage, in company with a large fleet 
from Gottenburgh, under the protection of a Bri- 



* It is not the practice of the Admiralty to publish in the Gazette anj Let- 
ters to their Secretary, except those -written by the Officers of the Navj, oi 
upon service. 



34. APPENDIX. 



tish convoy. The storm soon reduced the vessel 
to the greatest distress ; all her rigging was either 
driven away by the violence of the tempest, or 
cut off to prevent foundering or dashing the ship 
to pieces ; the pumps could not keep the water un- 
der ; and after the severest labour to resist its ad- 
vances, the ship became completely water-logged, 
while the hurricane continued with undiminished 
fury. In this situation we remained until the mor- 
ning of the 217th, our provisions and fresh water 
all destroyed or inaccessible, and we ourselves be- 
numbed and worn out with toil. We expected 
every moment would have been our last ; but at 
eight o'clock that morning, (Buchanness bearing 
N. W. and by N. at the distance of about 230 
miles from us,) we saw an armed ship, to which 
we made a signal of distress, and it was not made 
in vain ; the sea was so rough that there could not 
be any communication from her to us, but the 
stranger ship hovered near us the whole of the 
27th, in the course of which she put out a boat 
with a line, with the view of letting it drift against 
my ship and be the means of saving our lives ; the 
boat, however, drifted a great way from us, and 
this expedient failed. Reduced almost to despair, 
about two o'clock that afternoon, I and my crew 
resolved to make an attempt to save our lives, and 
got out our boat, into which a trunk containing 



APPENDIX. 



some cloths and valuables was put ; fifteen of the 
ship's company went into the boat, and with great 
difficulty reached the ship of war. In their haste 
to save their lives and get out of the boat she was 
allowed to drift with every thing which had been 
put on board, so that a fresh crew from the stran- 
ger, which I and the others who remained on the 
wreck requested to be sent to our assistance, 
could not return in it. We afterwards tried to 
launch our great boat, but she was staved to pieces 
by the breakers on the ship, and we were thus left 
without the means, and almost without the hope 
of being saved. Night came on ; our only food 
was pease, soaked with salt water. We passed the 
night in the deepest distress, but the stranger never 
left us ; and, at nine o'clock next morning, sent a 
boat with an officer, a boatswain, and twelve men, 
who picked us from the wreck with boat-hooks, 
ropes, &c. and carried us on board of their ship, 
which we found to be the Pylades, Captain George 
Ferguson, who, after struggling through the tem- 
pest till the 4th November, landed us in safety at 
this port. We received from him and his men 
every kindness which our destitute condition re- 
quired. We were supplied with linens and various 
kinds of clothes, of which we stood in great need ; 
and every comfort in his power to bestow was con- 
ferred with a liberal heart and an unsparing hand. 



36 APPENDIX. 



I cannot do justice to my emotions of gratitude, 
Avhen I reflect on the great personal exertions of 
Captain Ferguson, and the brotherly kindness of 
him and his crew, in saving me and two of my sons, 
and twenty- four others of my countrymen from per- 
ishing. I must leave their meritorious conduct to 
receive its highest reward, the approbation of the 
Lords of the Admiralty, the warm applauses of their 
country, and the consciousness which they must 
ever feel of saving and comforting fellow creatures 
and strangers in distress. — I have the honour to be, 
Sir, &c. 



THE END. 


