REM A R KS

O N

Dr. P R I C E's
OBSERVATIONS

ON T H
NATURE

o F
CIVIL LIBERTY, &c.

uo-re peregrinum 'ciina rauca reclamat.

HOR. Ep. xvii, 1. I, v. 62.

L O N D O N:
Printed for G. KEAPSLEY, No. 46, Fleet-ftreet,

MDCCLXXVI.
( Price One Shilling and Six-pence. )

TO THE

RIGHT HONOURABLE
FREDERICK LORD NORTH,

THESE REMARKS

ARE
RESPECTFULLY INCRIBED

BY HIS LORDSHIP'S

MOST OBEDIENT

HUMBLE SERVANT,

THE AUTHOR.

R E (I)
RE M A R KS

ON THE

OBSERVATIONS, &c.

A~-T9HE author of the Observations on the
T | Nature of Civil Liberty, &c, &c. en-
bw,, deavours to evince, that we have no

pretension to the government of our

own colonies in America. Strange do&trine !
to inculcate by a fallacy of argument, what his
judgment (of which he appears not to be defi-
cient) mufl, in foro confcientiae condemn-But
however the world may disapprove his obferva-
tions, he is happy in thinking that they are not
only ': important" but " just ;" so that he pre-
condemns any opinion varying from his own.

In polemical sentiments, of every nature, the
passions of mankind lead to an arrangement on

B one

( 1 )

one fide or the other-Excluding intereRl, or il-
lusion, our opinion will naturally tend to what is
equitable.

It is not my design to follow the author, pa-

ragraph by paragraph ; but to elucidate, to the
extent of my ability, not only how extremely er-
roneous, but of what pernicious tendency his
cbfervations are.

His first endeavour is, to define the nature of

liberty in general-phyfical, moral, religious,
and civil. As the latter only is the point in
queffion, and as he is not desirous to prove that
the Americans are deprived of the three firit,
which he might do with an equal degree of pro-
bability, we ihall confine our remarks solely to
the latter.

The bulk of the people in America, little ini-

tiated into the cabinet of their leaders, full of
imaginary ideas of promired liberty-yet were
the veil that blinds them but once cleared from
the cloud that obscures their better judgments,
they would, sensible of their past infatuation,
loon close the sanguinary fcce of defruCtive re-
bellion.

Let

(3)

Let us allow that all " civil free government

originated from the people; that they are the
source and the end."-Put it to the proof-Give
the helm into the hands of so many unskilful pi.
lots-The vessel would deviate from its course,
and soon be a-ground. Government certainly
sprung from neceffity-General convenience was
its objeat-and will still be its supporter. " Civil
" liberty (when I mention the word Liberty, I
" mean regulated freedom, not an anarchy of

a&ting agreeably to passion) can, according

' to Mr. P. be only enjoyed in its greatest de-
" gree in small states, where every member is
"capable of giving his suffrage in person, and
" being chosen into public offices." Let a com-
munity be ever so small, it must consist of diffe-
rent ranks of men ; what riot and disorder must
be the natural result, when the important offices
in that state may be occupied by the meanefl,
uninfuru&ed individuals. What corruption, and
sometimes what a scene of blood arose in the
Campus Mfartins at Rome, when the candidates
appeared, and the whole collective body of the
people were the voters ! Merit was sure to be
negleced, while vice, by its popular, dangerous
donations, received the plaudit and concurrence
of the people.

B It

( 4 )

It is universally acknowledged, that where

the nation is represented by its own free choice,
the determination of the majority of those repre-
fentatives is the vox populi. Mr. P. proceeds to
give us an idea of a government, the child of his
own fancy, the very existence of which is incon-
ifitent with human nature. W.'ith refped to the
house of commons, have they not been celebrated
for the ealoufy of their rights, the equity of their
laws, and the jufnefs of their decisions

" As the people have more or less share in go-

" vernment, and of a controuling power over
" the persons by whom it is adminiftred-fo it
"is complete, &c." Yet Mr. P. complains
that these very people, that he thinks requisite to
have so much power, are corrupted ; and their
representatives, corruptors. If we were to deal
in fiation, let us suppose, for a moment, that the
heart of every man was open to each infpe&or,
that no passion of fear, interell, &c. &c. could
enter, but was immediately vifible-what ma-
giftrates, what legislators could we not chufe-
)et they would not be free from censure.

In one place Mr. P. thinks that the suffrages
of a turbulent meeting of the people is the only

true

( 5 )

true state of civil liberty. In another he com-
plains, that the majority of the house are elet-
ed by a handful of the meanest of the people
at one period he is anxious that the lowest of the
people should possess the most important offices;
in the next, he accuses them of being biassed by
bribery in their choice. Surely if they are capa-
ble of undertaking an office of any consequence,
they may be allowed able to chute a reprefen-
tative. Thus he passes sentence both on the
people, and their members. " To be free is to
" be guided by one's own will." Certainly;
but when, for a variety ofreafons, we give up a
small portion to ensure the reRt, can this be
ftiled a servitude ? No; it is by our own frank
gift; and without it, adieu to all the advantages
of society. Mr. P. allows that the form of our
constitution is excellent-then why raise fan-
cied evils that have no existence ? What should
degrade it ? Every Briton must be proud of it!
Do we not hourly feel its glorious effets ?

" Government, fays Mr. P. is an institution

" for the benefit of the people governed, which
" they have power to model as they please.-"
If this was fat, what anarchy and innovation
must not be its consequence, if from every

whim

(6)

whim of a frantic multitude, the fabric must be
subverted !-Government is clearly, as before
remarked, derived from necessity, and the fame
cause will maintnta it. It is popular to fay, it
originated from the people.

Few are the intfances of licentiousness in the

higher orders of a state; their knowledge and
experience will di&ate to them its pernicious
consequences. The vulgar think that their li-
berty is infringed, if they receive the least curb
of legal reftririon: unrestrained by morali-
ty, a lawless conduct, unchecked, is the only
idea they possess of liberty. Despotism is in-
deed a branch of the fame tree; for if design-
ing individuals, aided by the fury of popular cla-
mour, confound all diftin&ion, and defiroy the
springs that moved the wheels of government, it
will ever terminate in the despotism of the most
artful.

The power of parliament is certainly de-

legated; the limitation of their time of fitting,
the check from the other powers, their own in-
capability of acing without the concurrence of
his Majesty and the house of lords, is too evident
to aflert any omnipotency in either them, or their

eletors,

( 7 )
(7)

ele&ors, the people. One cannotbut fnile whetl
we hear of the omnipotence of an illiterate mul-
titude. We lhould be indeed gloriously govern-
ed, if they were to be our rulers ! I cannot
conceive how it is possible (even by those
who firive by every popular art to insinuate
themselves into the good graces of the people)
to file them omnipotent. Is their omnipotence
in refpet to the formation of the laws ?-Are
there no other powers to acquicfce in them?
Is it with refpea to force ? Their numbers
are great, but easily dispersed by disciplined
troops. Is it with refpea to judgment ?-
I am afraid that is not with them, entirely
omnipotent.

Freedom, and all its ineflimable advantages,

cannot be too much cherished; but every true
lover of his country will not, by a sophistry of
reasoning, inflame the minds of his fellow-
citizens, by endeavouring to instil that the
administration of his country is in dangerous
hands. When no interested consideration prompts,
it ought to be an universal attempt to prop the
the pillars of that government by which alone
our country flourishes and our domestic felicity
is ensured. What anarchy must attend the sub-

version

( 8 )

verflon of government! I am confident it wilt
be replied, that their intention does not tend to
so deftrudive an end: they only are desirous to
change the measures that are pursued by the
present ministry, and put the helm into abler
hands. Allow me a homely fimile-Govern-
ment is but an intricate fuperftruaure. Suppose
we are continually sapping the foundation, in
raising new fupporters-the new ones are un-
able to prop the pile, and the old ones so wea-
kened as to totter under its weight.

I Ihall pass over many of Mr. P.'s observations,

the pernicious tendency of which are too obvi-
ous to be commented. He insinuates, by false
dedutions, very different conclusions from those
candor would dictate.

Many of his remarks, that he establishes as

faEs, I believe, are very open to refutation.
He affirms that liberty is the only foil where the
arts and sciences flouriCh. Let us, for a mo-
ment allow it. At what period were they ever
so celebrated as the present ? yet we are, agree-
able to his observations, deprived of all our glo-
rious rights-and in a slate of actual slavery.
But he errs in his proposition, though he may

quote

(9)

quote the page of Longinus, Addison, &c, &c.
yet fact, stubborn fat, will refute them. In
what age of the Roman empire, were the arts
and sciences at their zenith ? In the reign of
Augustus. France and Italy, whose govern-
ment is entirely absolute, have they not risen al-
most to the highest pitch ? Had he remarked,
that commerce only can flourish in a free slate,
his assertion had been, indeed, true. Absolute
dominions, from their very nature, cannot ex-
tend their commerce. Here is another proof of
the freedom we enjoy. Does not trade flourish,
and even encreafe, in all our ports ?

I believe that sentiments of genuine freedom,

untainted by ostentation, never stamped the ge-
nius of any period of history more remarkably
than the present. " Many sycophants of po-
" xer have been facrificed,"--but surely it is
more consonant to humanity, more glorious for
the nation, that no such, of any importance, ex-
ift. While the minister possesses public and
private virtues, the channel by which the cur-
rent of royal favour flows, cannot be sullied.
While we have a gracious King, wvhofe a&ions
are as untainted as his heart: vwh'e he is so
cautious in the choice of those enrufted with

C the

( o10 )

the adminifiration of public affairs, we can fear
no event, that Should place the fubje& in a paral-
lel situation, to contend in the fame cause
that ratsed the public arm against Charles the
First, or the unhappy James: and that such a
period may never again be read in British his.
tory, muff be the prayer of every honest mind.

The page of history will point various exam-

ples of the Subordination of one community to
another, where the distance, the vicissitude, and
uncertainty of the element, the representatives
rmut go through, supply us with a striking ob-
servation of its impracticability. What an ad-
vantage might not Mr. P. assec, if he could
explore, in any quarter of the world, two horses,
like Pegasus, where his favourite Americans
might, in the space of a few days, not only
ccn 'ev their representatives, but by the means
of the fame rapid fight, fend continually their
inftrucions. If a fiate receives all the advan-
tages that law, protection, and assistance of an-
otrer can aflord, surely lhe ought to acknov-
ledge herself indebted in the most grateful man-
ner, independent of all natural subordination. If
we allow the Americans to be in the state of fla-
rcr! that Air. P. paints them, wse mufl divefl his

Majefly,

( II )

Majesty, and both houses of parliament, of every
principle of humanity. We muff ourselves be
in the fame flaviih condition ; as the fame laws,
the fame legislators, that govern them, rule us.
The interest of Britain and her colonies mufl be
invariably the fame ; are they not a part of the
politic body ? Is not the safety of every part of
importance to the whole ?

It is strange, that England, ever celebrated for

her zeal in the cause of freedom, should become
all despots; that the country, whose very foil is
repugnant to it, who would never susser a ty-
rant, should have the feeds in every one of its
constituents. Again, every government requires
a degree of parade ; a military eftablifhmnent has
been esteemed requilite in the molt popular
ones.

In America, the assembly chosen by the peo-

ple, a council eleAed by that affcmbly, and a
governor appointed by the sovereign state, and a
variety of different offices for the impartial diftri-
bution of justice, denote a freedom of conflitu-
tion-not a slate of servitude. The very exit-
tence of a superior legislature is frill firongly in
their favour. If the governor a¢ts in a tyrannic

C 2 manner,

( Iz )

manner, there lies an appeal against him, to those
from whom they are certain of redress. Thus
circumstanced, no governor dares to -deviate
from his duty.

The colonies are governed by the laws of Eng-

land : if the afiembiies were to form their own,
and submit as their inclination prompted, to one
or the other-what a scene of confusion !

Permit me to remark, that fear, that flattery,

that the hope of preferment may tempt many to
protect a despot, but it will be found very rare,
that a whole nation would unite to oppress a
dependent one, who, if they were not aCtuated
by ambitious infatuation, would require no
more military than was requisite to retain im-
patient fipirits in a sense of their allegiance.
Impossible fuppofirions, chimeras, as they can
only p'ease for the moment, without any im-
portance, and shew the fertility of the writer's
invention, are passed over in silence, to moulder
into iafignificancy.

" Are there not causes by which one itate

"may acquire a rightful authority over another,
i rhough not confolodated by an adequate re-

" pre-

( 3 )

" presentation ?" I answer, there are such
caufes.-The right of conquest, though it is
to be confidered as the least permanent, while
the fame power does not refirain it under sub-
jedion, that first gave a title to it, yet, to deduce
good from evil, if it can be so ftiled-the Ro-
man empire (for many of their conquefis were
subsequent to the republican form of govern-
ment) though they usurped dominion over whole
kingdoms, yet the arts of knowledge and po-
litenefs first dawned under their fuecefsful in-
vafions-A just war cannot be indemnified,-in
the way of reimbursement, I allow it may;
but what can compensate for the loss of the
many lives sacrificed in the contest. Security
against any future injury in an hostile slate, can
consist only in the want of power to exert their
not-extinguifhed resentment.

Compa& may and ought to be binding.-If

a tfate is in imminent danger of being reduced
to the fubjefion of another power, and she
makes cessions to a state equally, or more power-
ful than her invader, to proteEt and support her
-Surely if The is saved by the guardian wing,
it ought never to be effaced from the memory
of pofierity, to whom they owe their very
cxiftence.

"Obli-

C 14 )

" Obligation conferred, in the mind of a

" generous people, is indeed a powerful tie."
Compa&, in many instances, is the effe& of
obligation. Liberty is an inestimable blessing-
but how can a subordination to a state, jealous
of her freedom, be entitled servitude. Are
taxes levied ? Are there impofs ? Do not the
Americans receive an adequate return ? One
would suppose, they wanted no duties, no
taxes; yet they imagine, they have a right to
be proteced, and that the Englith are to be
taxed to pay the expence of their support. It
would have been fortunate for us, if we had
possessed no territory in America; our debts
would not have been so large, nor our taxes so
burdened.

Different communities forming an empire,

ought to have mutual interests. It is by their
union, that they are powerful and refpedaed.
If every community is governed within itself,
not subordinate to one great legislature, they
would all be soon divided. Ambition in every
one of them would lead some artful individual
to place himself at the head; and opposition,
that sprung from a miltaken sense of liberry,

would

( 15 )

would end in despotism. If an empire, and
at betl it can only be nominal, be not taxed
by one great legislative body, but are ruled by
an internal legislation, they would soon be en-
tirely their own mailers; and where a state, as
well as a man, knows he has committed an in-
jury, it is too frequent they become irrecon-
cileable enemies. Can the despotic authority of
a Grand Signor be compared to the free lenient
power of a Britiih parliament. If the parent
state is free, the independent ones, if governed
by the fame laws, mull enjoy the fame liberty.
The example of Rome is not juft-Rome itself
was governed in the most democratic manner,
while all her provinces were governed by mili-
tary force. When Rome, the darling nurse of
art and science, became the fatal prey to a ty-
rant, yet to him we are indebted for the Au-
guflan age; it freed the world from civilized
matters, to become the slaves to the bolder in-
vader, and rude unpolifhed barbarians. The
light of reason and refinement that Roman
manners had spread over the conquered world,
was soon obscured by monkish superstition, and
the forfeiture of all that might have enlightened
their unadorned and ill-inftruEed minds.

PART

# PART II.

( 16 )

PART II.

IAm extremely apprehensive, that Mr. P-

will find the more rational part of man-

kind differ from him in their manner of thinking
with refpe& to America-for this, " he is in-
" dined to make great allowances."

I 1hould be happy to learn who are so stupid

as to imagine, the colonies hold their exitlence
only for our use. If they deem themselves
amenable to the laws of this country, all that
are promulged here bind them. Ignorant
mull Mr. P- imagine those to be, if there are
any, of the least degree of common understand-
ing, who are unacquainted of what colour they
are, and what language they speak, when they
daily crowd over. The common people mingle
with ours; the genteeler with those of their own
rank. Every friend to the honour of his coun-
try, must wish that this rebellion may close, and
the veil that obscures their better genius, be
thrown aside.

If

( 17 )

If precedents, statutes, charters, are of no

eJimation, adieu, at once to all order. If any
controversies arise, to what can we have re-
source, but to them ? These precedents, statutes,
charters, have been formed at different periods,
during a series of above 200 years. The mea-
fures of government have been, in the vail fuc-
cession of ministers, for so long a space, with
refpe& to America, invariably the fame. Has
reason and equity been so great strangers to the
English constitution, as to eflablifh laws, to
approve of them for almost two centuries, which
Mr. i- now finds out to be arbitrary, illegal,
and in opposition to the dictates of humanity.

In the occurrences of private life, reason and

3uftice ought to be the standard of our condut;
the criterion by which we judge of others;
in maxims of slate policy they are one of its
most essential properties, nor will ever true policy
be found to deviate from them-But if I am
injured, if I am deprived of my rights, every
law of nature, moral as well as civil, will
prompt me to be eftablifled in those claims that
I am unjustly bereaved of. Let us, for a mo-
ment, examine, who are the patrons to Ame-

D rica

( 18 )

rica, who are the uniform opposers to govern-
ment: they consist of two ranks; those dif-
asseted, disappointed in their pursuit after
lucrative employs: the other, I am even sorry
to imagine it, are the Dissenters; but as this
has been discussed in the " Remarks on the dif-

ferent opinions relative to the American co-
" lonies." I shall here drop it.

That no parallel inflance of rebellion may

ever deface the annals of history; that it may
conclude with honour to England; that the
Americans, sensible of their infatuation, may
wake from their dreams. Cruel must that dif-
position be, who after rising to manhood, by
the protecting wing of an indulgent guardian,
wishes to plunge a dagger in his breast. If he
can only preserve his being, and ad his duty to
polterity, by the defence of himself, and the
punishment of his execrable enemy, he must be
void of all the feelings of humanity, if he does
not exert his utmost force.

Mr. P. divides his inquiry into the following
sections.

i. In

## SECT. I. Of the justice of the war with America.

( i8 )

x. In refpe& of justice.
2. The principles of the contlitution.
3. In refpec of policy and humanity.
4. The honour of the kingdom.
And lastly, The probability of succeeding in it.

SECT. I.

Of thejuftice of the war with America.

THE hoflilities with America must be ac-

knowledged (except by those either deaf to rea-
son, or diffaffeced to government) to be found-
ed on jufice and policy. What pen, without a
great portion of felf-fufficiency, let its penetration
be ever so sagacious, dare censure the adcs of
parliament; ads, that experience has ftampc
as just, and observation marked, as the effeE of
reason. If we are deprived of the right to tax
America, what power have we over our colonies ?
There is an immense difference between a right
to that part of the possessions in America, that
is requisite to support their own government,
and a title to the whole.-Does the privilege
of taxation in England, imply a right to our

D pof-

( 20 )

pofefions? Politics and religion, in our en-
lightened age, are widely diftint; fuprermacy
is a claim entirely obliterated: yet it is very ex-
extraordinary, that those, who vary from the
eftabliflied faith, and live under the lenient in-
fluence of adminifiration, are ever firif to can-
vass its measures, and disapprove its regulations.
The mild, the indulgent hand of a British
parliament would require but a small reftrition,
to continue her subject provinces in a sense of
allegiance. Were they simply conscious of their
own advantage, peace and concord would spread
her all beneficial dominion over every part of the
united empire. If the baneful ascendancy of
some disorder, poisonous to the whole frame,
becomes predominant, and the force of gentler
medicines fail, we must find some more violent
expedient to suppress its deftruEive emanations.

" The superiority of the Britifl state," arises

not " from wealth" or the "' number of our

" people-knowledge or virtue." We are in-
finitely obliged to Mr. P- for placing the phi-
lofophers of America, on an equality with our
own. America may produce a Cromwell, and
I scruple not to aflrr, however ineffectual his

de-

( 2! )

designs may be) that there is one in embryo, but
they will never, I dare aflert, rival a Newton,
a Milton, or a Pope. The pretended ignorance
of Mr. P-, with respect to the real foundation
of our authority over America, is too glaring
not to be observed, even by the most superficial
eye. He forms questions, that were never
flated, and gives solutions to what will not
admit of a negative. One interrogation is so
much beyond the line of probability, that scarce
merits a reply-." The Englilh came from Ger-
" many, Does that give the German states a

i right to tax us ?" What inference can be ex-
tra&ed with refpec to America? Were the
English emigrated, supported, and softered by
the Germans ? They came over in ihoals, de-
luged from the overflowing multitudes of the
north, and the poverty of their own country.
Can the insolence of barbarians, in their inun-
dations, be compared to the generous support
that we have afforded America, descended from
the fame anceltors, and subjed by every tie, to
the fame legislature ?

Sentiments on religious and political fubjets
can have no affinits--Unity of a slate forms its

strength

( 22 )

strength; and unless the different parts of the
body politic are governed by the fame legiSla-
ture, it will branch out in a variety of intereits,
and enfeeble the whole. In religion, experience
has taught us, that many feets may exist in a
slate, and unite in the general cause. In the
Britiih dominions, all feearies own their alle-
giance, though the Dissenters are the general
opposers of government.

Mr. P. imagines, that the augmentatation to

our national debt, caused in our protection of
the Americans, amply repaid-that we did it,
on our own account. (In one oircumfiance it
was, we then confidered the Americans, as they
now atually are, our fubjeds, we could not
penetrate into the anguis in herba). But if
some prafcient being could have whispered the
grateful return, administration must indeed have
been deprived of all sense, if it had not left
them to become the prey of a despotic master.
They then might have proved good fubjeds,
and like tome animals, the more they receive
discipline, the better they behave, and even at
leait seem to love you the more-" They had

" an

( 23 )

" an exclusive trade with us," gracious God
the mighty obligation.

They condescended to trade with us-Are not

the advantages of commerce mutual ? If they
had no interest from it, how have they rose from
turbulent Oliverians to the fiourifiing enlightened
ltate Mr. P- describes them. " They fought
" by our fide," all great and galant! While
we were engaged in their defence, they graciously
lend their arm in the fame field of battle.-" As
"freemen, they have never discovered any re-
" lusance in giving ;" that is, in futuro, if
left to their option; they may perhaps some-
times deign to assist, if they imagine they can
reap any benefit from it-" But in obedience to
"a demand, and with bayonets at their breasts,
"they will give us nothing but blood."-Who
demands ? Can the ats of parliament be filed
demands ? Who placed the bayonets at their
breast? their own seditious principles.-The
words of Pet. Arb. are very applicable to the
Americans, sera reditfacies, dijjimulataperit. The
mask is thrown away, and the principles of the
first settlers are but too evident. I imagine, the
next maxims that are taught, will be the fubor-

dination

( 24 )

dination of England to America-it will be
urged, " that as the genius of liberty has fled
" from her once favourite shore, and deigned
"to fix her residence on the continent of Ame-

" riea, a nation, whose people, uninftruted
' in artifice, unallured by the bait of pleafLrre,
<c untaught in the refinements of voluptuoufnefs,
· content with a simple mode of living, where
" freedom feated her throne, requires no taxes,
" no duties are requested, no regulations, no
"police requifite--Harmony reigns without
" them, and the public treasury is ever over-

flowing by the frank donations of a free peo-

" pie. Where can we better hope for the refto-
' ration of the all-admired, the glorious con-

f" itution we inherited, though like a prodigal

' we have squandered it, but from the ad-
" ministration of such. a people. The golden
" age would be restored, and America rival

Rome in its most sourishing period."

It has been eftablifled by the content of all

nations, that the first finders have a right to the
country-Sailing along a coast, in possession of
another, gives no privilege to it-I allow, that
property so established, is founded solely by

universal

( 25 )

universal assent; and like many things, it is the
only rule we canjudge by. The assent to it for
so long a space, proves at least its utility-it
prevents confusion, and whatever is the cause of
that, must bejuft.

What privileges do not the Americans enjoy,

equally with the reft of (except the single one of
representation) British fubjefs ? It appears to
me reduced to this simple propofition-that they
and their friends in England want us to bear the
whole burden; and on a request of their par-
ticipating in it, it is replied, that if you will
not as as we judge proper, the sword shall
decide-A few ambitious men there keep up
their prejudices, and inflame their minds, while
their friends here are trying every expedient to
irritate the minds of the people; but to their
praise, be it said, without the least profpea of
success.

Mr. P. lays no firess on charters-They are

not of a nature to be regarded-Yet when there
is a possibility of extracing the least pretension
to favour the Americans, he would find that
charter to be of weight. If charters are not

E efficient,

(' 26 )

efficient, what human power is to be' sacred,
unless experience Ihould teach, that any one,
though formed by the necessity of the times,
mfould afterwards prove prejudicial. In the
name of God, let it be repealed. But are the
most inviolable bonds that guard society, to be
recalled, because sedition asks it ? I had sooner
dwell in a land of slaves, than in a country,
where the tumultuous cry of a few madman
can overturn the most salutary institutions. An
infant nation, emigrated from a powerful one,
may stipulate conditions on the promise of sup-
port and protealion-Nature dictates it. Those
conditions ought to bind posterity, if they re-
colleaed, that they would have had no exiftefce,
or at least a poor one, had not their progenitors
wifely granted some things, to ensure grandeur
to their poferit--but nature never would fti-
pulate; nature would never a/k, to expose a
human being to the excursions of wolves and
tvgers-W hat similitude can it bear ?

How is the reprcfcntation of this country

defective: Parliament represents us; the vo-
luntary election of a whole people.-The world
ias been lavish in its encomiums of the excel-

lence

( 27 )

lence of our government. It is the wifetl, and
the most equitable' that ever existed ! Yet Mr.
P. thinks America is contending for a better
-Skilful nation ! to explore what ages have
firove in vain for, and what ages have applauded
-Luxury and vice have been the theme of
every writer in every age; the fame complaints
that exist now, formed the page of the cen-
furer for centuries paft.-Happy country, that
when England finks, ihe may fly to you, and
in your bosom pour the last retreat from.flavery
at home. What a fate ! How ought it to exult,
when Mr. P. predicts, that Aftraa will make it
her last residence on earth.

The question is, whether America is part of

the Britiih constitution ? If not, we have no.
right to taxation: but if America owns itself
our fubjet-taxation is the only proof of its
fubordinacy. For that we contend; there can.
be no medium; America either is, or is not
part of the British empire-It admits of no pal-
liation. When any small slate in an empire is
obnoxious to the whole, it is requisite for the
well-being of all, that they fliould feel for
their ill-adtions equally with a criminal indivi-

E z dual,

( 28 )

dual, who, if he escaped puniihment, would
tend to the subversion of all civil order.

The magic on which Mr. P. founds the

whole force of his argument, is torturing a
few plain words into a sense they cannot admit
of-" the right of taxation," he styles a dif-
pofal of their property. In England, though
Parliament has undoubtedly a right to tax, yet
no privilege to dispose of property. The exi-
gencies of the state require some portion, yet
that implies no claim on the whole--" To be
'C subject to the laws and privileges of the parent
" state, he calls a power to model as it pleases."
If they had the government of our colonies
under their own formation, I wonder what
arrangement they would purfue-I am inclined
to think exact the reverse of freedom. Mr. P.
will fay, How can any one surmise so ridiculous
a supposition ? Do they not now battle in the
cause of liberty ? I deny it-I believe it the last
thing that entered into the brain of their present
leaders.

Certainly our claim to the colonies, is un-
alienable. At present, Mr. P. fays, " they

"are

( 29 )

s ere about half our number; but in fifty or
" sixty years, they will double our number"-
so in proportion, in the space of one hundred
and fifty years, we ihall scarce be a handful,
to so numerous, so great an empire, equally
celebrated for their advancement in all the arts
of life, as rapid in the increase of their pro.
geny. Mr. P. may hold in derision " this
" handful of people on the other fide the At-
" lantic," yet be it the wreath that crowns
every Briton, that wherever fortune may lead
him, he is proud of his native country, nor
would change it for this mighty America, this
darling of Mr. P.

If we were to allow, that philosophy, and

the muses of America, rivaled our most cele.
brated, we should boar, that a people emi-
grated from us, had retained those talents for
which our isle has ever been renowned-but
alas! the blush must now overspread the face
of every Englishman, if ever the Americans are
mentioned in his pretence by a stranger !

The dreadful painting of Mr. P. of the
time that may come, when liberty and virtue

will

( 3° )

will take their final adieu. That time will come
when the earth will be no more. If the pier-
cing praefcience of Mr. P. can divine such a
period, let him not keep it solely to himself,
but acquaint us all with the important ara, that
we may fly to his asylum of arts, knowledge,
and freedom. When such a description is re-
alized,. let his beloved America then exert her
power-the contest would be as great and me-
ritorous, as it is now shameful and seditious.

Pudet hec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuijle & non potui/Je refelli.-OvID.

xWhen thegovernmentof Britainis onceplunged
into that abyss of ignominy; when the free spirit
that now prevails, is mouldered into ruin; her
colonies might then with justice itrive to pre-
fcrve themselves from the fame fate: but while
the administration here is equitable; while law,
justice, policy, and reason, hold the reins of
government, nothing but sedition, and the
worif of principles, could prompt the Ameri-
cans to so destructive a rebellion. Let us not
torture our imaginations at the view of so gloomy
a scene; and if ever a thought arises, that tends

to

( 31 )

to such an improbable one, dispel them with
a petition to the divine Being, toward'off for
ever the hour that deprives us of all that is
valuable in life.

If the House of Commons is capable of fa-

crificing to regal power, the jurifdiaion in-
trusted to her of the colonies, she will not long
persevere in the preservation of our own; but
thanks to the genius that presides there, the
rights of the people, their own privileges, are
as cautiously guarded, as the sincerest .iter of
his country can requelt-While our graciditi so-
vereign aims at no subversion of any popular
rights, while he arrogates no unconstitutional
powers, we need not alarm the minds of the
multitude, too easily imposed on.-If we were
to grant them the extent of their present, at least,
their feeming-wifh, and they were to establish a
democratic system, how long would it exilt ?
Experience, to make use of the words of the
historian, would teach them, that real liberty
consists in a due obedience on laws and govern-
ment. The Athenians, A. M. 3380, sensible
of the error ir their government, were desirous
of establishing a legislator, but for a fear of

pro-

( 32 )

proceeding too far, there arose, what will
always happen, in cafes where either the sub-
jed rebels against the aatual government, or
where there is no regular one, different fae-
tions. At Athens, Megacles, Pisistratus, and
Lycurgus, werethe threeheads: the first, power-
ful by his wealth; the second, (as the author
of the history of Greece remarks) by the mild-
ness of his behaviour, -his affability, and his
great liberality towards the poorer citizens, had
acquired the highest popularity; but his win-
ning behaviour was no more than an artful cover
to tht:moft ambitious designs. Thus would
America have been situated, had administration
at home not curbed a rebellion, that would have
closed in the tyranny of some American Pififtra-
tus-who, by popular protestations, by large
donations, would have ingratiated himself, and
blinded them, till they could rcfift. Tully
justly observes, confuetudinem benignitatis lamgitioni
longe antepono, hac eft graviru bominum aique
magnorum--lli qua/i ealntatorum populi, multitu-
dinis levitatem voluptati quasi titillantrum.

The words, " freemen and slave," are ma-
gic to the brain-The idea of lbeing deprived

of

( 33 )

of being deprived of our liberty, banishes every
other consideration; the abhorrence to ilavery
is so great, that we run away with the idea,
without refleting, how diffanr, how improba-
ble it is, that we can ever be entangled in the
detested chains. Incendiaries in general are con-
vinced of it; the word alone will aid their
designs; while the cool empassioned reader fees
through the veil, that is almost pervious to the
slightest view. The very a& of toleration will
be censured by every sec, precluding their own.
The birth to the producions of authors, dif-
affecled to their country, is another testimony
of the freedom we possess. Was parliament
but a set of tools; were the officers of fRate
venal; were the ministers but the instrument of
an arbitrary tyrant; were the people absorbed,
and plunged into luxury and voluptuoufnefs,
such books would not be suffered to appear-
but our glorious conflitution permits the freedom
of the press; by it, our possessions are safe,
the liberty of our thoughts may be frankly dif-
cuffed, and even the rebellion of America finds
its supporters againit the admirable system of
our government, againit thofelaws, revered by

F all

## SECT. III. Whether the war with America is justified by the principles of the constitution.

[ 34 3

all Europe, and which prove an impregnable
rampart to the encroachment of regal power.

S EC T. III.
IF';et, fir t'e war witb Anmrica is justified by the

principles of the conflitution.

TO extend our ideas beyond the preservation

the colonies, it is evident, that almost the tran-
quility of the whole empire depends on our
exertion in this rebellion-Had we tamely
stooped to the daring spirit of the Americans;
had we suffered our constitution to have been
infringed-what an intfance of pufilanimity
had we discovered to all Europe ! What an ex-
ample to all our fubje&s-Rebellion might have
reared her head in every quarter of the world.
The stress Mr. P. lays, that if we have the
power of taxation, though he expresses in other
words, it implies a right to deliver them to the
Grand Seignor. It would not have been great
lois to us, if we had never had such turbulent
Iu-,jets-'Tis the second civil war, their seditious

tenets

[ 3s5 3

tefiets have. been the cause of, xxk zopowb
Xdov eoov.

Suppose the colonies of France or Spain

" had enjoyed, by compacs, for near a century
" and a half, free government, &c." Why
travel in the land of suppositions, when we
cannot be ignorant, that either France or Spam
would not susser any of her colonies to enjoy a
liberty, that their governments will not admit
of. I will venture to affirm, from the natural
dispositions of our colonies, that if Parliament
had repealed the ats, obnoxious to them, they
would have found some ground of quarrel, if
we had not acquiesced in all their fadious de-
mands. The feed was too deeply rooted, not
to have sprung up. It has been long bursting
for a vent.

The people, that is, their representatives,

have the sole disposal of their own money. The
Americans, for various causes, have no repre-
fentatives, and relying as they do, on the
justice of Parliament, they would d find o foun-
dation for disapproving mealures evidently
adapted for the benefit of the whole, had they

F 2 not

[ 36 1

not been predetermined on opposition. I would
aik one question, Are the Americans taxed in
an adequate manner to the expence of their go-
vernment? Mr. P. describes them as numerous
and powerful-Are their duties proportionate
to so flourishing a fiate ? The causes of the un-
happy struggle in Charles I. I small pass over.
However beneficial its consequences have been,
we should be grateful for what we enjoy, and
not call to recollection, a period so full of hor-
ror.

A war, thus undertaken in the support of our

constitution, whose very being is connected with
it, ought to be promoted, and carried on with
united vigor on our fide, till rebellion is con-
convinced, that her erroneous deftrutive prin-
ciples have been the detested cause of the pro-
fusion of so much blood, that years of allegiance
can alone atone for. But as compulsion can
solely restrain them in a sense of duty, a military
force will be impelled to retain them in it-
Cruel alternative! either to give up a country,
softercd and protected by an immense expence,
or by the sword, to decide whose subje&s they
are. It is dangerous to enfeeble government by

fpecu-

[ 37 1

fpesulations, how much more laudable to con-
ceal from an unthinking multitude, the source
of government-the obedience due to authority
ought never to ble canvassed by the people,
who, when they find themselves effeintially in-
jured by their rulers, will always invent expe-
dients to remove them-Deprive government of
that reverence that it claims from people of all
ranks, you withdraw its chief pillar. If Ame-
rica was disunited from us, what a variety of
plans would wander among them, till the mos
artful could feat himself on the throne. One

great source of evil, and which adds fuel to the
rebellion, is the number of petitions that were
presented to the throne in favour of the Ameri-
cans. In the commencement of the reign of
Charles the Second, an ae passed, that no more
than twenty were to sign their names to any
petition, but with the ratification of threejuftices,
or the major part of the grand jury: the fine on
a trespass was lool. and three months imprison-
ment.

SECT.

## SECT. III. Of the policy of the war with America.

r 38 J

SEC T. Ill.

Ojhe policy of the war with America.

I have Somewhere before observed, that I

imagifed the tranquility of the whole empire
pended on the vigorous exertion of the war
against the rebellious colonies. The whole sub-
jed has been so ably discussed, that, I am con-
sident, I should not have been presumptuous
enough to have delivered my opinion on it, after
so able a pen, as the dean of Gloucester, had not
the pernicious tendency of the pamphlet now
under disquisition, called for a reply.

The cause of the war was an attempt in the

Americans of retiring from the fubordinacy to
the parent itate. We muff either have acknow-
ledged, that -we had, till then, enjoyed only a
usurped authority, or pursued the only political
one, that of refifance. Eftablilhed cultom,
that foundation of all law, the concurrence of
above a century; the acknowledgement of the
firt settlers; the advantages derived, all co-

operated

[ 39 ]

operated to entitle us to the legislative power
over the Americans. The objedt of war is
clearly that of public interefl-It cannot be for
its own fake, " Extension of dominion," as Mr.
P. terms it. How can ambition prompt us,
when America is part of the empire ? If there
was to be an infurrelion in Scotland, and our
ministry sent an army to quell it, I suppose Mr.
P. would deem it, " the lust of power, and a
" desire to extend our dominions." The one
cafe is equally applicable as the other:

" All government, even within a state, be-

" comes tyrannical, as far as it is a needless and
" wanton exercise of power; or is carried
" further than is absolutely necessary to preserve
" the peace, and to secure the safety of the state."
I believe all mankind will assent with Mr. P.
but he here, for once, is a friend to the present
measures; the preservation of peace; the safety
of the state depends on the hostilities with our
colonies. The very life of government is its
objec, and the least relaxation would merit the
severest censure ; and nll the oppircbious epithets
of Mr. P. would then be justly placed. In all
distant subordinate provinces, if the government

Qof

C 40 ]

of the chief state is so enervated as to pass un-
noticed every improper a&c of their provinces,
in a few years their dependance would be
effaced from their minds, and a just contempt
for their feeble rulers would infligate them to
shake off allegiance to so pufillanirrous a power.
To discover a timidity is to betray a fear that
we err, that we are dubious if we really possess
any authority over them. The miniitry, con-
vinced of the truth of this remark, would have
blushed to have submitted to the American rod,
and to have sacrificed the policy and honour of
the nation to the clamour of a feeble minority.
Gracious God! If the opposition had been in
power, and had pursued submissive measures,
and bcwed the neck to our colonies-what
diihonour had not been refle&ed! what dif-
grace had not fained the present period ! To
have concealed our authority, had been a tacit
confession, that we were sensible of an error-
What a triumph to all our foes. But when we
are polTfiled of power; when unanimity at
home adds an additional lustre to our arms,
why nheath the sword, and become the scorn of
Europe ? Who, that bears any affec&ion to his
country, could susser her power to be called in

quetion,

( 4 )

question, for having tamely submitted to her
rebellious colonies.

All the artful painting of Mr. P. if it had

been drawn from truth or reason, would have
been lively; but while he firives to inflame the
imagination, and loses fight of that lenient soft-
ness of argument, that embellishes every friend
to his country, or patron to humanity; it
awakes compaflion, as well as resentment; when
talents, that might promote unity and peace,
emulate the incendiary, and add new fuel to a
flame, that he seems but too eager of its blazing;
the fumes of felf-applaufe may indulge his own
conceit, but the plaudit of the patriot will
never adorn him.

And now, praise be to the animation of the

ministry, the period is approaching, when
America will be taught, that her riotous fe-
ditions will not pass unpunished, and from that
period will a sense of their own interest, a
recolledion of the past profpet, route them
from their factious frenzy. If the genuine
thoughts of every Briton were discovered, an
approbation, which envy or interest can alone

G ex-

-( 42 )

exclude, would await the present adminiftra-
tion.

Secondly, The contest, as Mr. P. describes,

after the ruin of the Americans, can yield no
advantage to us. Rather let their towns be de-
solated, than the name of every Briton sullied ,
rather let them be severely punished, than an
acknowledgement of inferiority, or confession
of error, ihould give these proud colonists such
a cause of triumph; rather let them be impover.
ished, than when, if we had submitted to have
suffered their arrogance to have rose to a higher
pitch, and denounced war against us. Rebel-
lion, if successful, never knows its limits-
Many, whose restless spirits would have been
cooled by order, will arise, and in the scene of
confusion, still augment it, in the flattering ex-
pedation, that it may be the source of their own
grandeur. Can the acions of a just people, be
compared to the frantic ambition of an Alexan-
der, or a Cefar ? They had no cause of resent-
ment; they depopulated, and laid wafle fiates,
over whom they had no power; we only are
engaged in hostilities, in the defence of our own
authority. Illiberal comparison ! Wretched lrate

in-
v.

( 43 )

indeed! whole only joy is the desolation of
mankind, and the ambition of conquest.

" Blind resentment, and the desire of revenge,

" are infernal principles"-true; but to apply
such terms to the present adminifiration, argues,
what I am sorry any Briton thould be flyled.
When the nation has been injured, insulted, and
her legislature contemned, to pour convition
by hostilities, that they have themselves com-
pelled; these ever admirable measures meet with
names a ruffian can but merit. That people
declaim against the colonies is not amazing:
but how a native of Great-Britain can be- a
fiend to rebels, and a foe to the government of
his own country, is truly astonishing. What
we have done has been simply the effea of
obligation, reduced to a miserable alternative,
either to sacrifice ourselves, and punish rebellious
sUbjects. Could administration hesitate, it could
admit of no doubt-Adminiftration, conscious
of the firm basis on which it ats, is as much
superior to the trifling invecives of a Mr. P. as
its conduct is so unfullied, as scarcely to permit
the scrutiny of envy to discover any real blemilh.
The Americans have not dared to traverse the

G 2 ocean,

( 44 )

ocean, and desolate our country-Generous na-
tion !-But "' we have transported ourselves to
"their peaceful retreats-we have carried war

and desolation," If fubjets become rebels;

if that fiend, ambition, pride, and wantonness
of power, raise the arm of justice againfi them,
where are they to examine for the cause of
evil ?-In themselves. " We expeted," fays
Mr. P. " to find them a cowardly rabble"-r
They must have hitherto aaed with exteme.
magnanimity, to have given us cause for such a
supposition. The truth is, the levity of the Ame-
ricans, tired with the lenient administration of a
Britifi parliament, are eager to experience the
change of a free government, to a despot of their
own.-Allow an impoffibility--The Britihi troops
retired from their continent, their own Oliver
on the throne, in a few months, they would sup-
plicate our assistance to free them from the yoke.
Again, their country would be a scene of blood
-What a profpeaEt! How much more would
it tend to their advantage; how much would
they convince the world of their candour, if
they were to acknowledge their deception, and
close this sanguinary rebellion ? The best and
wisest may be deceived; but to persist in it,

stamps

( 45 )

Ramps an obstinate arrogance of mind. To the
American, no interell can spring from a con-
tinuance of war. At the conclusion of it, it
will require a series of years and industry, to
reinstate them. Learning, that began to dawn,
will still be longer, before it recovers from the
confusion their present miserable principles
have involved it in. The arts of refinement, that
delight in tranquility, will be almost entirely
banifhed,'and not resume her feat, till the olive
branch has enlightened the night, that there
hostilities have been the fourceof. Perish the
incendiaries.of such deftru&ion ! blasted be the
infiigators of such cruelty, that they may prove
the scorn and derision of their fellow citizens,
and the.torment of their own hearts! Pity it is,
that Mr. P. was not at the head of public affairs,
at tce .commencement of this rebellion: his
fertility-of invention would have saved the ho-
nour of the nation, and would have continued
the Americans in their allegiance.

From the firRf establishment of the colonies,

the disposition of the settlers prompted many to
think, that their retleffnefs would not sussei
them to remain any longer in their allegiance,

than

( 46 )

than they required the affifance of the state that
protected them. If the taxes are g"tater on
America at present, than half century ago, their
riches, their trade, are augmented in the fame
proportion. Who can imagine, that the diffe-
rent ltages of a stare, as they rife to opulence,
are not more able to support heavier burdens.
Mr. P. runs on, with a rapid flow of words, to
prove, that if we had borne every indignity, and
receded from every aE relative to the Americans,
they would have remained our fubjeas. That
this should be the style of an American, a friend
to their generals, would not be amazing. No
expedient, however disgraceful, would, I am
confident, have soothed the Americans. Had
we crouched under every insult, Mr. P. thinks
we might then have, in a course of time, gra-
dually overcome their fa&ious principles. The
importation of tea was seized on, as an occasion
to alarm the minds of the people. The bait
Succeeded, and regardless that they were de-
flroying the property of strangers, they wan-
tonly buried it in the sea. Necessity would
oblige the ruffian to plunder me; but he would
not, for the fake of injury to any one, despoil
them. Here the property of a great company,

under

( 47 )

under the prdteaion and concurrence of Parlia-
ment, cruelly perilhed; because it was the whim
of some fatious Bostonians. Such circumfiances
as these, are not insults! A compensation im-
mediately made, in acknowledgement of its
error, might have diminished the affront, but
could scarcely have exculpated them. After our
ministry had tried every expedient in vain to
soften them; every proposal was treated with
contempt. If an angel had descended, and
had strove to calm them by the most conciliatory
measures, his plans would have received only
lerifion or defiance. To such a people, the
sword only could teach a sense of duty. At
the commencement of hoflilities, had our mi-
niftry conceived, that the colonifis were resolved
to carry every thing on with such an enthusiastic
spirit of rebellion, they would have adopted
measures, that ere this, would have tamed
them; but the very leniency of administration
is an argument made use of as a evidence of the
vast prowess of America.

What mind can look on the congress but with

horror ? Who can think of their generals but
with abhorrence of their intentions ? With the

eye

( 48 )

eye of compassion, we regard a devoted people,
sacrificed either to the facious, the restless, or
ambitious. In the preceeding reigns, the Ame-
ricans were as yet in their infancy; no duties
were laid, because we were convinced of their
incapability of paying them; but now, opulent,
why fiould they not afift that government, to
whom they are indebted for their very existence?
In former reigns, the Americans less powerful,
less opulent, consequently more peaceable; con-
fcious, that if they did not depend on the pro-
tertion of the parent fate, their inability of de-
fending themselves, would soon have made them
a prey to some more powerful kingdom, whose
government, not being free, would have im-
pelled them to have received their laws; they
had not dared to have complained of real evils,
under the iron rod of a French or Spanish do-
minion, much less have rose in acual rebellion
for imaginary ones. At that period, while they
so immediately felt the enlivening influence of
our support, they elteemed our monarch as their
own. We enjoyed a few privileges over them;
they traded almost solely, except their contra-
band commerce, with us, if so, was it simply
to our advantage? Are they not opulent?

From

( 49 )

From what hs it arose ? We then esteemed oje
another as fellow-citizens, fubjeAs of the fame
empire. When they came here, they were re'
garded as the fame people. But the scene is
widely changed! increase of riches, a growing
number of people, have inspired fote with
hope, that they might disunite the colonies from
the parent state. The cry of freedom, that
npver-failing word, that incendiaries make as
subservient to their designs, and which always
sets the multitude in an uproar, inflamed some;
while others, carried by the current, uninten-
tionally aided the rebellion. Many, whofl
thoughts were peace, dare not venture to pro-
nounce them, for moderation and humanity are
ever negleted, and even endangered, in all po-
pular disturbances. Mr. P's ideal plan, " of

rejoicing to fee a multitude of free states,

" branched forth from ourselves, all enjoying
" independent legislatures, similar to our own,"
is indeed but a vain chimera, it founds prettily
in words, but experience would soon evince, how
impracticable it was. Divest mankind of am-
bition, pride, and all human failings, it might
have been reduced to practice; but we must
take the world as it goes, nor reflet on the

H con-

( 48 )

eye of compassion, we regard a devoted people,
sacrificed either to the facious, the restless, or
ambitious. In the preceeding reigns, the Ame-
ricans were as yet in their infancy; no duties
were laid, because we were convinced of their
incapability of paying them; but now, opulent,
why ihould they not afiift that government, to
whom they are indebted for their very existence?
In former reigns, the Americans less powerful,
less opulent, consequently more peaceable; con-
fcious, that if they did not depend on the pro-
tetion of the parent Rate, their inability of de.
fending themselves, would soon have made them
a- prey to some more powerful kingdom, whole
government, not being free, would have im-
pelled them to have received their laws; they
had not dared to have complained of real evils,
under the iron rod of a French or Spanish do-
minion, much less have rose in acual rebellion
for imaginary ones. At that period, while they
so immediately felt the enlivening influence of
our support, they esteemed our monarch as their
own. We enjoyed a few privileges over them;
they traded almost solely, except their contra-
band commerce, with us, if so, was it simply
to our advantage? Are they not opulent?

From

( 49 )

From what has it arose ? We then esteemed 6Ge
another as fellow-citizens, fubjets of the fadm
empire. When they came here, they were re,
garded as the fame people. But the scene is
widely chgaged ! increase of riches, a growing
number of people, have inspired fotne with
hope, that they might disunite the colonies from
the parent tate. The cry of freedom, that
never-failing word, that incendiaries make as
subservient to their designs, and which always
fees the multitude in an uproar, inflamed some;
while others, carried by the current, uninten-
tionally aided the rebellion. Many, whofC
thoughts were peace, dare not venture to pro-
nounce them, for moderation and humanity are
ever negle&ed, and even endangered, in all po-
pular disturbances. Mr. P's ideal plan, 'C of
"rejoicing to fee a multitude of free flates,
" branched forth from ourselves, all enjoying
" independent legislatures, similar to our own,"
is indeed but a vain chimera, it founds prettily
in words, but experience would soon evince, how
impra&icable it was. Divest mankind of am-
bition, pride, and all human failings, it might
have been reduced to practice; but we must
take the world as it goes, nor relect on the

H con-

( 50' )

criduat of a minifler, because le does not rule
a-golden age. His measures must be adapted
to the manners and principles of the times.

ffeftion has proved but a poor tie, to restrain

the Americans-Intereft would- be not a iota
more binding-Nothing but concessions from us,
that would difallegiate them, would be of any
effict. What infamy! The King that could
permit it, and the minister that dared advise it,
would merit the severest voice of censure. Had
opr canceffions kept pace with their demands,
on we should have went, till we had yielded
every thing. Their power would have en-
creased, a variety of interefis sprung up, and
in a few years we might have seen these Ame-
ricans in the field of battle against us. If at
present, when they are actually under our go-
vernment, they carry their virulence to such a
pitch, what would they not firove to have
affected, xvhen disunited from the parent tate ?
Mr. P. seems desirous, we ihould tread in their
fteps-Periih the thought! And may the time
never come, when civil convulsions will lay
waste our country, and the standard of rebellion
reared in every quarter. Does-the dignity of
Great Britain depend on the humour of her co-

lonies ?

( 5I )

nies ? Because they are facious, are -we all to be
plunged into ruin ? Our glorious constitution,
that gives us fuch.ineltimable rights, is to be. in
a slate of perdition, because America chufes to
rebel.

The felicity that dawned over them, before

such violent principles subverted their harmonó,
and corrupted its very fouyce, was very evident
from the cause Mr. P. assigns, their population;
and had not the Bostonians, with their tendency
to dissention, spread the baneful contagion, they
would have remained in the fame happy state..

The extreme humanity of the Engliih ,con-

ftitution; the principles of liberty, inherent in
our very nature, would prove an impregnable
rampart to our exercising the least degree of ty-
ranny over America. If the principles of any
man breathe a spirit of difaffetion to his cqun;
try, it is no difficult talk to picure a fictitious
profpea of impending ruin, to alarm the.mind
of the uninltruded multitude. But let the
anmator patrie convince his fellow citizens, -tha
the helm of government is in the ablef hands,
that the fame of his country was never Pmore

Hz re-

( 5'2 )

veret by foreign nations, than at this period;
that commerce, arts, and science, flourish
'with more than meridian glory. That these
'aliable advantages are as much the consequent
of those on whom depend the important affairs
of this mighty empire, as the inimitable form of
our constitution. At no period of the world,
did there ever exifl a nation so truly free. The
democratical nature of the Grecian republics,
inifad of spreading liberty, was the cause of
those revolutions, where cruelty triumphed in
the most inhuman manner. But I deviate from
my fubje&. Our hoffilities with the colonies
are founded on tle basis of truly patriot policy;
the verv safety, the happiness of even America
depends cn -its event. Those writers, whose
religion, whose tenets, delivered down from
their ancestors, heightened by disappointment,
or aggravated by difaffe&ed patrons, will be
clamorous against adminiftration-But are fuchto
be regarded ? Is theenthufiafm of a madman to
be compared to the gentler voice of reason ? Is a
part of the British empire to be sacrificed, be-
cause a few, of Oliv.rian principles, have averted
the minds of their countrymen from their ge-
iuine happiness. Is Ireland, because she pre-

sers

( 53)

ers allegiance to the best of Kings, to a scene
of desolation and rebellious factions, to'be ifyle
as slaves; to bear tlte cruel imputation of ser-
vimrde, because he is satisfied with an admirable
adminiltration. Detested be the inveEtives, that
wish -to animate intestine commotions-horrid
maxims that tend to inflame the minds of
our fellow-fubjeds. If the instigators of dif-
fenfion, are not content with the mode of theit
own government, let them seek for a better in
foreign countries; and if they do not return to
theirown, with abhorrence of their pars thoughts,
with a confcioufuefs, that not such a one exists
in the univerfe-what a heart mu'st he posiess.
Mr. P. must imagine, his abilities to extend
beyond almost the limits of human intelligence,
if he can deem himself capable of giving even
hints that have escaped the penetrating eye of
adminifiration. Look round the other empires
of the v.-orld-Is there one in 'so flourifhiilg a
state as our own ? Is there one, where the sub-
jeds enjoy so great blessings? What is there
deficient, that human nature can require?

Monsieur De Lolme, in a Treatise of the En-

glifh Conflitution, lately publified, alks the
following question ; which he himself answers.

" Are

( 54 ),

cc Are not the Englifli perpetually making
' complaints againfl the adminifiration? And

do they not speak and write as if they were

" continually exposed to grievances of every
" kind? Undoubtedly, I answer, in a society
" of beings subjea to error, diffatisfaaions,
" from one quarter or other, will necessarily
" arise; and in a free society they will be open-

ly manifested by complaints: but those corn.

o' plaints, let it be remembered, are not, in En-
· gland, the cries of oppression, forced at last to
" break its filence-They do not suppose hearts
' deeply wounded; nay, I will go farther,
" they do not even suppose very determinate
" sentiments, and they are often nothing more
,' than the firIt vent which men give to their
(' new, and yet unsettled conceptions."

Mr. P. finely remarks, " that if there was no

"public debt, there would be no occasion for
" half the present taxes".-If the exigencies of
state had not required the demands of money,
there would have been no debts: but is the pre-
sent adminirtration to be censured, because of
debts contraced by many a prior one ?

If

## SECT. IV. Of the honour of the Nation, as affected by the war with America.

( 55 )

If Mr. P. or Mr. B. think we injure the

Americans, and that the colonies are: the only
asylum of liberty and honour; if government
art home is arbitrary and illegal; if the people
are so degenerated into luxury and refinement:
if they are so loyal as to love and refpe& their
aimable King, let them aa as they profess, and
in the field of battle be patricides, and vindicate
rebellion.

SEC T. IV.
Of the honour of the Nation, as affeled by the

war with America.

TO recede from the contest with rebellion;.

to fuflain the mortifying triumph of seditious
fubjeas; to be dictated to by a. faaious assem-
bly ; to acknowledge the power of Great Bri-
tain inferior to the punishment of a few turbu-
lent Americans, are dotrines that no one but
an enemy to his country can inculcate,

The

( 56 )

The ats -of government were ever .esteemed

those of: the- whole nation. They are,. 1 shall
only except a few dissatisfied aathors, whoctrive
mrfetthe people in a blaze butadmnnifration,
like -a rock, is not to be shaken by every trifling
gu. t If aation, as well as an individual, errs,
let him recede; -he triunph over passion is great
aiBd meritorious ; bst when jiftice,' honoor, and
conscious integrity raise the arm, let us not yield
without an acknowledgement in the aggressor,
and a cessation from the cause of injury. Let
the proud American reflect on the lives sacrificed
in a detefled cause; let him confider that dif-
honour muff be the attendant of his country;
that in fwure periods execration will await his
name, and the.hiftoric page wiR blurb at the
narration: but I fear there salutary reflections
are far from their deluded minds; the' fory
when perused .by posterity will scarce be cre-
dited-For us nothing appears remaining, but
that the iron hand of war ruift root out princi-
ples so dangerous, so deftruive to the peate of
aankn. ::
d..

Peace

( 57 )

Peace is difpair'd!

khio can advifefubmiffion ? War-then War, &c.

Let the cafuiit explore sophistic reason ; let him
draw specious deductions; the voice of simple
reason andjuitice, unadorned with the refine-
ment of art, or the softness of a period, will be
loud against him: he may endeavour to drown
them, but they will fill rife and pour convic-
tion in his ears. Strangers of every climate are
amazed at their infatuated ingratitude-ftrangers
whose hearts whisper them, how just, how
equitable the British adminiltration has been
ever conduted; how every thing in oppofi-
tion to public integrity has been difcounte-
nanced; how repugnant the breast of every
Briton has been, againit the least incroach-
ment of their adored liberty.

There can be no difindion between the peo-

ple and their governors, in refpet to their ho-
nour and security; they are two links, if fepa-
rated, must be both involved in the fame ruin.
Government is an institution to effea whatever
tends to the dignity or advantage of the king-
dom ? Not the will of a mob incapable of dif-

1 cernment.

( 58 )

cernment. The ideal charms of a free govern-
xent, an equality, may please the enthufiat in
in his clofet-but like a vision of the night it
Yanithes as we wake. To retreat in a cause
where the honour of the nation -is -concerned,
where juflice is one of its chief pillars, would
cafla stain on our pre.ent era of British history;
would argue a meanness, not to fay-a sacrifice
of that truit, those in office are confided with.
Where the cause of quarrel does not spring
from ourselves, it would be infamous to make
concessions to the aggroffors, and those aggref-
fors rebels. Surely the united power of the
British empire need not dread, or be intimidated
by her colonies !-A powerful nation to ac-
knowledge the ats of the wisest, most humane
legifature in the -world, to be arbitrary, cruel,
and unjuft-this powerful nation at the zenith
of her glory !-The reader mult ihudder at the
thought. To behold his country at the feet of
an.iniuldiig American, confefing the superiority
over Great Britain, renouncing all past errors,

-vith hope of fargivenefs, if never guilty of the
fame indiscretion again-For Ihamel Such lan-
guage would route the resentment of the tamest
mortal. To the man whose breast does feel its

force,

( 59)

force, all argument muff be unavailing 'A
writer muff find his fubje& very defetive if he
endeavours to draw comparisons where there
is not the least affinity. Were the Coifieaits in'
the fame situation, with refpet td the Genoese,
or the French, as our colonies to us ? Are either
of their governments fmilar to ours? If the
Corsicans had been under a legifldture as eqtiita-
ble as ouTS, they would never have rose in
arms. " AI cefiions of one people t6 ahothet.
" are disgraceful to human nature." Urldoybt.
edly: but Who ever expressed a thdou;ght of
ceding America:? Are such acts consonant to
the tenor of a Britihf Parliament ?

Since the creation of the world the e.never,

was a government so admirably admi'rnftered' as-
our own. All quotations, except whete cir-.
cumftances referible exa&ly, are of noeff~aey.
Holland, alarmed at the cruel exadtions, the
tyrannical perfecufions against her by the Spa;-
nifh monarch, threw off the yoke: but, where.
has been there dreadfully cruel invasions against
the colonies ? Are the aits-of the'Romafi repDb-
lic, at one period; under the tyranny: of tribunte
dictators, but never enjoying any trie Hberty,

to

( 60 )

to be held in competition with the Bridfli Par-
liament ? The comparison of a magnificent pa-
lace to an humble cot would be equally firiking.
All Mr. P.'s comparisons are as foreign to the
purpose. England that would ihea' her dearest
blood in the defence of freedom ; that would rear
her irrefifiible flandard against tyranny and op-
pression, would never surely spread her protec-
ting arm for those who assume that name for
the most detected purposes. It would-ill- become
those celebrated in the glorious defence of liber-
ty, to file rebellious fubjets by that generous
title. The language of history in future pe-
riods will be, that the natives of Great Britain,
convinced of the amazing difference between the
cause of real liberty, and the cry of ambition
veiled under the specious mafr of freedom
though they would support the one, yet would
not susser the other to rear her hypocritic head.
It generally happens in politics, as well as re-
ligion, that the discontented exclaim against
the prevailing mode of either.

Mr. P. ascribes our persuasion to begin hofti-

lities:was an opinion of their cowardice. I am
sorry he flould ascribe so mean a motive to a

war

( 6r )

war 'undertaken to support the-rights of this
country.; or that EngliSh valour flould require
so despicable motive, in a cause where the honour
of his native country is so. nearly interested.
The noble Lord, Mr. P. mentions to have recom-
mended, at the passing of the Boston port-bill,.
coercive measures, undoubtedly imagined that
the Americans were not so loll to every renfe of
honour and allegiance, as well as to their own
interet,. to have dared to continue their hostile
intentions against the parent fltae. Had the
Americans been esteemed as brave as the most
romantic valour could aspire to, would that
have daunted us, when the honour of our coun-
try called for the arm of martial jufttice ? The
encomium paid to my countrymen is great';
yet this calumniator of British courage pretends
to be a subjea of our gracious King.

That we might not too much drain our owa

country of its inhabitants, it was deemed requi-
site to introduce foreign troops into America.
Those troops will be infpired-by the justice of
the cause they are engaged in. While we are
vindicating not only our own rights, but those of
mankind in general, not even France or Spain,

averse

E 63 }

averse as they are to the rising grandeur of 6-u
kingdom, would seize an opportunity, when'
they mufr be convinced, that not only our own'
glory is concerned, but that the fubjedcion of
the whole western world' depeads on the pre-
sent conreft.

It is impossible to conceive the effect, if we

had receded in our ats relative to America.
Other nations, under the administration' of Eng-
land might have deemed that they had an
equal piivgiege t6 be exempted from the ipwer
of Eniglih government; at least, if we miay
credit Mr. P. he esteems all order and- al-
legiance a- proof of servitude. i wifli all
who profess such maxims; lived under a diffe-
rent government-whether Grecian or Roman,
they would then have known the inetiffiable
blessing of our admirable constitution. After
this war with America is concluded; the colo-
nies will taste the charms of peace and tranqui-
lity, will find them more engaging than blood-
shed and sedition ; they will be then assured, that
what they conrefted for was' but a chimerical
idea, the fition of some distempered and un-
successful ambition. A kingdom when its -ho-

nour

## SECT. V. Of the probability of succeeding in the war with America.

[ 63 ]

nour is injured, that can think of a retreat, mufl
be on the last fSage, and loR to every sense of
dignity or honour.

SEC T. V.
Of the probability offucceeding in the war with

America.

A well conducted army of 30,ooo effective

men must ever 'be superior to an innumerable
number of raw undisciplined troops, led on by
generals without experience, and void of any
reafon-why they battle against those from
whom they derived the blessing they enjoyed.
A nation engaged in the cause of freedom will
be animated with an irresistible ardor: but where
hypocrisy in the leaders assumes the name, and
illusion in the people the sole instigator, it will
widely differ from those who are thoroughly
convinced that their liberties are invaded. To
evince the truth of what I advance, with refpedt
to America, it would be difficult to draw a
similar comparison from either antient or mo-
dern hiitory. The Americans are peculiarly

situated.

( 64 )

situated,. There is an. amazing diftinAion, when
a .aplon is epngged, in the preservation of their
rights, and a people battling in the cause of in-
novation. The event will justify the truth of
my assertion. America, at the close of the next
year, will recede from her deftru&ive princi-
ples; and, convinced that her manner of aAing
proceeded from error and artful representation.
Our na'\ai force will awe them from an attempt
to become masters of the coast. If we had no
maritime power, how could we ensure protec-
tion to our land forces ? If, as Mr. P. imagines,
rhey prefer destroying their sea-port towns,
to the leaving them a prey to their injured ene-
mies, one purpose is thereby answered. If no
naval force had opposed their maritime towns,
they would have been masters of the sea. If
they rebuild their towns more inland, the advan-
tages of commerce will be loft; without them,
how can they propose to inrich their country,
or even support it ? Recall the golden age; let
them live on the pasture of their own lands;.
let the necessaries of life be all that's requisite:
banish the passions of mankind; let the innate
principle of every one be so honest and upright
as to require no laws, no magistrate; let every

one
.. .

[ 65 ]

one, content with an equality, never to aspire to
fuperiority-they then will arrive to that state
"of virtuous simplicity." I believe Mr. P. speak§
the sense of (though I will not fay the wisest)
men in America, yet he argues from princi-
ples truly American. To argue about the pro-
bability of a war, when at present it can be
only that of opinion, is simply giving our own
conjetures: but where the wisest steps that hu-
man sagacity can devise, are proposed and put in-
to execution, there is all human probability tlat
the event will be what every lover of his country
would desire. Mr. P. is undoubtedly free from
any superstition that regards the interest of his
country: but where there is the least opportu-
nity to canvass the acions of an equitable admi-
ffration, and to censure the aftions of Parlia-
ment, that firm friend to the established faith,
he will clamour against every thing will reflet
honour to either. " In this hour, fays Mr. P.
' of tremendnous danger, it would become us
" to turn our thoughts to Heaven."-iA piety
of conduEt adorns every man; but it deviates
far from preibyterian cant, or so much fuperfti-
tion. We ridicule them as fanaticks. If peo.
ple will merit the appellation, let them not pass

-K unmo

unmolelte. I wiih that every man may enjoy
his fafol de penser, butlet him not, because he
differs from general opinion, strive to raise com-
motions. I know the pretended rigor of the
presbyterians would grow four at the very name
of a masquerade, or any amusement; while, if
they imagine themselves exempt from the in-
fpeftion of a firanger, would commit as many
faults as the greatest frequenter of the most
public diversion.

Let us piture the real difference between

our own kingdom and the colonies. Great-
Britain, powerful, free, and opulent, the feat
of arts and refinement, eminent for the exien-
five talents in every branch of human know-
ledge; and at present all there co-operating un-
der the best of miniiters, to raise the Britiih
name to the highest pinnacle of fame. While
the colonies, like a fair field, badly ownn; the
weeds entirely oppress the fine fruits it might
have yielded; but what was slid by an antient
philosopher, that there never was an opinion,
however absurd, but found its supporters; so
there never was a people, however Seditious,
but. would have a defender. The people of

York-

C. 67 ]

Yorkhire are not subje&s of the people of Mid-
diesex-; they are fellow-fubjeds, all acknow-
ledging allegiance to law and government; so
it has been with the Americans; they mull
either be subordinate to England, or totally
alienated from it. We are taxed by our own
representatives ; their situation will not admit of
it. With regard to their trade, enough has been
before remarked. " If they cannot," fays Mr.
P. " subsist without us, let them alone, they,
" will soon come back." Let any one ask him,
if they would ever have been in a degree of opu-
lence, had we not softered them; or rather,-
would they have been a people at all? Mr. P. is
offended, because Parliament is contented with-
the measures of the minifter-becaufe the two-
houses have judgment to diftinguilh when pub-
lic affairs are in the hands of honour and in-
tegrity. The influence of the crown cannot be
prejudicial to the liberties of thekingdom, while
the representatives of the people are so guarded
in their truit. Conscious of the important duty;
conscious that the rights of millions are confided
to them, they would vindicate the nation in op-
posing any attempt to unconstitutional measures.
In India, avarice has been the fatal cause of

K many

# CONCLUSION.

[ 68 ]

many oppressions; but has government been
defective in any point to stop its diffusion ?
Have not judges been sent over, with powers to
decide and superintend iny illegality ? But the
voice of censure ought not to cloud every one
that goes to so distant a quarter of the globe; and
in defence of many gentlemen that.have made
ample fortunes, I will venture to afert, that
they have not deviated from the ftriteft honour
or humanity.

It is evident, that the colonies, actuated by the

turbulent principles -of their ancestors; some
prompted by ambition, others instigated by a
restlessness of disposition; some from giddiness,
others from illusion, gave rife to this detested
rebellion.

C O N C L U S I O N,

AFTEPR all, I am inclined to make some al.

lowance for :he false reasonings this pamphlet
of Mr, P. abounds with. Mr. P. is a dissenting
preacher, born and nourished in the very bosom
of sedition, I do not speak the language of
bigotry or persecution; but I canhot help con-

fidering

C 69 ]

fidering the disse-nters as secret enemies to.go.
vernment, and an imperium in imperio. . It, is.
true, that at the accession of the present family,
they prayed and preached for its prosperity; but
it was in hopes, asit came from Germany, and
was bred up in a religion similar to theirs, it-
would favour them more and more, till- their
favourite republicanism and prefbyterianifmi
could be eftabliThed. -The.Diffenters grew dif-
satisfied; and they are now as much enemies to
the real government of this country, as they have
ever been. The Dissenters may fay, they are in
the right; that they have-reafon;the laws of nas
ture, Mr. Locke and Mr.:Sydney on their'fidq.
This does not admit of a consideration. The
government and people of England are against
them, for they are neither republicans nor pref-
byterians. Mr. P. is both the one and the other;
and reasons throughout his pa-nphlet as such,
and not as a member of the Ehglifh conftitition.
He is in fast no member of the English con-
fritution-He is a member of fation, which
has been, and ever will be, in politics and
religion, at enmity with the constitution. The
reader will permit a quotation which will illus-
trate this point from an excellent pamphlet,

lately

[ 70 Y

lately published [The Morality of a Citizen].,
" Every body is preserved by the concurrence
"of the general principles which-belong to it,
" towards its preservation. Whatever is intro-
" duced into it, and has not that concurrence, is
"a disease; and though it may accidentally
"produce good, it is always to be guarded
" against, and confidered- as an evil. · All kinds.
"of difients and oppositions to the regular ope-
" rations of a civil constitution, arc political
"diseases; and though they may, like natural
" ones, chance to be producive of great good,
"yet their primary and natural tendency is to
" defroy the conititution."

Again, " The queltion is, whether it be a

" man's duty to obey the laws and cufloms of
" his country, the reasons of which he may
" or may not understand, from a regard to that
" principle which we havw observed to be at the
"foundation of society; or fat up his opinion
"againit the public, and gratify himself at the
"expence of its peace and fecuritv ?"

The reverend Dr. P. may be furprized at
mv not having given him the title he aflumes;

bu!

L i' I

but as I was informed he was no graduate, I
thought it of very little signification.

With refpec to Mr. P.'s conclusion, as it is

only a plan of sacrificing all that is dear.to us, it
requires no comment. The heart of every Bri-
ton muil be the censurer of such a thought.

The press teems with inve&ives levelled at

the minister, who, confident of his own inte-
grity, permits them to remain in that oblivion
they never rose from. Why flould an equit-
able adminifiration support every needy writer,
who finding themselves deservedly neglected, de-
luge, from their airy regions, their insignificant
abuse; give them but a douceur, the cafe is al-
tered, and they are as lavish of their praise, equal-
ly unimportant, as their cenfurc.

It muff surely be the triumph of every En-

glifhman, that in whatever nation his desire of
improvement, his irtereft, or his pleasure, may
lead him, that he can affcrt, that the pilot of his
native country is addicted to no one deitru&ive
vice: that no extravagant fondness for women;
no ruinous attachment to gaming ; no continual

round

[ 7* 1

round of expensive amusements, to divert his at-
tention from the important employ he is en-
trusted with; that his domestic virtues go hand
in hand with his public ones; and that his
affection for his King and conntry support him
in his a;duous talk, malgrt the censure of those,
either envious of his personal merit, or the
weighty office under his charge.-Peace to all
such !

The freedom of our constitution is the won-

der and pr-ise of every itranger. The reader
will, I hope, permit me a few detached re-
marks on the original spring from which we
derive our admirable fyitem of government, so
extremely dissimilar to all others.

England was never, I mean subsequent to the

heptarchy, divided into more than one monar-
chy. The di:ifion of Spain and France into so
many petty principalities, where every little
king reigned with despotism, and were all de-
firous of assisting each other in the subversion of
the lear spark of freedom. Italy, by the oppref-
sion of papal power, by the insatiate exacions
of t'ie clergy, by their enthusiastic fanaticism,

adopted

[ 73 i

adopted those maxims by which alone priestly.
dominion can be established and maintained.
The conflitution of England, free in its very
nature, prior to the introdution of the feodal
system by the Conqueror; then, though the glo.
rious flame was fmothcred by the subversion of
the Saxon legislature, fortunately he adapted a
few of its laws, on the basis of which fpiung.
the consequent struggles of the people.

People of all flations, when they perceived

any infringement on the rights of the nation,
were eager to form themselves as a rampart
against the royal encroachments; tie barons,
in their Ariflocratic views; the people in the
hope of enlarging their privileges: they were
in want of mutual support; but the people,
conscious that many tyrants were more deitruc-
tive than one, seized the occasion, and ilipu-
lated conditions for themselves.

In Spain and France, conquest or alliance at

last united their kingdoms into one monarchy.
The people, always accumflomed to a flavifli
fubjetion, carried the fame sentiments to their
new lords, who as being so much more power-

L ful,

( 74 )

ful, nipt in its bud any inclination to a spirit of
freedom.

A variety of fortunate circumstances paved the

way to our happy constitution. The ufurpa-
tions of Henry the First, A. D. noo, was the
original ftep to atual freedom. A usurped au-
thority would, he was confident, even in that
unenlightened age, be subject to much contro-
verfy, if he did allure (by some popular actions)
the attachment of the people: his first flep was,
the granting of many privileges to the clergy,
who, as they then possessed so extensive a power,
must have been bribed into good humour. The
dvil charter, on the foundation of which the
Magna ChLarta was formed, owed its origin-to
the fame cause. The trial by jury, that bul-
wark of liberty, was planned originally by the
laws of Alfred; but the people in that rude age,
acuftomed to arms, seldom had recource to it,
and pursued the trial by duel, as more consonant
to their unpollfhed manner of thinking: but in
A. D. 1 , 6, to the immortal memory of Henry
the Sec;nd, it was revived, though he had not
sufficient influence entirely to abolish the other.
It is a difficult task, either to change a long ac-

customed

( 75 )

customed manner of ation or thinking. In
A. D. z215, the great charter made its appear-
ance; so that the usurpation of Henry and the
imbecility of John, were the happy means of
laying the foundation ltone to our conltitution,
superior to any in being.

I think it a remarkable contrast in the difpofi-

tion of England and its neighbouring rival, the
French; the difference of the two charters that
appeared at the fame period of time-the one
formed for the felicity of a wholeunited people,
exalted, middling, and humble stations alike par-
ticipated of its influence; the other, framed for
the eminence of a few nobles, disregardful of
their fellow creatures, whose toilsome lives, in-
dependent of that inhumane slavery they were
oppressed under, surely merited some portion of
attention.

If we examine into a period, though long

subsequent to the charter, I mean the reign of
the Stuarts, we shall fee the extreme caution the
guardians of our rights aaed with. As long as a
native king was feated on the throne, he was
paturally attached to his own nobles. Favours

from

C 76 3

from a gracious king print deep imprefions oa
grateful mind; they were ready to frpport him:
but as soon as a stranger was in poffefion of the
reins, addiced to, and preferring his county;-
men, it raised the suspicions of those, long ac-
customed to enjoy the favour of the sovereign,
tenacious of their own honour, and attentive to
every minnuti of a foreign prince.

BRITA N
F I N I S.
