Edinburgh September 20th, 1766

My Dear Sir,

I have been in the country all day, have barely time to write what I wish you to know by this post, in answer to a letter with which you have made me so happy. I will think no more of doubts or difficulties of any kind. Kate is mine. You have a numerous family of children. I hope that she is among those that will need your assistance the least. I am averse to all solemnity, I would not even have you think of going to the expense of new cloths for her on this occasion. I make no change in my house till she comes, and then she may change it as she pleases. I spoke something about Interest in my last; my meaning was that you should consider of a paper in which I may secure all I die possessed of to Kate and her children in case she survives me. I am in too great a hurry to explain this at present, but will send you a memorandum of it by next post, and you may have the writing ready to be signed when I get to Aberdeen. Doctor Black is ready to attend me whenever I call for him. My situation requires the decency of some forms, such as being called in church, and married by a minister of the Established Church. If Doctor Campbell is at hand to perform this office, it will be very agreeable. I hope that the ceremony of proclamation can be got over at Aberdeen in less than three Sundays. I can at a day's warning get a certificate of my being proclaimed here, and I hope you can get through that affair so as to satisfy Dr Campbell in much the same manner. If this can be done, I think you may get this letter and write an answer naming a particular day, so as that Dr Black and I may be at Aberdeen by the end of the first week in October. My time will only allow me to get to Aberdeen the day before and leave it the day after our ceremony. Your own family is company enough for me on the occasion. If Mr A. Gordon from Hallhead could without inconvenience be there, it would be pleasant, or anybody else that Kate chooses. This letter is the longer for being written in a hurry; but I hope it is to be understood and that it will procure from you, by the first post, the nomination of a day in the first week of October, or at furthest in the second. Dr Black and I will be there the day before. I am, your most obliged and affectionate servant

Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh Aprile 14th 1766

My Dear Sr

If your other friends are as Slow in writing as I have been you will imagine that you are neglected. I have for some years taken the Liberty to abstain from writing where I do not hope to produce some Effect & even where I intend writing habit & lazyness frequently get the better of me. Your Brother has shown me your last letter, & I hope that the matters may turn out as you wish them. Sometime in January last Coll. Mc Dowal sent me a Message to meet him on the Subject of a Commission from you. He told me that he intended to quit the Regiment but not the Service having a view to Change into the Dragoons; that he promised you the first offer & that you had referred him to me; He demanded 4. 000 Guineas. And was at that time on his way to London where he now is. I carried his Proposal to Mr Fletcher & Mr Alston who after considering what was to be done in the particular State of Lord Miltons Affairs determined that the Money shoud be advanced on your Security & your Brother the Coll's. And Referred the terms & the Conduct of the whole Transaction to Colls Fletcher & Mc Dowal at London. I thought  the affair woud have been Speedily concluded between them: but it seems some Missunderstanding has arisen to delay it which I cannot thoroughly understand either from Coll. Fletchers or Coll. Mc Dowals letters. There is a regulation of the Price of Commissions been lately Made to Which I imagine Coll. Fletcher wants to have this Bargain restricted altho' he does not directly say so, And Coll. Mc Dowal seems to expect £4000. He mentions offers that are made to him. But we do not hear of any formed intention to put a Lieut. Coll. over your head. Mr Fletcher sent for me a few days ago to Communicate your Letter & to desire that I woud write to Coll. Mc Dowal Informing him that he woud not insist on the new Regulation in the Article of the Price & was willing to agree to the £4000 but that he must insist nobody shoud be put over you while you are in actual Service & willing to purchase that he had written to the Secretary at War upon the report of such an Intention from you. That he only meant to prevent your Receiving any Injustice that whenever the terms were Settled with Coll. Mc Dowal he woud immediately join him in applications to the War office to have the affair concluded. This is the State of the matter at this Present Moment, My letter is gone & I hope  will bring an Answer that will contain no Difficultys.

I waited for some Conclusion in order to write you upon it but it is of more consequence to tell you how matters are while they remain in Suspence than even after they are concluded for they will then discover themselves. Your Brother & Mr Alston considering circumstances have acted kindly and readily and are dissposed to continue to do so, & I am perswaded that no hinderance will arise from them. Tho I am a bad writer I am so unreasonable as to wish to receive letters. Your simplest commands in any matter or any account of your wellfare will be most agreeable to me. And whether you hear from one or no you may depend on my not neglecting any thing else. I am

My Dear SSr 
your most Affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh, September 1766

My Dear Miss Katy,

A letter from me may possibly surprise you. I was very sorry to be obliged to leave Aberdeen without preparing you more gradually for the subject of it; but I hope that you will overlook every circumstance in the manner, for the sake of the very sincere good intention from which I act. The esteem and the love with which I am seized to you make me earnestly desire a much more near relation than that which has produced me the happiness of your acquaintance. If the tremendous name of Husband does not alarm you, that is the cousinship which I wish to bear to you. I would willingly carry this request to Aberdeen myself, but you will perhaps rather answer a letter than a verbal proposal, especially if your answer be such as I should be sorry to find it. My happiness very much depends on your allowing me to hope that I may see you before winter, and return from Aberdeen, I would fain wish, in your company, with a heart as full of joy as it was of regret at my parting with you last. If this proposal be disagreeable to you, I shall be most sincerely afflicted; if otherwise, do not torment me with reserve, where frankness would endear you to me so much. I am, with a very solicitous expectation of your answer, your most affectionate and most humble servant

Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh, September 18th, 1766

My Dear Miss Katy,

I am just now returned from Glasgow, where I have seen your uncle the doctor, and hope that what he writes to you will favour my request. I had written to your father before I set out from hence, and am very anxious to know his mind. Is it not possible to reckon me too among the number who have a great affection for you and a great concern for your happiness? I would fain hope that I shall be able some time or other to make my title to a place in that list very clear. Meantime, I can only have the pleasure of writing to you and assuring you of a tenderness which I had rather that my actions than my words should express. I have barely time to overtake the post, and conclude with the most earnest request that, whatever these gentlemen may think, you will pay some regard to the sincere affection with which I am, your most humble servant,

Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh, September 20th, 1766

My Dear Katy,

I have received a letter from your father, and am happy that no difficulty, either real or imaginary, has cast up on any quarter. It is with the utmost tenderness and joy that I think of you now as my own, and the happiest acquisition I ever made. As many circumstances at present make time very valuable to me, I venture to write to your father about every particular, and request him to settle matters so as to suit my present engagements. My mind is greatly to abridge formalities and points of ceremony. I like them not on any occasion, but when the heart is most of all affected and moved, they are impertinent to a degree of abomination will write no more at present, as I find I have my words to seek for.

I have been in the country all day, and have hurried to town in order to write your father. I only desire that you will make no difficultys about trifles. — I am, with the most affectionate regard, my dear Kate, yours

Adam Ferguson

I had written ‘Lothingness’, but erased it, perhaps feeling a little unhappy about the etymology of that word.

Edinburgh Sept. 22, 1766

My Lovely Katie,

Your letter is the most pleasant I ever received. Doctor Black and I shall be at Aberdeen the second of October in the fore-noon. In the evening, about five o'clock, I expect that you will be ready with a clergyman to put over our ceremony, that I may not be detained in the place where you are without seeing you.

I was to have written your father about some particulars either forgotten or not explained in my last. Be so good as tell him that my residence here is in the West Kirk parish; that is the designation to be put in any certificate of proclamation. Let him read this, that he may write me in what parish my dear Katie lives, if there be any distinction of parishes at Aberdeen. I will send him a scroll of the paper I mentioned in a post or two, for it requires so much time, it seems, to draw it up. I shall write to Doctor Black by this post to fix his coming here, and I hope that we shall keep our appointment most punctually. Till then and for ever more, my dear Kate, I am passionately yours,

Adam Ferguson


Edinburgh Sept. 24, 1766

My Dear Katie,

You have a paper enclosed which I should have sent to your father, if it were not for the inclination I have to correspond with you. Please deliver it to him: he will easily understand what forms remain on your part and his, and if there is anything amiss, it can be set to rights when we meet. It is such as a man of business here has scrolled for me. I have a line from your uncle the Doctor this morning. He is to dine here on Sunday next, and we set out on Monday morning for Aberdeen. I told you what was proposed in my last. We may be at Aberdeen on Wednesday evening, but I at present think it will be pleasanter on the road than there, unless I am permitted to see you, and we shall probably ly at Stonehive and go in to Aberdeen on Thursday the second of October, in the morning, to meet that afternoon, and I hope not to part again in a hurry. You will not be surprised at my proposing to leave Aberdeen again sometime on Friday the third of October; I have much to do here. But there or here, or wherever you are will be Paradise and every inn on the road a palace. Pray write to me, that I may know you have received my last and this, that there is no mistake, and that I may have the pleasure of receiving what comes from you. I am, my dear Kate,

most passionately yours

Adam Ferguson

Lauriston, July 30th 
1766



Dear Sir

I set out for the Highlands tomorrow morning with the Mr Grevilles. I wished to see you that I might receive my Manuscript & any remarks you have taken the trouble to make. If you have any that can be put in writing without too much trouble I beg that you will deliver them with the Book itself to Mr Russell the Professor of Natural Philosophy, who will call or send to you for it. I have informed him of my intentions & entrusted him with any negotiations that may arise with Booksellers in my Absence.

I am with the greatest Respect 
Dear Sir 
your most Obedient & 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson