Edinr May 17th 1760

My Lord

I have written this line, in case I should miss your Lordship; I dont know whither it is proper to trouble you about Stamp Masters. But I have a sister who is married to a man of the name of Wilkie at Coupar in Angus who some years ago was appointed Joint Stamp Master with one   Menzies who being unable for the Bussiness on account of his Age only retained the Sellary and so much of the bussiness as was to be done in the Town itself, Whilst it was understood that my Brother in Law was to do the Rest & I think to succeed in the office: I have a letter from My sister telling me that they are very much alarmed by some steps which they hear have been taken to change the destination of the office in a favour of a person who it seems has married Menzies daughter. My Sisters Situation forces me, perhaps to tresspass on your Lordships Goodness. If it should  [xxx] come before the Trustees for the Linnen Manufacture your Lordships Protection here woud add most sensibly to the Obligations I ly under. & am

My Lord your Lordships most 
Humble & Affectionate Servant 
Adam Ferguson

Edinburgh Nov.r 6th 
1760



My Dear Sir

I suppose you are so bussy that you have no time to receive compliments either of condoleance or congratulation. I who only mix a little news paper politics with Natural Philosophy have been extremely embarrassed with the affairs of the Nation ever since the news of last week & as far as news papers go there is nothing you do likely to escape me for some time to come. With all the interest I take in the public however I would not have troubled you at this time, if some notions I have about a private Affair did not press me so strongly that I cannot possibly refrain. Home sets out for London this day it woud be ridiculous for any body to think that applications in his favour are necessary where he is going, but I am extremely Anxious that his friends should  think as I do of the manner of directing their kindness. It is for this reason that I trouble you and endeavoured to press the same notion on him at parting. A Subsistance altogether precarious however honourable for the present or big with hopes was never to my mind. Every man of Worth shoud have a firm bottom on which he may stand however narrow it is & I may say of myself what I believe is not true of him that I never coud love a man intirely whilst I remain in absolute dependance on him or at least that I never coud act if I did love him so. Give me ground enough to stand on as my Predecessor Archimedes said & then I will show you what kind of Mechanic I am. I therefore wish most earnestly that every Other act of Friendship for Home was thought of no avail till he is fixed in some moderate reasonable or even little provisions sure for his Life & if his fortunes carry more let him pay at hazard for the rest as much as he will. You will forgive me for  Supposing for a moment that you can need to have views suggested to you on a like this. But I am anxious that not[hing] escape you & am perswaded that doing wh[at] call Justice to one of the most Amiable that ever existed since mankind had a being is of more consequence than half the Public measures you will pursue this Twelve months for more than that proportion of them will result finally in getting more Victuals for John Bull, for which I do not care one single farthing.

I most earnestly beg that you woud make Homes Friends beware of that most cruel Idea that if he is secure or independent for Life he will write no more. Make them beware of too great a fondness for their own Generosity to keep him in a situation that woud make them feel it every moment. None of these cautions may be needed & that will be a happy case; but if you are Satisfied of the truth of what I say I wish you woud not partys [. . . . .] concerned depart from it for [an inst]ant. I know that tho Home is the bold[est] in the World in interposing for Others he is shy for himself & may not see in so strong a light as he shoud do & I wish you woud add your Authority to what I said to him about it. Whilst he continues in his present Situation or any like it I shall always think of him with pain, as a man who is misplaced & who meets with injustice, if he shoud otherwise meet with all the marks of kindness that ever was bestowed on Man. I must repeat it again that half your Public measures will not be of this consequence.

Adresses are preparing from every corner & from what I can understand the Militia may be inserted in some places merely to pay Court.

What blessed days these are. I begin My Labours again in a few days. I am with The greatest respect

My Dear Sir 
your affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson