(Ž1~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~
.; 71

i.

/

INSTITUTES

0 F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

BY

ADAM FERGUSON, LL. D.
PnoFESSOR OF MORAL PFILOSOPHi IN WaE UsIVERSITY

OF EDINBUAC1.

A NEW EDITION,

ENLARGED.

BASIL;

Printed and fold by JAMES DECKER.
PARIS, fold by LEVRAULT FlElI.S, Quai Malaquai.

A 8 oo.

# CONTENTS.

CON T E N T S.

INTRODUCTION.

i. Of knowled'ge in general - Page 1
2. 0f the objels of study - - 2
3. Of the laws of nature - - 3
4. Of theory -
5. Of the ca/fes that have retarded the

pro.refs oJ science - - - 7
G;. Of the maxims of reason to be followed

in i;fLculation, as well as in common life 8

7. Of moral philofop/y - - 1
8. Of pneunmatics - - '
-

PART r.
The natural history of man.

C AP. I.

Itifiory of the species.

.1. General arranlgement - - 13
2. Of the Jorm, n

a ,d apec of man 14
3. Man's 'rcjidence, and mfannerl olfubfifi-

ence. - - -

4. 'arieties of the human irace 16
5. Period of human li/e - 17

6. Disposition of man to society - 8
7. Of population - - 19
8. Varieties of choice and pilit - 21
9. Arts and commerce ib.
o1. Disparity and rank - - 28
11. Of political eftablhinments - 30
12. Language and literature - - 33

C H A P. II.

Hiflory of the individual.

i. General arrangement - - 35
2. Of confioufefs - - - 36
3. Animalfenfe and perception - 37
4. Olfervation - - - 44
5. Memory - - ib.
6. Imagination - - -
7. AbftJraaion - - - 47
8. Reafonin - - 4-8
9. Foresight - - - 5
to. Propensity - - - ib.
11. Sentiment - - - 52
12. DeJire and avetfion - - 56
13. Volition - - - 57

PART II.
Theory of Mind.

CHAP. I.
General observations 59

C H A P. II.
Examples of physical Law colledled from the

history of mind - - 63

i. Laws of the undetlanding - ib.
2. Laws of the will - . 66

CHAP. III.

The foregoing laws applied, &c.

i. To Interejt - - - 70
2. Emulation - - - 72
3. Pride - - - 73
i. Vanity - - - 75
5. Probity - - - 76
6. Moral approbation in general - 77
7. The objec of moral approbation 80
8. The principle of moral approbation ib.

,p~~~~~

C H A P. IV.
Of the nature and future profpecis of the

human foul.

I. Of the immateriality of the foul 84
2. Of the immortality of the foul 8i

P ART III.
Of the .knowledge of God.

CH A P. I.

Of the being of God.

1. Of the univefalisy of this bclief l7
2. Of the foundations of thlis belief' 8

C 11 A P. II.

Of the attributes of God.

1. Of these attributes in gencral - ;)
2. Of the unity of God - - iib.
3. Of povwer - -
4. Of wfdom - - - - ib.
5. 01 goodness - - - - /,
6. Of juifice - - - !8

C A P. I1.
Of a future slate - - 9

PART IV.
Of Moral Laws, and their most general

applications.

CHAP. I.
Definitions - - - 0

C H A P. II.

Of good and evil in general.

I. General application of Ihefe terms 104
2. Of enjoyments and sufferings - ib.
3. Of pe,;fecions anl defJes - 1o5
,l. (/'profperily, and adveljity - ib.
5. Of/lhe que/lionl relating to thef Juplreme

or sole good - - - 6
(. Of the conf!llerations fom zwhich an

iinlalte may be made of whal is mo]i
valuable in human life - - 1 X

C H A P. III.
Of the fii'{ principle or law of morality, &c.

s. Of thc fiji principle of morality 12)

2. Application to Ihe mind 1- -
3. Of the ldei,'ees of happiness, and the

naCual ataliinienls of men - 125)
4. Of opinions pr)'OLduTcit of Smlf ry), o'

!hn! h1ider inprr ov(enem t - 1'-t

5. Of opinions, or circuinmances, pro-

duscive of happiness, or that lead to
improvement - - - 13o

6. Application to external acions 131
7. Diversity of opinions concerning the

moralily of external acions - 132

8. Caiies of this di'er/ity - - 133
9. Diference o/ the cafe - - 34
io. Difference of choice - - 135
11. Dfference of interpretation - 136
12. Fundamental laws of external acion 138
13. Different fanclions under which exter-

nal aceions are req;'ired, etc. - 139
14. Parties to whoil !ivs apply - 140

PART V.
Of Jiuri'prudence.

C H A P. I.
The foundations of compulsory law 143

C H A P. II.
The rights of men in general - 144

C H x P. III.
Laws of defence in general - - 145

C HA P. IV.

Difference of rights.

1. General divifon - - 146
2. Ri)hts peifonal - - ib.
3. Rights real - - 147
4. Original ri'hts - - ib.
5. Adveniltious rights - - 148

C A P. V.
Laws of acquisition in general - 149

C HA P. VI.
Law of occupancy - - 150

C 1i A P. VII.
Laws of acqnifition by labor - 15

C H A P. VIII.

Law of acquilition by contrad.
i. The oblirations of contracl - 153
2. Laws of conlra 7 in general - 154
3. Contraas of different denominations 156
4. The exceplions to contrai6s in general ib.
5. Exceplions peculiar to conditional and

reciprocal conlradls - - 160

C H A P. IX.
Law of acquisition by forfeiture - 162

C H A P. X.
Of the law of acquisition as applicable to

particular rights.

1. Of po1ffeffio - - - 63
2. Of propey - - - ib.
3. Of command or service - - 16iG

C H A P. XI.

Of the law of defence.

i. Of lte means of defence in general 167
2. The cafe of paries firallfers to each

other - - - - 168

3. Cafe of fellow-cili'ens - - 169
4. Cafe of nations - - 17
5. Concluion of juriflrudlence - 173

PART VI.
Of Casuistry.

C HA P. I.
Of the fanclion of duty in general 175

C H A P. II.
Of the fanclion of' religion - - 77

C A P. III.
Of the fan&ions of public repute 179

C A P. IV.
Of the fanetions of conscience - 18

CHAP. V.

Of the tendency of virtue in external a&ions.

1. Of the dfferent branches of virtue 182
2. Duties referred to probity - 184
3. Duties referred to prudence - 189
4. Duties referred to temperance - 191
5. Duties referred to fortitude - 193
6. blys of cafJi/iy - -
7. Of merit and demerit - 195

PART VII.
Of Politics.

C HAP. I.
Introduio - 197

C AP. II.

Of public ceconomy.

1. Of national resources in general 199
2. Of popluloufnes - 200
3. Of riches - - - 202
4. Of revenue - 209

C H A P. III.

Of political law.

i. Of the objcJ of political law - 213
2. Of the fjif principle of the political

law of nature - - - 214

3. Of-the people - - - - 215
4. Of thefafety of the people in general ib.
5. Of the political happiness of the people 219
6. Of the preferable inItilution or form

of government - - - - 220

7. Of theJfit difribution of trust and office 229
8. ConcluJion. 2
- 38

# INTRODUCTION.

INSTITUTES

F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

INTRODUCTIO N.

SECTION I.

Of Kinovwled.oe in general

A LL knowledge is either that of particular
fadts, or that of general rules.

The knowledge of faRs is prior to that of

rules; and is the firli requisite in the pratice
of arts, and in the conduct of affairs.

A general rule is the expreflion of what is

common, or is required to be common, in a
number of particular cafes.

General rules are the result of obferva-

tion, or will; and consequently are derived
from mind.

Baicn's novum organini.

1

PracRice, or conduc of any fort, though

regulated by general rules, has a continual
reference to particulars.

In speculation, we endeavour to efiablilh
general rules.

In pracice, we fiudy particular cafes, or
apply general rules to regulate our conduct.

SEC T. II.

Of the Objeós of Study.
'THESE are, History, Science, and Art.

History is the knowledge of particulars in
detail.

Science is the knowledge of general rules,
and their applications.

Art is the application of knowledge to
practice.

Any general rule, expressing what is fan,
or what is right, is termed a law of nature.

A general rule, when applied to explain

or regulate particulars, is termed a principle;
and explanations or injunctions from principle,
are termed theory or fJftem. The particulars
to be explained are termed phenomena.

Method in science is of two kinds; ana-
lytic, and synthetic.

Analytic method, is that by which we pro-

ceed from observation offad, or right, in par-
ticu]ar cafes, to eliablifi general rules.

Synthetic method, is that by which we

proceed from general rules to their particular
applications.

The first is the method of investigation.
The second of communication, or of the
enlargement of science.

Argument is of two kinds:
A priore, and a pofieriore.
By an argument a priore the fad is proved
from the law.

By an argument a pofieriore, the law is
proved from the fat.

S E c T. LII.

Of the laws of Nature.

M OST fubjeds in nature may be confidered
under two afpeds.

i. In refpe6 to the fad, or to their adual
state.

2. In refped to the excellence of which
they are susceptible.

Any general expression of the fad, or of

the excellence required, may be termed, a
Law of Nature.

The laws of nature are either physical or
moral.

A physical law is the general expreffion,of
a sac, uniform to a certain extent, in nafure.

A moral law is a general expreflion of the

excellence required in any fubjeEl; more par-
ticularly, of the rectitude required in human
affairs.

Pllrfical laws slate what is uniform, more
efpccially in the operations of nature.

In every operation, men are disposed to
apprehend an operating power or cause.

Causes are of two kinds:
Efficient, and final.
The efficient cause, is the energy or power
producing an effcl.

Although the nature of this energy is not

knowvn in any cafe whatever, yet in every
operation we confider that as the cause which
precedes or attends the operation, and to
which the eff'e is always proportional.

The final cause, is the end or purpose for
which an effe(A is produced.

In fuppoling final causes, we suppose the
exifience of mind.

Physical science is the knowledge and ap-

plication ofplyfical laws, orof efficient causes,
to explain and account for appearances.

Moral science is the knowledge of what is

right and proper in the adionis and characlers
ol men.

A physical law exists so far only as it is
the fad.

A moral law exifis in being obligatory.
The fubjeds from which physical laws are

collected, may be classed under four principal
heads:

Mechanism, vegetation, animal life, and
intelligence.

It has not hitherto been made appear,

although fornetimes attempted, that there
operations can be comprehended under the
fame physical laws.

The phenomena of vegetation are not com-

prehended under any known law of mecha-
nifm, much less those of animal lile or in-
telligence.

The fubjeds of moral science are, any mat-

ters of choice, together with the nature and
a6tions of free and voluntary agents.

The immediate use of physical laws, is
theory.

The immediate uses of moral law, are
choice, pradtice, and condut.

SECT. IV.

Of Theory.
PHYSICAL science conifts in theory.

Theory consists in referringparticular opera-

tions to the principles, or general laws, under
which they are comprehended; or in referring
particular effeds to the causes from which they
proceed.

To investigate or to point out any general

rule or law of nature, in which any parti-
cular fad is comprehended, is to account for
that fad.

Thus Sir Isaac Newton accounted for the

planetary revolutions, by showing that they
were comprehended in the laws of motion and
gravitation.

To pretend to explain phenomena, by

showing that they may be comprehended in a
supposition or hypothesis, or by applying to
them metaphorically, the language proper to
any other subjed, is illusory in science.

Thus the vortex of Descartes, being a mere

supposition, could not explain the planetary mo-
tions; and the terms, idea, image, or pidure

of things, being terms merely metaphorical,
cannot explain human knowledge or thought.

All phenomena, though not comprehended

under any known law, are proper materials
of natural history.

All fads that cannot be explained by any

rule previously known, or better known than
the ia&s themselves, may be termed ultimate
fals.

It is evident, that all theory must reft on
ultimate fads.

To require explanation or proof a priore

for every fad, were to suppose that human
knowledge requires an infinite series; which
is impolfible.

S E C T. V.
Causes that have retarded the progress of

Science.
i. T HE neceflhry avocations of human life.

2. The love of system, and impatience of
delay, in the study of particulars.

3. Emulation of speculative men, and de-
fire to supplant each other as founders of fe.s.

4. Prejudice, national or personal.

5. The difficulty of penetrating appearan-

ces, to dilcover what operations are like,
what different.

6. Affectation of acuteness, or novelty in
conteftijig the evidence of ultimate facts.

7. Vain delire of' accounting for ultimate
fadts.

The principal errors of human reason are,

on the one hand, a rash assent, without pro-
per evidence, and, on the other, indifcrimi-
nate fcepticifn, or the derpair of knowledge.

SE C T. VI.
Maxims of Renafon, to be followed in fpecu-

lation, as well as in common life.

E VERY inquiry proceeds upon a supposition
that foine ineafure of knowledge is attainable
in the libje( to which the inquiry refers. If
we despair of knowledge, we ihall cease to
inquire.

The evidence of reality is various and un-

equal in different infiances; but, in the uni-
verse, is sufficient to open our view Sin ie
order of Nature, and, in matters of import-
ance to human life, is sufficient to decide our
condua.

All evidence may be referred to four titles,

Consciousness, Perception, Teliimony, and
Inference.

1. It is the firfi maxim of reason, that no-

thing is to be admitted without that degree of
evidence with which it hlould be attended, if
true, and that, with this degree of evidence,
nothing is to be rejected.

2. That nothing be assigned as a law of
nature, until it be known as a fat in nature.

In general, it is safer to diredl our early

liudies to the invefiigation of the laws o na-
ture, than to the aflignrnent of causes. In the
latter, we are more apt to acquiefcein partial
representations, hypotheses, or unconsidered
appearances.

3. That fads, uniform as far as our know-

ledge of the subjed extends, be deemed uni-
versal laws of nature refpeding such subjed.

4. That partial laws be not extended beyond

the conditions and limitations under which
they are known to take place.

5. That like phenomena be referred to the
fame laws.

6. That no proof or explanation be required
of ultimate fads.

S E T. VI.

Of Moral Philosophy.

A LTHOUGH Moral Philosophy is not the
knowledge of what is, but rather of what
ought lo be; yet, before we can ascertain rules
of morality fitted to any particular nature, the
fad relating to that nature lhould be known.

Before we can ascertain rules of morality

for mankind, the history of man's nature, his
dispositions, his specific enjoyments and susser-
ings, his condition and future profpeds, should
be known.

From a proper colledion of such materials,

we ihould be able to ascertain what is best for
mankind, and to assign to every particular in
human life its comparative value, and real
place in the estimate of human affairs.

This, however, is not to be done without

a fair enumeration of the articles which men
are disposed to think of importance.

Pneumatics, therefore, or the physical

science of mind, so far as it is to be collected
from human nature, is the foundation of moral
philosophy.

S E C T. VIII.

Of Pneumatics.
PNEUMATICS treat physically of mind or spirit.

This science consists of two parts.
The sirs treats of man; the second, of God.
That part which treats of man, may contain

the hiliory of man's nature, and an explana-
tion or theory of the principal phenomena of
human life.

That which treats of God, contains the

proofs of his existence, attributes, and go-
vernment.

As the observation of particulars in every

fubje&, ought to precede the attempt to eftab-
lifh general rules, the history of man's nature
is the foundation of every science relating
to him.

This history consists of fads, of which some

occur on a general view of the species; others
occur to the individual, in recollecting what
passes in his own mind.

The first may be termed, the hifiory of

the lfpecies; the second, that of the indi-
vidual.

In the theory of human nature are solved

questions relating to the charalcers of men, to
the nature and future profpeds of the hu-
man foul.
i

# PART I. THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MAN (2).

# CHAP. I. HISTORY OF THE SPECIES.

## SECT. I. General arrangement.

INSTITUTES

OF
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART I.
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MAN 2

C H A P. 1.
HISTORY OF THE SPECIES.

SE C T. I.

General arrangrement.

T HE history of the human species contains
the following articles:

1. The form and afpe& of man.
2. His residence, and manner of subsistence.
3. The varielies of his race.
4. The period of his life.
5. His disposition to society.
' See Buffon's Natural Hiliory.

## SECT. II. Of the form and aspect of Man.

6. Population, or the generations and num-
bers of mankind.

7. Varieties of choice and pursuit.
8. Arts and commerce.
9. Disparities of rank and estimation.
lo. Political establishments.
1i. Language and literature.

SEC T. II.

Of the form and aspec7 of Man.

T H human form is eret, furnilhed with
articulations and muscles fitted to retain this
posture, and to move it with ease and safety.

The hand and the arm of man is an inftru-

ment and a weapon, not a prop or support
to his body.

His form and posture are well fitted to ob-

servation, to the use of reason, and to the
pradtice of arts.

His afpelt is exprefflve of his thoughts,

sentiments, and intentions. It is calm or agi-
tated; mildorfierce; languidorardent; doubt-
ful or decided; timid or intrepid.

His natural expressions confill of adions, gef-
tures, smiles, frowns, tears, looks, together

## SECT. III. Man's residence, and manner of subsistence.

with changes of color; and exhibit, on the
whole, a variety, and a grace, which either
do not take place, or are not observed in other
animals.

He is naked and unarmed; but, by his
invention, qualified to supply these defeds.

The final cause appears to be, that his
talent for invention ihould be employed.

SE C T. III.

Man's residence, and manner offubfJitence.

OTHER animals have their ranges on the
earth, beyond which they do not willingly
firay, or beyond which they are not qualified
to subsist.

Some subsist only in the hot climates, others

in the cold or the temperate; but man relidcs
equally in every climate, and can fubfill on
great varieties of food, both animal and
vegetable.

He either accommodates himself to the in-

conveniencies of his situation, or learns to
surmount them.

## SECT. IV. Varities of the human race.

SECT. IV.

Varitics of the human race.

UNDER the general form and aspet of man-
krind, there are considerable varieties of the race.

Men being dispersed over the face of the

earth, receive the influences of climate, fitua-
tion, and foil.

The animal and rational temperament, is

comparatively phlegmatic and dull in cold
climates; is more ardent and quick in warm
climates; but has always possessed a diftin-
guifhed superiority in the temperate.

Apart from these diliindions, the diverfi-

ties of race are nmarkcd by a difference of fia-
ture, features, and complexion.

Mankind may be referred to fix different
races.

The European, theSamocide, the Tartar,
the Hindoo, the VNeo ro, and the American3.

3 Buffon of the varieties of the human race.

SECT.

## SECT. V. Period of human life.

SE C T. V.

Period of human life.

EVERY species of animal is preserved by fuc-
cession.

The death of one generation is as much a

part in the order of nature, as the birth and
succession of another.

In the human species, according to foiiie

observations, half the numbers that are born
die before the seventeenth, the seventh,' or
even the third year of their age is expired.

Long life 4, in all climates, consists of be-
tween seventy and a hundred years.

It appears from the annual register of'deaths

where the numbers of people are known, that
about one in thirty dies each year:

That, of twenty-feven or twehty-eight,
one is born:

That about a fourth of the whole number

are'males between-eighteen and fifty-fix, able
to carry arms.

4 Buffoli's Natural HiRflry.- Halley's Tables. Low-

thorp's Abridgment of the Philosophical Tr4nlacaioas,
vol. 3. p. 669.

20 ..|
3

## SECT. VI. Disposition of Man to society (5).

S E C T. VI.

Disposition of Man to fociely ".

A NIMALS have been difiinguifhed into two
clafes; the solitary, and the social.

Animals of prey, for the most part, are
solitary.

Other animals are, for the most part,
associating.

The afrociating may be farther subdivided
into two kinds:

i. Those which aflemble in flocks or herds,
merely for company or safety:

2. Those who unite their labors for some

common purpose, and difiribute the burdens
of the community according to some rule of
inftin& or of reason.

The latter are afrociating and political.

Man, though an animal of prey, and, from
neceflity or sport, addiced to hunting or war,
is, nevertheless, in the highest degree, afio-
ciating and political.

Societies may be referred to four general

classes. Families, companies, nations, and
empires.

5 Essay on the History of Civil Society, part 1. fed. 3:

## SECT. VII. Of Population (7).

Families arc united by affedion;: companies

by the desire of society; nations by the desire
of security; and empires by force.

Men, by their confederacy, as well as by

their artifice, are enabled to subdue every
other species of animal, to subsist by their
spoils, and to employ the firength of other
animals, though superior to their own.

Separate societies are, for the most part,
rivals or enemies 6.

S C T. VII.

Of Population '.

M EN exist in greater numbers than any other
species of the larger animals. .,,

In some cafes they are found to increase.
in others to decrease in their. numbers; :

The quick or flow inreafe of animai/ a

general, depends on the physical laws of pro-
pagation, on the security, and, the means of
subsistence the species enjoys.

6 ETay on the History of Civil;Society, parit1. fest 4.

7 Ibid. part 5. fe&. 4. t: Vallace's Numbers of Man--
kind. Hume's Populousness of ancient natiops.

The first relate to the age at which the parent

becomes prolific; to the time that elaples in
pregnancy; to the frequency of breeding; to
the numbers of each brood; and to the period
during which the parent continues prolific.

Thelaws of propagation determine the num-

bers that may spring iiom any ingle pair; and the
numbers of generations that may fubfifi together.

These laws, in. every species of animals,

are, in favorable circumliances, fuflicient to
its increase.

len, in every secure situation, people up

to their resources; and ihe aid of government
is required, not to improve on the laws of
propagation, but'tb b'eIiol security and plenty.

Animals of prey have most difficulty in pro-
enrin;g.their food.

Animals which are made a prey are least
Securie.

The' feiiritv and subsistence of men are mofi

impaired -by theibr'-ori mutual hostilities and
oppressions.

The laws' of propagation, as well as the

means of subsistence, are' supposed most favor-
able to population in the warmer climates. To
this it is imputed .iat'fnations in those cliiates
are populous, even: under great defets of
government,

## SECT. VIII. Varieties of choice and pursuit.

## SECT. IX. Arts and Commerce (8).

SE C T. VIII.

Varieties of choice and pirfuit.

M EN have not, like the other animals, a
fixed and determinate choice of external objeds
and pursuits.

Nations are frequently, by the difference

of their manners and customs, mutual objects
of wonder and censure, of contempt and
av-rfion.

Even of two men placed in the fame or like

circumstances, one acquiesces, or is pleased;
the other complains.

They differ in refpet to the means which

they employ for the attainment of the fame,
or of similar ends.

SE C T. IX.

Arts and Commerce .

T HE materials which men are concerned to
provide may be referred to five general titles,
the means of afely, fJtbJiftence, accomnmoda-
tion, and ornanmtnt.

8 Harris on Coins,

These considerations lead to the practice of

many arts, which are more or less successful
in proportion as they are multiplied, separated,
and complete.

They also suggest the advantages of property
and wealth. '

The consideration of safety leads to the
invention of arms, and places of retreat.

The earlieR weapons appear to have been

the club, the fling, and the bow: To these
succeeded, in process of time, the spear and
the sword, joined to the buckler or shield;

Fire-arms, cannon, and then mulketry.
The desire of retreats has given rife to the
art of fortification.

The art of wvar, in every age, must be

accommodated to the species of arms, engines,
and methods of fortification in use.

The arts which men pracife for fubfiflence
are, filling, hunting, patfurage, and agriculture.

Nations that know least of the means of

subsistence, not finding enough in the fponta-
neous growth of the earth, have recourse to
hlnting and filling.

In the result of these arts, the hunting-

ground, the lake, the river, or the bay, may
be appropriated to the society; but the game
is seldom appropriated to the individual.

Nations that have observed the method

and the advantage of breeding herds, betake
themselves to palturage.

They, at firl, generally migrate, or wander
with their herds.

The individual acquires an immediate pro-
perty in cattle, but not in land.

Nations that are acquainted with the use of

herbs, fruits, and grain, which do not grow
spontaneously, or do not grow in sufficient
quantities, betake themselves to agriculture.

The culture of land, to a certain degree,

m:i' precede property , as it did among the
ancient Germans 9, and among the nations of
North America.

Agriculture , where the obje(S is the tem-

porary produce of land, is compatible with
migration: Where the objet is the improve-
ment of foil, and perpetual fertility, agricul-
ture requires settlement, and the property
of land.

As the property of land excites to inven-

tion in agriculture, it likewise excites to in-
vention in other arts.

9 Vide Cufar, lib. 4. cap. i.; and lib. 6. cap. 22±
Charlevoix's Hittory of Canada,

They who have no land, betake themselves

to manufacture, that they may have wherewith
to buy the produce of land.

By manufacture, men are furnifled with
the means of accommodation and ornament.

The means of accommodation are, clothes,
hloufes, furniture, utenlils, equipage.

Men, in different ages, are unequally fur-

niflied with these articles; they even sublist
without them; but, in the ruder climates,
under such inconveniencies, as diminish the
numbers of the species, or prevent their
increase.

The means of decoration are fucl things

as please the fancy, without being necessary
or ufefil.

Men, in all ages, are fond of decoration;

they combine ornament with the means of
fubfiflence and accommodation; but they may
fubfifi, and enjoy every conveniency, without
regard to ornament.

Ornaments are principally made of rare
materials; as gems, precious metals, &c.

Riches consist in the abundance of things

that conduce to safety, subsistence, accommo-
dation, and ornament.

Riches are the result of arts and industry.

Whatever ingenuity men exert in the prac-

tice of arts, their success will depend on a
proper distribution of their employments, and
on their making a separate business of each.

In making this difiribution, the parties trust

that they may be able to exchange what they
have to spare for what they want.

The progress of arts, as well as the carual

distribution of commodities, depending on
situation, climate, and foil, render commerce
expedient, or even necessary.

Commerce, in the finplefi form, confifis

of barter, without any flandard of valuation,
or medium of exchange: Each party gives
what he has to spare of one kind, for what
he wants of another.

To extend trade, money, communication,
and the interposition o merchants, are required.

The first money, or medium of exchange,

was generally some fiaple commodity, as corn,
cattle, &c.

These were things of uncertain value, of

inconvenient bulk, perishing or expensive in
the keeping, and not eatily divided, without
making a change of value.

To avoid these several inconveniencies,

the precious metals have been admitted in
every trading nation as the medium of exchange.

They are, for the greater conveniency,
employed in the form of coin.

The pound, or other ascertained weight or

quantity of the precious metals, was employed
as the standard of valuation.

The coin of all nations has undergone

considerable changes, both in refpecd to
fineness and weight.

The present tiandard for silver in England
is 11 oz. 2 dw. fine, to 18 dw. allay.

For gold, 22 carats fine, to 2 carats allay.
The pound of fiandard silver is cut into
62 Ihillings.

That of gold, into 112- guineas.
The pound of silver was originally cut into

20 shillings: lence 20 ifhllings are fiill the
nominal pound in money.

In the reign of Edward VI. the fiandard of

silver was greatly debased, and the coin greatly
diminilhed. The fiandard confifled of three
parts of fine to nine of allay; and the pound
of this debated metal was cut into 72 hillings.

The fiandard and weight of the coin have,
since the reign of Elizabeth, remained the fame.

Operations on the coin embarrass trade,

by perplexing tranfadions, and by alarming
the interest of debtors and creditors.

If, in debasing coin, the interest of the
creditor is not guarded, he mufi be defrauded.

In raising the value of the coin, the debtor
would be defrauded.

Mofi operations on coin have been of the
former kind.

The use of coin, and adtual payments in

money, are not necelfary in every commercial
tranfadlion.

In the transfer of great funls, even the

precious metals would be cumberfone and
inconvenient.

To avoid this inconvenience, the practice
of circulating bills has been adopted.

This pradtice is founded in credit, and
tends to extend it.

Commerce employs a number of separate

profeflions; the manufadcurer, the factor, the
carrier, the merchant, tile retailer.

The price of commlodities in trade is as
their scarcity combined with their demand.

Articles, in the production of which, labor

time, and skill, are required, coninuic to
multiply, while the price is funlicient to mnain-
tain the laborer during the time he is cmll-
ployed, to reimburse his apprenticcflip, and
other expenses, and to furniih an adequate
ewvard.

## SECT. X. Disparity and Rank.

When the price falls below this measure,

the manufa6ture is discontinued, until the
scarcity brings up the price.

SE C T. X.

Dfparity and Rank.

M EN are diverfided, in refpecl to their per-
fonal qualities and conditions.

The diftintioa o' personal qualities arises

from unequal firength and capacity, unequal
knowledge, resolution, and courage, unlike
dispositions of benevolence or malice.

There differences conflitute either relations

of dependence and power, or comparative
degrees of estimation.

The firong, the knowing, the brave, are

powerful; the weak, the ignorant, the fear-
ful, are dependent.

The benevolent are beloved; the malicious
are detefied.

Theknowing, the generous, andthe brave,

are elieemed; the ignorant, the ungencrous,
and the cowardly, are contemned: and all the
qualities of human nature being referred to

the predicaments of excellence and defect, one
man is held to be more, another lcfs worthy.

Men differ in their predilection of qualities
confidered as the constituents of excellence.

They prefer qualities the molt necessary inl

their own lituations, and the most eminent in
their own way.

In dangerous situations, and in warlike
ages, they chiefly admire valor.

In learned societies, they admire know-
ledge and ingenuity.

In trading nations, they admire indufiry,
punctuality, and fair dealing.

But there being some circumfiances com-

mon in the situation and difpolition of all
mankind, such as, their being united in so-
ciety, and concerned in what relates to their
fellow-creatures; men universally admire qua-
lities which confiitnte or procure the good of
mankind; as,. wifdorm, jufice, courage, and
temperance.

Such qualities are. generally comprehended
under the title of Virtue;

Opposite qualities, under the title of Vi/ce.
The external conditions of men are foine-

times confounded with personal qualities, and
appear to have the fame effects.

## SECT. XI. Of Political Establishments (10).

The rich are powerful, the poor are de-
pendent.

Riches and birth, even equipage and dress,

are admired. The reverse of these exposes to
contempt or negle(t.

Disparities are found in every slate of so-

ciety; they are greateli where riches, power,
and education, are most unequally distributed.

S E C T. XI.

Of Political Eftablilmnenzts o.

W HEnE men afociate from affedlion and
choice, and with little sense of private or of
separate interest, they have been known to
subsist without rule or political eftablithment.

Even where they associate from a sense of

expediency or necessity, they follow, without
rule, the fuggeflion of every particular occasion.

But in maintaining an union which has

arisen from casual coalitions, or force, focie-
ties have been obliged to adopt, and to submit
to, government.

'1 L'Efprit des Loix, liv. 2. Essay on the History o-
Civil Society, part i. fed. 10. Ibid, part 5. seA. 2,

Where the coalition was casual, or forced,

individuals felt separate interefis, and wilied.
for rules to adjult their pretensions.

Some suffered themselves to be governed,

and others pretended to government, on the
footing of casual dependency and superiority.

The abuses of casual subordination have
led men to think of positive intiitutions.

Positive intlitutions have confirmed, alter-

ed, or restrained, the powers which arise
from casual subordination.

All the political inflitutions of men may be
reduced to two general clafres:

The simple, and the mixed.
Under the finple infltitutions, the supreme

power is committed to a single person, or to a
single assembly or body of men.

In mixed institutions, the supreme autho-

rity is exercised by a plurality of collateral
powers.

Simple institutions are, democracy, aritio-
cracy, monarchy, and defpotifn.

Democracy is the supreme power of the
collective body.

This institution is calculated to correct, or

to remove, the effects of adventitious depend-
ency and subordination, and to reconcile
equality with order.

Aritfocracy is the supreme power of a par-
ticular rank or class of men.

This class of men has, in some cafes, been
elective; in others, hereditary.

The institution itself, though calculated to

confirm the;fuperiority of one rank,. and the
dependence of the other,, may, notwithftand-
ing, preserve equality among the members of
each class.

Monarchy is the supreme power of a tingle

person, who, placed at the head of many sub-
ordinate dignities, has an authority defined
by laws.

This infiitution is calculated to confirm
adventitious dependency and subordination.

Extensive and perpetual military arrange-
ments have led to monarchical subordination.

Despotism. is the supreme power of a single

person, assumed and maintained by force, on
tlle ruin of every other pretension to rank.

Despotism has arisen from conquest, or
military usurpation.

Mixed inflitutions are, either mixed re-
publics, or mixed monarchies.

In mixed republics, the supreme power has

been ihared betwixt the colledtive body, and
a senate or convention of nobles.

In

## SECT. XII. Language and Literature.

In mixed monarchies, the supreme power

has been flared betwixt a king and nobles, or
betwixt a king, nobles, and people.

S E CT. XII.

Language and Literature.

LANGUAGE, in the most general sense, com-
prehends all the external signs of thought,
sentiment, or will.

Signs are, either original, or conven-
tional ".

Original signs are such as !men are led by
infiin&l to employ, and to interpret.'

Such are, tones of the voice, change of
features, andgeftures.

Conventional signs are such as mei have
agreed upon, or rendered customary.

Conventional signs may be ranged under
the three following heads. .

1. Mute signs. :.
2. Speech.
3. Written characters.
Where men are refirained from the use of

speech, or are defecive in the organs of
hearing, or of pronunciation, they have re-
course to mutefigns, and thereby attain, in a
considerable degree, the purposes of language.

I See Reid's Inquiry into the huian. mind.

.

Nations employ unequal measures of acion,
and of mute signs, together with speech.

Speech is universal to mankind, and pecu-
liar to the human species.

Every separate nation, or tribe, for the

most part, has had a separate language, or
different dialecE.

The theory of speech, whether universal

or particular, is the science of grammar ".
- Written; characters are the signs of words,
or of articulate founds.

They are either verbal', or alphabetical.
Verbal. characers are the signs of entire
words.

Alphabetical characters the signs of elemen-

tary founds; or modulations; which being
combined.,; constitute words.

Writing preserves the memory of-palt

tranfaEtions, of observation, and experience;
It preserves literary producions, and tends to
improve and to extend the use of speech.

Literary producdions may be referred to three
principal titles, Hitory, Poetry, and Science.

The firli and third treat of realities.
Thefecond extends to invention or filion.
Men :have excelled in poetry, while: they
were yet rude in history or science.

1: See Harris's Hermes

# CHAP II. HISTORY OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

## SECT. I. General Arrangement.

C H A P II.
HISTORY OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

SECT. I.

General Arrangement.

T HE hifiory of the individual contains the
following articles.

1. Consciousness.
2. Animal sense and perception.
3. Observation.
4. Memory.
5. Imagination.
,6. Abfiradlion.
7. Reasoning.
8. Foresight. :.:
9. Propensity.
Io. Sentiment.
i1. Desire.
12. Volition.
These articles may be ranged under the

denominations of powers, dilpofitions, and
habits.

The first eight articles are commonly refer-

red to the understanding; the remainder to
the will.

## SECT. II. Of Consciousness.

Habit is incident to all living natures, and

has something analogous even in the inanimate
system of things.

SEC T. II.

Of ConfcioufJefs.

TIHE mind is conscious of itself, as aaing
or suffering, in all its operations and feelings.

It is conscious of the laws of thought or

?eafon, which are termed the metaphyJical
or geometrical axioms.

These axioms are the conditions on which

all thought proceeds, and which need not be
expressed, but for the fake of order or method.

## SECT. III. Animal Sense and Perception (13).

SEC T. III.

Aninmal Sense and Perception 's

SENSATION is obtained by means of corporeal
organs; and is, for the most part, attended by
an original or acquired perception of some
external cause of the sensation, or objec of
the perception.

The organs of sense are commonly reduced
to five heads:

Touch, Taste, Smell, Hearing, and Seeing.

To c H.

The whole animal frame is in some degree
an organ of touch.

The sensations of touch, or feeling, are
either pleasant, painful, or indifferent.

The interior or subcutaneous parts are

sensible only to the pains which arise from
hurts or disorders.

The final cause appears to be, that, in their

ordinary and found state, they fliould require
no attention; but, in cafe of disorders, that
they thould give the alarm.

'3 See Reid's Inquiry into the human mid.e
13 See Reid's Inquiry iuto the human mind.

On the exterior surface of the body, harm-

less sensations are indifferent; but whatever
hurts is painful.

Indifferent sensations are the indications of
the mere contat of innocent bodies.

Painful sensations are indications of hurts
or wounds.

Pleasant sensations are the sign of relief

from what hurts or wounds; as of moderate
warmth succeeding to great cold, or the converse.

Many indifferent sensations in particular

parts of the body, as in the hands, the tongue,
&c. are indications of the intimate proper-
ties, and nice difiinhtions of bodies; as of their
figure, polish, hardness, foltnefs, as well
as comparative heat or cold.

The perceptions of this sense are, in some
infiances, original; in others acquired.

The figure, hardness, softness, heat, and
cold of bodies, are matter of original perception.

Many of their salutary or pernicious quali-

ties are learned by experience, and are matter
of acquired perception.

In some cafes we perceive the nature, as

well as the .existence of qualities; as of figure,
hardness, softness.

In others, we perceive the exifience of the
quality, but not its nature; as of heat and cold.

The firfi have been termed primary, the
other secondary qualities of bodies.

The sensations by means of which we per-

ceive primary qualities, are, for the molt part,
indifferent, and have no name.

The sensations by which we perceive fe-

condary qualities are, for the most part, either
pleasant or painful; are confidered apart from
the perception they bring; and frequently
usurp the name of the quality perceived, so as
to occasion a considerable ambiguity in language.
Thus heat or cold, which are the names of
certain unknown properties in bodies, a:-'
sometimes understood of animal fenfalion or
feeling

The animal sensation can, in no cafe, have

any resemblance to the subjec or quality per-
ceived.

Its informations, therefore, are not like

that we receive from the infpedion of a picure
or image; but like that we receive by means
of language, or other arbitrary signs.

In original perception, the lign is affixed
by nature, and the interpretation inftintive.

Our sensations are not fitted to furnish us

with the means of invefiigation, and of proof,
but with perceptions which precede all invef-
Ligation or proof.

The sceptic, who affels to disbelieve the

informations offense, has the fame perception
with the dogmatist, who professes to believe.

T A S T E.

The organ of taste is placed in the tongue
and palate.

Its sensations are, for the most part, either
agreeable or disagreeable.

The qualities of bodies perceived by it are
secondary, as already explained 1.

The sensations of taste become, after some

experience, the indications or signs of what is
pernicious or salutary in food, &c.

But the fame subjed is frequently known

by sensations, which differ greatly in refpe&
to pleasure or pain.

The sensation is sometimes pleasant, at

other times painful or indifferent, while the
fame obje& is hiill perceived.

Thus, under the influence of appetite, the

taste of food is pleasant; when the appetite is
cloyed, the taste is disgusting or painful; but
the fame species of food is still perceived.

The taste is likewise oft-times indifferent,
or is not, in any considerable degree, either

'4 See p. 59.

pleasant or painful; yet in all those cafes the
objea is perceived, and its qualities nicely
diftinguiflied.

S A E L L.

The organ of smell is placed within the

nostrils, near to the passage of the air in ref-
piration.

There is a greater analogy between the fen-

fations of smell and tafie, than between those
of any other two of our senses.

They agree in giving a perception of fe-

condary qualities; in enabling us, by the help
of experience, to distinguish external fibjedis,
and to recognise the fame fubjecl by the media
of sensations that vary from pleasant to painful
or indifferent.

H E A R I N S.

The organ of hearing is placed in the in-
terior part of the ear.

The sensations of found, whether single or

multiplied, and variously combined, are either
pleasant, painful or indifferent.

The quality perceived is secondary, found,
by1 investigation, to be pulses of the air,

occasioned by explosions, or by the tremors
of tense and elastic matter of any fort.

Sounds are diversified by their intensity and
musical tone.

Tones being a natural expreflion of senti-

ment, are, by certain combinations, easily
rendered pathetic.

Different founds are, by experience, learned

to be the signs or indications of different
fubjets, and of different movements.

S I G H T.

The organ of fight is placed in the eye.
Its sensations are sometimes pleasant or
painful, but, for the most part, indifferent.

Of the qualities perceived by means of these
sensations, fonme are primary, others secondary.

The original perception obtained by fight,

is that of the visible appearance of things ex-
ternal. This appearance includes futperficial
extension and figure, apparent magnitude^
color, illumination, and slade.

The acquired perception is that of the real
dimensions, figures, and distances of bodies.

In the use of this organ, there is a ferles
of signs and interpretations.

i. The visible appearance is perceived by
means of light.

2. Objects are perceived by the interven-
tion of this appearance.

The fame obje& is perceived under great
varieties in the visible appearance.

The solid dimensions of bodies are under-

flood from the disposition of light and shade
on the visible surface.

The difiances of known bodies are inferred
from their apparent magnitude and diftincdnefs.

The real magnitudes of bodies at a known

difiance, are inferred from their apparent
magnitudes.

This discernment of objects from their

visible appearance, is the result ofobfervation.
Where we have no meafire of the diflance of
bodies, we cannot, from their apparent magni-
tude, ascertain their real magnitude; or,
where we have no measure of the real magni-
tudes of bodies, we cannot, from their ap-
parent magnitudes, ascertain their distance.

The perceptions of sense are communicated
to others by information or testimony.

## SECT. IV. Observation.

## SECT. V. Memory.

SECT. IV.

Observation.

OBSERVATION is the attention specially paid
to things remarkable.

Things become remarkable by their reference

to ourselves, or by their comparison, fimili-
tude, or contrast with each other.

Colledions of observations, or of fads,
constitute hifiory, either descriptive or narrative.

Descriptive history is the detail of co-existent
circumstances and qualities.

Narrative hifiory is the detail of successive
events.

SECT. V.

Memory.
M EMORY is the recolledfion of fubjeis pal.

It is casual or intentional.
It is casual, when fubjedts or thoughts, by
any connexion of their own, recur to the mind.

It is intentional, when the mind, from
design, recalls any subjet or thought.

## SECT. VI. Imagination.

SECT. VI.

Imagination.

IMAGINATION is the stating of obje6s as invented
with all their qualities and circumfiances, real
or fi&itious.

'Imagination is exerted in matters which

we know or believe to be real, as well as in
matters which we invent or believe to be
fiaitious.

It includes, therefore, all the conceptions

in which we endeavour to specify or parti-
cularize our subjel; and in this is diftinguiihed
from abitration, in which we endeavour to
generalize.

The history of our conceptions is, perhaps,

the most important article in the hiliory o' the
human mind.

We acquire a habit of conceiving together

qualities or circumstances which are presented
together.

Qualities uniformly or generally presented

together in nature, form our conception of
natural fubjeds, and are the realities on which
we proceed in our condut.

Occasional coincidences are sometimes con-
ceived as natural and efiabliihed combinations.

Combinations of fancy, report, or vulgar

representation, occupy our conception in the
fame manner.

Objects imagined may be described, may

excite sentiment and passion, and lead our
desires and averlions.

Hence imagination is the chief faculty em-

ployed in description, invention, and perfua-
sion, and in iating the obje&s of our choice
and pursuit.

Different nations, ages, and men, at

under the influence of different imaginations
or conceptions.

Such imaginations, when fortified by habit,

do not give way to reason or convicion, and
must be supplanted by other habits.

Obje&ts are imagined separately or jointly.
In the separate images of things, are con-

fidered their real or pofible qualities and
circuinftances.

In their joint images are ;confidered their°
similitude, analogy, or opposition.

Similitude consists in the likeness of parts.
Analogy consists in the similarity of relatioi,:
and proportion of parts.

Opposition confifis' in the; contrariety of
qualities, and proportions or relations:

. . ~~~~. -. '
. .

## SECT. VII. Of Abstraction.

Similitude leads to arrangement, and the
classing of objeds together.

Analogy leads to the rhetorical figures of
firnile, metaphor, and allegory.

Opposition leads to diftinscions, antithefes,
and contrast.

SECT. VII.

Of Abfira67ion.

ABSTRACTION is the stating of qualities and
circumfiances apart fiom fubjedts, qualities, or
circumliances, to which they are adually
joined in nature.

Thus, in arithmetic and geometry, num-

ber and quantity are fiated apart from things
to be numbered or mcafulred.

In abftrat terms, qualities are iated apart
from their fubje6ts.

In :mechanics, motion is fiated apart from
refifiance or friltion.

In generic names, qualities in which indi-

viduals agree are stated apart from those in
which they differ.

Abliradlion is, in a great measure, arbi-

trary; hence the various methods of claffifi-
cation followed in natural history.

## SECT. VIII. Of Reasoning.

Abftracion is the reverse of imagination:

It is the foundation of general and compre-
henfive reasoning, not of description or paflion.

Men are sometimes the dupes of their own

abfiracions, and confider them as separate and
independent existences.

Abftracion tends to disqualify men for

affairs. It is the habit of confidering circum-
fiances apart; while, in affairs, all circum-
fiances come together, and must be kept in
view at once.

S E C T. VIII.

Of Reasoning.

REASONING comprehends clafffication of par-
ticular fubjeas, inveltigation, and applicatiron
of general rules, together with demonstration,
the application of evidence.

In classification, we refer particulars to
certain predicaments, fixed or arbitrary.

In investigation, we observe what is com-

mon in the operations of nature, or inquire
what would be right in the actions of men.

In the application of rules, we ihow thepar-
ticulars which are comprehended under them.

In

In this science consists.
In demonfiration, or the use of evidence,
we employ teliimony or argument.

Argument is taken either a priore, or a
pofteriore.

Argument a priore, proves or disproves

the fa& from the law, or the effec from the
cause.

Every argument of this fort may be reduced

to a perfedt syllogism, consisting of three pro-
positions: Of which one announces the law,
either negative or positive; another compares
the law with the fad to be proved; and the
third affirms or denies the fadc, from its con-
formity with, or opposition to the law.

Argument a poferiiqlre, proves or disproves
the rule, from the enumeration of particulars.

Every such argument may be reduced to

a syllogism , confiliing of two propositions:
One is induction, or enumeration of fads; the
other affirms or denies the law, from the
concurrence, or want of concurrence in the
particulars brought to eliablilh it.

s+

## SECT. IX. Of Foresight.

## SECT. X. Of Propensity.

SE CT. IX.

Of Foresight.

FonESIGHT is the faculty of conjecuring what
is to follow from the past or present.

It requires penetration and sagacity: The

iirlt, to comprehend all' the circumstances of
the cafe in question; the second, to perceive
what is likely to follow from those circum-
itances.

Penetration and sagacity are the foundations
of good conduct, art, and ifill.

S E C T. X.

Of Propensity.

M EN ,like'the other animals, are adive
from original choice and propensity.

They delight in freedom and exercise; they

pine under restraint, or in the absence of
objects fit to excite them.

The activity of man's nature confifis in
propensity, sentiment, desire, and volition.

Propenlities have their elfedt prior to the
experience of pleasure or pain.

They are either animal or rational.
The animal propensities are, the appetites

to food, sleep, and the propagation of the
species.

There appetites are periodical or occa-

fional, and are intermitted when their ends
are obtained.

The rational propensities lead to felf-pre-

servation, to the care of our children, to the
union of the sexes, to society, and to prefer
what is excellent.

These, like animal appetites, give a direc-

tion to human nature prior to any experience
of their gratifications.

But, contrary to the analogy of animal

appetites and gratifications, they may continue
to occupy habitually, without satiety or difu ft.

All affections of kindness are, in their own
nature, pleasant.

All emotions of hatred are painful.
Having these natural propensities, we fiate

objecs under the predicaments of good or of
evil, as they are supposed conducive or oppo -
site to the purposes of our propensities.

## SECT. XI. Of Sentiment (15).

Whatever is thought conducive to prefer-
vation, is reckoned good.

Whatever is thought pernicious, is reckoned
evil.

Whatever promotes the welfare of society,

or of any objed beloved, is therefore supposed
good.

What is pernicious, is supposed evil.
Whateveris thought, initfelf, to confitute
a perfe&ion or excellence, is supposed good.

Whatever is thought to constitute imper-

fecion, or to fink our comparative value, is
supposed evil.

Hence the great influence of opinion on the
external pursuits of men.

S E C T. XI.

Of Sentiment .

SENTIMENT is a state of mind relative to sup-
posed good or evil.'

Sentiments are pleasant or painful.
The sentiment arising from a supposed good

attained, is pleasant; from a supposed good
miffed or forfeited, is painful.

'5 See Theory of agreeable fentiiments.

A supposed evil avoided, is pleasant;
incurred, is painful.

The plealure, in both these cafes, is
termed JOY.

The pain is termed Sorrow, or Grief
A supposed good, in expecation of being

gained, is plcafant; in expectation of being
lofl, is painful.

The pleasure, in either of these two cafes,
is termed Hope.

The pain is termed Fear.
Thus all our sentiments or passions may be
referred to four general heads:

Joy, Grief, Hope, and Fear.
But there is a great variety in the sentiments

of joy and grief, of hope and fear, correspond-
ing to the nature of the supposed good or evil,
and of the propensity by which we are direc(ed
towards it.

The sentiments of those who are occupied

chiefly in their own preservation, are, the
sense of safety and success, or of danger and
disappointment.

The first may comprehend security, exul-

tation, and insolence; the second, jealousy,
terror, and despair.

The mofi painful sentiments of those who

are occupied chiefly by their regard to man-
hind, are alleviated by the pleasures of affecion,
confidence, and good-will.

The sentiments ofthofe who are occupied

chiefly with the conlideration of excellencies
or defecs in themselves, or in others, are, on
Ihe one hand, refpesing themselves, and
their own absolute perfeRions or defects, self-
approbation, and elevation of mind; on the
other hand, fliarne, remorse, and dejecdion.

In respect to comparative advantages, and

superiority to other men, their sentiments are,
exultation, vainglory, insolence, and contempt.

The fentirents of men refpeding real ex-

cellencies in others'are, esteem, rcfpe6t, and
veneration.

Efieem is a sentiment of approbation tend-
ing to confidence.

Reflec is a sentiment of approbation tend-
ing to fubrniflion.

Veneration is a high degree of refpel.
The fentirnents of men refpedcing defedts
are, contempt, ridicule, indignation, and rage.

Contempt is a sentiment of disapprobation,
tending to indiflerence or neglet.

Ridicule is a sentiment of disapprobation,
mixed with mirth or pleasantry.

Satire and Raillery confilt in exposing what
is ridiculous.

Buffoonery consists in assuming it.
As the sentiment of disapprobation predo-
minates, ridicule approaches to scorn.

As the sentiment of pleasantry predomi-

nates, it approaches to mirth, and may evenbe
mixed with tenderness.

The scornful are rarely susceptible of ad-
miration or love.

Indignation is a sentiment of difapproba-
tion, mixed with resentment.

Rage is a sentiment of disapprobation,
mixed with hatred.

The sentiments of men refpeding compara-

tive advantages in others, differ according as
they are disposcd to love or hate, and accord-
ing as they slate the comparison, whether with
themselves or with other men.

The superiority of those they love, com-

pared to themselves, produces deference and
refpet.

The superiority of those they hate, so
compared, excites envy; of those who are

## SECT. XII. Desire and Aversion.

indifferent, excites humiliation, or is a mor-
tification.

The superiority to those they love,, com-

pared to others, excites exultation; of those
they hate, compared to others, excites ani-
knofity and regret.

Languages may be conceived to vie with

one another in the power of exprefing these
varieties of emotion and sentiment.

SEC T. XII.

Desire and Averflion.

D ESIRE and aversion arise from our concep-
lion of objets, founded in experience, fancy,
or report.

Men's desires and aversions are various, as
their opinions or conceptions of things.

In proportion as the conception becomes
habitual, the desire oraverfion becomes so also.

Certainconceptionsofpleafure, profit, pre-

ferment, and worth, produce sensuality,
avarice, emulation, and greatness of mind.

These desires, though, in some instances,
they carry us far beyond the scope of our

## SECT. XIII. Of Volition.

:original propensities, have a foundation in
forne natural propensity, and lead to the ob-
jects which, in our opinion, tend to fulfil its
purpose.

Sensuality is founded in animal appetites,

and implies a purpose of enjoyment, even
during the intermissions of appetite.

Avarice is founded in the care of felf-pre-

servation; but limits it to the desire of riches,
or the means of fublifience.

Emulation is founded in ambition, and is

the delire of superiority, supposed to conlilt
in preferments and honors.

Greatness of mind is founded in ambition,
limited to personal qualities and real perlsc(iion:;.

What we habitually desire, we also fialt

as our intereli, in judging of our concern in
any matter of choice.

SEC T. XIII.

Of Volition.

VOLITION is the a6 of will in free deter-
minations.

The determination is free wherever it is
voluntary.

The motives from which we chufe, do not

destroy our freedom; for, to a& from motives
in the manner we ourselves approve of, to be
willing, voluntary, and free, in any adtion,
are synonymous terms.

We are responsible for the part we chufe
to aót.

# PART. II. THEORY OF MIND.

# CHAP. I. General observations.

INSTITUTES

F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART. II.
THEORY OF MIND.

C Il A P. I.

General olfervations.

THEORIES of mind, no lets than theories
of matter, proceed upon the knowledge of
physical laws, applicable to explain appearances.

It is admitted, that the intellecqual fyliem,

as well as the material, hath its laws; but it
is apprehended that the laws of the intelledtual
'fyflem are not equally well observed '

' Spirit of laws, book i.

This apprehension comes from our not con-

fidering the difiindtion of laws, as well as of
fubjecls.

The term law is ambiguous.
It fonmeliines signifies the uniformity of a
hidt in nature.

In this sense it is employed in theories of
the material fVftem .

And in this sense chiefly the material system
is said to have its laws.

In this sense every law must be firidly

observed; because it is law only so far as it is
observed. Gravitation is a law only so far as
bodies actually gravitate.

But in this finfe, too, the intellectual fyflem

liath its lawvs; for, in the operations of mind,
some fads are uniform.

In this sense, therefore, the laws of the

intelledcual fyflem are equally well observed
with those of the material.

The term lav, however, has a farther figni-

fication, and means a rule of choice, which
we delire to have uniformly observed.

In this sense it is employed by moralifis,

civilians, and those who infirud the taste ia
any matter of elegance or beauty.

2 See Laws of Naulre, in the Introduction to every
tyftcm of mechanics.

In this sense most commonly it is meant,
that the intellectual fyiem hath its laws.

And in this sense the law may fubllt, with-

out being firifly observed: For it is law inl
consequence of its redcitude, or of the author-
ity from which it proceeds; not in consequence
of its being the fat.

But, although the more important laws of

this fort relate to the intellectual f'yienl, yet
there are laws of the fame kind relating to the
material fyfiem.

Such are the expressions of what is required

to elegance, beauty, or utility, in natural sub-
jcds, or of what is required to perfedlion in
works of art.

In such refpeas, material, as well as intel-
lectual fubjets, may deviate from the law.

In the vegetable and animal kingdoms, there

are deformities, difiortions, and diseases; as
there are in the intellectual kingdom follies,
abfilrdities, and crimes.

To avoid, as much as poflible, these ambi-

guities, laws of the first fort, whether relating
to mind or matter, have been termed p1yfical
laws; and laws of the second fort, moral laws 3.

3 See Introduction.

Common use will authorize thisinterpretation;

although the use of these terms is far from
being precise or determinate : For frequently,
whatever relates to matter, is said to be phy-
fical; whatever relates to mind, is said to be
moral.

In consequence of this vague use of the term

moral, any theoretical question relating to
mind has been fubfiituted for moral philosophy;
and speculations of little moment have sup-
planted the study of what men ought to be,
and of what they ought to wish, for themselves,
for their country, and for mankind.

# CHAP. II. Examples of Physical Law, collected from the history of mind.

## SECT. I. Laws of the Understanding.

C H A P. II.
Examples of Plifical Law, collected fromn

the hiJiory of mind.

S E C T. I.

Laws of the Undeialanding.

Tu e hiflory of theunderftanding may furnish
three principal rules, or physical laws.

The firit relates to the consciousness of our-
selves.

The second to the perception of other things.
The third to the comprehension of fubjeds
of which we are conscious, or which we perceive.

F IRST L A W.

We are conscious of our exigence, operation,
and will.

This is the highest measure of evidence, to
which no fcepticifin ever extended.

S E C N D L A W.

Perception is obtained by the intervention

of media, whether like or unlike to the fubje t
perceived.

i. The medium of sensation.
2. The medium of signs.
The sensation by means of which we natu-

rally porceive the exifience of external fubjecs,
has no resemblance to those fubjcdts.

The signs by which we naturally perceive

the exifience and meaning of other minds,
have no resemblance to the things signified.

From this law may be explained the effects

.of rites in religion; of manners, as well as
language, in common life; of title, fortune,
and falhion, as grounds of efleem.

Rites are adopted as the signs of devotion
towards God.

Manners as the signs of our dispositions
towards our fellow - creatures.

Language as the expression of sentiment and
will.

Title and fortune are indications or confiitu-
ents of superior condition.

Falhion is the form in which superior con-
dition is known.

Many signs having no natural connexion

with the things they indicate, vary in different
countries, and change in the fame country,
without any change of sentiment refpe(ing the
tliings themselves.

THIRD

THIRD LA W.

To comprehend any particular subjet, is to
know some general predicament or class to
which it may be referred.

Thus to comprehend the nature of any par-

ticular being or quality, is to be able to refer
it to some known species or class.

To comprehend any operation or phenome-

non, is to be able to refer it to some eftablilhed
or known law of nature.

Thus we comprehend all the phenomena

that can be referred to the laws of gravitation,
cohesion, electricity, and so forth.

From this law may be explained the pro-

ceeding of the mind in science, in claffication,
investigation, and experiment, as well as in its
recourse to hypothesis and imaginary system of
any fort.

To make a new discovery, is either to invefti-

gate some law, or to point out some new appli-
cation.

Thus Sir Isaac Newton investigated the law

of refracaion, and applied it to tlr rainbow,
and to the colors of natural bodies..

Dr. Franklin applied the laws of eleEtricity
to lightning, and to the aurora borealis..

5

## SECT. II. Laws of the Will.

The laws of nature are the genera and species

under which particular fa&s are ranged, or the
predicaments to which they are referred.

Some predicaments have their generic names

in every language, have been universally ad-
mitted, and are coeval with human thought.

Such are, substance, quality, quantity, num-

ber, perfetion, defe&, good, evil, time,
place, &c.

Others are more arbitrary, and chosen to

render human knowledge methodical and com-
prehenfive.

Such are the classes and orders into which

fubjeds are difiributed in the method of different
natural historians.

S E C T. II.

Laws of the Will.

1lHE history of the human will may furnifi
the three following general rules.

FIRST LAw.

Men are disposed to preserve themselves.
Hence danger alarms, and safety is studied:
The hurtful is Ihunned; the useful is valued,

Under this last title men desire the means

of subsistence, health, firength, beauty, parts,
temper, resolution, &c.

This is commonly termed the law of Jelf-

prefeirvaion: but so great is the variety of
men's opinions, and such the caprice of their
passions, that the melancholy and froward seem
to be at variance with themselves, and appear
to desire what is deftrudcive.

SE C O N D LAW.

Men are disposed to society.
They not only associate together, but take

part with their fellow-creatures, and confider
general calamities as matter of regret, general
welfare as matter of joy.

This may be termed the law offociety; and

is that which qualifies the individual to be the
member of a community, inclines him to con-
tribute to the general good, and entitles him
to partake in it.

The reality of this law has been disputed:
i. Because all the actions of men are not
beneficial to society.

2. Because even beneficial ations may be
accounted for from other motives.

The actions of, men are regulated, not by

this lawv only, but by this combined with every
other law of tleir nature.

If the law of felf-prefervation, for the moll

part, prevail, it does not follow, that the law
of society has no effecL

The external effecl, or tendency, of every
lawv, is diversified in different circumfiances.

The general tendency of the law of gravita-

tion is, to cause bodies to approach to each
other; as the tendency of the law of society
is, to bring men together, to engage them in
good offices, or to relirain them from ill ones.

Heavy bodies are-not alvays falling, nor

social natures promoting the good of society.
;SEvery physical la\v, nevertheless, operates
to one uniform effedt, though with a different
appearance.

Thus gravitation operates in pressure towards

tfe earth, rwhether bodies be at refl, dr in
i-oion; in an) direction. When bodies are
supported, it w\eighs on the plop that fuppolts
them. In descending, it accelerates; in acend-
ing, it retards; in projection, it turns motion
into a curve.

In the fame manner, what is here termed

lhe lav ofjbcicty, though varied in its appear-
ance, is equally real in its effeds. In minds

witlhot prjc'dice, it is indlfcriminate huma-
nitv. In liiendfllip it is beneficence: In firife
it is some degree of refiraint : In good offices
it is felf-approbation: In ill offices it is remorse:
Confirms the resolution in one cafe, and weakens
it in the other; so that even the malicious are
conscious of its power.

As to the motive from which acions bene-

ficial to mankind proceed, there may be various
in various infiances, butnoperfoncan know, ex-
ceip in his own cafe, that there are no sincere
al'eilions of benevolence and good-will.

THIRD LAW.

Men are disposed to better themselves.
They difiinguilh perfections from defects
they admire and contemn.

This is the great principle of ambition in

human nature, and may be termed the law of
rfiiialtioin, or of'progreffio : it is an ultimate
sild in the nature of man, and not to be explained
ly any thing that is previoufy or better known.

Excellency, whether absolute or comparative,
is the supreme object of human desire.

BIiches, power, and even pleasure, are covet-

ed with extreme ardor, only when they are
confidered as the badges of eminence or rank,
and become subj eels of diifindion and emulation.

# CHAP. III. The foregoing laws applied in explaining the phenomena of Interest, Emulation, Pride, Vanity, Probity, and Moral Approbation.

## SECT. I. Of Interest.

CHAP. III.

The foregoing laws applied in explaining the

phenomena of ntereft, Emulation, Pride,
Vanity, Probity, and Moral Approbation.

SE C T. I.

Of Interest.

INTERETED NEs S appears in solicitude
about our situation and future profpecs: when
in extreme it stifles affecion, and leads to the
commiflion of frauds and of crimes.

This passion is comprehended in the law of

felf-prefervation, and is a partial application
of that law, founded in an opinion of the
great consequence of external advantages.

Opinions, and their consequences, are more

orlefs prevalent, in proportion to the preva-
lence of circumfliances by which men are led
to entertain such opinions.

For this reason interefiednefs is very prevalent.
The opinion on which it is founded, arises
fiom the following circumtfances.

i. The infiindive care of felf-prefervation.
2. The early prepofleffion in favor of sensual
objetIs, because they first engross our attention.

3. The continued care of estate or fortune that
is necessary wherever property is established.

4. The rank which riches are supposed to
befiow.

From this last consideration, the law of

estimation comes to be combined with the law
of felf-prefervation, in accounting for the inter-
efted pafflons of men.

The interested confirt of two classes; the
prodigal, and the avaricious.

The prodigal are commonly most rapacious,
being urged by the desire of enjoyment.

The avaricious are more cautious, being
restrained by the fear of want.

Interest and felfilhnefs are sometimes em-

ployed as synonymous terms: but the sensual,
the proud, the vain glorious, are not less fel-
fish, that is to fay, less void of benevolence,
than the interested.

And the fault of the interested, consists not

in the measure of care bestowed on themselves,
but in the mistake of their own principal con-
cerns.

## SECT. II. Theory of Emulation.

S E C T. II.

Theory of Emulation.

E LLUAT 1 ON appears in competitions, heart-
burning, and firife.

It arises mofily in the pursuit of things of
mere comparative value.

Such are, riches, renown, power, or\rank.
The value of riches is comparative; for it

consists, not in any absolute measure of wealth,
but in polTefflng more than other men.

Renown consists in being more talked of
than others.

Power confifis in being able to command

other men; and rank, in being of superior
flation.

They who desire what cannot be affeced

by comparison, such as real happiness, and real
virtue, apart from the reputation of either,
are not addicted to emulation, enjoy their own
neafure of good, and rejoice in what is pof-
sessed by others.

Emulation may be directed to useful actions,

and have effeds serviceable to mankind; but is
itfelfan unharpy disposition, a source of envy,
jealousy, and malice.

## SECT. III. Of Pride.

The emulous are not satisfied with any

attainment, while others posess an equal, or a
superior measure of the fame advantage.

The character of the emulous is not elevation

of mind, but a passion to be the first in refped
to those articles which the vulgar admire; as
Caesar desired to be the firit in a village, rather
than the second at Rome.

The emulous are enemies to each other,

and to men of superior reputation. They arce
for the most part, vigilant, courageous, and
vehement; indulgent to those who are confessed-
ly inferior, but malicious to those who, in point of
consideration, are equal or fuperiorto themlelves.

They commonly prefer mean company, in

which they can afflme a superiority, to better,
in which they must submit to equality.

Emulation is one effet of ambition, is com-

prehended in the law of eflimation, and ariles
from an opinion, that excellence consists in
superiority to other men.

S E CT. III.

Of Pride.

PRIDE appears in neglec, inattention, con-
tempt, and arrogance.

It is founded, therefore, in a mean opinion
of other men.

It is comprehended in the law of eflimation;

for it is in consequence of this law that men
either admire or contemn.

Pride, or contemptuousness, is inconfifient

with affecion, candor, or any regard to the
rights of mankind.

The desire of perfetion, and even the love
of virtue, have been confounded with pride.

This abuse sometimes proceeds from inatten-
tion to propriety of language:

Sometimes from affe&ation offigurative speech;

as when we fay, decent pride, noble pride,
the pride of doing well, &c. Here it implies
contempt; but, in a good sense, the contempt,
of what is unworthy.

At other times this confusion of words is

affeced, in order to favor a fyfiem; as when
we would depreciate virtue, or disprove its
reality, by speaking of it in terms which are
commonly taken in a bad sense i.

Pride results from the law of estimation, as

an abuse of it, or an improper contempt of
other men.

4 Mandeville's works.

## SECT. IV. Of Vanity.

It is ridiculous to attempt confounding the

love of virtue with pride: Their tendencies
are oppolite.

Virtue is a refpe& for the rights of men,

and esteem of what tends to the good of man-
kind.

Pride is a difrefpe&t for the rights of men,
and contempt of mankind.

SEC T. IV.

Of Vanily.
VANITY appears in affe&ation and ostentation.

The vain assed what they think will capti-

vate the attention and obtain the praile or
others.

They are ostentatious of what they fuppo'e

conflitutes their importance, as of their persons,
fortune, equipage, talents, and adventures.

They are gratified by admiration, without
any other evidence of merit.

Vanity is comprehended inthe law of efli-

mation; for it supposes the dilincion of admi-
rable and contemptible, however mifunderfioold.

It is the reverse of pride, over-rating the

value of other people's opinions, which pride
contemns,

## SECT. V. Of Probity.

The vain are capable of great efforts of

courageand resolution when supported by public
opinion, and when ading in public view; but,
without this support, are feeble and irresolute.

The attention they pay to other men not

proceeding from the heart, but from the desire
of consequence and applause, they always fail
where the fruits or effects of real affecion are
expected.

S EC T. V.

Of Probity.

P. o B I T Y appears in ads of justice and
b]eneficence.

Men who regard the rights, and feel for the

sufferings of others; who are ever ready to do
ads of kindness; who are lhiihful and true to
the expectations they raise, - are said to have
probity.

Probity implies the love of mankind, found-

ed in a temper that is compassionate, candid,
and liberal.

It is comprehended, therefore, in the law
oi society.

Probity may be underfiood to constitute an

excellency, but cannot be the foundation of
pride or contemptuousness.

## SECT. VI. Of Moral Approbation in general.

It may be understood to merit applanfe, but

is directed by affection, not by the desire of
admiration or attention.

Men of probity prefer integrity to any other

,kind of supposed excellency; but frequently
have a modelt opinion oftheir own merits.

They are perpetually aiming at the wortlh

they know and admire, not referring to it as
a fiandard by which to censure others.

SE C T. VI.

Of Moral Approbation in general.

1ORAnL approbation is the judgment formed

of characers and ations, as being excellent
or juli.

It is opposed to disapprobation or blame.
The apprehension of excellence dr defect, ill

forne initances, as of beauty or deformity, ill
merely animal or material natures, is accon-
panied with flmple emotions of admiration or
contempt : But, to every person, the appre-
henfion of excellence in himfell is attended
with elevation of mind. The apprehenlion of
defed is attended with fliaie or remorse. The
fame apprehenlions retipecing other men are
atten(led with complaency, veneration, love,
pit)-y indignation, and scorn.

MAen fond of paradox have questioned the

reality of moral diflindions: But expressions of
praise and blame, in every language, the im-
portance of men's adions to mankind, the
opposite nature of dispositions that form the
chara6ters of men, the most vehement sentiments
of the human heart, which reler to this subjed,
- thow, that the diftindion of moral good and
evil is real, and universally acknowledged.

In treating of moral approbation, four quef-
tions may be separately fiated.

i. What do men, for the most part, approve
or blame ?

2. By what principle, or consideration, are

they direted, in particular cafes, to befiow
their approbation or censure ?

3. What is the proper fubje& of approbation
or censure ?

4. What is the rule or principle by which
men ought to judge of moral charaters ?

The two first questions are physical, and

belong to this place; the two last are moral,
and their answer will be comprehended in
the firlt, or most general laws of morality.

The filbjed of morality has been greatly

perplexed by the blending of these questions
together.

The aaual errors and corruptions of men,

have been mustered up as so many proofs that
there is nothing which men ought to efleent
or desire.

In physical questions, we attend to the fad;

in moral questions, to what is good or evil.
The fad, however well eftablilhed, and how-
ever universal, does not preclude us from
condeiving and chufing what is better.

If all men were aduated, by interest, emu-

lation, pride, or vanity, it would not follow
that probity is no objec of esteem or desire.
When we are told, therefore, that candor
and benevolence are hypocrifiy; that courage
is anger; elevation of mind is pride; and
temperance formality or affedation, - we
may ask; whether these allegations are meant
as a fiate of the fad, in the pretensions of some
men, or as examples of what men ought to be?
The fads may be true; but to chufe a pattern
confessedly bad, would be absurd,

## SECT. VII. Of the Object of Moral Approbation.

## SECT. VIII. Of the Principle of Moral Approbation.

SECT. VII.

Of the Objea of Moral Approbation.

T HE objed of moral approbation is either some
disposition of the mind, or Come external ation.

Probity is the most approved disposition;

and the external expressions of probity the
most approved adions.

These conflitute the whole, or the most eflential
part of virtue.

Other fubjecqs maybe admired or contemned,

but these alone are the fubje6ts of moral appro-
bation, of efleem, and love.

S C r. V I II.

Of the Principle of Moral Approbation.

oonIr. approbation is comprehended in the

law of cltimationj and is indeed the principal
ilai from which we infer the reality ofthis law;
as the vertical pressure and fall of bodies are
the principal fads from which, in mechanics,
we infer the law of gravitation.

It is, therefore, itself an ultimate fad and

principle of nature, not an appearance to be
explained from any other principle better known.

It

It has been termed Reason, Conscience, and

Moral Sense; but there are so many different na-
mes, not different explanations of the lamre th ing.

As the excellence of human nature conlilts

in certain faculties and dispositions, thcee, w\vhcl
possessed, invigorate the sense of that excellence
which they confiitute. The intelligent are con-
firmed in the esteem of wisdom, and the bene-
volent in the esteem of probity, by the con-
currence of such characers in other men with
what they perceive in thernfelves.

Every facultyand disposition, in this manner,
has a tendency to juflify itself.

The vicious affections and desires of men

warp their judgments, and mar their sentiments
ofjultice.

The emulous and interefied are unwilling
to admire what is adverse to their own designs.

External actions are variously admired or

blamed, as they are varioully understood to
express different characters and dispositions of
mind.

Thus men are led by custom in theirjudgment
of rites and external observances.

They are led by emulation or interelt to

assed the approbation of ations favorable to
their own designs.

6

They are led, by their situations, to entertain
a prediletion for particular qualities.

Some prefer the military, others the pacific
virtues.

But, so far as the virtue or moral excellence

of a man confifis in such qualities as fit him to
procure the good of mankind, the benevolent
must have a prediledion for virtue, or be
specially prepared to admire that excellence. s

Approbation, at the fame time, appears to

be a specific sentiment in the operation of that
law of our nature, which we have termed the
Law of estimation.

Systems have differed chiefly by deriving our

choice of ations and characers, some from the
law of felf-prefervation, and others from the
law of society 6; but the fad is, that, if bene-
volence is underflood to be an attribute of
human nature, the laws of felf-prefervation
and of society coincide in all their tendencies
and applications.

Man is, by nature, a member of society;

his safety, and his enjoyment, require that he
thould be perferved what he is by nature;

5 Vid. Lord Shaftesbury's Inquiry into Virtue.
i See Smith's Theory of floral Sentiments.

his perfecion consists in the excellency or
measure of his natural abilities and difpoiitions;
or, in other words, it consists in his being an
excellent part of the system to which he belongs:
So that the effec to mankind should be the
fame, whether the individual means to pre-
serve himself, or to preserve his community.
With either intention he must cherimh the love
of mankind, as the most valuable part of his
charater. As this is the foundation of probity,
it is that which leads men to give to probity,
as such, the preference to every other difpofi-
tion or habit of mind 7.

7 Efay on the History of Civil Society, part i. seCt. 6.

# CHAP. IV. Of the Nature and Future Prospects of the Human Soul.

## SECT. I. Of the Immateriality of the Soul (8).

C H A P. IV.
Of the Nature and Future Profpeas of the

Human Soul.

SE C T. I.

Of the Immateriality of the Soul s.

T H E nature of man has been universally
confidered as mixed, or composed of an animal
and intellecual part, of body and mind.

This nature is capable of many functions,

of which some being the exertions of corporeal
organs, constitute the animal part; others, not
being referred to any corporeal organ, are
conceived as the attributes of mind or spirit.

Man, in refped to his animal nature, differs

fromi the brutes only in the degree or manner
of what he exhibits; but, in refped to hisintel-
le&ual nature, differs totally, and in kind.

Being deltined to ad from observation and

experience, not from special inftindt, he is,
when ignorant, apparently inferior in artifice

s See Baxter on the Immateriality of the Soul

and power to the other animals; but, when
knowing, greatly superior.

That by which he excels other animals, is

termed his mind, and has been universally
diftinguilled from body.

The properties of mind have no analogy to

those of matter: Properties of the one are even
opposite and contradictory to properties of the
other.

Matter is divisible and inert; mind is indi-
visible and active.

What are called faculties of mind, are its

adive powers, of which all may be exerted
together, or in the least measurable portion
of time.

They are not diftin& parts of a complicated

nature, but abftradions, which enable us to
confider separately the simultaneous operations
of mind.

The mind of man is, in a particular manner,

united with his body, and present to whatever
assets the senses: But, in other instances, is
equally present to the molt remote, as to the
peareft objeA of thought.

## SECT. II. Of the Immortality of the Soul.

SECT. II.

Of the Immortality of the Soul.

Ev ERY queflion relating to a future slate
must be solved from the nature of the foul,
from the fiate of the fad at death, or from
principles of religion.

The nature of the foul being indivisible, or

not subjed to a dissolution of parts, and anni-
hilation being unknown in the order of nature,
it follows, that the foul is physically immortal.

The faa at death is, that the body ceases to

be animated, or to give signs of the presence
of mind: But mind being of a different nature,
mnay exist apart.

No argument can be drawn from principles

of religion, until these principles be laid down
or stated.

# PART III. OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.

# CHAP. I. OF THE BEING OF GOD (1).

## SECT. I. Of the Universality of this Belief.

INSTITUTES

O F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

P A RT I II.
OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.

CHAP. I.
OF THE BEING OF GOD '

SECT. I.

Of the Unierfality of this Belief.

MIIANY operations in nature have been uni-
verfally looked upon as the exertions of mind
or spirit, diftind from man.

I See Ray's Wisdom of God in the creation. Sermons
at Boyle's Ledures.

The most ignorant apprehend such exertions

in the little sphere of their own concerns.
The more knowing apprehend them in the
general order of nature to which their obfer-
vation extends.

The conceptions of rude minds on this

subjed are groveling, or require correction;
but absolute atheism is an effet offiudy, and
an effort to withfland original feelings. If fuc-
cefsful in any particular infiance, it is no more
than an exception to a general rule.

Our habit of occupying the imagination with

corporeal fubjeds, brings on a disposition to
conceive every thing under corporeal images,
and even of doubting the exifience of what
is not corporeal: But, on recollection, we must
be sensible that the first and surest part of our
knowledge is that of mind. And the existence
of delign, perceivable in the order of nature,
not lets familiar than the existence of what we
fee and hear.

The belief which is here assumed does not

imply any adequate notion of the Supreme
Being. Men, for the most part, have entertained
notions on this fubjeet, unworthy even of
human reason.

## SECT. II. Of the Foundation of this Belief.

But thebeliefthatanartift, or author, exifls,

is confilient with mean and improper notions
of his capacity and intentions.

The belief that Homer composed the Iliad,

is compatible with inadequate notions of that
poet's genius.

The belief that books,read at school were

composed by men, is confilient with a notion,
that even the classics were written for the use
of children.

S E C T. II.

Of the Foundation of this Belief.

T iE beliefofof Intelligent Power operating
in nature being universal, cannot depend on
circumfiances peculiar to any age or nation,
but must be the result of human nature, or
the suggestion of circumfiances that occur in
every place and age.

In the nature of man, there is a perception

of causes from the appearance of effecs, and
of design from the efiablifllnent of order, or
from the concurrence of means to an end.

Sceptics have not denied the reality. of these

perceptions; they have rather complained of
them, as the foundation of general and vulgar
errors.

But our knowledge and belief of every fort

originates in some such natural perception,
as in the perception of matter and its proper-
ties; in the information we take from others,
and in what we understand as the meaning
of signs.

In any of these cafes, we can assign no

reason for our belief, but that we are by
nature made in one cafe to perceive existence;
in another, to accept information; and in the
third, to underliand what is signified.

No argument is required to prove, nor can

argument have any effe& to refute, where
nature has determined that we ihall perceive,
be informed, or underhiand.

No one can refrain perceiving that. the eye

was made to fee, the ear to hear; that the
wing was made for the air, the fin for the
water, the foot for the ground; and so forth.

The perception of an end or intention in

the works of men, implies the belief of an
artifI. The perception of an end or intention
in the works of nature, implies the belief
of God.

To acknowledge the perception of order,
is to admit final causes.

In Nature, final causes may be confidered

as the language in which the existence of
God is revealed to man.

In this language the sign is natural, and
the interpretation inftintive.

Its accents are heard in every quarter, and

its charader is written on every material to
which our knowledge extends.

# CHAP. II. Of the Attributes of God.

## SECT. I. Of these Attributes in general.

## SECT. II. The Unity of God.

CHAP. I .
Of the Attributes of God.

SE C T. I.

Of these Attributes in general.

T HE attributes of God are charaters of the
Supreme Being fuggefied by his works.

They may be referred to five principal

titles; Unity, Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
and Justice.

S C T. II.

The Unity of God.

T HE perception of final causes implies the
belief only of one God.

To conceive a plurality of gods is a corrup-
tion.

## SECT. III. Of Power.

## SECT. IV. Of Wisdom.

Different nations separately formed their

notions of the Deity. On comparing these
notions, they did not endeavour to reconcile
them to the belief of one supreme being; they
formed a lift compored of many gods, having
their different attributes and separate depart-'
ments in nature.

SE C T. III.

Of Power.

Po w E n is the attribute of the first cause;
and, in the Creator of all things, cannot be
circumscribed.

SECT. IV.

Of Wisdom.

VVTISDOM is the attribute of intelligence;
and the belief of wisdom in the author of
nature, is implied in the perception of final
causes.

## SECT. V. The Goodness of God.

The Wisdom of God is perfec and infinite,
or cannot be deficient in the discernment of
any thing that exists, or of any thing that is
possible in refped to matter, form, relation,
excellence, or defet.

SECT. V.

The Goodness of God.

n H r s is the attribute of the creator and
preserver of all things.

The proofs of goodness are,
1. The creating of sensitive and rational
beings.

2. The measures of good which they are
made to enjoy.

3. The order efiablifhed for their preservation.
Without the first, there would le no objedt
on which goodness could exert itself.

And the numbers of such objets, as well as

the deliination suited to the nature of each,
are proofs of goodness in the first cause.

2. What their numbers or destinations are,

cannot be known to us; but the order and
tendency of what we know, leads to the belief
of universal good.

The lot of man is mixed, but his nature
likewise is fitted to a mixed scene.

He complains of evil in his external circum-
stances, or in his own nature and condut.

The first subject of complaint is termed pby-
Jical evil; the second, moral evil.

Physical evil is the discordance of things to
man's desires.

Without such discordance there would be
no place for active exertions.

Complaints, therefore, of physical evil are

not proofs of absolute evil in the works of God,
but the symptoms of an active nature in man
properly placed, and having proper excitements
to exert its power.

A scene in which there were no accefflons

of good to be gained, or, what is equivalent,
no apparent evils to be removed, would be a
scene of inaction, adverse to the nature of man.

In other words, a being that perceived no -

evil, or had no want, could have no principle
of adivity.

Man by being employed as an adive power

in the order of nature, is not made to forego
his own happiness.

The enjoyments of men are observed to

depend not on the measure of external accom-
modations, but on the part they ad; not on
their safety, but on the degree of courage they

possess; not on what they gain for thelnfelves
or others, but on the degree of ardor and
affection they exert.

Moral evil is the b!emihi of man's nature,

flort of what is perfect or right; and what he
himself feels on this fubjecl is an evidence that
he is not at once what he is destined to become.

Complaints of moral evil are the symptoms
of a progressive or improving nature.

A being that perceived no moral evil, or

no defec, could have no principle of im-
provement.

To remove the complaints of moral evil,

it is necessary that men were either freed from
all imperfections, or rendered insensible of the
imperfections they have.

The first is impossible: Men must have the
imperfedions of created nature.

As to the least poffibie measure of such

imperfetions, we are far from being able to
ascertain it.

For a being to be insensible of the imper-

sections he has, would be an irretrievable
blemilh in his nature.

Man's pungent sense of his own errors and

defects, as it is the source of his complaints
against the f-liem of things, so it is the source

of

of his improvements, and is a beauty in his
nature.

He is a voluntary agent, destined to a&6
under the following wife restraint:

That his hurtful dispositions are painful to

himself, and his beneficial disposition's are
pleasant.

The'fuffering, as well as the enjoyment, in

this cafe, is aproofofbeneficen'ce in the power
that inflicts it.

3. Every lart, in 'the order of nature, is
calculated for the 'pr'ervation of the whole.:

Things the'mof ireinote, are made to con-

cur (to the fame falutary.purpofes.; : .i
. :

The order of the planetary system is'd'aldcu

lated for the':prefervation! of every ':eingi'that
occupies ahnypart of this fyfteili) : :. ';:, :. ,

The pains, as well as the pleasure& of

living: arnd sensitive ciratures'; 'tends to 'their
preservation. ''i! : '.

The. brder of natutreis preferved'i, y 'the

succession of lives; so that, whilst the in'd.iy-
dual is perishing, the species of every animal
is safe, and the system of nature is secured
from decay.

7

## SECT. VI. Of the Justice of God.

SEC T. VI.

Of the JuJfice of God.

JUSTICE is the result of wisdom and goodness;
and therefore most perfec in God.
*. Whence is the diftinAion ofjuf/ and unjufi,
but from God the author of all things.

Jufiice is goodness impartial, and, universal;

rendering every part fubfervient.to the whole,
and calculating the wholefor the preservation
of its.parts; but precluding every part from
any enjoyment in what is pernicious to the
wohole.

. The pains and pleasures incident to man's
nature, are distributed agreeably to this rule
of justice. :

For the characlerifiic decree of God, ap-

parent in the firudure of human nature, is,
that benevolence is always pleasant, malice
is. always painful.

# CHAP. III. Of a Future state.

C H A P. III.

Of a Future Jfate.

CONTRARY to the appearances at death, the
human foul has been generally supposed to
survive its separation from the body, and to
be reserved to a future fiate of rewards and
punishments.

This apprehension is agreeable to the most

rational notions of the goodness and justice
of God.

That goodness which disposed the Almighty

to create, may likewise dispose him for ever
to preserve his intelligent creatures.

There is a continual creation of rational as
well as animal natures.

But animal natures areicertainly extinguish-
ed; why not rational ?

The first is neceffary.tiThe world would

be overstocked with animals, if generations
did not die to make way.for..thofe that were
to follow.

But the world of spirits may , without
inconvenience, increase for ever.

The desire of immortality is intfindive, and

is a reasonable intimation of what is intended
by the author of this desire.

The progress of man's intelligent nature may
be continued beyond the attainments of this life.

MWhoever confiders the anatomy of the foe-

tus will find in the structure of bones and muf-
cles, in the organs ofrefpiration and digeliion,
sufficient indications of a design to remove his
being into a different state.

The observant and intelligent may perhaps

find in the mind of man parallel signs of his
future destination.

The government of God is righteous; but

man's inftingive desire of difiributive justice is
not fulfilled in this life. Hence the universal
belief, that wicked men, are to receive addi-
tional punishments, and good men additional
rewards, in. a. future state.

" Diverfo itinere, malos a bonis loca tetra,

f' -inculta, foeda; gtque.formidolofa, habere '."
: . C'atJ in Sali'tJ.ift. .Cat.Cat onfpiracy.

# PART IV. OF MORAL LAWS, AND THEIR MOST GENERAL APPLICATIONS.

# CHAP. I. Desinitions.

INSTITUTES

F
MaORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART IV.
OF MORAL LAWS, AND THEIR MOST

GENERAL APPLICATIONS.

C H AP. .

Definitions.

lNMORAL law, as distinguished from physical
law, -is any general expression of what ought
to be.

In this sense, the rules of art, the canons

of beauty and propriety, relating t any subje6t
whatever, are to.be classed with moral laws

Moral law, as referred to intelligent na-

tures, is any general expression of what ought
to be chosen or done.

See Hutchefon of the Ideas of Beauty. and Virtue

Mechanical operations proceed without
object or opinion.

Animal operations are determined by infiinc.
Rational ations by opinion, or conception
of what is good.

Hence good, wherever apprehended or

exprefled, implies an obligation to determine
the choice of every rational being to which
it refers.

The negle&t of it, in moral ations, is matter
of indignation or blame.

Moral laws may be confidered under differ-
ent afpets, and diftinguilhed by different titles.

Conlidered in refpe& to their source, they

may be diftinguilhed as original, or natural
and adventitious, or conventional.

Confidered in refpe& to their subje6s, they

may be distinguished by denominations taken
from those fubje6ts; as laws of religion, or of
society; as laws of peace, or of war; as laws
political, civil, or criminal.

Confidered in respect to the persons to whom

they are applicable, they are laws of nations,
or the laws of particular fates.

Moral philosophy is the knowledge of

moral laws, refpeding their sources and their
applications.

The obligation of every law, whether origi-

nal or adventitious, general or partial, may
be resolved into an obligation of the law of
nature.

The first or fundamental law of nature rela-

tive to mankind, is an expression of the great-
eft good competent to man's nature.

Subsequent laws are branches and applica-
tions of this.

# CHAP II. OF GOOD AND EVIL.

## SECT. I. General application of these terms.

## SECT. II. Of Enjoyments and Sufferings.

CHA I.

OP GOOD AND EZIL.

* S EC T. I.

General application of these terms.

T HE terms good and evil are applied to en-
joyment and suffering, perfe&ion and defe&,
prosperity and adversity.

Enjoyment and suffering are oppofite-con-
ditions of a sentient nature.

Perfedion and defe& are the opposite con-
ditions of an improvable or progressive nature.

Prosperity and adversity are the opposite

conditions of things contingent, in which the
most fortunate have not a choice.

S E C T. II.

Of Enjoynents and Sufferings.

T HE enjoyments and sufferings competent to
man's nature, are either animal or intelledual.

## SECT. III. Of Perfection and Defect.

## SECT. IV. Of Prosperity and Adversity.

The Tirft are mere animal sensations of

pleasure and pain, or the gratifications and
the wants of appetite.

The second are sentiments attending the

conception or consciousness of good and. evil,
such as love and hatred, joy and hope, or
grief and fear; or, in general, the occupation
or inoccupation of powers naturally active.
and agreeable or disagreeable.

S E C T. III.

Of Perfection and Defet.

T H principal perfections of man's nature
are, benevolence, wisdom, and force of mind.

The principal defeEts are, malice, folly,
sensuality, and cowardice.

This contraif is commonly expressed in the
terms Virtue and Vice.

SE C T. IV.

Of Prosperity and AdverJity.

T HE circumfiances relative to man's nature
that constitute prosperity are, health, educa-
tion, security, fortune, and long life.

## SECT. V. Of the Question relating to the Supreme, or sole Good.

The opposite circumstances that constitute

adversity are, disease, neglet, thraldom
poverty, and death.

S E T. V.
Of the Question relating to the Supreme,

or sole Good.

T HE charaaers of men are variously formed
upon their predile6tion for pleasure, honor,
or profit; and disputes have arisen in the
schools of philolophy concerning the prefer-
ence to be given to one or other of these, in
erecting a system.

In fiating the obje6 of this controversy,

we may assume, that men mufft owe their mea-
sure of happiness either to the gratification of
natural desire; to the quality of their difpofi-
tions, and the proper exertion of their natural
powers; or to both there united.

This assumption will enable us to comprise

every doctrine on the subjed of happiness,
under what was taught by the Epicureans, the
Peripatetics, or the Stoics.

The Epicureans fiippofed the supreme good
to confilt in the enjoyment of what we are by

nature led to desire; and, as desire originates
in the sense of pleasure, they contended Ibr
pleasure as the fuprerne or sole good, and the
measure by which the value of excellence itfclf
was to be estimated.

Thinking independence, however, necef-

fary to the completion of happiness, they sup-
posed the perfec man capable of enjoying his
pleasure not only in the absence of every ex-
ternal cause, but in the midfl of circumfianccs
of a contrary effect.

The Academy, and, after them, the Peri-

patetic School, diftinguiflled excellence fronm
pleasure, and gave to the first a superior place
in the scale or eltimate of things good.

They observed, that all desire does not
originate in the sense of pleasure.

That there are various propensities of nature,
prior to the experience of pleasure or pain.

Such are the propensities of every animal

to the use of his organs: The propensity of
man to the use of his faculties.

The natural affe&ion of parents to their
children.

Love and confidence, founded in sympathy
or conceptions of merit.

Ambition and elevation of mind, founded
in the conception of excellence and worth.

They observed, that, to these, or some of

them separately, we are willing, on many
occasions, to sacrifice every consideration of
pleasure or profit, and to incur every circum-
fiance of pain or lols.

They maintained also, that the measure of

happiness which men attain, is not to be efii-
mated from the degree in which they possess
or enjoy the objects of desire; but more from
the part they take, or from the conduit they
hold in this adtive scene, where so many affairs
and tranfadions arise in purfiing the obje6ts
of original desire; but where the conduct of
the person acting is nevertheless the principal
consideration.

In just conduc, the virtue or supreme ex-

cellence of a man confifis; and in this also
consists the supreme good to which he ought
to aspire.

That, although human life is put in motion

by the spring of certain original desires, yet,
that the motion itself is of more importance
than the moving power which gave rife to it.

Wisdom is of more value than the external
advantage secured by it.

Benevolence is of more value than the
benefit conferred by it.

And, in general, that, wherever man is

the infirument employed for the attainment of
external ends, the means are of more value
than the end.

They did not, however, venture to assert

that the end was indifferent, or that the life
of a virtuous man might be equally happy inr
adverlity and in prosperity.

They were contented with giving to virtue

the highest place in the scale of happiness; and
they supposed it to be so much above that of
every other good, whether of pleasure or
profit, that the highelt measures of these were
never to be put in competition with the obl:-
gations of integrity and justice, even in mat-
ters of the smallest importance.

The Stoics concurred with the Peripatetics

ip the principal parts of this argument. They
dilfinguilied between the occasion on which a
man aded, and the acion itself. The firit
might be, and actually was frequently of a
trivial nature, while the adion was of great
importance. This they farther explained, and
urged more forcibly than the Peripatetics had
done.

They maintained, that good and evil con-

fiRed altogether in the part which a man adted,
not in the circumliances in which he was placed.

In their controversy with the Peripatetics,

they laid hold of the concessions made by the
latter, in respect to the preference due to any
consideration ofjultice before the highest con-
fiderations of pleasure or profit; and main-
tained, that it was absurd to fiate, under the
fame denominations of good and evil, things
in their nature so different, that the highest
consideration of one kind could not be brought
in competition with the lowest of the other.

That this was not merely in words, to

confound things together, which ought to be
stated apart; but to countenance hesitation and
irresolution, when sacrifices of pleasure or
interest were to be made to considerations of
justice and duty.

They observed, that, as the people are

often milled by the inaccuracy of their own
expressions, it is no inconsiderable objet of
philosophy to corred this defec, and to teach
men to call nothing good but that which is to
be chosen at all times, and without any ex-
ception whatever, and not to indulge them in
the error of confounding, under the fame

.appellations, things contingent with things
which are in their own power, and for which
.they are responsible.

They observed, that it was ablurd in the

Peripatetics, who acknowledged the fupreine
excellence of the virtues, among which mag-
nanimity and fortitude had a principal place,
nevertheless to suppose that happiness would
.be more complete if there were no occasion to
call forth or to exercise these virtues.'

It appeared absurd to fate , under the

fame denomination of good, the wealth which
the miser coveted, and the contempt of that
wealth which the liberal sometimes expressed,
and always maintained when proper.

For these reasons, the Stoics limited the

appellations of good and evil to virtue and
vice alone.

Their system, in the common acceptation

of words, feermed to be. made up of paradox.
Pain was no evil; pleasure was no good; all
external events, whether prosperous or ad-
verse, were indifferent: But this, in their
language, meant no more than that there was
no moral turpitude in pain, no moral ex-
cellence in pleasure; that virtue might be

pradtifed equally in'all events, whether prbf-
perous or adverse.

When the occasion did not require a differ-

ent choice, pleasure was to be preferred to
pain, and prosperity to :adversity;- that:, as
pleasure was often to be rejected, and pain to
be embraced, it wasi;abfurd to call that good
which it was, good;.to rejed, 'or evil, which it
was an evil to avoid. There was, in the pro-
per or improper use :of what besel us, a !aoll
good 6Or evil; but this good. was to; be found
in adversity, as well as prosperity,, and the evil
no less in prosperity; than in; adversity.

Thus we may conceive, 'that the Epicureans

made happiness to confilft in the objec&s of their
purfuity;!'r in' the eiijoyteniit of them.

Thait: the S'toies placed it in the proper

choice of their pursuits, and in the integrity
and. wisdom of their conhdf;; whilrt ':the iPeri-
patetics. required,:both to cimplete the- idea;of
happinesss or the supreme good. ' '

There. weie other schools, whose language

differed from that of the fe&s we have men-
tioned, but who, in :refpe&[ to the' effet& or
tendency of their. fyftemsn,' might be involved
with one or other of these. - ' .

In

## SECT. VI. Of the Considerations from which an Estimate may be made of what is most valuable in Human Life.

In general, it may be affirmed, that every

feE acknowledged the necessity of virtue, or
allowed, that, in every well directed pursuit
of happiness, the ftriAefl regard to morality was
required. The Stoics alone maintained that
this regard itself was happiness, or that, to
run the course of an active, firenuous, wife,
and beneficent mind, was itself the very good
which we ought to pursue.

SE CT. VI.
Of the Confideralionsfrom which an EJtimale

may be made of 'what is mnof valuable in
Human Life.

IT is a maxim allowed in some infiances, that
we ought not to dispute about tafies; but this,
in every cafe, is certainly not true.

We are by nature qualified to diflinguifl

tafles themselves, as worthy and unworthy,
as well as to diftinguifi other objects by means
of our tafies.

We think meanly of ourselves for the plea-
fures we take, or the pains we ihun; and we

.,

think well of ourselves for the pleasures we
forego, or the pains we endure.

The feeling of the present moment, unfup-

ported by experience of its effecds, unjuliified
by any judgment of its value, and unwar-
ranted by observation of what pafles in human
life, is a very uncertain, fleeting, and lalla-
cious fiandard of eliimation.

To chufe well, we ought to confider not

only what is at present agreeable, but what
occupies the mind molt intensely, what occu-
pies most continually, and what is the most
permanent subjec of fatisfadion and efieem.

By this teli the several articles of reputed

good and evil may be safely examined and
eflimated.

Animal enjoyments are occasional and tran-

fitory; they pall on the sense, or mull wait
the returns of appetite.

They occupy, therefore, but a small por-
tion of human life.

Sensuality, or the attempt to render them

continual, impairs the power of enjoyment,
and the faculties of the mind.

Sensuality is a diliemper of the imagination,

of which the languors or difgufis need to be
remedied by a mixture of rational anlufements
and pafiimes.

The sense of animal pleasure seems defined

to excite to adion, and to dired man to what
is salutary, but not to confiitute the enjoyment
of human life. Bodily pain is occasional, but
not always transient.

It appears destined to dired men in fllun-
ning what is pernicious.

It is prolonged to a greater measure than

any bodily pleasure, and sometimes actually
ends only in death.

Suitably to its final cause, the pain remains

while the attack on animal life continues; and
it increases as the danger approaches.

In human life, for the noft part, bodily

pains are but fligltly experienced, and are not
the evil which we have mofl to fear.

The continued enjoyments of men in human

life, arise from their ative engagements, their
all'edions, joys, and hopes.

Their continued sufferings arise from ill
temper, envy, jealousy, malice, and cowardice.

Men are belt amused with exercises that

engage them most, that awaken their affedions,
and occupy their talents.

For this reason the more serious and urgent

occupations are to be preferred to the more
flight and apparently pleasant.

Men of business have more enjoyment than
men of' difipation.

The reverse of amusement is inoccupation
and languor.

AfleElions are pleasant, in proportion as
they are ardent, diffused, and extensive.

Malice is painful, in proportion as it is
diffused, rancorous, and implacable.

Joy and hope are inlenfe and permanent,

in proportion as they are founded in just
opinions of things.

False opinions lead to transient joy and to
disappointment.

Grief, and fear, and disappointment, are

most fiequent where men mofi mifiake the
moment or value of things.

Vehement aflsecion, ative engagement, or

pafflon, suspend the sense of bodily pleasure
or pain.

Intelleatual enjoyments, in general, are

preferable to the animal, as they may be
rendered continual, or occupy the greater part
of human life.

It appears, upon the whole, that serious

engagements, benevolent affeclions, and jult
opinions, are the preferable source of enjoy-
ments in human life.

It has been obfcrved, that one of the

lirongeli propensities in human nature is ambi-
tion, that which tends to perfection, or the
bettering ourselves.

The phenomena of this propensity are

mixed, its abuses, emulation, pride, and
vanity, are mixed with moral approbation,
magnalninity, and elevation of mind.

Under the influence of this propenity,
men forego any pleasure, or incur any pain.

Benevolence, or the love of mankind, is

the greatest perfecion; it is likewise the source
of greatest enjoyment.

VWifdorl , or a juli efiination of things, is

the beli security agailnf disappointment, despair,
and all the wretched pallions.

Temperance is the proper use of enjoyments
of every fort.

Fortitude is an antidote to dejction and

fear, the beli security in danger, and the belt
alleviation of unavoidable sufferings.

The higher animal pleasure is rated, the

more temperance, or the proper use of them,
null be valued.

The more bodily pain appears formidable,
the more fortitude, that enables men, with

presence of mind, to avoid, or with patience
to endure it, is to be valued.

The greatest defels, as well as sufferings,

of men, are malice and cowardice, or result
from intemperance and folly.

In human nature , therefore , the most

eligible enjoyments, and the liate ofleaft susser-
ing, coincides with the most excellent slate of
the characer.

Prosperity is aqually valued, on account of

its filppofed tendency to constitute enjoyment,
or to better our fiate.

Health enables us to attain to the preferable

enjoyments and accomplishments of human life,
but is not an absolute security for either.

The proper use of health is good, the
tbufe is evil.

Good education is calculated to promote

good dispositions, and to belliow valuable
accomplishments.

Negle&t has an opposite tendency.
But neither the bell nor the worst education
necessarily produce any precise effect.

Security or liberty is belt attained under

wife political eftablifiments. It is the result of
justice, and tends to promote the love of
mankind,

This effet, and all the proper uses of
liberty, are good.

The abuse is evil.
Thraldom is, in all refpels, the reverse
of freedom or security.

Competency of fortune is sufficient to all
the purposes of animal life.

Increase of wealth does not proportionally
increase enjoyment.

It often leads to sensuality, dissipation,
sloth, pride, and disdain.

Man is formed for mixed fortune; difficul-

ties and dangers call forth powers, in the exer-
cife of which his greatelt perfecions and his
greatest enjoyments consist .

Mere life is to him an opportunity to avail

himself of the good, while it exposes him
likewise to incur the evil, of which his nature
is susceptible.

^ Henry IV. fays the President Henault, was among

the best and the greatest of our Kings. He met with that
which forms great men, and inakes them known, diffi-
culties to be furnounted. dangers to be encountered; and,
above all, adversaries who were worthy of him: as re-
quiring the full exertion of all his abilities

Abragt de I'lIiloiri de France, fin du regn: de Itenry IV.

The proper use of life is good, the abuse
of it is evil.

The value of prosperity, in general, depends
-on the proper use of advantages.

The proper use of things is a perfedion of
human nature.

The desire of perfedion, therefore, well

*underliood, appears to be the surest guide to
enjoyment, and to all the advantages of prof-
perity,

All our enjoyments, betides those of sense,

arise from our having some pursuit or affection,
to which pleasure is not the objet, but an
accession, Thus the pleasures of hunting arise
from eagerness to seize the prey; the pleasures
of occupation arise from the ardor with which
we pursue our obje6t, the pleasures of assec-
tion arise from the regard we have for other
mnen; and the pleasure of good ations arises
from the esteem of virtue. If pleasure be our
sole objet, we must forego it in all those
infiances,

The measure of good which any one pof-

fesses is to be estimated from his personal
character, not from his circurnftances, or ex-
ternal means of enjoyment.

In the different denominations of good and

evil, it appears that virtue and vice are of the
greatest moment.

The first is itself the greatest advantage,

the fecureft pofleffion, and that which enables
men belt to employ all other advantage, and
all other polIeffions.

The second is wretched in itself, and turns
every other circumstance into a curse.

# CHAP. III. OF MORAL LAW, AND THE SUBJECTS TO WHICH IT IS APPLICABLE.

## SECT. I. Of the fundamental Law of Morality.

C H A P. III.
OF MORAL LAsW, AND THE SUBJECTS TO

rWIICH IT IS APPLICABLE.

SE C T. I.

OJ the fundanmental Law of Morality.

FR o M the foregoing ertimate, we may ven-
ture to affirm, that the qualities of man's nature
are of more moment than any of the circum-
stances in which men are placed, and that the
firlt concern of a man is to confider what he
himself is, not how he is situated.

In flating a first principle of morality, how-

ever, it is not necessary to enumerate all the
valuable qualities of human nature; it is sus-
ficient to felec some fundamental article, in
itself important, and leading to the whole.

With these conditions, a principle will

serve our purpose, the better for being ex-
pressed in few words, provided it bring into
view that which is molt essential, and that
which is for ever to he kept in mind.

Under this description, we may venture

to assume, as a first principle of morality,
that the greatest good competent to man's
nature is the love of mankind.

Benevolence, and the love of mankind,

are terms nearly synonymous; but we prefer
the latter in this place, as excluding preten-
sions to merit on account of any sentiment
without an objet, and as requiring, at once,
all the efficacy of a good disposition towards
those who are within its reach.

The law of benevolence may be applied

separately to mind, and to the external actions
of men.

In its application to mind, it will lead us

to enumerate the valuable qualities conneced
with it, whether as cause or effet; and it will
lead us to complete the definition of virtue,
or the description of a rational nature accom-
plifhed and happy.

In its application to external actions, it

will lead us to confider in what variety of
external forms the fame dispositions of mind
may 'appear, and to mark out the tenor of
conduct which the just will naturally hold.

## SECT. II. Of the application of the Laws of Morality to Mind ; or of Happiness.

SEC T. II.
Of the application of the Laws of Morality

to Midl; or of HappineJfs.

H APPINEss is the possession of the greatest
good, or the possession of a mind benevolent,
wife, and courageous.

It is a difiindion of the personal qualities
of men, not of their situations.

'The foundation of happiness is a benevo-

lent aflfe&ion, ever directed towards some real
objet, but most intense towards the most
worthy, and molt adcive towards those who
need its aid.

Among its objedqs God is supreme.
This affection being an active principle,

requires or inspires all the qualities which are
requisite to attain its end.

Among these qualities wisdom occupies the
principal place.

An extensive and just underflanding leads
to piety, benevolence, and candor.

Good intentions have not the corresponding
effects, if not properly conduced.

## SECT. III. Of the degrees of Happiness, and the actual attainments of men.

Good intentions, when milled or abused,

end in disgust, or in a too general diffidence
of mankind.

This disposition requires courage and forti-

tude; for weak minds are too much occupied
with their own safety to entertain any sincere
or vigorous affecCtion.

It requires temperance; for men addiced to

sensuality or diflipation are not capable of
continued or serious attachments.

This allfeion, when sincere and ardent

naturally occupies the mind to the exclusion of
inferior pleasures, of personal anxieties, and
fears; and is therefore a principle of temper-
ance and fortitude.

S E C T. III.
Of the degrees of Haplpnefs, and the ac7ual

attainmentets of meln.

iE definitions of perfec happiness and of
perfed virtue are the fame.

Universal benevolence, unerring wisdom,

a force and elevation of mind, which inferior
pleasures cannot seduce, and which blameless
sufferings cannot depress.

In giving this definition, we present an object

of desire, without attempting to determine in
what measure or degree it has ever exified.

Men conceive perfecion, but are capable
only of improvement.

The conception of perfection is a light to
dired their progress.

The object of moral philosophy is, to as-

certain this conception, not to determine in
what degree it is realized.

The dispositions of men are various, and

their forces unequal: It is impossible to afcer-
tain the limits of their progress.

Human nature fails in the direcdion it takes,

not in the force with which every man endea-
vours to better himself.

Different men, in the pursuits of ambition,
take different diredions.

It is the ambition of one man to be rich,

of another to be noble, of a third to be re-
nowned; it would be easier to improve in the
merits of a just and vigorous mind.

Men commonly are what their conceptions

and habits of thinking have a tendency to
make them. Mifcrable under the effec of
conceptions that mislead or enfeeble the mind.
Happy under the effed of conceptions of an
opposite tendency.

## SECT. IV. Of Opinions or Conceptions productive of Misery, or that hinder Improvement (3).

SECT. IV.
Of Opinions or Conceptions produ5iae of

Miserly , or that hinder Improvement 3.

IT is unhappy to lay the pretensions of human
nature so low as to check its exertions. The;
derpair of virtue is fiill more unhappy than the
despair of knowledge.

It is unhappy to entertain notions of what

men adqually are, so high, as, upon trial and
disappointment, to run into the opposite ex-
treme of difiruft.

It is unhappy to reft our own choice of

good qualities on the supposition that we are
io meet with such qualities in other men, or
to apprehend that want of merit in other men
will dispense with that jufiice or liberality of
conduct which we ought to maintain.

It is unhappy to confider perfetion as the

fiandard by which we are to censure others,
not as the rule by which we are to conduct
ourselves.

3 See Epidetus by Arrian, and Antoninus's Medi-
tations,

It is a wretched opinion, that happiness

confifs in a freedom from trouble, or in
having nothing to do.

In consequence of this opinion, men com-
plain of what might employ them agreeably.

By declining every duty, and every adtive

engagement, they render life a burden, and
they complain that it is so.

By declining business to go in search of

amusement, they reject what is fitted to oc-
cupy them, and search in vain for something
else to quicken the languor of a vacant mind.

It is therefore unhappy to entertain an

opinion, that any thing can amuse us better
than the duties of our fiation, or than that
which we are in the present moment called
upon to do.

It is an unhappy opinion, that beneficence

is an effort of fell-denial, or that we lay our
fellow creatures under great obligations by the
kindness we do them.

It is an unhappy opinion, that any thing
whatever is preferable to happiness 4.

The

4 There is hardly a man to be found, fays an inge-

nious observer. who would not rather be in pain to
appear h:ppy. than be really happy to appear milerable;
Tat!er. Ao. 63.

The vulgar, as well as the learned, have

their paradoxes: They frequently prefer in-
terelt, fame, and power, to acknowledged
happiness.,

They prefer consideration., or the imputa-
tion of worth, to worth itself.

It is wretched to rely for happiness on what
we cannot command.

'It is wretched to have an'opinion of good

in things which we might forego with indiffer-
ence, or of evil in tliigs: which we might
endure 'ith patience; . i"'
. .

It is an error to employ terms of admira-

tion or contenipt loosely, and without'atten-
tion to their proper meaning.

We'vtilgarly fiy, :that a man is the better

or the worse, whenwe imean only that fo'iii
thing:has happen.d' 'to6 affec:his fortuine; e.

Such phrafes,"we'-fuppofe, may'be u'itder-

fltood; but, like ffiany others of the fame kind,
they'flur over a very 'bfuird apipriehen'fioin,;
that confounds exteiriil : cicumflrices : With
pe fonal qualities, ,nahdavliat lo'es not b'eibng
to a man with What Aos.: : :':;;

'Men, to appear ,appy,! run into .,pigqity ,.au
incur serious difi'ef.

9

## SECT. V. Of Opinions or Circumstances productive of Happiness, or that lead to Improvement.

SE CT. V.
Of Opinions or CircumnfJances produtive of

Happiness, or that lead to Improvement.

IT is happy to value personal qualities above
every other consideration; and to fiate per-
fetion as a guide to ourselves, not as a rule
by which to censure others.

It is happy to rely only on what is in our

ownpower; to valuethe characters ofa worthy,
benevolent, and firenupus mind, not as a form
merely to be observed in our conduct, but as
the completion of 3what we have to wiif' for in
human life, and to confider the debasements
of a malicious and cowardly nature, as.the
extreme misery to which-we are exposed.

It is happy to have continually in.view ,that

wre are members of society, and of the com-
munity ofmanlkind; 'that we are infiruments
in,the hand; of God. for. the. good of his .crea-
tures; that, if we arq ill rBerbers of society,
or unwilling infiruments in the hand of God,
we do our utmost to counterac our nature, to
ait- outfiatmon, and to iunAo ourselves.

I am in theftation which God has affgned

me, fays Epi6tetus. With this refletion, a
man may be happy in every fiation; without
it, he cannot be happy in any. Is not the
appointment of God sufficient to outweigh
every other consideration? This rendered the
condition of a slave agreeable to Epidetus,
and that of a monarch to Antoninus. This
consideration renders any situation agreeable to
a rational nature, which delights not in partial
interefis; but in universal good.

Whoever has found conceptions of things,

and possesses good personal qualities, holds
them in dependence only upon God; but the
circumfiances in which men are placed; the
policy or government of their country; their
education, inftrudion, and example, - have
great influence in determining what they shall
think, and what they ihall be inclined to-
perform. '

## SECT. VI. Application of the Laws of Morality to External Actions in general.

SE C T. VI.
Application of the Laws of Morality to

External Adions..in general.

ExTEsRN.AL actions, in refpea to the person
vhop performs them, if confidered apart from
affedion-or intention of mind, are mere move-
ments of the body,. confiituting neither enjoy-
ment nor suffering, good nor evil; and, in
riefped tp the perfqns affected by thein, are
mere physical causes,.. producing benefit or
harm, but without any moral quality whatever.

-. But affeqtion, intention, or will, being
good or evil, it follows., that the fame law of
morality which requires. or forbids. the assec-
tjin, muftlikewife require or forbid,the exter-
nal conduct that is supposed to result from: it..

The law which requires the love of man-

kind, supported by wisdom, courage , and
temperance, likewise requires every external
action that is suited to this affetion, and to
these qualifications.

The law that prohibits malice, remifinefs,

cowardice, or intemperance, prohibitslikewife
every external effect of these charaders.

## SECT. VII. Diversity of Opinions concerning the Morality of External Actions.

S E C T. VII.
Diverity of Opinions concerning the Morality

oJ External AStions.

NOTWITHSTANDING the alarming difference
which all mankind conceive between inno-
cence and guilt, honor and diflonor; yet, in
comparing theirjudgments, they do not appear
to be agreed concerning the acions which they
require or prohibit in any cafe whatever.
What is reckoned innocent or praise-worthy
in one country, is reckoned a heinous offence
in another. The definitions of theft, murder,
or treason are different in the laws of different
countries;. and actions materially the fame are,
in one cafe, morally good, in another cafe
morally evil.

The terms exprefflng the external duties of

men in one language, have not a precise equi-
valent in another. Hence we are sometimes
inclined to doubt the reality of any fiandard
by which to ascertain the diftinciobn of right
and wrong.

## SECT. VIII. Causes of this Diversity.

S EC T. VIII.

Causes of this Di,'efity.

T Hls difficulty may, in part, be removed
by observing, that, as mere external acions,
apart from intention and will have no moral
quality, we muff not expect to ascertain the
difiindion of moral good and evil in the
description of external actions. We must look
for it in what is charaReriftic of human na-
ture, will, intention, and deign, whether
benevolent or malicious.

Concerning these, there has been no diver-
lity of judgment.

All mankind are agreed, that benevolence

and courage are good, that malice and cow-
ardice are evil; and, if it should be alledged,
that any number of men are of contrary opi-
nions, yet every person may, from his own
experience, corred the error.

The different acceptation of external adions
proceeds from three different causes:

j. The difference of the cafe.
2. The different choice of the parties who
are asseted by the action in queliion.

3. The different interpretation of actions.

## SECT. IX. Difference of the Case.

SECT. IX.

Difference of the Cafe.

CASES change with the person, and with
circumstances.

An action materially the fame is permitted

to one person, and forbidden to another: It
is the duty of a magistrate to put the guilty to
death; this would be criminal in a private party.

A person may kill in his own defence, but
not in different circumstances.

Cafes are varied indefinitely; and rules of

a&ion being general, cannot provide for all
the peculiarities of any cafe whatever.

The only direftion on which men can rely
in every particular cafe, is the difcernmentof

f .,,:r. 'anl hprpvrrpnt mind.

## SECT. X. Difference of Choice.

S E C T. X.

Diference, of Choice.

TH E different choice of parties interested in
the efifet of any acion, arises from opinion.

One person believes that to be good for

hinifelf, Which another'perfon believes to be
evil. In their reuiiifition of beneficent actions,
they differ accordiigly: One man requires as a
favor' what another'would resent as an injury.
'; There is. no' external effect of which men
may not entertain'dciitradidory opinions, even
of life and:of death: '

' The father armong the Efquimaux requires,

at a certain age,; that' his own children mhould
puti hirim tbo death.' '

The' widow inhEurope desires to have a

good settlement inade by her deccafed hus-
band: In India, mhe desires to be burnt on
his funeral pile.

In every cafe, ations are required as the
effeEs or expressions of kindness and regard.

## SECT. XI. Difference of Interpretation.

S C T. XI;

Dierence of Interpretation.

IN many infiances, external anions are, in
their own nature, indifferent, or of no effect;
but are the eflablifhed signs and exprelions of
neglect or attention, of good or of ill will,
or of some affecion or disposition.

Such are many religious rites in every

country, and many ceremonies observed in
common life. Even actions of more oonfe-
quence are fiequently more regarded on account
of their meaning, than on account of any
other effet.

The ingenuous or malicious mind is so well

known in every age or country by some deter-
minate course of life, that the cufiomary action
alone is sufficient to procure approbation or
blame: We look no farther in difiinguifling
right and wrong; and, as the peasant is fur-
prifed to hear a language different from his
own, and doubts whether they who use it
possess the fame faculties of reason with him-
self; so we are surprised to be told that men
are pleased with what is offeniive, or difplcafed

with what is agreeable to us, and doubt
whether they have like sentiments of morality
with us.

But, so far as adions are mere epreffions,

the choice of them, like that of words, is
perfeEly arbitrary;, and nations may differ from
each other in .their external observances, as
they do in their speech, without any incon-
venience whatever. One nation commends
what another condemns, merely because they
interpret the fame, or a like adion, differently.

The diversities of manners arising from dif-

ference of choice or interpretation, render it
difficult to judge of the merits or personal
qualities of men, in ages or nations remote
from our own.

The vulgar are able to interpret only the

manners of their own condition and country;
they commonly mistake those of a different
rank, or of foreigners.

There is, in fadt, nothing in external man-

ners which opinion may not render agreeable
or disagreeable; and the opinion of one country
is not the rule or standard by which to judge
of the manners of another.

The definitions of crimes vary in the law

of different countries; because different overt
ads are specified as the marks of guilt.

## SECT. XII. Fundamental Laws of External Action.

Terms of praise or blame have not their

precise equivalent in different languages; be-
cause men combine variously, under different
terms, the circumstances from which they infer
merit or demerit.

This is consistent with a perfeA agreement

of opinion concerning any particular circum-
fiance apart, as well as, in general, concerning
what is good or evil, in the dispositions of men.

SECT. XII.

Fundamental Laws of External A4ion.

i. IN matters indifferent, we ought to ob-
serve the manners of our country, as we speak
its language, or wear its dress.

2. In matters of importance, we ought to

chufe what is for the good of mankind, in
opposition to opinion and custom.

Thus we ought to do whatever tends to

inspire benevolence, to check malice, and to
secure the rights of mankind; and ought to
avoid whatever has a contrary effe6t, and
whatever tends to make way for oppression.

## SECT. XIII. Of the different Sanctions under which External Actions are required or prohibited.

When the habits or affeAions of men change

for the better or the worse, they improve or
degenerate.

When their customs change from what is

innocent, or beneficial to mankind, to what
is pernicious, they are said to undergo, not a
change of manners merely, but to be depraved.

If they mould be ignorant of the tendency

of their own pernicious cultoms and manners,
even this ignorance would be an article of
depravity.

S E C T. XIII.
Of the dfferent Sandions under which External

ASdions are required or prohibited.

1 HE fandion of any law is the good or ill
annexed to the observance or to theneglec of it.

The general fandion of moral law is, that

the observance of it is happiness, and the
negled is misery.

This fandion is variously modified in the

cafe of external adion, by considerations of
force, or considerations of propriety, and in-
ducements of choice. Hence,

i. The fianlion of compulsory law.

## SECT. XIV. Of Parties to whom the Laws of Morality reser.

2. The fandion of duty.
The fandions of compulsory law are, any

forcible means employed by men to vindicate
their own rights, or those of others.

The fanetions of duty are, any confidera-

tions that determine men, from choice, to at
properly.

SE C T. XIV.
Of Parties to wvhom the Laws of

Morality refer.

T H E laws of morality may be referred to
the condud of single parties, in refpedl to one
another, or to the proceedings of collecive
bodies, in refpedl to their own members.

The condud of tingle parties is required,

or prohibited, either under the special fanc-
tions of compulsory law, or under the fanc-
tions of duty.

Condud required or prohibited under the

fandion of compulsory law, is the subjed of
jurisprudence.

ConduA required or prohibited under the
fandion of duty, is the subjed of cafuifiry.

Proceedings of collective bodies, in what

affects the fiate and form of their community,
is the fubjecl of politics.

Communities fiated in their relation to each
other, are to be confidered as single parties.

':'~. *

,C . : . '

~ i"> . .4 .

i. , .. . .. ...' _

:Z . .4 . :,',
:

# PART V. OF JURISPRUDENCE.

# CHAP. I. Of the Foundations of Compulsory Law.

INSTITUTES

O F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART V.
OF JURISPRUDENCE.

C A P. I.
Of the Foundations of Compuilfory Law.

H E, fundamental law of morality ,- in its

first application to the actions of men, is pro-
thibitory: and forbids the commiffioii'f w'rongs.

Every person being entitled to defend hi'm-

felf:and'ihis 'fellow-creatures, may repel'any
wrong by force; and the prohibition bf'irbdrigs
is tlle!firft'compulfoty lawtof nature.$: '. '-;''

Any article in the state of a man.which:miniy
'be niairitaired by:foreej, :isetrmed his right.

Jurisprudence confiisi of two parts;.: :
* The:i:e relates? t:;the rights; tie 'econd,
.' tlhe'de'&cesgof men; i - .. . .: .

# CHAP. II. Of the Rights of Men in general.

CHA P. II.

Of the Rights of 3ien in general.

A Right is such a relation of the person to
a thing, that no alteration ought to be made
in it without his own consent.

The term ouoght, in this definition, implies
a sentiment of moral obligation.

Things are the constituents of the person,
or the confiituents of a person's fate.

A regard to the rights of men is compre-

hended in the law of felf-prefervation, com-
bined with the law of society; or, in other
words, this sentiment of right is inseparable
from ourdifpofition to preserve ourselves, and
our- fello1w-creatures . ; : .::,

. rong is a violation of right.. The moral

Sentiment arising from a sense of wrong in our
own-cafe is exafperated-by rfentment;: in that
of others, is indignation,. conceived' on; the
perception of guilt-,in one, and of suffering
in, another. . .
.

No one can have a. right to what; is:, not

possible, or not rea. . :.L

:.,Tjhe right.of one man; to any; gisen. thing,
excludes the claim of a nother to teaja e .thing.

CHAP.

# CHAP. III. The Law of Defence in general.

C H A P. III.

The Law of Defence in general.

A Right may be maintained by any means
that are effedual and neceflary.

This law of defence includes three clauses:
1. That a wrong apprehended may be
prevented.

2. That a wrong offered may be repelled.
3. That a damage done ihould be repaired.

1o

# CHAP. IV. OF RIGHTS OF DIFFERENT DENOMINATIONS.

## SECT. I. General Division.

## SECT. II. Of Rights Personal.

C H A P. IV.
OP RIGHTS OF DIFFERENT DENOMINATIONS.

S E C T. I.

General Division.

nIGHTS may be confidered in refpe& to their
fubje&, or in refped to their source.

In the first refped, they are said to be
personal, or real.

In the second, they are said to be original,
or adventitious.

S E C T. II.

Of Rights Personal.

PE RS N AL rights fubfit in the person, and
relate to the confliituents of his nature.

Persons are said to be natural or artificial.
Persons natural are single men.
Persons artificial are corporations or fiates.
The rights of natural persons subsist in the

limbs and members of the body, in the facul-
ties and talents of the mind, and the uses of
both.

## SECT. III. Of Rights Real.

## SECT. IV. Of Original Rights.

The rights of artificial persons fubfirt in

their confiituent members, their fortis, and
their laws.

S E C T. III.

Of Rights Real.

REAL rights subsist in things of which any
person may have the exclusive use.

Real rights may be referred to three prin-
cipal heads:

Poffefflon, Property, and Command.
Poffefflon constitutes right only while a
thing is in actual use.

Property constitutes a continual right;
No one can have a right of possession ti
the property of another.

Command is a right to the ferivies of
obedience of other men,

S E C T. IV.

Of Original Rights.

O RIGINAL rights are the universal a'ppiu
tenances of man's nature, and coeval with his~
being.

## SECT. V. Of Adventitious Rights.

The- personal rights of men are original.
If.we suppose that nature authorizes lwhat-

ever is neceflary to the preservation of her
works, the right of the parent to command the
infant ch;ld is original; but, in every other
instance, no man has an original right to force
the ol edi-nce of another, except in obliging
him to ab.iain or desist from wrongs.

SE C T. V.

Of Advlenlilious Righls.

A.DVEIN-TTIqTIj u rights are luch as accrue
variously to men in the course of human life.

Original: rights are recognised on being
mentioned, -

Adventitious rights are matter of dilcuffion',
and recognised only so far as they are proved.

In treating of adventitious rights, we nwuei:

not only enumerate their fubjeds, but likewil'e
the means by -which they may be acquired.

Possession, property , and command are
adventitious rights.

The adventitious diflindions in focicty arc

founded-, for the most part, on property and
command.

# CHAP. V. Of the Laws of Acquisition in general.

Cq s P. 'V.

Of the Laws of,:.Actfition in general.

No right can be 'acquirld: by injuftiie;' or,
in other words, by'any- deed piernicious' to
mankind.: -

The means of acquiring any rigst.'may'be
referred to four principat hea'd: ' H:-: -

Occupancy, Labori ::Goineritiii ,;-: a:d;
Forfeiture. ;

i·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~' " ^

# CHAP. VI. Law of Occupancy.

CHR A P.

La4 of Qpccupancy.

O ccIuP.IAN is-fuch a relation ofa person
to a. thing, As that .no.- other perfoRn can use
the fame thing, without detriment or moles-
ttion top Ae ;oceupie'. .,

In this maanne ,; .pefon may occupy the.

ground oniE.hich he lies, the vater he drinks,
the air he breathes, the light that fiines upon
him, the trad of the sea on which he fails;
but no one can occupy the earth, the passing
stream, the atmosphere, the light of day, or
the ocean.

# CHAP. VII. The Law of Acquisition by Labor.

CH P. VII.

The Law of Acquiftion by Labor.

LA BOR is any effort by which a person may,
for his own use, fabricate, procure, or im-
prove any unappropriated subje&t.

The right acquired to the fruits of labor,

is implied in the original right all men have
to the use of their talents or faculties.

Prior to convention, men do not acquire

rights by the observance of any form or cere-
mony that is of no effect; for the right acquired
is only to the use of what is produced.

Mere accession, or what is not the effect of

any care and labor, if there be no convention
to the contrary, falls to the first occupier.

The increase of a man's flocks or herds,

being the fruits of his care, is his property;
but the accellion of new lands or islands con-
tiguous to his, falls to the first occupier.

A man, by laboring on another's property,

cannot annul the other's right; on the con-
trary, the fruit of his labor, if it. cannot be
removed without damage to the principal sub-
jed, falls to the proprietor of that subjed.

But a person who happens, bonafide, to

employ his labor on the subjed of another,
may remove or enjoy the fruit of his labor,
if this can..be done without detriment or in-
conVeniency to the other.

Civil conventions accommodate the effecs

.of accession or of labor to the conveniency of
parties, and'to the policy of particular flates.

, J ',: ,,
. .…

# CHAP. VIII. THE LAWS OF ACQUISITION BY CONTRACT.

## SECT. I. The Obligations of Contract.

C H AP. VIII.
TrIE LASS OP ACQUISITION BY CONTRACT.

SECT. I.

The Obligations of Contral.

A Contrad is the engagement of parties to
perform what is supposed to be in their power.

Engagements are made by promises.
Men, by nature, rely on the performance
of promises.

The obje& of a promise or engagement be-

comes, to the person accepting of that pro-
mise, part of his state; breach of faith is an
injury, and he is entitled to repel it by force.

Here the compulsory law of Nature, which,

in its original form, is prohibitory, or nega-
live, becomes, in appearance, positive, re-
quiring some accual performance; but the
object of law is nevertheless a mere prevention
of that wrong, which a breach of faith wouldA
conflitute.

## SECT. II. Laws of Contract in general.

S E CT. II.

Laws of Contra in general.

.T H E source of conventional obligation,

is the right of one party to exact a performance
upon which another has made him rely.

2. Contracls, therefore, create right only

to what depends on the will of contrading
parties.

3. To constitute a contra6, mutual promi-

fes, or a promise and acceptance, are necef-
fary between parties, ading freely, and pof-
sessed of the use of their reason.

Although one party has promised, if the

other has not accepted, the lalt cannot pretend
to have an expecttion raised.

But mutual promise implies acceptance.
Men who are known to be under reliraint

or insanity, cannot raise any reasonable ex-
pedation.

4. A party may stipulate in person, or by

his agent or messenger, in words, acdions, or
signs, that are underflood.

5. A person is bound by the stipulations of
a servant or messenger, to whom he has given

credentials, or whom he has authorized by
sufficient acknowledgments of his trust.

6. Words are to be interpreted in their

most ordinary sense, or in the sense in which
it appears from other signs that they were in-
tended to be used.

7. An ation of any kind, performed with

L view to raise expectation, or by which it is
known that expetations are naturally raised,
is fuflicient to contfitute a contrad.

8. Custom is a reasonable ground of expec-
tation; and therefore is binding on all parties.

Great part of the civil conventions of-men

are conflituted by the received cullowns of their
country.

A practice introduced by force may become

a legal cufiom: for being such as men are re-
concileable to, after they are reconciled, and
continue to observe it voluntarily, it becomes
a matter of convention.

But pralcices, or fufWerings, to which men

are not reconcileable, and with which they
are made to comply by force, are usurpations,
and never can, on the foot of consuetude, be
confidered as matter of convention.

## SECT. III. Contracts of different denominations.

## SECT. IV. Of the Exceptions to Contracts in general.

S E C T. III.

Contracts of different denominations.

CONTRACTS may be diftinguilhed as absolute,
or conditional; and as single, or reciprocal.

Absolute contrats: are constituted by a
simple promise and acceptance.

Conditional contra.s express promise and
acceptance under a. condition.

Single contracs consist in the promise of
one party, and acceptance of the other.

Here one party is promising, the other
accepting.

Reciprocal contracts consist of mutual pro-
mises, and mutual acceptance.

Here each party is both promising and
accepting.

S E C T. IV.

Of the. Exceptions to. Contrals in general.

A NY promise given is rendered void, by the
exceptions of force, fraud, injustice, or in-
possibility.

FIRST EXCEPTION.

Force is constituted by a&tual violence, or
menaces, employed by the accepting party.

This exception is valid.
1. Because a person extorting a promise by

force, cannot have a reasonable expectation of
its performance being intended.

2. Because the party offering force commits

an injury; and instead of acquiring a right,
may be prevented, repelled, or obliged to
make reparation.

N. B. This exception does not extend to

the cafe of contracts entered into with one
party, on account of the violence offered by
another.

Nor is this exception admitted by the prac-

tice of nations in the cafe of any surrender at
war, or military capitulation.

SECOND EXCEPTION.

Fraud is constituted by the deceit which a
party employs to obtain a promise.

This exception is valid,
1. Because a party who is known to be

deceived concerning what he promises, cannot
raise an expectation that he will perform when
undeceived.

2. Because deceit, or imposition, is an
injury, and gives a title to reparation.

1N. B. This exception does not invalidate

the promise made to an innocent party in con-
sequence of the misinformation of another.

Nor does it invalidate any military capitu-
lation, though obtained by firatagem.

THIRD EXCEPTION.

Injustice consists in the wrong which a third

party would susser from the performance of a
contra&c

There are four different cafes in which
this exception may be offered:

Cafe I. When neither of the contrasting
parties was aware of ite wrong.

In this cafe the contract is simply void.
Cafe 2. When only the party accepting
was aware of the wrong.

In this cafe, the contract is void; and the

party accepting has committed an injury against
the party pronifing, as well as against the third
party, who, if the contract had taken effet,
was likely to have suffered.

Cafe 3. When only the party promising
was aware of the wrong.

If he promised with intention to perform,
he is injurious to the third party concerned.

If he promised with intention to plead the
exception, he is injurious to the party accepting.

Cafe 4. When both parties were aware
of the injufiice.

Both are injurious to the third party con-
cerned.

FOURTH EXCEPTION.

Impossibility extends to every cafe that can-

not, in the nature of things, take place; to
every article that exceeds the power, or that
does not depend on the will, of the parties.

This exception, like the former, may be
offered in' four cafes.

Cafe 1. When neither contracting party
was aware of the impossibility.

The contract is simply void.
Cafe 2. When only the party accepting
was aware of the impossibility. -

This condud is either irrational, or may

be injurious to the party promising, by drawing
him into snares and fruitless attempts.

Cafe 3. When only the party promising
was aware of the impollibility.

## SECT. V. Exceptions peculiar to Conditional and Reciprocal Contracts.

It is injurious to the accepting party, by
creating vain expectations.

The 4th cafe, Supposing both parties aware

of the impossibility, is altogether irrational and
absurd.

SEC T. V.
Exceptions peculiar to Conditional and

Reciprocal Contracas.

ALL conditional contraas are void, if the
condition has failed, or is found to be unjust
or impossible.

The condition may be a mere contingency,
or it may depend on the will of either party.

If a contingency, thepartiesmaybe allowed

to interpose, as they do in games of Ikill and
dexterity.

Or they may not be allowed to interpose,
as in games of chance.

If the condition depend on the will of the

party promising, he becomes bound to perform
one a6tion, only, in consequence of having
performed another.

If

If it depend on the will of the accepting

party, he acquires a right only in cafe of having
performed his condition.

In mutual contrads, a party failing on his

part, has no title to exad performance on the
other part.

Pi

# CHAP. IX. Of the Law of Acquisition by Forseiture.

CH A P. IX.

Of the Law of Acquiition by Foifeiture.

W a oEVER has done an injury is bound
to repair it. In this manner, the injurious
person may have forfeited to another what was
formerly his own right.

No man can forfeit by aftions casual and

involuntary. Such aaions, when prejudicial
to others, are misfortunes, not injuries.

# CHAP. X. OF THE LAW OF ACQUISITION , AS APPLICABLE TO PARTICULAR RIGHTS.

## SECT. I. Of Possession.

## SECT. II. Of Property.

C A P. X.
OF TH l.AWI OF ACQUISITION, AS APPLICABLE

TO PARTICULAR RIGITS.

S E C T. I.

Of Pofftion.
H I s is acquired by occupancy alone.

S E C T. II.

Of Properly.

' 1 HIS is acquired, to any subjed formerly
unappropriated, by labor alone.

The effect of prescription in civil society,
results fiom convention, not from occupancy.

Property may be transferred by convention
or forfeiture.

A convention transferring property, is a
conveyance.

A conveyan ce confi ts of consent and delivery.
A party who has obtained consent without

delivery, may defend, or occupy, the flbjed&,
in right of the lormer proprietor, notin his own.

## SECT. III. Of the Right to Command.

Hence it is argued, that the mere consent

of a party deceased, without delivery, cannot
convey property; because the party deceased
having no right, the fubje6 falls to the first
occupier.

The force of lalt wills is an effedt of con-

vention among the living, not of right fur-
-iving the dead.

SECT. III.

Of the Righi to Command.

T H E right to command is acquired by con-
trad or forfeiture.

The contract between the mafier and hired
servant is a reciprocal contra&c

The terms are such as they mutually ftipu-
late, or such as known customs ertablifh.

The civil contract or convention between

the magifirate and subjed, or sovereign and
people, is likewise reciprocal.

The terms are such as the parties stipulate

in express charters and fiatutes, or such as may
be ascertained from known cufloms.

The social compac, from which, accord-
ing to some writers, all the mutual duties of

men in society are derived, is a mere fi&ion in
theory, rcfembling the fition in law, by
which a plea Awhich arises from one source,
is fufiained as coming from another.

Thus mutual pleas of guardian and ward,

which arose from equity, were sustained in
the Roman law as arising from contrat.

There never 'was in reality any contra&

prior to the eliablifhlnent offociety. Customs,
charters, and liatutes, which constitute or
express the civil conventions of men, are all
polierior to the cliablifllment of society.

Fi(lions of law may be convenient in

arranging civil actions, but are of no use in
explaining the laws of nature; for by the law of
nature, every right, and every obligation, is
admitted only where it is real, and can receive
no confirmation from any fidtion whatever.

The original rights of men, founded in

humanlity, and in the title of every person to
defend hirnfelf, are so lar from gaining force
by being referred to a supposed convention,
that they are actually weakened.

Alen are equally sensible of their obligation

to abliain from wrong of any kind, as from
breach of faith. The obligation to abstain fioml
breach of faith, is actually comprehended in

the more general obligation to abfiain from
harm of any kind.

A right to command is sometimes acquired

by forfeiture, when a person who has done a
wrong, becomes bound to repair it by his
services.

No contrac or forfeiture can deprive a man

of all his rights, or render him the property
of another.

No one is born a slave; because every one
is born with all his original rights.

No one can become a save; because no

one, from beingaperfon, can, inthelanguage
of the Roman law, become a thing, or subject
of property.

The supposed property of the matter in the

slave, therefore, is matter of usurpation, not
of right.

# CHAP. XI. OF THE LAW OF DEFENCE.

## SECT. I. Of the Means of Defence in general.

C H A P. XI.
OF THE LAWr OF DEFENCE.

SECT. I.

Of the Means of Defence in general.

BY the law of defence, a person may main-
tain his right against any other person who
wrongs, or is likely to wrong him, by any
means that are necessary for this purpose.

The means of defence may be referred to
three principal heads:

Perfna(ion, Artifice, and Force.
The law of defence does not authorize the

use of any means that are unnecessarily hurtful
to the party againit whom they are employed.

A man is entitled only to preserve his owrn

right: Whatever harm he does beyond what
is necessary for this purpole, is an injury.

The law of defence may be applied to per-
sons in three different cafes:

## SECT. II. The case of Single Parties Strangers to each other , or unconnected.

1. That of single parties supposed Strangers,
and unconnected.

2. That of fellow-citizens.
3. That of nations.

SECT. II.
The cafe of Single Parties Strangers to each

other, or unconnected.

T H I s cafe is commonly treated of under the
title of the fiate of nature; and in this fate
every man is supposed unconneded with all men.

It is absurd to entitle that the fate of nature

to which men are not naturally disposed, and
in which they most certainly never were known.

It is a mere supposition, under which

certain applications of the law of nature may
be abliradtly confidered.

Writers have not recolleted, that it was

sufficient for the purpose of their reasonings,
to suppose any two or more parties uncon-
necled with one another, though not uncon-
necled with all mankind.

Such parties are possessed of their original

rights; but having no convention, can have
none of those rights, and none of those obliga-
tions , which arise from convention alone.

i

## SECT. III. The Case of Fellow-Citizens.

If either party fliould commit an injury

againfi the other, the injured would be entitled
to his defence.

It is vain to ask, who is to judge between

them; for all reference to judges is excluded
by the supposition.

They must act and judge for themselves;

and where persuasion and artifice have failed,
or are not likely to succeed, may employ
force, but fiill upon the fuppolition that they
employ it only in defence of their right.

SE C T. III.

The Cafe of Fellow-Citizens.

F E L L ow-citizens are connected by civil and
political conventions; on which are founded a
variety of adventitious obligations and rights.

The obligations of fellow-citizens are either

those of fellow-fubjeds, or of magifirate and
subjec.

Fellow-filbjefts have stipulated to refer their

differences to the judgment of courts, and to
employ, in their defence, the power of the
magifirate.

This law admits of the following exceptions:
i. Where the judgment of courts cannot

be had, nor the power of the magifirate inter-
posed, to prevent an injury.

2. Where the relief by civil suit cannot be
adequate to the injury apprehended.

Judges are bound to decide according to law
and jutlice.

Mlagilirates are bound to defend the rights
of the Iubje&.

The magitirate, as acling in defence of the

state, and of its fubjecds, is entitled to repress
crimes by refiraints and punilhments.

He is dirce(lcd, in the applical ion ofreftraints

and punishments, by the law ol'nature, and of
convention.

The law of nature, where there is no con-

vention to the contrary, limits the power of
the magililate to what is necelfary to defend
the innocent. All restraints or severities em-
ployed beyond these limits are unlawful.

It is not always expedient, in civil society,

to carry puniffliment to the utmolt rigor even
of natural law.

The laws of convention are various in dif-

ferent fates; in some nations permitting arbi-
trary imprifonmcnt, unlimited severities, and

## SECT. IV. The Case of Nations.

tortures, for every crime, at the discretion of
the magifirale.

Powers of this fort are frequently ufurpa-

tions on the part of the magifirate, not his
rights.

The rights of the fubjccl are in danger,

when the magilirate either adopts a rule that
is uni li, or wlhen his decisions are irregular
and arbitrary.

S E CT. IV.

The Cafe of NLalios.

.A-IOG nations, the ad of the sovereign,
or of those employed by the sovereign, is con-
fidered as the act of the nation.

The acl of any private person is not the ar

of the fiate, except so far as, in his action, lie
is proteted or acknowledged by the fiate.

A nation may receive an injury in the
perlbn of any of its members.

A nation injured, may make reprisals on

the persons and effedls of any, or all the sub-
jeds of the offending nation.

Nations who maintain controverted rights

by artifice or by force, arc laid to be in a
slate of war.

War is jufl only on the supposition of in-
juries apprehended, offered, or perpetrated.

Remonfirances and declarations, wherever

they can be falely employed, ihould precede
hofiilities.

The immediate objea of war is victory.
The laws of war previous to victory are,
i. Such holtilities only are lawful as are
necelfary to obtain the victory.

2. Wherever it is safe to grant an enemy
quarter, it is not lawful to refuse it.

3. Breach of faith is exploded in the practice

of nations at war, and would be ruinous to
mankind.

4. Any party may assist the injured; but

whoever affilis the injurious, may be treated
as an enemy.

5. The Person or effeds of an enemy, where-

ever found, may be seized, if this can be done
Without detriment to any innocent party.

6. The effects of a friend going to an enemy,

if they would enable him better to carry on
the war, may be seized.

7. Captives may be detained while the war

continues, and until fatisfadion and security
be obtained.

## SECT. V. Conclusion of Jurisprudence.

Laws of war after victory:
1. The conqueror may avail hinfelf of his

power to preserve his rights, and obtain repara-
tion of a wrong that has been done him.

2. Succels in war does not confiitute a right;

but damages and suffering incurred in war give
a title to indemnification.

3. The conqueror may take such precau-

tions, by disabling his enemy, as give hin a
proper degree of security for the future.

4. Nations do not acquire a property in

the perlons of their captives, as they do in
efl'eds lawfully seized.

SE C T. V.

ConcluJion of Jurisprudence.

BY the maxims of compulsory law, a person
may, on every occasion, maintain his right:
But from considerations of duty, he is, on
many occasions, obliged to forego it.

A person is more concerned to maintain

and to exercise the asseRtions of a beneficent
mind, than he is to preserve his condition in
any other refpet.

The conventional laws of society, in some

infiances, as well as the law of humanity,
admit, that the extreme neceflity of one party
may fuperfedc the right of another.

# PART VI. OF CASUISTRY.

# CHAP. I. Of the Sanctions of Duty in general.

INSTITUTES

F
MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

P A T VI.
OF CASUISTRY.

C H AP. I.

Of lhe Sanqlions of Dully in general.

A LAW of duty is an expression of what a
person ought to do from choice; and in doing
which, he is said to have merit; or in doing
the contrary, to have demerit.

The firIt application ol the fundamental law

of morality is prohibitory, forbidding the com-
milfion of wrongs.

The second is positive, requiring every

external efled of virtue, or of good-will to
mankind.

But ads of good-will or beneficence cannot
be extorted by force.

The object of compulsory law, is the pre-

fervalion of parties exposed to wrongs; who,
in defending themselves, may, even by force,
oblige others to defilt from injuries.

The objet of morality, in what relates to

the duties of men, is the virtue of those
who a&.

Compulsion would alienate the affetions
of men.

Favors extorted by force would be rob-
beries.

Whoever employs deception or force, ex-

cept in his own defence, or in that of his
fellow-creatures, commits an injury.

The fandions of duty, are those of religion,
of public repute, and of conscience.

CHAP.

# CHAP. II. Of the Sanction of Religion.

C AP. II.

Of the Sanclion of Religion.

RVELIGION is the sentiment of the mind relat-
ing to God.

The fan6tion of religion is its tendency to
influence men's condut.

This tendency is of two kinds.
The first is, to make men love wisdom

and beneficence, as being the chara6terifiics of
the Supreme Being, whom they adore; and
to make them love their situations and their
duties, as being appointed by Providence.

The second is, to make them hope for
rewards, and to fear punifhincnts.

The religious doctrin e of rewards and punish-

ments is a species of compulsory law, extend-
ing to all the thoughts and inclinations, as
well as the actions of men.

This law, in all its extent, can be safely
applied by every person only to hiinfelf.

When magistrates think thlemfelves armed
with the fan6tion of religion, and entitled to

12

restrain thoughts as well as acions, they attempt
what is placed beyond the reach of their power.

Superstition, or the abuse of religion, has
been accompanied with very fatal eflecs:

With a misapplication of moral efieem,

and the fubfiitution of frivolous rites for moral
duties; with cruel animofities of party, and a
false apprehension of fandtity in any ats of
injustice and horror that proceed from a sup-
posed religious zeal.

# CHAP. III. The Sanctions of Public Repute.

C n A P. IlI.

The Sancnions of Public Repute.

T HESE fandions include the influence of pre-
vailing opinions and examples, together with
the commendations and censures men beftoYV
on the actions that please or offend them.

The influence of prevailing opinions and

examples, arises from the social nature of man;
and is one condition by which men are fitted
to ad in companies and societies.

The tendency of this influence is good or

evil, according to the nature of the opinions
or examples that prevail.

Nothing distinguishes men of a happy nature

more than that force with which they are tome-
times able to correct false opinions, and with
which they are always able to resist their
contagion.

It is part in the social nature of man, to
desire praise, and to shun blame.

restrain thoughts as well as alcions, they attempt
what is placed beyond the reach of their power.

Superstition, or the abuse of religion, has
been accompanied with very fatal ell'eds:

With a misapplication of moral efieem,

and the substitution of frivolous rites for moral
duties; with cruel animofities of party, and a
false apprehension of fantity in any ats of
injustice and horror that proceed from a sup-
posed religious zeal.

C AP. II.

The San6lions of Public Repute.

TaHESE fandions include the influence of pre-
vailing opinions and examples, together with
the commendations and censures men beftov
on the actions that please or offend them.

The influence of prevailing opinions and

examples, arises from the social nature of man;
and is one condition by which men are fitted
to adt in companies and societies.

The tendency of this influence is good or

evil, according to the nature of the opinions
or examples that prevail.

Nothing distinguishes men of a happy nature

more than that force with which they are bome-
times able to correct false opinions, and with
which they are always able to resist their
contagion.

It is part in the social nature of man, to
desire praise, and to ihun blame.

This puts it in the power of every person to

reward adions agreeable, and to puniih adions
disagreeable to himself: But as commenda-
tion and censure are frequently ill diflributed
it is a great weakness to be guided chiefly by
such considerations.

# CHAP. IV. Of the Sanctions of Conscience.

C H A P. IV.

Of the SanSions of Conscience.

T1. s fandion is conflituted by the satis-
fa6cion men have in doing right, and the Lhaine
or remorse which arises from having done
wrong.

Men being desirous of personal excellen-

cies, and averse to personal defects, have satis-
fadion in acdions that tend to the purposes of
virtue.

They feel remorse or shame for ations that
tend to the purposes of vice.

The fentillents of conscience are frequently

blended with those of fuperliition or cultom,
and, like them, are subjed to error.

It is the objed of cafuiltry to prevent, or

to carrec such errors, by pointing out the real
tendencies of virtue and of vice in external
a4ions.

# CHAP. V. OF THE TENDENCY OF VIRTUE IN EXTERNAL ACTIONS (1).

## SECT. I. Of the different branches of Virtue.

C H A P. V.
OF THE TE.NDENCY OF VIRTLE IN EXTEPN7AI

ACTIO'NS '

SE C T. I.

Of the dferent branches of Virtue.

IT has been observed, that a fool can neither
come into company, nor go out of it; can
neither fit, fiand, nor walk, like a man of
sense '. It may be said likewvife, that a knave
can do nothing like a man of probity.

The law of external action is so essential to

morality, that men very frequently confine the
\hbloe of morality to this law.

But virtue is, in reality, a qualification of

the mind, although the term equivalent to
virtue, in every language, implies all the
required effecls and appearances of this qua-
lification.

Its constituents are, Disposition, Skill,
Application, and Force.

1 Cicero de officiis, lib. i.
Maxims of La Bruycre.

Corresponding to the number of these con-

iit>,':lts, virtue has been divided into tour
capital branches, called the Cardinal [Vilrues.

These are, Jtfiice, Prudence, Temperanhe,
and Fortitude.

Jufiice, is the regard flown to the rights
and happiness of mankind.

Those effects of justice which mere inno-

cence implies, are required under the fanetion
of coumpulfory law.

Those that constitute beneficence, are re-
quired under the fancdtions of duty only.

Prudence is that discernment by vhich men

diftinguilh the value of ends, and the fitness
of neans to obtain them.

WVithout this qualification, men are not

fitted to ad with any measure of ileadinefs
confiliency, or good eflfet.

Temperance is ablilnence from inferior

pleasures or amusements that mislead our
pursuits.

No one can apply himself effedually to any

worthy purpose, who is liable to the interrup-
tion of mnean pleasures or amufenents, that

3 This division is so natural, that it has alw'iys

presented itself whcn we hlave treated of the ielicilt o'.
.xcelleiicc competent to man's nature.

## SECT. II. Of Duties referred to Probity or Justice.

occupy an improper part of his time, that flifle
his afl'elions, or impair his faculties.

The maxim of temperance is, that a perton,

having once ascertained what his belt and
happiest engagements are, ought to count every
moment loft, that, withoutneceflity, is other-
wife employed.

Fortitude is the power to withfiand oppo-
fition,,.difficulty, and danger.

All the good qualities of men have a re-

ference to some effe& that is to be produced,
and have a merit proportioned to some diffi-
culty thlatis overcome. Hence diSpositions and
capacities of any fort are of no avail, without
resolution, and force.of mind.

S E C T. II.

Of Duties referred to Probity or JuJiice.

D IITIES referred to probity, are either private
or public.

T H E private duties are, Innocence, Can-

dor, Piety, Frien(d/hip, Gratitude, Liberality,
Charity, Civility, and Politeness.

Innocence has been observed to be the

objetl of conmpulfory law, and is the molt in-
difpenfible charaderiRtic of probity.

It implies, beside other effecs, Veracity

and Faithfulness: the first opposed to deceit;
the second, to perfidy.

Candor is the just allowance given to the

pretensions or merits of other men, in oppo-
fition to prejudice, or to the suggestions of
interest.

Piety is the exercise of veneration and love;

firfi, towards God; next, towards those who
by nature or choice are proper objects of our
reipect and affeclion.

The exprellions of piety to God are either
fixed or arbitrary.

Its fixed expressions are ads of beneficence,

which concur with the providence of God in
promoting the good of his creatures.

Its arbitrary expressions are the different
riles eliablifled in different countries.

FrieidJlip is the beneficence of private

parties, proceeding from motives of particular
efieem and attachment.

This includes the reciprocal duties of parent

and child. Of husband and wile, and of all
other private relations.

The duties of the parent are, to maintain,

to protea, to educate, his child; and, as far
as he is able, to efiabliih and to secure his
fiate or condition.

The duties of the child are, obedience,
deference, and gratitude.

Many of the duties of hulband and wife are

conventional; and, as such, are matter of Lirid
law; but the observance of them inuf proceed
firon the heart.

Confangtuinity is a natural tie. The for-

tunesof men are commonly involved inthofeof
their family; and relations are, on account of
this connexion, among the firli or nearesi ob-
je&s of beneficence.

Graltlude is the return made for favors
received.

Men of probity are neither ungrateful nor
jealous of ingratitude in others.

To require a bare action under the title of
gratitude, is to fboreit the title of benehator.

The returns due from the grateful, cannot

be ascertained by any precise measure, nor
can they be exaded by force.

The intention of the beneifcor is more to
be regarded, than the value of his benefit.

Were it efiablifhed, that returns could be

'exacqied by force, it would follow, that bene,
fits could not he distinguished lfrom fees, nor
the effelis of gratitude from those of confiraint.

The ingratitude of mankind is fometimtrn

alledged as an excuse for negledting ?ood offices;
but it is the business of a man to perform his
own part, not to answer for the returns which
others may, or may not, be disposed to make.

Liberality is the free communication of
what is ours, to oblige others.

Charity is the free communication of what
is ours, to relieve the diftrefed.

Undillinguifling charity is pernicious in
trading nations.

It is a wife maxim in trading nations, That

no person able to earn his bread Thould be
maintained gratuitously.

But charity to those who have no bread,

and are unable to earn any, is a duty of the
firongeft obligation, and a velryimportant object
of public concern.

CiviZity is a guarded behavioulrin the ordinar.y
intercourse of foci.ly, to avoid giving offence.

Politeness is a behaviour intended to plcafc,
or to oblige.

Ci-ili !t and pclilcnrfs are comprehended
in the general charader of good breeding.

To be well bred, a man must possess discern-

nent, candor, and good will; atleat a fincera
aversion to offend. The effects of affetation or
design are easily diftinguilhed.

Ill-bred Ien sometimes asse6t great plite-

ness, but thev shock and mortify those they
pretend to oblige.

Flattery, exceflive or insincere professions,
are vicious.

The sentiments of the heart sometimes eva-

porate in words; and great profeflions are,
even without any intention to deceive, putin
place of benefits.

The public duties of probity are, Allegi

ance on the part of the subjet, Prote6dion on
the part of the magiitrate, and Public Spirit in
all parties.

The Alegriance of the fubje&, is the fide-

lity, deference, and submission, he owes to
the magitirate.

The Protection due from the magistrate, is

the interposition of power to preserve the peace,
and to secure the fubje& in the possession of
all his rights.

The Public Spirit due from every member
of any community is,

## SECT. III. Duties referred to Prudence.

i. A faithful discharge of any office intrulied
for the public good.

2. A continual preference of public safety,

and public good, to separate interells, or
partial considerations.

S E C T. II.

Duties referred to Prudence.

IT is the objea of prudence, to dired a mat
in what he is to wilh for himself, for his fiiend,
for his country, and lor mankind.

In this sense, prudence is the guide or

directory in every duty: But, in its more
limited acceptation, it refers more particularly
to the duties which affect a man's hate or
condition.

These duties may be referred to the follow-

ing heads: Decency, Propriety, ModletyJ
Oeconomy, Decfion, and Caution.

Decency is the agreeablenels of a person's

appearance and carriage to the sense and opinion
of other men.

The rules of decency are prohibitory, and

forbid whatever would offend, inpudity, filth,
or obscenity.

Propriety is the suitableness of a person's

behaviour to his nature, his age, his Ration,
and rank.

There is in all the external effcdls of virtue,

as being suitable to man's nature, a propriety
that may be confidered apart from their other
recommendations.

Diffidence, and a cautious approach to the

manners and pretensions of manhood, are
proper to youth.

Refoltlion is proper to manhood.
CalinneJ and Deliberation to age.
Di-'nii' and Reserve , without contemp-

tuoufnefs or petulance, are proper to men of
high Ration.

Dejercnce, without servility, is proper to
men of inferior rank.

Modefly is a proper reserve on every sub-
jle of felf-eiiimation.

It forbids ofientation of what we possess,

of what we have done, or of what we have
suffered.

Oeconoiny is the proper adjustment of a
person's expense to his fortune.

Where fortune constitutes rank and power,

oeconomy is required to preserve independence
and freedom.

## SECT. IV. Duties referred to Temperance.

Sensuality and gaming are adverse to good
oeconomy.

Decision is a seasonable and resolute choice
of what a perfoli ought to do.

In some cafes, hesitation is equal to a total

purpose of ina(ion. Every opportunity is loft,
and every meafi're comes too late.

Caution conllils in a proper attention to all

the difficulties that may occur in what a person
undertakes.

The great objects of caution are, not to

engage in what is above our firengl , nor to
commit ourselves to persons that lmiflead or
.deceive.

SECT. IV.

Duties referred to Temperance.

D UTIES referred to temperance maybe com-
prehended under the heads of Sobriety and
Application.

Sobriety is the moderate use of food, and
of other animal gratifications.

The general tendency of fenfualitv , is to
beget habits of sloth, and neglect of affairs.

The immoderate use of intoxicating drugs,

or liquors, have these effecs in a high degree.
It reconciles men, otherwise of an active difpo-
fition, to inoccupation and idleness.

The debauch of the sexes being sometimes

joined with passion, may occasion a continued
or habitual negle&t of affairs.

Application is the preference ofbufinefs to
amusement.

BufiJnefs is supposed to terminate in tome
serious purpose; amusement in mere paftimc.

Dijfipation is a weakness of the mind,

disabling it from chufing or prosecuting the
occupations that would engage it mofi effec-
tually, and with most advantage.

SECT.

## SECT. V. Duties referred to Fortitude.

S EC T. V.

Duties referred to Fortitude.

T HE duties referred to fortitude are, P4-
licnce, Intrepidity, and ConfJancy.

Patience is the calm and deliberate susser-

ing of any trouble or pain that occurs in
human life.

Peevilinefs, the reverse of patience, tends

to realize imaginary evils, and to increase what
is real.

Intrepidity is firmness, and presence of
mind, in the midst of dangers.

Intrepidity is frequently the greatest security
in danger.

Colstancy is perseverance in all pursuits
or engagements properly chosen.

The wavering are seldom capable of exe-
cuting any purpose.

## SECT. VI. Uses of Casuistry.

SE C T. VI.

Uses of Casuistry.

H E rules of cafuifiry cannot supersede the

judgmniit aiid good disposition of a virtuous
mind.

Attempts to give casuistry this consequence,

proceed fiomni fuperfiition, and tend to confirm
the most naivimf fiperliition, by multiplying
external observances, that minead the atten-
tion, from qualities of the heart, to matters
of form,

Good disposition is necelary to the happi-

ness of mankind; and dutiful condut naturally
results' fromf good disposition.

It is however of moment to anticipate, in
general ruile, the external effedts of virtue.

a.hefe rules render the description of virtue

itfellfmore particular, and more complete.
Being supported by the fariAions of religion,
and of public repute, the rules of duty may
procure to society the benefit of useful adions,
even where they do not procure to the person
ading the happiness of a virtuous disposition.

## SECT. VII. Of Merit and Demerit.

S E C T. VII.

Of Merit and Demerit.

A CTIONS are said to have merit or demerit,
according to the nature and degree of the moral
quality they bear.

Aaions that express good-will to mankind
in the highest degree, have the highest merit.

Hence beneficent actions. performed in the

face of dangers, difficulties, and perfonal:fuf-
ferings, are allowed to have the highest merit.

Acfions that proceed from malice, and give

examples of mischiefs done without induce-
ment or provocation, are of the highest demerit.

We express our sense of demerit in the
different degrees of crimes, offences, and faults.

A crime is an injury done from malice,

jealousy, revenge, avarice, or some other
passion that sets mankind at variance.

An offence is a wrong done in the gratifi-

cation of some passion in its own nature con-
fiftent with amity.

A fault is a wrQng done from inattention
or ignorance.

Faults of inattention are culpable in pro-

portion to the moment and importance of the
subjed.

Faults of ignorance are more or less cil-

pable, as the defe& of knowledge argues neglei
and inattention.,;

It is a general maxim, That ignorance of

the fad may be admitted as a plea of innocence;
but not ignorance of the law.

Ignorance of atural law, orof duty, would

be one of the greatest defeds of a rational
Nature,

# PART VII. OF POLITICS.

# CHAP. I. Introduction.

INSTITUTES

OF
MORAL PHILOSOPHY'.

PA' T VII.
OF POLITIC5S.

C H A P. I.

In troduction.

IT appears from the history of mankind, that
men have always a&ed in troops, and compa-
nies; that they have apprehended a good of
the community, as well as of the individual;
that while they prarife artsj e:clb for his own
preservation, they institute political forms, and
unite their forces, for common safety.

It may be proved, that most of the opinions,

habits, and pursuits, of men, result from the
state of their society; that men are happy in
proportion as they love mankind; that illeit
rights and their duties are relative to each other;

and, therefore, lthat their most important con-
cerns are to be found in their mutual rela-
tions, and in the state of their communities.

One great department, therefore, in which

the love of mankind may operate most efledually,
yet'remainis to be confidered in the policy or
eftablilhment of nations.

A nation is.bny,"independent company or
society of men ading under a common direcdion.

The u'nite'd fo'rce 'f numbers, and the

direcion under which they ad, is termed
the state. . ..

Nations are happy who are. composed of
happy men..

Nations are wretched who are composed of

6nhappy' iien, '.! . ':
- ' Nations: may, b. 'confidered in refpet to
their refourcesi or in refped to' their infii-
tuttons. .:

National relburees are the objeAs of public
,economy. -...il;: ... .:, :d ,.

National:infitutions are the objeds!of poli-

tical;law. - c - ' ' .

.'., .,"'..... ':; ; ,
e:,

# CHAP. II. OF PUBLIC OECONOMY.

## SECT. I. Of National Resources in general.

CH A. II.
OF PUBLIC OECONOMVY.

S E C T. I.

Of National Resources in general.

NATlONAL resources "include every article'
that tends to contlitute the strength :of a nation,
or that may be e'mnloyes' fdl 'its prefervaiti6n.

Such articles 'ni'y b6 referred to three prin-
cipal heads; People, Wealth, an' Reveriue.

Some of these have been already confidered,

in refpe&t to the fad, or in refpe&t to the course
wliich mankind aAiially! hold' inithi', tireattnent-
of them. ' i o..i : .>
'T o 1

They are now td:lbe confidered in refpe&

to their absolute 'atifc'dorslparative value, and
in refpec to the 'rieins by which they are bell
preserved or advancedd. .'"'

## SECT. II. Of Populousness.

SECT. II.

Of Populousness.

T n value of numbers is proportioned to
their union and character.

Numbers without union or virtue, do not
constitute '"firength." " "'

A people, in consequence oftheir numbers,
fornetimes;,become, difpnited. and corrupted,

I: they inhabit , Jige; an extensive terri-

tory, they lare disunite#,, ,nd lose fight of their
community.,, A few engross the management
of public affairs, and with-hold from the many
everyLf.ubje.& of public zeal, or political occu-
pation. jThe, jgreatqerpart are thrown into a
fiate ,olanguprand4 okfcri,, ,and susser them-
selves to become a prey to those who are pre-
pared;to; invade: their right:s.,

Human nature,, ,ifalate.,sof a moderate ex-

tent, has .p;ofpere4 and, excelled; but in flates
overgrown, has generally, declined and de-
generated.

If great numbers be crowded into narrow

difiri6s, or cities, they are exposed to corrup-
tion, become profligate, licentious, seditious,

and incapable of government or public assec-
tions.

The union of a people depends on the ar-

rangements or dispositions made to employ
them where the public service requires.

The union of the people in republics, arises

more from their affealion to the community,
than from the power established to enforce
their services.

In monarchies, it arises from the love of

personal dignities, to which individuals aspire
in serving the liate.

In defpotifin, it arises entirely from the

power that is prepared to enforce the services
of' the people.

The character of a people, confidere/a as a

national resource, is to be estimated from their
fitness to reap, and to preserve, or to improve
the advantages of their constitution, and to
support their country in pursuit of its objes.

Different charaAers are required under
different forms of government.

Under republics of every fort, high degrees

of probity are required; under monarchy,
less; and under despotism, leafi of all.

The principal objecs in every fiate, next

to the political confiitution, are defence and
commerce.

## SECT. III. Of Riches or Wealth.

In refpec to defence, men are to be

estimated by their hardiness, courage, and
discipline.

In refpeA to commerce, men are to be

estimated by their induliry, and by their skill
in profitable arts.

Commercial nations may value accessions of

art, as the fureli means of gaining accessions
of people; for, in circumliances otherwise
favorable, population keeps pace with the arts,
and.means of fubfifience.

Inliitutions that, by securing property, and

by preventing opprieffion, encourage the fettle-
ment of families,' and facilitate the rearing of
children, are the most favorable to population.

SEC T. III.

Of Riches or Wealth.

M EN are supposed richin possesing the means
of defence, fubfilienice, accommodation, and
ornament.

Wealth is a national resource, because it

may' be employed in maintaining useful or
serviceable men, and in fupplyingthe exigen-
cies of slate.

The constituents of wealth may be confi-

dered in refpedt to their value, and in relpedt
to their price.

As the use of wealth is to maintain and

accommodate men, articles or commodities are
valuable in proportion to the numbers they are
fit to maintain and accommodate.

The means of fubfifience are necessary.
The means of accommodation which con-

tribute to the preservation of men, and to the
increase of their vigor and health, are next in
value to the necessaries of life.

But articles of mere ornament are of no
value at all.

The luxury of a people is to be eflimated
from their copfumption of mere ornaments.

The price of a commodity is measured by

the. quantity of any other commodity that is
commonly or occalionally given in exchange
for it.

Price is most commonly expressed, and
paid, in money.

Hence money is confidered as the equiva-

lent of all commodities, and the confiituent
of wealth. j,,

But commodities are no less the equiva-
lents of money; and abundance in any one

species, .whether of money or other commodity,
will buy a participation in the whole.

The price of commodities fluctuates, and

keeps pace with the quantity of money in cir-
culation, with the scarcity of. the commodity,
with the demand, and with the riches of those
who consume it.

Articles of ornament are frequently of the
greatest price.

Commodities that are the work of labor,

time, and kill, cannot continue to be fold for
less than will maintain the workman, and pay
the whole of. his advance.

As the value ot commodities is measured

by the nunibers they may maintain, so the
coil of a commodity may be eliimnated by the
numbers and time :employed in producing it.

The wealth of.any country is proportioned

to its :natural advantages, to the indufiry and
skill of its inhabitants, and to the profit of its
trade. ': j- ' ;'

Natural advantages are, ;good climate.,
fertile foil, andi useful materials.

Indufiry and skill comprehend all useful

arts, agriculture, and manufa6ture, in all their
branches. ' ;

The profit of trade is the profit either of

the consumer, of the producer, of the mere
chant, or of the fiate.

The profit of the consumer consists in being
supplied with necessary or ¥feful commodities;

The profit of the producer, in the vent of
superfluities;

The profit of the merchant, in the balance
remaining, after he has paid coli and expenses;

The profit of the (late, in the increase of

wealth, or the accunlulation of commloodities
in the poffeflion of its memblers.

Commerce, by accommodating all parties

with what they want in exchange tor what
they can spare, enables and encourages them
to increase their produce.

Commerce refperting the fiate, is either
internal or foreign.

Internal commerce is the exchange of com-
modities between ftibjeds of the fame liate.

Foreign commerce is the exchange of com-
modities between fibljeds of different fiates.

In fiates of considerable extent, the internal

commerce is of more consequence than the
foreign commerce.

The importance of foreign commerce dimi-
iihes as the state extends.

Commerce between nations may be confi-

dered in refped to the balance of price, or
the balance of value.

The balance of price commonly stands for

the difference supposed to remain due by one
nation to another, after appretiating the whole
goods that have passed in exchange between
them.

The balance of value is the difference of

real value in the whole goods that have pafled
in exchange.

The profits of foreign commerce are deter-

mined by the balance of value, not by the
balance of price.

The nation that has the balance of price

against it, may have the balance of value in
its favor. It may have received the means of
defence, of improving its land, or of extend-
ing its trade, &c.

The nation that owes the balance of price,

will be obliged to part with its money, or
some other commodity, in oider to pay that
balance.

A trade in which a balance of price is in-

curred, cannot be continued, unless there be
a continual supply of money, or other commo-
dity, by which the balance may be paid.

The produce of land is a continual, and
may be made an increasing fipply.

The produce of mines, or the importation
of money, may be continual.

Nations who carry on any part of their

internal trade by credit and bills, need propor-
tionally less supplies of money.

The ule of bills in circulation tends to
extend credit.

Credit is useful or pernicious, according
to the use that is made of it.

It is ufelul to an indulirious and thriving
people.

It is pernicious to the fpendtllrift and the.
prodigal.

The expense of remitting money from one

country to another, affects the exchange of
their coins.

That nation which has occasion to remit

noft money, mutl pay this expense, and is
said to have the exchange againli it.

But as money may be remitted to make

profit, it does not follow from the tate of ex-
change, that a nation is either gainer or loser
.by trade.

The profits of trade are either mutual or
partial.

They are mutual, so far as commerce ac-

commodates all parties with what they want,
in exchange for what they can ipare; and
enables every party to improve his peculiar
materials, and to pursue his peculiar art; and
procures to the merchant and carrier an ade-
quate reward for their trouble.

In commerce mutually beneficial, that party

gains most who receives the more useful com-
modity; and who receives the produce of
much land, time, and labor, for the produce
of less; and who, in conducting his trade, is
employed in the more healthful and least
corrupting occupations.

The profit of trade is partial, when things
of value are exchanged for things of no value.

The following are laws of commerce,
founded in the preceding considerations.

1. That, where profits are mutual, com-
merce should not be restrained by either party.

2. That, if we suppose a trade to terminate

in giving the means of accommodation and
subsistence in exchange for mere ornaments,
such trade may be wifely restrained by the
losing party.

3. That monopolies are pernicious to
commerce.

4. That

## SECT. IV. Of Revenue.

4. That the state of a: nation's wealth is

not to be efiimated from the state of its coffers,
granaries, or warehouses, at any particular
time; but from the fertility of its lands from
the numbers, frugality, indufiry, and ikill of
its people.

S E C T. IV.

Of Revenue.

HA T part of national wealth which is al-

lotted for purposes of state, is the public
revenue.

The public revenue may arise from denefne
and unappropriated subje&s, or from taxes.

The firli is the earliest species .of revenue

in rude nations, and is suited' to their indo-
lence, and ignorance of lucrative arts.

The second is belter suited to the industry
and frill of commercial nations. '

It is not the interest of commercial nations,

that any subje6t should remain unappropriated.
While a subjeA remains unappropriated, 'it is
commonly neglecled. " ;

14

Revenue arising froih taxation; may ihcreafe

together with the- numbers, wealth . and fru-
gality of the people.

In judging of the absolute or comparative

expedieecy of different taxes,! the following
axioms may be admitted.

1. That the exigencies of the slate must be

provided for at any hazard or expense to the
subjet. . i

a. That, in levying taxes, no subjeA be
unnecessarily burdened- .

3. That the security of the subjea, or that
-6f his .property, be iot, iipaired:

4. That taxes which check settlement and
indufiry be avoided.

5. -That 'taxes least felt as grievances be

preferred. ..
- 6.jThat the least burdensome method of
-colle&inhg taxes be dhofen.

N. B. The method of farm appears, from

experience, to be more buirdenfome than that
of revenue-office.

Taxesmay be referred to:four general heads:
Capitation, Assessment, Customs, and Excise.
:Capitation is a tax on the person, and falling
equally on the poor and the rich.

Capitation may be oppressive to the poor,

without levying from the rich what they are
able to furnihi to the state.

Capitation is a symptom of despotic and
oppressive government.

Assessment is a tax on .ricies; and is pro-
portioned to the estate assetsed.

Affeflments may fall equitably, when pro-
perty is unequally difiributed.

Land-eftate being mpofteafily ascertained and
valued, is the propereft subjeA of affeffinent.

The stock of the merchant is fluCAuating;

and attempts made to ascertain it might give
occasion to frauds, or improperly disclose the
secrets of trade.

Customs are taxes imposed on, goqds it
commerce, and advanced by the merchant.

Cufioms imposed on the necelfariesof life

are a tax on the poor, and have the effes Qof
capitation.

Cutfoms imposed on matters of ornament,

or costly accommodation, are a tax on the
prodigal, or the rich.

Such taxes are most agreeable to humanity
and justice.

Customs are ah encumberance on trade, and

may amount to a prohibition of particular
articles.

Customs, though advanced by the merchant,

fall on the confuier; but being involved in
the price of the conimodity, are not commonly
feli as'a tax.

As the merchant must not only be reim-

burfed, 'but have' posit on all his advance, it
follows, that the earie'r in trade customs are
paid for ay comriodity, the heavier they must
fall on the confuimer.

"Excise is a ta:x'in comodities in use, and
paid ibythe consumer.

Excjite.may 'be rendered a tax, either on

the rich'or' the pbor separately, or on both
proportionally. "'"

Excise is less burdensome to the consumer,

tilan'a"'n'equivalent; raised in customs; but is
more likely to'!b' felt as a grievance, and to
create more animosity in the subje6t againli the
aate-- - - -' -..

# CHAP. III. OF POLITICAL LAW (1).

## SECT. I. Of the Object of Political Law.

C H AP. III.
OP POLITICAL LAIV x.

S E C T. I.

Of the Objeci of Political Law.

W n ERE nations have occurred in the pre-
ceding parts of these notes, they have been
collidered only in respect to the hiltory of their
efiabliflhrents, or in refpe6t to the foundations
o' civil rights, and of civil obligations.

Such rights and obligations are diverrified

in dinferent inliances, by special conventions,
which form the political and civil law of the
co:mnnunity: But men have original rights and
interefis to guard, in refpec to which adtual
eliablifhrnents and conventions may be salutary
or pernicious, and give rife to a quefiion,
which is now to be difcufled, WIhat is beJt
for mankind, in their political capacities ?

If, in dilcufiing this quefiion, we arrive at
any general principles or rules; these may be

I See Infiruditions of the Empress of Russia. L'Es
prit de Loix, tomi. i.

## SECT. II. Of the first Principles of the Political Law of Nature.

termed the Political Laws of Nature, and are
the obje&s of this chapter.

To invefiigate such rules or principles,

whether relating to men in general, or relating
to men in particular circumfiances, is to afcer-
tain not what men actually have done, but
what they ought to do; and is therefore pro-
perly introduced in this place as a branch of
moral science.
Of the FirJ Prinlcipies of the Political Law

of Natur e.

IT is a felf-evident prop'osition, that political
infitutions are beneficial in proportion as they
contribute to the safety and happiness of the
people.

This principle, therefore, may be safely
assumed as a first principle of political law.

In applying it, we must confider,
i. Who are the people.
2. In what their safety consists.
3. In what their political happiness confifis

## SECT. III. Of the People.

## Of the Safety of the People in general.

SE CT. II.

Of the People.

U NDER this denomination we are to con.
ceive not any separate order or clars of men;
but all the members of the community, whe-
ther magifirate or subjed, or in whatever way
diliinguithed, in the casual ditiribution of
condition or rank.

Of the Safety of the People in general.

1T HE safety of the people consists in the
secure enjoyment of their rights.

That the rights of men may be secure, it

is necef'ary, either that there thould be no one
to invade, or that there fiould be a sufficient
power to defend.

The first is not to be expected in human

affairs; the second is the principal objeEt of
political eifablifhments.

It has been the obje&, or the fortune, of

some communities, to possess members who
might be intruded with any powers.

It has been the objec of other communi-

ties, to grant such powers only as might be
intrufled with any men.

These several cafes, real or supposed, may

be entitled, The government, of Innocence., of
Virtue, and of Law.

,Under the supposed government of inno-

cence, or of virtue, matters of form are easily
adjusted.

Under the government of law, it is necef-

fary, that the rights and obligations of men
ihould be clearly expressed.

This is the objet of conventional law.
In every convention is supposed the con-

sent of parties given in person, or by others
properly authorized.

[The sovereign is authorized to enact laws.
Laws: relate to.the con'titution, to civil
rights, or to crimes.

The most perfec laws relating to the con-

ftitution, are such as confer. on the magifirate
power to reltrain crimes,- and to defend the
community; but under limitations sufficient to
prevent the abuse of this power.

The most perfec laws relating to civil rights,

are such as effecually secure every person in
his slate.

It is the maxim of civil law, That every

person fliould remain in his pofleffion, until
a better title be undoubtedly proved.

Laws relating to crimes, prcfcrlibe the form

of trials, and point out the overt ads for which
certain puniflments are appointed.

The following are maxims of natural law
relating to prosecutions.

1. That every person is to be deemed in-
nocent until he is proved to be guilty.

2. That no one Thall be obliged to give
evidence that may afedc himself.

3. That no one miall be tortured into con-
sessions or discoveries of any fort.

4. That no one Ihall be punifled, unless

he ihall have committed forle acion in itelt'
pernicious, or specially declared by the law
to be criminal.

5. That it is better the guilty escape, than
that the innocent susser.

6. That the objet of punishment be to
correct the guilty, and to deter others.

7. That the puniflmlent be not such as

would Shock humanity, or disorder society
more than the crime.

To secure legal rights, it is necessary that

the laws should be ftrilly interpreted and
applied.

Under the government of law, difcre-

tionary powers are not safely intrusted, except
to judges named by the parties; or to juries
-purged by the challenge of parties, and in,
terelied equally to prote& the innocent and to
punish the guilty.

In the security of rights confifis civil and
political liberty.

Liberty is opposed to injuflice, not to

refiraint; for liberty cannot fublilt without the
supposition of every just reliraint.

Natural liberty is not impaired, as some-

times supposed, by political institutions, and
is impaired only by usurpations and wrongs.

The laws of different communities beliow
unequal privileges on their members.

Those are the most salutary laws which

distribute the benefits and the burdens of civil
society in the molt equitable manner. But it
is no small measure of liberty to be secured in
the poffellion of what the law bellows.

## SECT. V. Of the Political Happiness of a People.

SECT. V.

Of the Political Happiness of a People,

T1 E political happiness of a people consists
in the love of their country, and in that difiri-
bution of rank and fiation which is best suitcd
to their merits and capacities.

Men who are leait aduated by separate in-
terests are best disposed to love their country.

Men who have the fewest adventitious

difiinclions of birth or fortune, are most likely
to be classed according to their merits, to be
employed suitably to their abilities, and to
find the fiations in which they are molt likely
to cultivate their talents, and their virtues.

That a community may be loved in the

highest degree, its members should be relieved
of personal anxieties and occupied in what
relates to the public.

They should be made to confider the hlate

as the equal parent of all, difiributing equal
benefits, and requiring equal services.

Wherever the slate confines political con-
lideration to a particular order, who sacrifice

## SECT. VI. Of the Preferable Institution or Form of Government.

the rights of others to their own interest or
fancy, it cannot be loved.

The reason and the heart of man are best

cultivated in arduous situations, and in the
exercise of public duties.

SE C T. VI.
Of the Preferable InJiitution or Form of

Government.

NOTWITrHSTANIDING what we may conceive,
in general, as delirable for mankind, every
political question mutt have a reference to some
particular cafe, and must be determined ac-
cording to the circumfiances of that cafe.

Men of fpecilation have in vain endea-

voured to fix a model of government equally
adapted to all mankind.

One people is unfit to govern, or to be
governed, in the fame manner with another.

Nations differ in refped to charader, and
in refped to their Htate or condition.

The charader of a people refers to their

degree of virtue, or of other principle, on
which the iate may rely for the discharge of
civil and political duties.

The fiate or condition of a people is deter-

mined chiefly by their casual subordinations,
and by the extent of their country.

Casual subordination is founded in diftinc-
tions, original or adventitious.

Original difiindions are, the differences of
capacity, disposition, and force.

Adventitious diftindlions arise from fortune
and birth.

Queiiions relating to the propriety of any

political inliitution, can be solved only hypo-
thetically.

Such questions may be put on four different
suppositions.

FIRST SUPPOSITION.

The supposition of a people perfecly vir-

tuous, diflinguilhed from one anolher only by
their original differences, and forming iates of
small extent.

Such a people are fitted to govern themselves.
They may consent to be governed by the

majority of their own number, or occasionally
by single men; but to oblige such men by force
to resign the sense of their own minds, and to
follow what is different from it, were, by the
fuppolition, to substitute vice for virtue.

Being perfescly virtuous, every one will be

willing to bear his hare of the public burdens,
and will receive, in his turn, that confidence
and trust for which he is by his capacity and
experience qualified.

They are supposed to have no adventitious

diflinaions to mar the effed of their personal
qualities.

Being of small extent, the whole may be
occasionally or periodically assembled.

They need no precaution against the com-
mifflon of crimes, or the abuses of power.

Thefole obje& ofgovernmentis, to assemble,
and to dired their force for national purposes.

This, however, is a mere supposition; for

no entire nation was ever known to be per-
fe6ly virtuous.

SECOND SUPPOSITION.

A people in whom the virtuous and .the

vicious are mixed; who admit adventitious
diftindions in differentdegrees, and form states
of various extent.

This is not a mere supposition, it is realized,
and the moft.general defcription.of mankind.

If there :be no great separation or diftinc6ion
of rank .and condition;

If virtue greatly prevail over vice;
If the fiate be of finall extent;
Such a people are fit for democracy.
Their numbers admit of being assembled
in collective bodies.

Their virtues and their institutions may
prevent crimes, and abuses of power.

They may reap the advantages of demo-

cracy, in a manner that will more than com-
penfate its inconveniencies.

If such a people be separated into different

orders or classes, they are fitted to arifiocracy,
mixed republic, or mixed monarchy.

If in two classes, one is diliingtiiiled from

the other by a conliderable superiority, they
are fit for arifiocracy.

Commercial nations of a small extent are,

in the result of diitincions that arise from the
practice of arts, and the unequal ditiribulion
of property, best fitted to arifiocratical govern-
ment, or to mixed republic.

The inferior class, if not greatly debased or

corrupted, may have a ihare in the govern-
ment, either by a negative on the determina-
tion of the arifiocracy, or by being intrulied,
not with an acive pat in the government,

but only with the choice of those who are to
ad for thenm.

The fame supposition applied to Hates of a

greater extent, and to a people among hliom
a greater variety of rank is established, will
justify the preference of mixed monarchy.

It were happy for::mankind, if, together

with changes of circumflances, they could
always make suitable changes in government,
and no more.

Where changes of circumstance are gradual,

corresponding changes of government takeplace;
but sudden innovations of any fort, precipitate
men into fitnations in which they are not
qualified to at.

THIRD SUPPOSITION.

A people on whose vanity, and sense of

personal importance, rather than virtue:;, the
fiate mull rely for the discharge of;the civil
and political duties; a people amongst whom a
continual adventitious fubordinafion takes
place, without any example, or any desire, of
equality.

Such a people are not fit to govern them-
selves.

The

The continual gradation of rank must ter-
minate in a prince or monarch.

They require monarchy as a bond of union,
and as a source of honor.

While every one attends to what concerns

himself, the monarch, for the preservation of
his own person and dignities, must attend to
the public safety, and public order.

The subordinate ranks will courthis favor,

and consult their own dignity, by a6tions,
either splendid in themselves, or useful to the
slate, whilfl they are serviceable to the king.

The members of the liate are drawn toge-

ther, and moved in a body, not by their love
to the community, or to mankind, but by
their veneration for their common superior,
and by their expectations from their common
source of preferment and honor.

The maxims of honor are not fifceptible

of sudden changes; and the dignities of family
though for the noft part conferred by the
prince, are hereditary, and therefore inde-
pendent.

Both these oircumftances oblige the prince

to govern according to fixed and determinate
laws.

FOURTH SUPPOSITION.

A people perfectly vicious, without sense
of honor, or hereditary difiindions.

Such a people mull be refrained by force.
Every conliitution, even that which con-

fides molt in the virtue of the subject, must
employ force to repress crimes.

If the whole people be inclined to commit

crimes, and be refirained only by fear, the
profpied of prompt and terrifying punishments
mull be continually placed in their view.

This supposition may be employed as an
apology for despotism.

Where every person is disposed to commit

crimes, the fewer that have power, tb much
the better.

When all power is committed to one person,

even supposing himself to be a criminal, it is
his interelt, for the moll part, to refiirain the
crimes of others.

His severities, or cruelties, by the fuppofi-
tion, can no where afflid the innocent.

His dominions, though, like a prison,

committed to the keeping of vile and merciless
men, is nevertheless the only fit place to receive
those who cannot be olherwife restrained from
injustice.

But this cafe, like that which was first

flated, of a people perfedcly virtuous, is a mere
fiippofition, and never was realized in the cha-
racler of any people.

Men are generally as far from the extreme

of perfect vice, as they are from that of perfeCt
virtue.

They who contend, that defpotical govern-

ment is in fad the befl for mankind, proceed
upon four suppositions, all equally violent
and Ialfe.

1. That all men would commit crimes if
they durst.

2. That crimes cannot be restrained with-
out discretionary powers.

3. That a person to whom discretionary

powers are committed, will employ them to
repress the crimes of others, but not to commit
crimes of his own.

4. That the sole objet of government is,

to control the adtions, never to cultivate the
nature or form the characters of men.

These iuppofitions are contrary to reason
and to experience.

The fad is, that the manners of men are

various; and that the fame penal laws, and
forms of juiice, by which a people may be

successfully governed in a virtuous age, will
not always be sufficient to restrain them in
ages corrupted.

When the criminal passions increase in

violence and boldness, it may be necessary to
increase the measure of punishments.

When crimes multiply, and criminals are

enabled to employ the forms of law as the
subterfuges of iniquity, it may be necessary to
alter such defecive forms: But it never can
be necessary to deprive the innocent of all the
defences of reason and justice; for the fame
reason and jutiice which protect the innocent,
may condemn the guilty.

In times of occalional tumult, popular

frenzy, or rebellion, it may be neceflhry to
treat those who commit such crimes, not as
fubjecls amenable to the laws, but as enemies,
who, by invading the public peace, have de-
prived every citizen of his safety, and who
therefore cannot have the benefit of laws until
the public has recovered its security.

Such domefiic disorders, like foreign wars,

render discretionary power occasionally ne-
.ceffary: But this necessity is only temporary.

For the most part, even in corrupted fiates,
it is as much the interest of the subject as of

## SECT. VII. Of the sit Distribution of Trust and Office.

the magistrate, to keep the peace, and to
repress crimes.

Absolute despotism is an extreme of ideal

corruption: Every avoidable approach to it is
an usurpation and a national misfortune.

It tends to produce that extremity of vice

to which it is supposed to be adapted as a
remedy.

The objedt of defpotical government, is

not to secure the subjed in the poffellion of
his rights, but to make him a property; not
to suppress vice, but to suppress the highest
and noblest virtues of the heart, public spirit,
independence, and courage.

S E C T. VII.

Of the fit Difiribution of Trufi and Office.

/Ls men of different characers and in different
circumfianccs, require a variety of infiitutions,
so different confiitutions of government require
or imply a different difiribution of trulf and
office.

In free governments of every denomination,

where law is necessary, the law mufi be enadled,
interpreted, and executed. Hence the offices

or funtions of srate are, legislation, jurifdic-
tion, and execution.

Legislation, under every confiitution of

government, is the immediate act of the so-
vereign power, and cannot be delegated with-
out transferring the sovereignty.

This rule does not.exclude the concuri'ence

of councils, nor the observance of forms suited
to the constitution..

Under democracies, the legislation is exer-

cifed by the collessive body; but it is not ne-
ceffary that the colleaive body fliould delibe-
rate, as well as decide,

The collecive body may name senates, or

feled councils, to prepare quefiions of legis-
lalion.

They may vary the form of collecting the
votes, or of promulgating the law.

They may fix, at discretion, what numbers

are required to constitute a legal assembly, and
what proportion of those present mutt concur
in a public resolution.

Under ariftocracies, the colledcive body of

thofewho govern, whetherby elective or here-
ditary title, must exercise the legislature.

They may ad, notwithstanding, under the
fame forms and limitations that have been

mentioned as compatible with the sovereignty
of the whole people.

Under monarchy, the legislature is exer-
cifed by the king.

The king liands in need of councils; and

his legislative power may be qualified by the
forms ofregifiration, orpromulgation, required
to give the force of law to his edicts.

In mixed government of any fort, the legis-

lature mull be exercised by the concurrence of
all the collateral powers.

If a law could be enacted without the

concurrence of any single power, that po er
might be suppressed by the others.

If the supposed collateral powers were to

afremble, and decide quections of legifl.lion
by the majority, any way defined, the govern-
ment would cease to be mixed.

The fovercignty of collateral powers is com-

patible with a variety of forms relating to the
proposing and the enading of laws.

Sovereigns of any denomination, who have

fuil'ered courts of julice to follow cullom as a
rule of decision, are to be understood as having
eliablifled that cuflom into law.

Jurifdicion, or the office of judge, is, to

interpret the law, and to apply it in particular
cafes.

This office, under every confiitution,
should be disjoined from that of legislation.

The sovereign, being accustomed to will,

or to command, cannot submit merely to
interpret, or to follow a rule.

Particular cafes are modified by circum-
fiances that create prejudice, or excite passion.

The sovereign, having no superior, may
follow prejudice or paillon at discretion.

The sovereign having enaced the law,

would, under the influence of special motives,
make free to dispense with it.

Popular or numerous affernblies would be
swayed by faction.

Princes would be swayed by their passions,
and by solicitation.

Two questions may be put relating to
judicature:

1. Who ought to judge?
2. Of what numbers are courts of jufiice
belt composed ?

i. Wherever laws are greatly multiplied,
the knowledge of law becomes a profession.

No judgment can be safely given without tli
counsel of those who are knowing in the law.

The office for which counsel is necessary,

is that of pointing out the law , and the whole
law, in any particular cafe.

Persons who are not lawyers by profeflion,

nay, in the manner of the judges at Rone,
and of the juries in Great Britain, interpret
and apply a law which is pointed outto them.

Beside the counsel employed by parties,

the public may employ counsel for jufiice and
law. This is the nature of olficial judges in
Great Britain.

Jurifdiclion committed entirely to official

judges, is attended with thle following incon-
veniencies.

The official judge being a continual magif-

tratc, may entertain the prejudices of the
magisirate against the fubjecl.

The peculiar prejudices and partialities

of the official judge, if he has any, may be
known.

They who enjoy his favor, are tempted to

trespass in hopes of impunity, or to commence
vexatious suits in hopes of success.

They who apprehend his displeasure, do

not feel themselves secure even in poffellion
of innocence.

These inconveniencies are removed, in a

great measure, by the efiablifhment of judica-
tures in the Roman forrm, or in that of juries.

The juryman is equally interested to pro-
tet the innocent, and to condemn the guilty.

Juries may therefore be intrusted with

some measures of discretionary power, to
mitigate the rigors of law, or to supply its
defects.

Where a people are divided into a number

of separate orders and claf'es, as those of
Patrician, Equefirian, and Plebeian, Lords
and Commons, the rights of one order are not
safely intrusted to the judgment of another;
and it would be expedient, that every party
were judged by his peers.

2. Under popular or republican govern-

ments of any fort, courts of justice are best
composed of few members.

Courts comnpoed of many members carry

popular fartion and party into the judgment-
feat. The individual hopes to screen himself
even in judging falsely, under the authority
and credit of the whole body.

No one is accountable; no one is confpi-

cuous; all are tempted to humor their party,
and to judge at discretion.

Under monarchy, courts of justice are best
eompofed of many.

Here the influence of the crown is more to
)e dreaded, than the lfacion of the people.

This inlluence can less overawe or corrupt
numerous bodies, than tingle men, or a few.

Numerous bodies, in their deliberations,

admit of the zeal and ardor that animate po-
pular allemblies; and even -whilli they do not
judge more impartially than tingle men would
do, they judge with more independence.

The spirit of facion, which in republics is

the greatest corruption, in monarchy tends to
prevent a greater servility to those in power.

The office of the executive is, to apply the
force of the fiate for national purposes:

i. To give el'edi tothe laws.
2. To defend the community against foreign
enemies.

Occasions on which the executive must he

exerted, are either continual or casual; and
in cafe of danger from abroad, require secrecy
and despatch.

The sovereign in republican governments,

confifling of the whole people, or of numerous
bodies, cannot exercise the executive.

Such bodies cannot be continually assembled,
nor ready to aflenmble at all times.

The resolutions of the executive require

*more secrecy and derpatch than can be had in
any numerous or popular assemblies.

Affairs that come in course, or that admit

of delay, may be committed to senates, or to
fele6 councils. Such are the management of
public revenue, negotiations, and treaties.

Affairs that may come fortuitously, and by

surprise; that will not admit of delay, mufl
be committed to single men; as to the magif-
trate, or officer who has the keeping of the
peace, and the leading of armies.

Under monarchy, whether pure or mixed,

the king is capable of every branch of the
executive.

But he ought to delegate whatever tends to
render his power terrible or odious;

To reserve what renders it an objed of
refped or affecion.

The abuses of the executive power are
varioully reltrained under different constitutions.

In republics, they are refrained by the

Ihort duration of office in the person of any
individual, by the vigilance and emulation of
his competitors, if not by his own virtue and
moderation.

Those were the happiest republics, who

educated virtuous citizens, to whom any pow-
ers might be safely intrufed.

Some of the most important powers, both
in Sparta and at Rome, were discretionary.

In monarchy, the abuses of the executive

are restrained by the forms of law, and by the
privileges of subordinate ranks.

In all constitutions they may be restrained
by having magistrates and minifiers accountable.

By the integrity of those who conflitute

the force committed to the direcion of the
executive.

When the armed force is part of the people,

it is their intcreft, as well as their duty, to
refrain from abuse.

## SECT. VIII. Conclusion.

S E C T. VIII.

Conclusion.

IT may appear from a comparison of the fat,
as flated in the hifiory of the species, with
what is now flated as the law of political ex-
pedience, that men generally accommodate
their efiabliflments to their circumfiances,
and that, upon the supposition of such circum-
liances, there is little room for improvement.

Men of probity and courage, in finall

communities, have recourse to Republican
government.

Men diftinguifled by inequalities of birth,

and acluated by sentiments of honolr, have
ranged under mcnarchs.

Large empires continue to be governed,
as they are formed, by force.

Mixed descriptions of men, led by the

variety of circumfiances in which they are
placed, have exhibited a corresponding variety
of mixed governments. And the issue in every
cafe has been such, that where we cannot

materially change the character and circum-
liances of the people, it would be folly to
attempt any radical change in the form of
government.

In speculation, we form general views and

look into distant consequences; but the first
maxim of found speculation is, where matters
go tolerably well, to beware of change.

If therefore it be supposed, that an itch

of political reformation is dangerous to man-
kind, it is not supported by knowledge.

The ignorant are as apt to tamper with the

best confiitution, as to reform the worst. In
general, they are tenacious of custom: but in
some particulars are delirous of change.

The genius of mankind leads to progrefflon.

Every order of men, and every individual,
apprehend an inconvenience which they would
remove, or an advantage they would gain,
and they would break through every form to
attain their end.

Arts, commerce, population, as they ad-

vance or decline, give rife to new circum-
fiances, and fuggefi successive arrangements.

The people under the pressure of great in-
conveniences break out into revolts and effe6c

great revolutions; under the pressure of the
least inconvenience they seek for proportional
relief, and in the process ol time, by small
alterations, produce a material and sensible
cnflót.

In this current, we may wish to accelerate,

retard, or direA the motion, but it is the
nature of man to proceed. In fleering our
course, it is material to know the tendency of
changes, whether the efled is to be near or
remote.

In every political deliberation, itis material

to kliow what is bell for mankind, that we
may depart from it as little as pollible.

A well informed underfianding, in the worst

situations, may secure some happy effedcs,
though far short of the ideal perfection which
the speculative are apt to look for in the affairs
of men.

Political interests, are those of all others

which ought leaf[ to be committed to chance.
Our safety, our peace, our relation one to
another , our improvemient or degeneracy,
depend in a great measure on our political
inltitutions. Byi these our rights are preserved

or

or violated, our relation is made to approach
to that of equals, or to that of mafler and'
slave, crimes are repressed or licensed.

Political institutions tend to augment the
good or the evil with which they are fraught.

Human affairs, in some infiances, tend to
improvement; in others, to corruption.

The inflitutions of men, in one care, pro-

mote their improvement; in the other, haften
their corruption.

Inflitutions that proceed on maxims of jus-

tice, that engage the minds of citizens in public
duties, that teach them to efiimate rank by the
measure of personal qualities, tend to preserve
and to cultivate virtue.

On the contrary, inflitutions by which men

are fripped of their rights, or by which they
are made to hold their poffeflions as discretion,
under which they arc ftppofed governable
only by force, or by the fear of punishment,
tend to beget tyranny and insolence in the
powerful, servility and vileness in the depend-
ent; to cover every vs'B're wvith paleness ',
and to fill every heart with jealousy or dejection.

V^ id. L'Erprit des Loix, liv. 6. c. 5.

16

The greatest and most extensive benefit

which the wife can procure, is the eftablilh-
ment or preservation of just institutions.

The greatest injury that wicked men can

commit, is the overthrow or corruption of
such institutions.

THE END.

sb'J' tA,., ''
^KVM
