Edinburgh Novr 26th 1763

Dear David

I was just about writing to you when I had the pleasure of your letter. I knew you woud not forgive me if I did not tell you what Josey was doing. He went to Mathisons School immediatly on coming to Town, but has not begun the Greek. We have not been able to find a teacher who has any number of Scholars with whom to class him, it not being the fashion here to begin Greek in this manner & I begin to doubt whether we should gain any considerable advantage by attempting it.

Hunter at the College has two Class's, at the first of which he begins the very Rudiments of the greek grammar at the other he continues to read Greek Authors. Josey will be young enough to mix with his Scholars even at the first class two years hence & it is a question whether we coud prepare him sufficiently for the second. To send him to the first with a smattering learned elsewhere is only enabling him to be idle while the Other Boys are bussy, & perhaps giving him a habit of neglecting the Thing altogether, which literally happened to myself in a like Situation.

Meantime Mathison after some weeks tryal with many  commendations of Josey tells me that he is defective in some of the Principles of the Latin Tongue, particularly in Prosody, & has not a facility in writing sufficient for his School exercises. Part of this complaint may arise from a mere difference in the particulars chiefly attended to in this School & from the manner of teaching. I think Josey reads Virgil very well for his Age but I perhaps woud not be a good Scholar at Mathisons Class. At any rate it will be an advantage to him to be on a footing with his companions in the Mechanical parts & to have fair play to his Emulation. I have for this reason desired Mathison to find me a Person who by Attending him an hour at home in the Evening may bring him forward in the Particulars he wants & to give his Man directions necessary for that purpose & to choose one who is fit to proceed to the Greek with him in case you continue to desire it. He will however read the Latin Grammar with him &c till we hear from you or till he has the same facility of quoting Rules of Prosody that the Other boys at Mathisons Class have acquired by being used to his Way. At Present his Journal as he tells me begins with getting up at eight taking his breakfast & going to School where he remains to Eleven. Then to the High School yard to play at English Man & Scots Man or the Hare  and the dogs, of which I take the merit as I saved him from the writing School at that hour. He returns to School at twelve & continues till two, goes to writing between three & four & spends his Evening as he tells me in getting his School tasks or in reading amusing books such as his Uncles History. In short he is a very amiable boy with quick parts in my opinion as well as yours, and there is no doubt but he will do well. Write your opinion about the Greek: meantime a month will not be misspent in the way I proposed. After that he may go on to the Greek or the French or some thing else as you shall think proper.

I am very glad of every thing that gives you pleasure even of some things that give you pain. From all accounts both before & since you went to Paris it might have be foreseen that your reception even from Sincere as well as affected admirers woud amount to a degree of teasing. But all for the best as my fellow Philosopher Pangloss says. I dont care if you are chassé de France à Coups de Complimens & accablé en Angleterre a coups de richesse so as not to find any rest to the Soles of your feet out of Scotland. I woud fain consider every accession to your Fortune as so many dishes added to the future dinners in James's Court & your Eclat in France as  the forerunner of much Variety of chosen & excellent Wines from every quarter of that great Kingdom. Mean time tho I like to lounge at firesides in practice I have not in speculation that opinion you mention. I know nothing that is necessary to happiness but Cordiallity & the talent of finding diversion in all places. I remember somewhere a Mans being told that he was too Nice because he coud not dine on a Ragout and must have cold mutton. But I shoud not perhaps contradict you so flatly nor rub so hard considering how tender your Sensibility will be grown after so many lenient applications.

I have seen Lord Marischall sometimes since he has been here, he is indeed very engaging & I shall certainly follow your directions relating to him. Ahmet Ulla now a Christian has followed him to this place. It is a pity she changed before she came here she woud have been the first Lady who ever entertained at Edinburgh the hopes of Rogering to all Eternity. I need not tell you to put Gen'l Clerk in mind of me. I only wait to hear of his coming to London or some place of Residence in order to write to Him.

I am just now interrupted by one Lister chosen by Mathison who is to attend Josey as above at the rate of two Guineas or if that is too much a Guinea & half a Quarter.

All your friends here are well. Believe me to 
be Dear David 
Most Affectionately yours 
&c Adam Ferguson