Galway May 25th 
1753



My Lord

I had no opportunity of seeing any Charter Schools untill the Regiment came to this Town, which is the reason your Lordship has not heard from me sooner. There is one at Loch-Rea about Sixteen Miles from this Place, which I went to see, & inclose a State of the Masters acc'ts with the Society according to the information I had. As your Lordship was desirous to know their manner of Building for this purpose: I have attempted to make a Plan, at which I am not expert, but it will perhaps be more satisfying than a Description. I had only room on the Paper for the Ground floor. Above Stairs the Body of the house is divided in the midle by a Partition which forms apartments for the Master and Mistress, & the wings of each Side are in intire Rooms where the Beds are for the Children. They have Garrets over head for Store & Lumber.

This School is build upon an Acre of Ground which was given to the Society by My Lord Clanrickard, And they have a Lease of forty Acres at Six pounds per An[num]. 

The Complement is twenty Boys and twenty Girls of which only two are now wanting. They complain much of the difficulty of finding Children, because the Papists are averse to the Design. In looking over the Register, I found all the Children at this School to a very few are Natives of Dublin, & I believe they pick them up more easily there than in the Country.

They teach them to read English & repeat the Catechism with some Arguments against Popery: but most of their time is employed in Work. The Oldest of the Boys are employed in what they can do without Doors; the younger Boys knit Stockings & the Girls Spin. When their time is out they are put apprentice to Protestant Tradesmen or to Service Under Indentures.

I hear pretty Good accounts of their success in General. Many Gentlemen get Servants from these schools; & I was told in Particular of one Paterson in the Country of Antrim who carrys on the Linnen Manufacture to a great extent, & employs about a hundred from these Schools.

Our Review is over this Day. Major Grant sets out for Scotland in a few days, & I hope to see your Lordship soon after this letter. I am

My Lord your Lordships most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson



PS. I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship that I begin to Despair of finding a Wolf Dog, for the Breed is become very Scarce in the Country.