RR/~~~"

E /A Rie
R E ARKS

ON A
PAMPHLET LATELY PUBLISHED

BY DR. PRICE,

INTITLED,

OBSERVATIONS on the NATURE of CIVIL
LIBERTY, the PRINCIPLES of GOVERNMENT,
and the JUSTICE and POLICY of the WAR with'

AMERICA, &C.

IN A
LETTER from a GENTLEMAN in the Country

to a MEMBER of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON:
PRINTRD FOR T. CADELL IN THZ STRAND.

M DCCLXXVI,

REMARKS
R E A R K S

ON A
PAMPHLET LATELY PUBLISHED

BY DR. PRICE.

In a Letter to a Member of Parliament.

S I R,
SEN D you some Remarks upon Dr. Price's
Pamphlet, concerning which you do me the

honour to desire my opinion. A gentleman
who gives his name to the Public is intitled to
have the fairest conftruftion put upon his words,
and I shall be extremely sorry if, in differirg
from Dr. Price, any exprefion escape from me
that is too abrupt for the refpe& that is due to
him. As I am a mere commentator, I am likely
to bas dull as the reit of my fraternity, but flall,
nevertheless, abide by the order, and confine
myself to the matter, that is fuggefled by my
Author.

B You

[2 ]

You will please to observe, that the Doc-or

refs his argument on a definition of Civil Li-
berty, which is therefore a principal subjet of
theie Remarks. He confiders Liberty under
four general divisions, Phbfical Liberty, Moral
Liberty, Religious Liberty, and Civil Liberty .
The firR is the principle of spontaneity. The fe-
cond is the power of following our own jenfe of
right and wrong. The third, the power of exer-
cifing the religic;n we like best. And the fourth,
or Civil Liberty, is the power of a civil society or
jfate to govern ifteif ly its own cifcretion.

The Docor, in the following inference from

all thele definitions collated together, puts Li-
berty in contradifcinction to Restraint, and
makes Restraint, in every cafe, the essence of
Slavery. ;iln all these cafes, he fays, there is a
fcrce -which sands opposed to the agent's own will,
and wL ick, as far as it operates, produces servitude.
And he concludes the whole deduction with ob-
serving, that as far as in any inflance the operation
of a:y ca'.r comes in to ;refrain the power of self-
go'-vernmrt, so far flaveiy is introduced. Nor do
I think, he adds, that a p-ecifer idea than this of
Libe;-,y and Slaveiy can be formed.

* SeI, I, . .

I am

C3] .

I am under the necessity, however, of owning,

that this idea is omewhat perplexing to me.
It does not appear, that upon this idea of Li-
berty any civil community can be formed with-
out introducing slavery. For even where the
collective body are sovereigns, they are seldom
unanimous, and the minority must ever fubmir
to a power that ltands opposed to their own will.

In this, however, the loss of Liberty may be

fiJpc';l unavoidable; for it is common to fay,
that men, by entering into society, give up a
part of their Natural Liberty.

But there is yet another difficulty. If Liberty

be opposed to Refiraint; I am afraid it is incon-
fiient with the great end of civil government
itself, which is to give people security from the
effe& of crimes and disorders, and to preserve
the peace of mankind.

The Liberty of any single man, in this fenfc of

a freedom from relsraint, would be the servitude
of all. In Turkey, perhaps in Brandenburgh,
there are persons who pretend to this Liberty;
but I believe that no one can devise a more
plentiful source of slavery than this. The Li-
berty of every separate diffriE or corporation in
a slate would be national independence; and as

B2 far

4 ]

far as the humour for it should spread, would
threaten every community with the loss of every
incorporated member that has a pretence for
separation, or a fancy to fct up for ifclf.

I confess I am somewhat surprised that

Dr. Price, who quotts ontifquieu with o
much regard on cthcr occasions, fliould have
overlooked wh.t he has said on th's. Among
the other milfaken notions of Liberty, this cele-
brated writer ohfirves, T1'at some ,ha: ciofounded
the LPcwrr- cf the people with the Liberty f the
people* . -T:ha ini deocracies the pecple seem to do
,what they pl je; tlt tht Liberty does not colnfi
in doing hbat we pleafi. It conrifts in being free
to do what we ought to incline, and in not being
cbligcd to do what we ought not to incline . We
oo-hbt to remember, he continues, that Indepen-
dence is one thing, and Liberty another. That if
any cilizen wee free to do what he pleased, this
vwold be an extincion of Li!erty, for every one
e!2 woidd have the fame freidc;m j.

If the Doctor perfit in his definition of Civil

Liberty, it will be difficult to support the high
encomium which he bestows upon it. For it
would be a real curse to numbers of mankind

L'Efp-it des Loix, ivr ii. c. 2.
t ibid. c. 3 Ibi.

to

to be left to do what they please. Certain, in-
fiances we have had of this Liberty in the cafe
of despotic princes, who were taught to think
that they had a right to do what they pleased;
but they were, in consequence of this Liberty,
the completeft wretches that have appeared in
the hi'ory of mankind.

Whether we fay or no with Montesquieu,

that the power of the people is not the liberty
of the people, it may be said with confidence,
that the power of the people is not the happi-
ness of the people. Corrupt and vicious men,
afiembled in great bodies, cannot have a greater
curie beflowed upon them, rih:n the power of
governing thcmfelves.

It is possible that the Doctor may have meant

to qualify his definition and the encomium of
Civil Liberty, by supposing, that it was pre-
ceded by Moral Liberty; and if he did, :his
would be rather an aukward way of informing
us, that Liberty conlifts in the freedom t doo
what is ju and innocent. In the mean cine,
and till Moral Liberty is fully eftabliihed in ihe
world, we flall do well to prepare foine e-
firaint for the inclinations of men, and be con-
tented with a Liberty which secures to us the
possession of our rights, while it restrains
from invading the rights of others.

2 ITei -,

(6)

Here, however, I am obliged to look for-

ward fomn pages , and mufi confess, that the
Doclor hiiniflf has qualified his description of
Liberty in iome such manner as this: A free
fJane, he fays, at the fame time that it is free
itfcE, makes all its members free, y excluding li-
ceniioiuf;efs, and guarding their pejons and pro-
perty and good name againfl infilt. That is to
fay, when we bring together the two parts of
the Docor's description, that a free state pro-
duces servitude, to produce Liberty. Or, as
he concludes the paragraph himelf, that Gc-
vernmiet reJifrains Liberty, when used to dejiroy
Liberty.

This collision of words, I confess, renders the

precision of the Dodcor's former idea somewhat
suspicious; but we must be contented with the
good meaning, and only regret, that the qualifi-
cation of the general definition had not come
sooner, and that it is not more uniformly kept
in view through the piece. If a writer should
insist, that the inhabitants of St. Giles's have a
right to seize the houses in Grosvenor Square,
and afterwards, upon a difficulty Itated, should
qualify his doctrine by fayuig, that he affirmed
the right only on a supposition that they had

Page 12 and 13.

bought

( 7 )

bought the subje&s in queflion, and had paid
for them, his doctrine might be true on the
whole; but his manner of stating it, by leaving
out so important a condition till it was required
to solve an objection, especially if he dropt it,
afterwards through the whole of his argument
might appear somewhat exceptionable. It is
probable that ome of the parties concerned
would be in such haste to avail themselves of
the right, that they would not stay to think of
the condition. And I apprehend with some re-
gret, that the Docor may have readers who
will reason on his definition of Liberty, and
think themselves entitled to do what they please,
without attending to the qualification that is as-
terwards brought to explain it.

My impatience to have a satisfactory account

of this important subject, by collating together
the descriptions and limitations of my Author,
has carried me a few pages too faf ; I think
myself now, however, authorised to conclude
with the content of the Doctor, that Civil Li-
berty is not precisely a power to do what we
please, but the security of our rights; and that
a person may be free, although contrary to his
own will he is obliged to pay his debts, and
even to contribute to the revenue ol' the iate.
And if the Doctor insists that Liberty f ii implies

a x· cloni

(8)

a freedom from restraint, he will please to ob-
serve, that nothing can give a more complete
freedom from unjult rcftraint, than the perfeit
fccurity that we cannot be wronged. This is the
frecdom which Mcntefquieu holds forth to
our esteem; and I presume, it is that Liberty
on which Dr. Price beflows his encomium, not-
withflandiig his apparent partiality to the free-
dom of doing what we please. I now return
to the place at which I met my Author .

The Doctor, in every fep of his argument, is

somewhat hurried by his own definition. In
every free slate, he fays, every man is his own
legiiator: all taxes are free gifts for public
services. It may be fair to ak in what part of
the world such a state does, or ever did exist ?
Or what fort of laws thieves and pickpockets
are likely to make against theft ? Or how much
of his property the miser is likely to bring to
the coffers of the Public ?

In most free Rates the populace have as

much need to be guarded against the effe& of
their own folly and errors, as againR the usurp-
ation of any other person whatever. And the
eflence of political Liberty is such an etablifh-

*Page 4.

nent

(9 )

ment as gives power to the wife, and safety to
all. The exercise of power in popular assem-
blies has a mixture of effecs, good and bad.
It teaches a people, as it did the Athenians, to
become wits, critics, and orators. It gives to
every man one chance against being oppressed,
in allowing him to appear for himself. But it
places him when accused before rash, precipitate,
prejudiced, and inequitable judges; he is no
more his own legislator, than he is the master of
the people, And he is in fa& subjet to a
power, which is of all others the most unstable,
capricious, and arbitrary: bound by no law, and
fubjeat to no appeal. For this reason, Mr.
Montesquieu has very wifely said, that Demo-
cracy and Aristocracy are not by their nature
free governments *.

They are inferior in this refpef to certain

species of monarchy, where law is more fixed
and the abuses of power are better restrained.

The Door farther observes , or concludes,

from his definition, that Civil Liberty in the mofi
perfect degree can be enjoyed only in small flates,
'where every member is capable of giving his sus-
frage in person, and of being chosen into public

' Esprit des Loix, liv. ix. c. 5. .- Page 7.

C offices.

. ( o

offices. It is true that democracy is tolerable
only in small states; and the Do&or certainly
means to speak of democracy, when he makes
this inference on the fubje& of Liberty. But
even in the smallest fates, the preservation of
public consistency and justice, the security of
private rights, must ever recommend some mix-
ture of ariftocratical power, that may prove a
check on the caprice of the people; and such a
mixture took place in all the happiest institutions
of antiquity.

The Doaor owns *, that although Liberty

be most perfea in small states, it is not altoge-
ther banilhed from great ones: For, where alt
the members of a fate are not capable of giving
their suffrages on pzblic measures individually and
personally, they may do this by the appointment of
fubfitutes or representatives.

In this conceflion, the Dotor begins to elude

the force of his own definition; and when we
confider how little in some cafes the conitituent
may know of what his representative does, it
appears, that by this device, men may be their
own legislators, without so much as knowing
that laws are enacted or proposed. And even.

* Page 7.

America,

( II )

America, at the distance of three thousand
miles of sea, may enjoy its freedom by fend-
ing fubflitutes or representatives to the Parlia-
ment of Great Britain.

This indeed is one of the happiest institutions

of mankind, and might be of use in small as
well as in great states, by giving every order
of the people that thare in the legislature of
their country, which is necessary to guard their
own rights, without enabling them to usurp on
the rights of others. But I must still contend,
that the Liberty of every class and order is
not proportioned to the power they enjoy, but
to the security they have for the preservation
of their rights.

In stating this fortunate principle however,

theDoctor very reasonably recommends a fair and
adequate representation, and makesfuch a defcrip-
tion of pretended inadequate representation, as I
am afraid can hardly fail of being applied to the
government of Great Britain *. The reprefenta-
tives of seven millions are chosen by less than
three hundred thousand, and the whole is at-
tended with circumstances that make the Dotor
exclaim, it is an abuse of language to fay, that

Page 10.
C fuic

( I2 )

fucb a slate poseses Liberty. And that rather
than bE governed in such a manner, it would per-
haps be better to be governed by the will of On:
JMan without any representation.

The fat in our history, I believe, is, that

there never entered into the head of any person
able to bring it about, except Cliver Cromwell,
the idea of having the people of Great Britain re-
presented. Perfins of a certain description were
in the way of attending the king in his wars
and in his Parliaments. It appears that they
confidered this diftinetion rather as a burden
than as a privilege. The kings were in use to
grant exemptions to the officers of their court,
and to others. The counties and boroughs
that ent fubfitutes were obliged to give-them
wages; and sometimes, by the connivance
of heriffs, eluded the duty altogether. In
process of time, however, a place in the King's
Court of Parliament became of more confe-
quence. Deputies became willing to serve with-
out wages; boroughs revived their charters.
Freeholders embraced their distinction as a pri-
vilege, and their representatives improved it into
a formidable power, which became of the great-
eft importance to themselves and to their
country. So little however are mankind corn.
monly aware when they are laying in politics

the

( I3 )

the foundation of the best fuperftruaures. The
spirit of the constitution, the design of the con-
ftitution, are the mere conftrucions of fpecula-
tive men; at least, they only mean the cffeet of
the constitution, which, notwithstanding the
disdain of our Author, has been in many re-
fpeas superior to the effect of any other con.
flitution in the known world; and notwith-
itanding the high ideas of Liberty with which
it is contracted does atually bestow upon its
fubjecs higher degrees of Liberty than any other
people are known to enjoy.

It is known, that under all the defects of the

British Legislation, the subjet enjoys more fecu-
rity than was ever before enjoyed by any peo-
ple; and this not accidentally, but by a very
natural tendency of the constitution, by lodging
legislation in the hands of persons interested in
the justice of the laws which they make, and by
giving to all the different orders of the state a
power to rejeEt or amend every law that is like-
ly to be grievous on themselves. It is less ma-
terial who elects, than it is who may be elected.
For so long as no one can be elected without
the qualifications of a British commoner, the
interests of the Commons in the lower house is
fecu e.

7 The

( 14 )

The experience of Europe, Asia, and Africa,

should convince Dr. Price, that it is not bet-
ter to be governed by one man than by such
a representation: but this hasty expression of
the Dotor, hows the danger of going so fast
in search of ideal perfection, which is apt to
make us despise what is attainable and obtained,
for the fake of something impracicable, and
sometimes absurd.

It is of great moment to extend the partici-

pation of power and government, as far as the
circumstances and charater of a people will
permit; but extremely dangerous to confound
this advantage with Civil or Political Liberty;
for it may often happen, that to extend the par-
ticipation of power, is to destroy Liberty. When
al the powers of the Roman senate were tranf-
ferred to the popular assemblics, the Liberty
of Rome came to an end.

In general, to be free, is to be guided by one's
ewn will; but licentiousness is its opposite *.

Dr. Price seems to forget his own definition

of Liberty, and admits the reitraint of crimes
as necessary to it: nay, admits that Liberty is

* P. , 12.

not

( 5 )

not les infringed when the licentious multi-
tude do what they please, than it is when a single
person does so; although he seems to think,
and perhaps justly, that the former infringe-
ment is the most repairable and the least prni-
cious of the two, p. 14.

Dr. Price has very juffly observed, that the

imputation of omnipotence to any government'
except that of the firongeft, the most numerous,
or the greatest force; is absurd and that even
force cannot always secure obedience. It must
be satisfied with the alternative of obedience, of
tortures, or of death. Government, whatever be
its origin, must employ various engines, of which
force is but one authority, refpe&t, public
confidence, persuasion, are the principal en-
gines to be employed with the body of a well-
meaning and innocent people: force is the en-
gine to be employed against criminals and slaves.
And the government of mere force, in every in-
stance, either finds people slaves, or makes
them so.

It is absurd to fay, as some writers have said

in the course of this paper-war, that there mufft
be in every state one supreme uncontrolable
power; for this never yet existed in any state
whatever. The despotic Prince, in search of

such

( 16 )

such a power, finds, that he changes the corn-
trol of assemblies, councils, civil departments,
or of men of education and virtue only, to come
under the control of Serjeants and Corporals.
In our government, King, Lords, and Commons
are not one power, but three collateral powers;
any one of which may flop the motions of all
the reft. This observation, however, takes
'nothing from the authority of their joint as
wherever they concur, nor had any one till now,
from the extreme ettlements of Britilh subje&s in
the old world, to their utmost migrations in the
new, doubted the validity of any such a. Dr.
Price seems to regret that the efforts formerly
made by our fathers in behalf of Liberty are
no longer repeated he hould likewise regret,
that our liberties are no longer attacked in the
fame manner as in the times of our fathers. The
contest between the prerogative of the King and
the privilege of Parliament is discontinued:
the King has influence enough in Parliament
to obtain the neceflary supports of his govern-
ment, though, I hope, never to obtain the
smallest resignation of the people's right. In
the contest of our times, the parties are the
pretenders to office and the holders of office. A
noble contest, though an ignoble cause. I
must call it a noble contest, as it is undoubtedly
one principle of life in our constitution. It

leads

( I7 )

leads one party to watch the motions of admi-
niftration; and the other to be on their guard
because they are watched. As the matter now
flands, indeed, it is more the interest of oppo-
fition to stop the ordinary movement of go-
vernment, than to prevent its abuses. If they
can stop the ordinary course of government, the
minister must withdraw to make way for them-
selves: but in preventing abuses, they only ob-
lige him to change ill measures for good, and
by this means to take a firmer hold of his power.
I know that many ill consequences might be im-
puted to the state of our parties; but I am not
for removing any one safe-guard to freedom,
until we have found a better.

Dr. Price infers from his argument, that no

one community can have any power over the pro-
perty or legijlatiot of another, that is not incorpo-
rated with it by a jus and adequate representation.
P. 19.

In this paflage, by the word Power, he cer-

tainly means the right to have such a power;
for it is an undoubted fad, that many ltates
have had the power. Even the admired and
happy republics of Swifterland and Holland
have their fubje& towns and provinces; and
this nascent republic of New England too, if it

D acquire

( i8 )

acquire the independence which, under the de-
nomination of Liberty is projected for it, may
come to have its subject towns and provinces,
and, among the foremost, some of those who
are now so ready to become partners of its re-
volt against the itate.

I do not contend for the right to any such

power in any actual cafe, but I contend not only
for the reality of the power, but for the right
likewise in some supposable cafes. No writer
on the law of nature, that I know of, has de-
nied that states or bodies politic may perform
every a that any private party can perform;
and if this be admitted, it follows, that they
may, either by contract or forfeiture, become
tributary or subjet to another state or body po-
litic, as much as a single man may become the
servant or debtor of another single man by fipu-
lation or forfeiture.

This maxim of the law of nature, I confess,

does not bind the Americans to contribute to
the supply of the British Empire, unless it can
be shewn that they have received all the benefit
of fubjeEts; and therefore have stipulated to
perform all the duties of fubjets, by the fame
tacit convention that binds every inhabitant of
Great Britain.

I agree

( I9 )

I agree with the Dotor, that the fubjecton

of one state to another is inexpedient, and often
calamitous for both; but this will not preclude
one member of the fame slate, who has always
made common cause with another, from having
a very just claim to expeE a joint contribution
to the common support.

After what has passed between Great Britain

and her Colonies, whoever pretends that Great
Britain hould drop every claim of a return,
and the Colonies refuse to make any return,
under every possible security to their property,
must have very high notions of the generosity
incumbent on the one party, and as low notions
of what is incumbent on the other. Nay, but
they have traded with us, and this is enough:
and have not we traded with them ? Have they
given us their goods for nothing ? Or have
they been careful to receive value? Or have
they taken less value than other nations would
have taken ? These questions should be an-
fwered before we are told that their trade has
repaid us for all the blood and treasure we have
expended in the common cause, and before it
can be admitted that in the heights of prosperity,
at which they may arrive, they are not bound
under any form, or with any precautions, for the
remainder of their property, to contribute any

D 2 part

( 20 )

part of it whatever to the common supplies of
the Empire.

The Do&or owns that one state may become

bound to indemnify another for an injury done
them, or be bound to give security against fu-
ture injury; but who can set limits to the poffi-
ble rights thus established in the claim of one
state against another. It is impossible to tell
how long a state may be tributary, or how much
it may pay before it has acquitted a debt of in-
demnification; or what precaution may be ne-
ceflary to obtain, for the future, a sufficient
security against injuries. The Romans, when
they recovered Campania from its revolted inha-
bitants, and from Hanibal, thought proper,
for their own future security, to abolish the
Municipal Senate, and assemblies of that pro-
vince: Such meetings they confidered as a stand-
ing conspiracy against themselves. In this I
{hall not pretend to justify their condut, but
suppositions may be made that would be fuffi-
cient to justify it, and such as I shall neither be
willing to make nor apply to the American Co-
lonies: But let no one contend, that in the ple-
nitude of madness, they may not forfeit more
to the state, than any one would be willing to
exaa from them. I will not fay what an impe-
rious flare, like that of the Romans, so often

quoted

( 2I )

quoted in a imilar cafe, would have exaced
and done; but if we are to hope that one party
will not inflit the penalty, we may hope like-
wife that the other will not incur it.

Writers on the Law of Nature sustain the va-

lidity of a fair contra&t in all cafes where the
performance is possible or lawful. That it is
both possible and lawful for one corporation or
body politic to submit themselves to the laws,
and contribute to the supplies of another, no one
will doubt; that all corporations and bodies po-
litic belonging to the fame state are aually
under such a contract, no body ever que-
stioned.

No one can bind himself to receive the reli-

gious opinions of another, because his opinions
are not in his power, but he may bind himself,
if he pleases, to pay a ihilling in the pound of
his estate.

But can one generation bind another ? No

doubt, in every lawful contract, as much as any
person can bind his heirs, or as much as the late
King of France could bind the successors to his
crown to leave Canada in the possession of the
English. The Docor's reasoning on this sub-
jeet takes away the obligation of treaties, or at

best

{ 22 )

best makes them temporary agreements, to last
for the lives of those who made them.

It is confessed, that favours voluntarily con-

ferred, cannot be stated as a ground of debt;
but they who reft so much on the affection and
attachment of the Colonies to the Mother Coun-
try, ought to allow Something for the favours
done by the Mother Country to her Colonies.

The Doctor attempts a diftintion between

the reparation of parts in the fame kingdom,
and the reparation of parts in the fame empire,
which I confess I cannot comprehend; but if he
lays so great a stress on the difference of names,
he may be told, that Great Britain and its de-
pendencies is not an Empire, but a kingdom.
I fee no warrantable part for mankind to a&
under either denomination, but to acquiesce in
the government which Providence has given to
their kingdom or their empire, until they are
sure that they do not change it for the worse;
and in this, reformers upon general principle,
however sanguine, are far from being secure.

It is the fashion, however, I observe, with

some writers, to give high expecations of the
great perfection to which human nature is tend-
ing, especially in America; for I think Old

England,

( 23 )

England, by their account, is degenerating.
But a republic extending 1200 miles in one di-
rection, and without any known bounds in the
other, is ill an experiment to be made in the
history of mankind. Our ancestors made the
experiment in vain, within narrower limits;
they too had high expectations of what mankind
were about to exhibit; they thought the millen-
nium and the kingdom of Christ were at hand,
but they found, in their tead, the iron reign of
an usurper, supported by military force. It is
charity, perhaps, to pray that if the Colonies
must break with us for ever, they may be more
faithfully served by those they employ, than
they themselves have served their country. The
officer, perhaps, has not yet appeared, who,
on that emergency, is to dismiss the Congress as
Cromwell did the Parliament. But what title
have they to hope for an exemption from the
too common fate of mankind; the fate that has
ever attended Democracies attempted on too
large a scale; that of plunging at once into mi-
litary government ? The armies they form
against their country will need no other title to
become their malters. It is even fair to con-
clude, from the history of the world, that there
is no time of more danger than those times of
sanguine, of florid, and enthusiastic expeclation,

t in

( 24 )

in which mankind are bent on great and hazari
dous change.

Americans, however, may ill be thought

out of this question; they seek no innovation;
they are the parties that contend for the ancient
eftablilhment. Their plea, however, I hope is
better founded than this *. The Parliament of
Great Britain has made laws for the Colonies
from their first eftablilhments. The charters of
the Colonies fubjeaed them to taxes, and they
have been taxed by as of the British Parlia-
ment: Matters therefore were in their ordinary
train, when the Americans ftopt hort, and
would proceed no farther. I will not, however,
insist, that the change of circumstances may not
have required a change of policy; and that, as
the Americans are growing rich, and have some-
thing that tempts rapacity, they ought to have
better security for their property, than the conti-
nuance of former pracice will perhaps betlow.
But, in this view of the contest, what is to be
done if the Colonies have a right to contend for
new securities ? Let them apply to the state with
proper professions of duty, and representations
of the dangers they apprehended; but no one

See the Rights of Great Britain aflerted againt the Claims
of America,

can

( 25 )

can pretend that the state ought to yield up the
ordinary way of constituting a revenue, till a
new and better way is fubfiituted in its place.

The Dotor refers to the example of the Ro-

mans, and bids us confider how much they sus-
sered for having been the tyrants of other na-
tions, and I shall never recommend to any slate
to follow their example.

Dr. Price * has deduced, from our leading

principle, viz. that every rejiraint on the will of
man is an introduSion of slavery, a number of
consequences that seem to hi- incapable of be-
ing disputed. There is, indeed, nothing that
requires to be disputed, but his principle itself,
for with that, the consequences mull fall. Its
application, as he observes, to the present que-
sion with America, is obvious; and the principle
indeed seems to be made for the application,
and is fitted to justify the desire of national in-
dependence, under the name of Civil Liberty.
The change of words has a mighty effe&, even
in the frame of an argument. There is not an
Englilh gentleman, I believe, that would not
Ihrink from the thought of reducing millions of
his fellow-fubjests to a fate of lervitude, and as
few that will not be sized with indignation in

* Part If. p. 3.

E being

(26)

being told that the Colonies aim at independ-
ence, and will contribute no longer to the joint
support of their common country.

We shall be told, however, that the Colonies

do not aim at independence.-Yes, if they aim
at the Liberty designed for them by Dr. Price.
If they aim only at security to their rights and
properties, let the question be fairly flated, and
put in the train of pacific discussion.

The Doctoris pleased to fay, that the question

of right, with all liberal inquirers, ought to be;
not what jurifdicion over them, precedents, ifa-
tutes, and charters give, but what reason and
equity, and the rights of humanity give: This,
he fays, in truth, is a question which no kingdom
has ever bad occasion to agitate. It is certainly
the firfl time it ever was proposed that men
having any political eablifhments, statutes,
precedents, or charters, should at once demolifih,
cancel, or set aside all the maxims, records, or
conventions on which every party must rely for
the preservation of his property, and from which
alone he can learn the relation in which he stands
to the tfate, or to his fellow-fubjets. Why
has no kingdom ever had occasion to agitate
such a question ? Have no parties arose in poli-
tics before ? Have no dillrits or corporations
of the fame community claimed privileges and

exemptions

( 27 )

exemptions that have been disputed with them ?
It is well known that such queffions have been
agitated, and that parties uniformly referred to
precedents, tatutes, and charters for a deter-
mination. To bring queffions of this fort to
any supposed tribunal of reason, of equity, and
humanity, is to set human affairs afloat upon
the ea of opinion and private interef, and to
deprive men of those charts, landmarks, and
rules of failing, by which they were in use to be
guided, and to diret their cause.

It is certainly true, that no nation ever planted

Colonies with o liberal or so noble a hand as
England has done. But she has done so on
the plan of those very charters, flatutes, and
precedents which are now to be set aside. And
her having done so much for her Colonies, is
surely an unfavourable topic from which to in-
ser the right of her Colonies to do nothing for
her. It is indeed to be lamented, that, in the
place of argument, this controversy is haften.
ing to employ the sword. Blessed were he that
could bring it to a different issue. But 1 hope,
that neither the Americans, nor the advocates
that plead for them, will think, that every con-
cefflon flould come from Great Britain. They
have hitherto said to the King of Great Britain,
on his own territory, as the Romans said to

E 2 Pyrrhus

( 23 )

Pyrrhus and to Hannibal, " You muff evacuate
" this land before we will treat;" and if this were
granted them, it is likely they would be ready
to declare what further concessions they expeE
from the Crown and Legilfature of their coun-
try.

The Docor * proposes to determine the jus-

tice of the war by the obje& of it; and this
he collects from a latute moved and carried in
Parliament, under the auspices of a noble Lord,
and of honourable gentlemen, who are the de-
clared friends of America, and in whose inten-
tions the Americans repose such confidence, that
they have never once, as I have been told, com-
plained of this declaratory law. From this
tfate of the cafe; that is, from the silence of
America on this law, and from the friendly in-
tentions towards America of those who ob-
tained it; I am inclined to think, that this law
cannot be the ground f the quarrel. I rather
lufpe&, that we are going to war about taxa-
atiun and property, than about speculative de-
clarations of right; and that one party is very
indifferent about laws that are to bring them
nothing, and others about laws that are to take
nothing from them. And on this supposition I

Pa;r I!. Sca.. i.Pae 3 .

Should

( 29 )

ihould think, the fair way of determining the
justice of the claim, would be by flating two
questions. The firit, Whether the charters, fta-
tutes, and precedents; that is to fay, whether
the present confiitu:ion of Great Britain refpet-
ing her Colonies; has committed a power of
Taxation over America, to the legislature of
Great Britain. If this question hall be decided
in the affirmative, as I am persuaded it mut
be so decided, it will follow, that the Legifla-
ture of Great Britain has yet incurred no blame
in urging a claim in which they were justified
by the constitution of the state.

I however mofl willingly admit a second

question. Has the situation of affairs under-
gone any change that require a change of po.
licy and of measures, that deserve the attention
of the Legifature, and on which the Colonies
ought to be heard with candour and patience,
bo as to avoid, if poflible, inconveniencies to
which, in a new situation, old precedents, and
even statutes and charters might carry us ?

The principal changes in our circumstances

are, that our Colonies, under the influence of
charters and statutes, have increased in resources
and in people: that Great Britain is heavily
burdened, and that now, from being at an or-

dinary

( 30 )

dinary expence in nursing and protecting her
Colonies, ihe would gladly draw ome share of
the public supplies from thence. This fitua-
tion, I confess, is new, and may require some
suitable policy. If the Parliament of Great
Britain, as formerly, be to grant the money of
the Americans ; the latter may think their pro-
perty not secure. At the fame time, if any
party independent of the Parliament of Great
Britain be to grant money to the Crown; this
constitution loses one of its principal securities,
the dependence of the Crown for supplies on
the Commons of Great Britain.

Here is a difficulty, on which it is not fur-

prifing that parties ihould differ, and inadvert-
ently get into a very hearty quarrel, in which
both may susser extremely before any one is able
to find a solution.

In Rating the question, I have passed over

many things which other persons may think of
great consequence, in order to come at what I
apprehend every one will think so.

I do not write in order to persuade my corre-

fpondent, that the Legislature of Great Britain
should retain their unlimited power of granting
the money of America. But I write under a

I deep

( 3I )

deeD convition, that the Americans ought to
contribute to the supplies of the empire. And
that they ought now, before an indemnity is
granted for the pafl, to specify the taxes on
which they will effablith a revenue for the state,
and which, without augmenting the burden on
them, may increase with their resources their
population and the immunities given to their
trade; but subjea to no other alteration, with-
out the content of Parliament and their own.
Or if they choose rather to pay some fixed pro-
portion of what the Commons of Great Britain
from time to time levy on themselves, let them
have it in the mode which they themselves, or
better judgments than mine, can determine.

They have been told, that the Parliament of

Great Britain will not tax them, if they are
pleased to tax themselves. No fpeci.c tax, no
specific fum has been mentioned to them; and
yet this proposition, coming from the Com-
mons of Great Britain, has, by themselves and
by their advocates on this fide the water, been
termed an insult. The plain Englifl, I am
afraid, is, that the Americans do not think any
supply from thence due to the state of Great
Britain. Or, that their advocates do not think
they ought to grant any such supply till they
themselves are in power. The Americans may

flatter

( 32 )

flatter themselves, that if the party that now
opposes Government, were in power, they would
obtain every favour and every concession. But
they may be assured, that no Minister in the
councils of the King will surrender the un-
doubted right of this country, to require from
America ome hare in the supplies which are
necessary to support the the Imperial Crown
and the Empire of Great Britain. If precau-
tions be wanting to secure the rights of that
people in the mode of attaining this necessary
end, the parties may still have an opportunity
of entering into a candid and fair discussion of
this subjec. Commissioners are soon to be ap-
pointed by the King, who are to accompany
his fleets and armies across the Atlantic, doubt-
less with the humane and merciful intention to
spare, by pacific means, if that is yet possible,
the effusion of blood.

In this light the Colonies ought certainly to con-

fider this lenient measure. And if they do, I think
they ought to be ready on their part, to meet the
advances of the King with dutiful representations
of the Securities they deem necessary in the future
administration of government refpeaing them.-
If no such ftep is taken, we may fairly conclude,
that they are intoxicated with the idea of fepa-
ration and independence, and that they are re-

solved

solved not tb grant supplies in any mode or ir
any proportion whatever. And if this be their
resolution, I am afraid the sword muff strike as
well as be raised; and till they exculpate them-
selves from the design of withdrawing their alle-
giance, and every reasonable mode of ulpply from
the Crown of Great-Britain, the wounds they re-
ceive will appear to comefrom the hand of Justice,
and will remain unpitied by many persons, who
are far from wishing to invade their liberties.

It is likely that the councils of the King will

incur more censure for the relucance with which
they have armed the kingdom against this re-
volt, than they will for any supposed precipi-
tation in urging matters to extremities. But it
is a noble error to have been flow in believing.
that Britifi fubjeds, unmoleited in their reli-
gion or in their liberties, still in pofleffion of
that government by which they had arrived at
so much prosperity, untouched in their property
by any unprecedented invasion ; and if assailed,
only assailed by penal statutes, to make compen-
fation for an outrage done to the property and
the trade of their fellow-fubjets: It was, I fay, a
noble error to be flow in believing that British
subjects, under this description; would have
drawn upon themselves and this nation all the
horrots of a civil war. If we were taught to
think them pufilanimous, they were certainly

F taugh

( 34)

taught to think our councils irresolute, diftrat-
ed, and unflable; but both, I hope, will return
from their errors, and exchange the sword for a
more rational mode of arbitration.

Dr. Price, being to confider the jufice of the

war, recites all the pleas that may be offered
by the state in support of coercive measures.
Those pleas he supposes to be, he necfity of
war to preferie the unity of the empire: our fupe-
ri;rity: our pretensions as the parent fiate: the
return duefor our benefits: our sovereignty in the
territory of imerica. The Do&or will own,
that union is at least a desirable object, and will
pardon our endeavours to preserve it, by the
tame means that states, the most moderate, have
employed for this purpose; the policy of a com-
mon interest, a common sense of duty, and the
authority of a common government. If any one
contend, that we ought to rely on either of the
former principles to the exclusion of the latter,
and that we ought to resign either the authority
or the force which government on occasion must
exert, I should fufpec that he does not wih to
have us united, nor even to leave us possesed of
the common resources for the preservation of
peace and good order, that all nations have em-
ployed within their dependencies.

I mean

C 35 )

I mean not to argue from the second topic.

Nations do not found obligations of allegiance
and duty on difference of wealth, numbers of
people, or the uppcfed precedency of scholars
and learned men. i hopc the remaining title,
however, will not be ol flithtiy trcated. The
name of Parent State is not an empty found.
It carries the authority by which civil rights are
eftabliflled and modified. If America derive
nothing from this authority, why did its settlers
take any charters from the crown of Great-
Britain ? Or if they were emancipated by these
charters, why is not their emancipation ex-
preiled in ome such terms as the following?
Wh'Vereas certain persons mean to depart this our
kingdom and form fiates apart, we hereby eman-
cipate fich perfions, discharge their allegiance to us,
and difiontinue our prote.icon. If, on the con-
trary, they took possession of their settlements
by grants of the Crown, if they have been uni-
formly confidered as British fubjecs, amenable
to the law and under the protection of the state,
what title have they now to withdraw their al-
legiance because their settlements were made in
America, any more than if they had been on
Hounllow-Heath or on Finchley-Common?
The charters, the precedents, the flatutes on
which this right of the state is founded, can no
more be disputed than the charters, precedents,

F an.'

( 36 )

and statutes on which the constitution of the
state, respecting any other part of its power, is
established. The utmost any party can plead
is, that circumstances are changed, and require
a new system of policy, or at leaf some addi-
tional precautions, to give to the British fubjets
of America the fame security, or a security as
nearly as possible the fame, with that which is
enjoyed by their fellow-fubjects at home.

Exaction of gratitude is but an ungracious

plea; the fa& is, that the state protected and
encouraged that part of her fubjets on the fame
mixed motives of political interest and affection,
that he protects and encourages every other
member of the community, and there is no
other member that has not an equal title to
reje& the claim of gratitude. It may again be
repeated, that confidering what has passed be-
tween Great Britain and her Colonies, the Ame-
ricans will be found to a an odious part
in this contest; they are not satisfied with the
enjoyment of their municipal governments, and
such a mode of contributing to the supplies of
the empire, as may be consistent with the safety
of their persons and their properties.

The sovereignty of a territory, and the pro-
perty of its land, every where admits of a dif-

tinEtion,

( 37 )

tinaion. The state is undoubtedly sovereign of
all the territory on which any of her fubjeas,
under her protecion, and by her charters and
grants, have made any settlements; and the ter-
ritory of North America was, and is subject to
all the claims of sovereignty under the limita-
tion of statutes and charters. I write from
memory, but appeal to the original deeds,
whether ome of them did not give an exemp-
tion from Taxation during a limited time, with
. c-cent implication, that at the expiration
of that term they should be fubje& to taxa-
tion like other British fubjt&s. And whether
others did not limit taxation to specific duties,
mentioned with a like implication, that the
right of taxation was entire while the exercise
of that right was reftrited.

But Dr. Price is willing to plead *, that the

Colonies did fettle under the faith of charters,
and we muff admit, that they have a right to
all the immunities and exemptions granted them
by statute, or by charter under the authority of
statute; but let not their advocates plead the
authority of charters in one page and rejet
them in the next. It is certain, that the Co-
lonies were planted on the authority of law, and

* P. 40

never

( 38 )

never aspired to establish their privilege on a
higher base. It is likewise probable, that all of
them, at their first settlement, would have
enbraced, as an ample security of their property,
an exemption from every burden besides that of
parliamentry taxation. How far this security
may now be deemed sufficient, I am willing to
leave as a subject of better and more able dif-
culion.

The remainder of Dr. Price's observations on

the jufrice of the war tend to prove, that the
pait or present site of the constitution refpea-
ing the Colonies, is not precisely what it ought
to be in the present state of the empire, nor such
as it ought to be in the event of farther changes,
of which he has tated the poflible contingency;
and in this 1 do not pretend to decide, but hope
that persons better qualified will bring it to
proper trial, not of force, but of political ex-
pediency and national wisdom.

Dr. Price, in the 2d Section of the 2d Part of

his Pamphlet, in which he inquires, whether the
war with America is j.ftified by the principles of
the constitution, affects to confider the Americans
as a separate people; and inquires, whether the
war be made to elabliJh our constitution among
them. If this question has any meaning at all,

2 I ap-

C 39 )

I apprehend it should stand, Whether, by the
present conflitution of the state, the Legislature
of Great Britain is in poffeilion of a right to
impose taxes and to enact laws binding in Ame-
rica ? If they be in possession of such a right,
have they been known to abuse it ? They have
been in poffeflion of the right, and scarcely at
all exerted it. But the Americans are now
alarmed, and think that this right may be abu-
fed; let them come forward, therefore, and urge
the precautions necessary to be taken against
this abuse. If they will accept of no security
below that of independency, and total fepara-
tion of commonwealth; this, I apprehend, they
muff acquire at the point of the sword. But
other and better remedies for the evil may yet
be expe&ed from the councils of a state that has
been as remarkable for moderation, as for re-
solution in the conduct of great affairs.

Advocates in this cause perpetually quote the

spirit and principles of the British confitution
against the letter and the fact. Do they mean
its primeval slate, the intention of its 'founder,
or something else, that they fancy concerning it?
Its primeval state is very little known; and if
it were, could not be admitted as the rule of
proceeding in opposition to subsequent eflablifh-
ments and compacts. In that sage which is

called

( 40 )

called the feudal constitution, the King had hid
domain or royal estate, and had no other claim
on his fubjeas but their personal services in his
wars. When he wanted some extraordinary
supply, he summoned his vassals together,
and made his proposition to them for that
purpose; they deliberated and refused, or
granted ometimes in commutation for mili-
tary services, and fomtimes as a voluntary gift.
The Constitution was gradually raised upon these
foundations. The Parliament became what it
is, and the state in poffefiion of a maxim, that
the King can raise no supplies without consent
of Parliament. This is the origin, and this is
the far in our constitution; and right or wrong,
till within these few years, or few months, with-
in the Britilh territory Of Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America, Parliament was supposed omni-
potent and irresistible: what change may now
be made to accommodate forms to new fitua-
tions, I hope may fill be determined by a better
decision than that of the sword. But, till that
is determined, I hope, that every good subjea
will pay a proper refpe& to the fat, and the
letter of the confitution, whatever fancy he may
have about the spirit of it. We may wish for
improvements in the laws of the Rfate, but till
these are made, we must abide by the law as it
stands.

In

( 41 )

In the next Sedion*, Dr. Price brings in

question the policy of the war with America.
There is, in fad, no apology can be made for
any war, betides the necessity of it to maintain
bome right, and some right that is worth con-
contending for at this expence. Whether Great
Britain has any such right now at flake, and by
what steps this right came to be brought in
hazard, are two separate questions.

I muf maintain, that until our union is le-

gally dissolved, the American Colonies are a part
of the British empire. That ads of sovereignty,
from which Great Britain might, or did derive,
material advantage, were exerted by the legifla-
ture of Great Britain. That the ad of naviga-
tion, the ads limiting trade, the appointment
of governors and other civil officers, the efla-
bliflment of a revenue, however inconsiderable,
were all of them ads of sovereignty, in which
the state and people of Great Britain are deeply
interested. That the interest of Great Britain,
constituted by there ads of sovereignty, is now
in imminent hazard; and in all human proba-
bility, to be secured by that force alone with
which the slate shall appear to be armed in sup-
port of its own rights. So much has been said

* P. so.
G for

( 42 )

for the Americans in this country, and they have
met with so little control in their own, that their
pretensions arelikely to rife. If they prevail by
force in reducing the power of legislation, will
they not take the fame opportunity to reduce the
navigation at, and other every right of sovereign-
ty? What is to hinder their proceeding to as-
fume that independency, which is so roundly
prescribed to them under the denomination of
Liberty? Are they not getting fast into a fitua-
tion, in which the overeignty of the Crown is
likely to become as odious, at least to their
leaders, as the power of the Legifature itself ?
One man is brought from behind the counter,
to be member of a sovereign Congress; an-
other to be one of five that wield the execu-
tive power of a great empire: others are pro-
moted proportionally, though to inferior fta-
tions; and may entertain hopes of rising to the
highest: one man is raised from a dealer in
hories to 'e a general, another from a barber
to be a culonel; all of them, I make no doubt,
well qualified for the stations they fill: but
whether they be or no, likely to be fond of their
dignities, and unwilling to part with them;
ready to employ all their authority, all their
credit, all the force they can command to pre-
vent the return of peace, which muff bring the
downfal of their power, and fend them again to

their

( 43 )

their trades and their obscurity; what but a
proper force, and a proper aspec of determina-
tion, on the part of Great Britain, can bring
flch persons as these to reason, or deliver out of
their hands the bulk of the fober and the in-
duftrious people of America ? who, feeing their
properties and their peace at flake, will be
glad to return to the bosom of the ate, and
be happy to receive such fatisfa&ion on the
future security of their property and civil rights,
as I hope no generous or candid mind can ever
entertain any idea of refuting them.

Men are indeed, as Dr. Price observes, too

apt to be governed by the lust of power, by re-
venge, and by other detestable paiffons. But are
these passions unknown in America? Have the
leaders in this revolt no ambition, no revenge
to gratify, or would it be prudent in any ad-
ministration to trust to the moderation and can-
dor of parties, who have oared already so high
above the condition of fubjeas, and who have
such an interest in perpetuating a breach to which
they owe so much personal consequence ?

It may be confessed, that as matters now

fland, the Americans are not likely to acknow-
ledge the moif evident rights of Great Britain,
farther than thole rights are supported by force.

G 2 But

( 44 )

But it will be asked, How came we into this

situation ? Is not the war, though neceTfary now,
the sequel of many unnecefary steps, that being
discontinued in time, would have prevented it
entirely ? It may be so, and so have been the
greater number of wars that have afflicted man-
kind. Disputes arise, provocations become re-
ciprocal, and evils accumulate. The beginnings
are admitted, because no body perceives the
end; and every fool is a wife man after the event
has shown him what was coming.

I am willing to own, that Dr. Price is inclined

to censure measures, rather than to strike at men.
That for this purpose he recals to our memory,
the policy of many years, fraught with initruc-
tion to those who are now to act on the scene of
public affairs. He predics, though 1 hope rashly,
the loss of America; and to make us fenfi-
ble how much we are to lose, he paints in the
most favourable colours, the happy state at which
that country at the beginning of these hostilities
had arrived, and the growing importance of its
trade to Great Britain. I hope, however, it will
be remembered, that the Colonies arrived at this
happy Rate under the influence of British policy,
and under the undisputed right of the British
Legislature to bind them in all cafes whatsoever:
and as we have so long prospered together, under

this

( 45 )

this policy; that the Do&or's prediction may
still prove false; that a moderate hare of public
spirit and good intention, on that fide of the
water as well as on this, may still save to all par-
ties their reciprocal advantages, without incur-
ring the inconvenience that either apprehends.
But for this purpose, as we are perpetually
alarmed with the hundreds of thousands that
the Americans can arm, I am afraid that Bri-
tain must not come to the conference unarmed,
or in a ft to be insulted.

I write in every page on the supposition that

negociation may take place; and who, but in-
fernal spirits, would ever go to war with any
other intention than to obtain an equitable
peace. The party on whose fide the aversion to
treaty lies, will be answerable for the confe-
quence.

As for the trade of America, I am ready to

allow it as high as the advocates of America are
pleased to make it. Be it granted that we fold
them our goods at our own price; but unless this
price was a higher than we received from other
markets, unless it was better paid, I do not fee
why this trade is preferable to any other vent fcr
our commodities. Even if the price were
higher, which I am told it was not, the flow

3 returns

( 46)

returns of this market rendered it less profitable
than many others we have had and till may
have.

But have the Americans a right to withdraw

their trade from our merchants and manufac-
turers, as well as their supplies from the state ?
If they have not, why should it be supposed that
they mean to carry the lines of separation be-
yond the bounds which they themselves, and
their advocates, assea to prescribe. Trade is
the child of interest, and will follow where its
parent leads. But the right of sovereignty must
be maintained by authority, and ometimes by
force. The subjects of Great Britain do not
claim a right of sovereignty, neither in Europe
nor in America; but they expect from each
other, and from the Americans, the reasonable
co-operation of fellow-fubje&s; and the state
itself must maintain its sovereignty in both. If
any part of the monarchy withdraw its allegi-
ance, the remainder mutl repel such an insult
with their blood.

We are, in this argument, threatened with

the attacks of enemies from abroad, while we
are engaged in a war with our Colonies. But
the advocates of America, it is hoped, do not
with that the ifate of Great-Britain should bow

the

( 47 )

the head to foreign nations, as well as to her own
subjects. If our quarrel be momentous and
just, we must support it or perilh, be the enemy
who he will. But we have had our wars, and
none of our enemies have yet had cause to re-
joice in the effet of their arms against us. I
am, however, inclined to believe, that this alarm,
as it is injurious to the honour of nations with
whom we are at peace on the faith of treaties,
so it is injurious to their sagacity, and discern-
ment of their own political interest. What are
they likely to gain by erecting the colonies of
North-America into a power independent of
Britain ? Will their own Colonies become more
dutiful after this example of a supposed success-
ful revolt ? Or will they have lets to fear in be-
half of their Weft-India settlements, from this
rising confederacy, than they have from Bri-
tain ? The new enemy will be nearer to those
settlements, and have many more advantages in
seizing them, than the old.

Few persons are qualified to enter the lilts

with Dr. Pricc, on the subjed of accounts and
calculations; but this alone will not enable us,
in particular cafes, to decide the great questions
of national right. Paper-currency and public
debt are the consequences of a fortunate confti-
tution, and of an unlimited credit both public

and

( 48 )

and private. They have given us the advantage
in many a contest to forces superior to our own;
and the evil, though great, by our Author's
account, is susceptible of a cure. It is probably
in order to urge this cure, that the desperate
ifate of the patient is so much explored. Such
admonitions go home to Ministers of State, who
can verify or disprove the sacs, and will not be
shaken by false allegations. The people, how-
ever, are in more danger, and in the most flou-
riflhing time of the Public, may susser as much
from a false alarm of bankruptcy, as they could
from a real one. A false and wanton alarm of
fire, in a crowded theatre, has cost many lives;
but they who alarm us so loudly on the subject
of public credit, may have the consolation to
know, that their own accounts are not fully
credited, otherwise we should have the people
of England crowding into every avenue that
leads to the Bank, and treading each other to
death, with an eager haste to get forward while
any cash was to be had for their paper.

Most people, however, believe, that it is not

necessary for a great kingdom to have all its
riches in cash; and even the example of the
Americans, whose advantages Dr. Price is not
on the present occasion inclined to decry, will
serve to prove, that a people, with no better re-

source

( 49 )

iource than a paper circulation, may rush into
the midst of alarming convulsions. The Ame-
ricans have reaoln to believe, that their country
will be a feat of war, and yet carry on their
operations with paper. Will not the landing of
a few troops on their coafis, infuJrreions threaten-
ing a revolution of governmenct, or events that pro-
duce a general panic, operate in America as they
would do in Europe ? And put an end there, as
it would any where else, to the subsistence of
armies, and to every species of traffic that de-
pends on the faith of paper, or the credit of a
government that supposes a revolution in or-
der to give it any being.

But if in the present contest with America

our revenue is likely to decline, and if the
whole of it be scarcely adequate to the difficul-
ties in which we are involved; this does not ap-
pear a proper argument to convince us, that we
ought not to expect any aid from America; nor
is it a very liberal apology for the Americans re-
fusing to bear any part of the burden, of which
a considerable part was incurred in their own
cause. In their cause singly, if they persist and
prevail in gaining that Liberty of independence
which is now pointed out to them; but in our

*P. 77.

H aommon

( 50 )

common cause if they continue united with us,
and bear ajuft proportion of our burdens.

In tfating the honour of the nation as affeed

by the war with Amnerica, Dr. Price supposes,
that the claims of the state are wrong, and that
the refiltance of the Colonies is jufi. On this
iuppofition, the argument is unanswerably for
him; and the concetfions of justice, however
late, would, at least to our fellow-fubje&s, be
honourable. But this, I humbly conceive, is
begging the question. Hitherto the State has
proceeded in the traa of precedents, and fol-
lowed the rules of law and of charters. If a
change be expected, the grounds of it should be
laid in amicable representation, not in open war
and hostility. Nations are like private men,
they may commit errors, but must not susser
themselves to be kicked even into reason. When
the parties are once armed, a great nation must
attend to is reputation, as well when it sheaths
as when it employs the sword. If the Ameri-
cans refuse upon any terms, whether in con-
junction with, or in subordination to the Parlia-
ment of Great-Britain, to furnish any part of
the public supplies, it is by no means necessary,
in order to justify the ue of the sword against
them, that they invade this fland. If a person
re:use the payment of his just debts, he may be

compelled

( 5' )

compelled to do right in his own habitation, no
less than if he had aually entered with violence
the house of his creditor.

We are said to assume as much power over

the Americans as either the Genoese or the
French could afiume over the Corsicans. The
State of Great-Britain had assumed nothing but
the power of prote&ing her Colonies, when her
conttitutional powers in America began to be
denied, and her authority spurned. What has
happened since is surely matter of regret, at
least, if not of just censure, to the warmest
friends of America. A daring breach of peace
and violence to property was committed, and
went unpunished. Direct war has been levied
in return for penal statutes. And inflead of
reparation to their fellow-citizens for the da-
mage done by the citizens of Boston, we are
told, that they are an independent republic, and
no longer accountable to the laws.

We are bid to think of the allies of the Ro-

mans in Italy, how they claimed to be enrolled
as citizens of Romeo how they fought, and how
the state perifned in the struggle. The claim
of those allies was, by every reasonable person,
thought to be fraught with disorder and public
ruin. It was strenuously opposed by the mot

H candid

( 52 )

candid and virtuous citizens of Rome. The
multitude of the people, in the place of assembly,
but too often made a scene of confuion. IE
was not thought necessary to bring an acceffon
of the whole populace of Italy to swell the tu-
mult. The event of the war was fatal to Rome;
not because the claim of the allies was refused, as
Dr. Price seems to insinuate, but because it was
granted; and the sequel proved a striking ex-
ample of what the Doctor does not seem to ap-
prehend, that the power of the people is not
the good of the people. Their liberty funk as
their power increased, and perished at last by
the very hands that were employed in support
of the popular cause.

W.e are bid to confider* how far we are

likely to succeed in the present war. The
reader will please to observe, that success in war
is a term of uncertain meaning. It may stand
for the extermination of an enemy on the one
hand, or for the most equitable terms of peace
that can be obtained on te other. If the Doc-
tor means the first, I hope that we Ilall not fuc-
ceed. If he means the second, I hope we hall
succeed; and if the Americans be actuated by
any thing hort of frenzy, they will not resign

* Seaton V.

their

( 53 )

their property and their peace, burn their own
towns, and fly to the desert, as the Doctor in-
sinuates, to avoid embracing us once more as
their brethren, and concurring with us upon
some equitable and safe ground, in supporting
the common cause of the slate. This I hall
call vicory; and a victory to all the ingenuous
and well-informed natives of America, as well
as to those of the fame deicription in Britain.

Some individuals among them, who mcet in

Congress, or frand at the head of armies, as the
Lords of America, may think the reunion of
the Empire a defeat; but to every one else, I
hope, it will appear a new era of prosperity,
and glory to the slate.

Dr. Price supposes , contrary to the leon

of independence, which, under the denomina-
tion of Liberty he has read to the Americans,
that they may still be willing to remain in the
bofomn of the state, and on the fame bottom with
their feliow-;fubjeas in Britain: But in what
sense, and to what effec, remain on the fame
bottom with us ? Will they acknowledge the law
of the slate, and contribute some reasonable pro-
portion toward its support ? Will they be con-
tented with a reasonable security, admitted in

* P. jio.

the

(54)

the form of granting this supply, that it fliall
not be augmented without their own content ?
If ever any such proposal had come from Ame-
rica, I am persuaded it might have served as the
foundation of friendship, and terminated in some
happy arrangement. But if, by maintaining
their union with us, they only mean to continue
the practice of calling upon our fleets and ar-
mies to defend them when attacked, without
contributing any thing to support the power that
protets them, I do not fee what interest the
Rate has in this union. Nay, but they are wil-
ling to leave us the command of their trade. I
confers I do not fee the wisdom of this policy
on the part of America; we are arrived at an
age of experience, in which all parties might fee
the expedience of exchanging reftritions on
trade for compensations in revenue. If the slate
were disposed to oppress, he might do so as
effectually by reftri&fions on trade, as by impofi.
tions of taxes. And I believe, that if the Parlia-
ment of Great Britain, in its disputes with the
Crown, had hofen rather to leave the trade of
the people at its mercy, than to grant its sup-
plies, the Public would have long since suffered
severely by the choice.

I am sorry that Dr. Price hould endeavour to
flatter the Americans on a supposed aversion of

3sj~~ ~ the

( 55 )

the people of Great Britain to this war, or im-
pute to this circumstance the supposed flow pro-
grefs made in recruiting the army. The nursery
of the army in this country consists in the super-
numeraries of our manufaturers, and labour-
ing hands. Had the American leaders, by
flhutting their ports on our traders, distressed us
as they proposed, recruits for the army would
have been bur too easily found; but as matters
now stand, our armaments muf increase with
their usual pace. If, to avoid loading the pub-
lic, by means of new levies, with an enormous
half-pay lift at the end of the war, it is to be
opened with a supply of foreign troops, I hope
ik wi cl ole with them too; and that in what-
(::.: manner the first army that goes to America
i, composed, it will satisfy the people of that
country that peace with Great Britain is better
than war.

I am farther sorry, that Dr. Price ihould flat-

ter the Americans on the subjed of their own
strength, and of our weakness. If the Docor
were pleated to recollec a few more of the pas-
fages of history, with which he is so well ac-
quainted, he would observe, that no general,
being to invade a country, thought himself
obliged to have an army in numbers equal to the
natives; and that most of the unhappy con-

quests

( 56 )

quefis recorded in the history of mankind were
made with small armies, who, having the fupe-
riority of discipline, made a progress the more
rapid that their numbers were few: in hort,
that small armies have done more than I hope
the arms of Great Britain will have to do in
America; they have reduced, and kept in sub-
je&ion, extensive countries, replenished with
numbers of people, not of the weak and effemi-
nate alone, but of the molt warlike and fiercest
nations that are known in history.

The Romans, a little before the second Punic

war *, mustered in Italy seven hundred thousand
foot, and seventy thousand horse; yet this coun-
try was invaded by Hannibal with twenty thou-
sand foot, and fix thousand horse : The great-
eft part of it was reduced, and remained in the
hands of this enemy for sixteen years. With
how small an army did Cafar reduce four hun-
dred independent Certons, and fierce nations in
Gaul ? With how few did he afterwards invade
Italy itself, and with how few did he reduce the
whole Roman Empire ? Were the Saxons that
landed in Britain superior to the Britons; the
Danes to the Saxons, or the Normans to the
Englih ? On this point, therefore, .cald be
sorry to flatter the Americans. The cii r:'ions

* Polyb. lib. ii. c. 24. ;. -
,,d

:hat

( 57 )

that arise in a country that is invaded, turn the
superiority of numbers into disorder and weak-
ness. The Americans have not yet met the
Britiih soldiers on the plain, and when they do,
their numbers, I imagine, will not avail them
much.

I have as high a sense of what men ought,

and will do, in defence of their liberties, as any
man: But I flatter myself, in the present cafe,
that, unless the Americans mistake indepen-
dence and separation of commonwealth for Li-
berty, that they will not think themselves called
upon to try the force of this principle.

I hould willingly, with Dr. Price, in the

close of his pamphlet, or while he is hastening
to the conclusion *, rejoice in the profpea of a
power growing in America that shall astonish
the world. If it were not proposed to raise this
power by dismembering the slate of Great
Britain, and by stripping her of a branch lhe
has nourished with so much care, and which by
having partaken with her in every national ad-
vantage, is now in condition to bear an equi-
table part in her burdens; and which certainly,
on every principle ofjuftice, human and divine,

* Page 103.

I is

( 53 )

is not now entitled to fay, we need you no
longer, and will take no father part in your
affairs.

I confess that I think, when the cause of our

country is at flake, impartiality is but a doubt.
ful virtue. It may be noble to wiih that our
country should do no wrong, and it may be
lawful to flay her hand when raflly lifted up
against ti-e weak and the helpless; but when
swords are drawn, to beat down that of a friend
while the enemy is striking, I am afraid, is per-
fidy.

The Americans, it is true, are not come

here to invade us; but they with-hold the
rights of Great Britain, and oblige us to invade
them, which is a no less justifiable ground of
hotility. When citizens of Great Britain anti-
cipate with joy the independent or separate
greatness of America, it is natural to suppose,
that they think the dismemberment of this em-
pire will bring us back only to what we were
about a century ago; diminish our luxury, give
a check to many vices, and by landing us down
a few fleps on the scale, only renew our endea-
vours to remount again. This, however, is not
of a piece with the history of mankind; nations
in their progress, though weak and inferior to

3 their

( 59 )

their neighbours, spurn their condition, and
continue to advance from the bottom to the top
of the scale. But nations that have been high
can seldom bear a fall; they fink in fthe cale
with a retrograde motion as rapid as they ad-
vanced. Is Great Britain then to be sacrificed
to America; the whole to a part, and a state
which has attained high measures of national
felicity, for one that is yet only in expecation,
and which, by attempting such extravagant plans
of Continental Republic, is probably laying
the feeds of anarchy, of civil wars, and at last
of a military government, so much that, in this
great contest, Dr, Price might have ventured to
fay, that the friends as well as the enemies of
America may not know what they are doing?

I am happy to find in the conclusion of this

Pamphlet , that Dr. Price, notwithstanding the
language of independence which he has taught
the Americans, is pleated to repeat with ome
exprefiions of approbation, a motion for peace,
fuggeted by a noble Lord, in which the union,
dependency, and participation of America in
the burdens of the Empire are included as part
of the plan. The proposal does honour to the
noble Lord; and if it had atually come from

* Page 103.

A merica,

( 60 )

Ameriea, I mhould have thought it an equitable
ground upon which to open a council of deli-
beration with the most friendly intentions. I
should have prayed that, while the delibera-
tions were open, parties would agree to a
cessation of arms, and a suspension of penal fta-
tutes. But I fee not the use of fabricating plans,
of which the firIt ftep always is a concession on
the part of the Rfate, without any overture of
submission on the part of its fubjeas. These
subjects have treated plans of the minority with
the fame contempt that they have treated acts
of Parliament or resolutions of the majority,
and seem to be determined to bring this contest
to an iflue more agreeable to the enemies of
Great Britain than to its citizens and friends.

P. S. I know not how the tenets of any

party may be affeaed by what I write, but my
paper is now in your hands if you publish
it, I shall become the Author of a Pamphlet;
and in that cafe beg of you to remember, that we
pamphlet-writers of every condition mistake
ourselves for statesmen, and so decide and advise
without reserve. But that, not being singular,
you w ill treat me no worse than you have done
others of the fame description. Our esteem
with many is fallen; but our consequence with
a warm-hearted and reasoning people, who like

to

( 61 )

to be consulted in their own affairs, merits the
interposition of the best informed and best in-
tentioned persons in the kingdom. My small
pretensions being only to a hare of the last
gratification, I hope to meet with ome indul-
gence on the first. And am,

Your's, &c.
THE END.
