Brunstain Aug.t 15. 1757

My Dear Sir

I am sorry to find from your Letter to my Lord Milton that the dislike you formerly expressd to stay at Groninguen continues to give you so much Uneasiness. My Lord desires me to assure you that when he considered of a place proper for your Studies the only Reasons he had to prefer Groninguen arose from Circumstances advantageous to you. He thought that Retirement would be more proper and even more agreeable to yourself, than being exposed to Company who might divert you from your business & hinder the design which both he & you had in going abroad: For this reason he preferrd Groninguen to Leyden which is more frequented by our Countrymen & where they frequently interrupt & seduce one another. The Truth is that Foreigners generally attach themselves to one Another abroad which is a great disadvantage because they can reap little advantage benefit from One another & are made to neglect the business for which they went. There was another reason which made my Lord's choice of Groninguen appear extremely desireable to me, that I knew some worthy people there to whom I could recommend the Care of your health & in whose Friendship I thought you might entirely confide Which I hope you have found confirmd by the behaviour of Mr Falkner & Vandoeveren.

However I hope it will be in your power to prevent any  disadvantage My Lord apprehends in leaving the place you are now in and as you are so desirous of going to Leyden he yelds to your Inclination in that particular although his Opinion is still the Same. As this Step is entirely our own he hopes you will be upon your Guard against any ill consequence it may have. He has not desired me to repeat any of the Remarks he formerly made upon your Plan of Study although he is still of the same Opinion & spoke from the Experience he has had in the Study you are now upon.

It distressed him greatly to find you still under some degree of Uneasiness, but he trusts to time for the Removing it & to the assurances you will always have of his Tenderness as well as Care & attention to whatever concerns you. Any thing from myself upon this occasion may be extremely improper, but I cannot help repeating the sincere concern which I & your friends here take in your welfare. We had no occasion for professor Rücker's Testimony to satisfy us as to your ability in your Studys and hope you will be able to make Leyden more agreeable to yourself as well as equally profitable in your business. I am My Dear Sir

your most affectionate & 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson





This Letter is wrote 
at my desire & 
with my Approbation 
signd And. Fletcher


Edinburgh Octr 4, 1757

Sir

I have just received your letter inclosed to Mr Home, & am sorry that my omission in not writing you sooner shoud have given you the trouble of a second letter, or occasioned any degree of suspence with respect to my inclinations. I would have written immediatly on having the honour of your former letter, If I had not thought it unnecessary to give you that trouble. As Mr Home had Signifyed my intire Submission to My Lord Butes directions, & my willingness to be employed on any terms His Lordship thought proper. The proposal at first found one great difficulty with me in breaking in upon my Inclination to Setlement after some years of Wandering & uncertainty, of which I confess I was become tired: But there were considerations enough to remove that difficulty, & the principal one which remained upon My Lord Bute's Letter, was a very Sincere Anxiety about my qualifications to fill a place of so much consequence & such tender concern to His Lordship, & in which every circumstance I had access to know, made me think with pain of any degree of dissappointment to him.

I am extremely sensible of the honour of this Confidence from a Person who is so well apprised of the Nature & importance of it & shall endeavour to profit all I can by the views he will no doubt continue to give me.

I am just now upon terms for disposing of My Chaplaincy which is but a precarious Possession to one who has tired of following a Regiment, & who in time of service can have little more than the name & the chance of being suddenly called upon from Abroad. If I can get My Colonel to concur in this Affair I shall have litle further connection with the Clergy of Scotland & be under no necessity of appearing in their Character & shall be very glad if that Circumstance is equally  [xxx] agreeable to My Lord Bute.

Home has left his quarters at Braid & lives in Town. He has finished the first Acts of Agis & they are now in the hands of a Copyer, & will I believe be sent to you when done. I dread the difficultys which remain in the Plan from the Mixture of two Objects & Passions, but I have avoided ever discouraging him upon a point which coud not possibly be altered. He wrote you by last Post & is now gone to the Countrey for a Day or two. I hope you will forgive the Length & the freedom of this letter & believe me to be

With the greatest Respects 
your Most Obliged 
& most Obedient humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson