Edinburgh Aprile 17th 
1767



Dear Sir

I promised to make all my applications to the Ministry by your means & I hope that before all the affairs of this church & State are settled you will think me a man of my word. I beg that if you are not disgraced and on your way to Scotland before this comes to hand, which I hope you will be very soon, that you will favour the Prayer of the inclosed Petition from My Colleagues. I am not concerned but their Petition is reasonable it is gone I believe to The treasury by some Proper conveyance & I woud fain hope it may receive some Support from you likewise as being of the Northern Department.

I am glad to hear from Jno Home that the last representation we made in his affair may be Satisfactory. God grant your continuance in Power till this affair is dispatched. I am  much obliged to you for the Review and to the Author of it for his favour & partiality to me. I have just now sent me by Lord Kames who is at Blair Drummond a Letter of Mrs Montagu to His Lordship. If I knew the ground on which she trod in this countrey I woud kiss it for the Notice she is pleased to take of me. I am very sorry for the complaints of her health & for her thinking that mankind in any state shoud be as perfect as her conceptions, in order to give Satisfaction. I dont believe that there is in the whole list of created beings one that acts his part or fulfills his destiny better than man, & I am perfectly satisfied with him & with no circumstance better than I am with his fancying a perfection superiour to his own Nature which is the foundation of many of his complaints. I write all this in hopes that when you see Mrs Montagu you will mix some of my Philosophy with your own. I am nevertheless somewhat Angry  with her for conjuring up the Spartan black broth against me . I thought to have laid this Devil under the Genteeler appellation of Pottage which you know is here a dish in great request. I know that you are an admirer of the Athenians as well as Mrs Montagu & if I were to plead the cause of Sparta against her I must appeal somewhere else. Meantime I believe in my conscience that very few even of the Spartans coud receive her commendations without Vanity, and I am in this Article but a mere Scots Man.

John Home sets out for London next week. I expect to dine at the Poker with Edgar, to day he goes there for the first time. All is well here & what your malice wanted to represent as mischief done by me has turned out no mischief at all.

I am Dr Sr 
your most Affectionate 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
