Glasgow, 12 Dec. 1763

My Dear Hume

The day before I received your Last letter I had the honour of a letter from Charles Townshend renewing in the most obliging manner his former proposal, that I should travel with the Duke of Buccleugh and informing me that his Grace was to leave Eton at Christmas and would go abroad very soon after that. I accepted the Proposal but at the same time explained to Mr Townshend the Difficulties I should have in leaving the University before the beginning of April and begged to know if my attendance upon his Grace would be necessary before that time. I have yet received no answer to that Letter, which I suppose is owing to this that his Grace is not yet come from Eton and that nothing is yet settled with regard to the time of his going abroad. I delayed answering your letter till I should be able to inform you at what time I should have the Pleasure of seeing you.

Make my most respectful complements to the Baron de Holbac. The second edition of my Book is extremely incorrectly printed. I think it necessary however that it should be followed, rather than the first edition which is not quite so incorrect, on account of a very considerable addition which I have made to the third Part in order to obviate an objection of our friend Elliot. As soon as I have a months leisure I intend to new cast both the second and third parts of it, of which the form is at present by no means agreeable to me. A months leisure, however, is what I very seldom have in my present situation. It may be a year hence before I am able to execute this, and I should be sorry if the translation we[re] to stop upon this account. As soon as I have executed it I shall communicate the alterations to the Baron de Holbac the very day I deliver them to the English Bookseller.

Make my Compliments to all the men of Genius in France who do me the honour to know anything about me: But above all to Mr Helvetius whether he should know anything about me or not. Tell him that my own book was printed tho not published before I had the opportunity of reading his which hindered me from giving an account of it among the other systems of Philosophy.

The reception you have met with at Paris is not in the least beyond what I expected. I took the liberty to show part of your letter to some of our female friends notwithstanding your injunction of secresy; We all laughed heartily at your pretending not to be pleased with the flattery you have met with. You see how modesty is rewarded in this world. Are you made Secretary to the Embassy? You are so very proper for the Office that I can scarce believe they will give it you. The ridiculous affair of Wilkes seems at present to be the principal object that occupies the attention of the King, the Parliament, and the Public. You will oblige me extremely by letting me hear from you as soon as possible and as often as Possible.

I ever am My Dearest friend 
Most faithfully yours 
Adam Smith
