Dalkieth house, 13 Sept. 1767

My Dear friend

I cannot easily express to you the indignation with which your last letter filled me. The Bishop is a brute and a beast and unmerited preferment has rendered him, it seems, still more so. I am very much ashamed that the very great affection which I owe to his Brother had ever imposed upon me so much as to give me a good opinion of him. He was at Kirkaldy since I received your letter and I was obliged to see him, but I did not behave to him as I otherwise would have done. He thought proper to leave Edinburgh the day or the day before his brother arrived in it, without waiting to see that Brother to whom he owes everything, who was then, and is still in the most terrible distress, and who used to have no other foible so great as his esteem and regard to this haughty Blockhead. I excuse our old friend for not having taken more notice of this affair on account of the present state of his health upon which I shall explain myself to you more fully at meeting.

Be so good as to convey the enclosed letter to the Count de Sarsfield; I have been much in the wrong for having delayed so long to write both to him and you.

There is a very amiable, modest, brave worthy young Gentleman who lives in the same house with you. His name is David Skeene. He and I are Sisters sons; but my regard for him is much more founded upon his personal qualities than upon the relation in which he stands to me. He acted lately in a very gallant manner in America of which he never acquainted me himself and of which I came to the knowledge only within these few days. If you can be of any service to him you could not possibly do a more obliging thing to me.

The Duke and Duchess of Buccleugh have been here now for almost a fortnight. They begin to open their house on Monday next and I flatter myself will both be very agreable to the People of this country. I am not sure that I have ever seen a more agreeable woman than the Dutchess. I am sorry that you are not here because I am sure you would be perfectly in love with her. I shall probably be here some weeks; I would wish, however, that both you and the Count de Sarsfield would direct for me as usual at Kirkaldy. I should be glad to know the true history of Rousseau before and since he left England. You may perfectly depend upon my never quoting you to any living soul upon that Subject. I ever am Dear Sir, Most faithfully yours

Adam Smith
