Toulouse, 21 Oct. 1764

My Dear Hume

I take this opportunity of Mr Cooks going to Paris to return to you, and thro' you, to the Ambassador, my very sincere and hearty thanks for the very honourable manner in which he was so good as to mention me to the Duke of Richelieu in the letter of recommendation which you sent us. There was indeed one small mistake in it. He called me Robinson instead of Smith. I took upon me to correct this mistake myself before the Duke delivered the letter. We were all treated by the Marechal with the utmost Politeness and attention, particularly the Duke whom he distinguished in a very proper manner. The intendant was not at Bordeaux, but we shall soon have an opportunity of delivering his letter as we propose to return that Place in order to meet my Lords Brother.

Mr Cook goes to Caen to wait upon Mr Scot, and to attend him from that place to Toulouse. He will pass by Paris, and I must beg the favour of you that as soon as you understand he is in town you will be so good as to call upon him and carry him to the Ambassadours as well as to any other Place where he would chuse to go. I must beg the same favour of Sir James. Mr Cook will let you know when he comes to town. I have great reason to entertain a most favorable opinion of Mr Scot, [and] I flatter myself, his company will be both useful and agreable to his Brother. Our expedition to Bordeaux, and another we have made since to Bagneres, has made a great change upon the Duke. He begins now to familiarize himself to French company and I flatter myself I shall spend the rest of the Time we are to live together, not only in Peace and contentment but in gayety and amusement.

When Mr Scot joins us we propose to go to see the meeting of the States of Languedoc, at Montpelier. Could you procure us recommendations to the Comte d'Eu to the Archbishop of Narbonne and to the Intendant? These expeditions, I find, are of the greatest service to My Lord. I ever am my Dear friend most Faithfully yours

Adam Smith
