Tho I declare befor god & man that I am a Christian, in faith, only, I mean (for in Practice far short) yet I do forgive you all your sins of ommission — only Indeed because you have taken Care of my Rousseau; you are tolerably good at drawing Characters; & I am so proud of finding the Author who alone had the key of my heart resemble my heart, that I am certain you for Once drew from the Life. In every article I am him except peevishness which God willing, men oppressing, & Time serving may bring about. A feeling heart is apt to Soar. A Cool philosopher who has no guide but reason, no Aim but truth, no passions no follys but Love of fame, (a breath blown over his Tomb) Cannot possibly grow peevish. They only Live for their Sort of eternity, which we people of fancy, of warmth and imagination, we who believe in higher Scenes of existence, we Epicures who never will ceace from Ideas of enjoyment indulge in. We grow impatient, we do not meet with that perfection we are born wit[h] the Ideas of, & we grow peevish for want of them. We forget we are in the nursery & long for the dining room. This is my Rousseau's case & will soon be mine. In the mean Time I am as jealous as he that any body should pay for my Bills. [. . .]



Lord bless you, bring Rousseau here. Trees to shelter him! Such nonsense, There's as many trees in Scotland as would hang all the rogues in England, every man his Tree. Tell him that & he wont be afraid of want of Shelter. Sweet old man he shall sit beneath an Oak and hear the Druids Songs.



The winds shall bring Soft sounds to his ears, & our nymphs with the Songs of Selma, Shall remember him of joys that are past. O bring him with you. The English are not worthy of him. I will have him! I cannot speak to him but I know his heart and am Certain I coud please it.



This is a high pitch of vanity but I am sure of it & its the only Coquetry I am mad about, were Voltaire to call at my door, I woud Say, I will not see him. Bring my dear old Rousseau. I am Sure he is like my John Aikman. [. . .]

[. . .] I am truly yours

Al. Cokburne

Fr 1s Febry.
