Dear Brother

I write you in a hurry, after a long public Dispatch, only to inform you, that I am now appointed Secretary to the Embassy with the usual Sallary of 1200 Pounds a Year. This Intelligence came to Lord Hertford by the last Post; and this Point was obtain'd at the earnest and even obstinate Demand of his Lordship, after Sir Charles Bunbury was appointed Secretary for Ireland. The English Ministry had intended, not to appoint another Secretary of the Embassy; who, they knew, woud not be receivd; but to suppress that Office altogether, from Views of Frugality. Nothing can be more agreeable to me, than to owe so great a Favour to a Person, whom I love & esteem so cordially.

There is another Circumstance in this Affair very agreeable. No body can do more Justice to the Merit of my Friend, the Countess de Boufflers, than the Duke and Dutchess of Bedford, who have indeed been essentially obligd to her in their Family Concerns. She wrote the Duke about a fortnight ago, that the time was now come, and the only time that probably woud ever occur, of his showing his Friendship to her, by assisting me in my Applications; and she wou'd rest on this sole Circumstance all his Professions of regard to her. He receiv'd her Letter while in the Country; but he wrote her back, that he woud immediatly hasten to Town, and if he had any Credit with the King or Ministry, her Sollicitations shoud be comply'd with. He is not a Man that ever makes vain Professions, nor does he ever take a Refusal. He woud find the Matter finishd, when he came to London; but it is a sensible Pleasure to me that I owe so great an Obligation, to a Person whom I love and esteem so sincerely as that Lady.

I had great hopes all this Winter of seeing the Countess in a Station suitable to her Merit, and of paying my Respects to her as part of the royal Family. Several Accidents have disappointed us; and the various Turns of this Affair have more agitated me, than almost any Event, in which I was ever engag'd. She is to take a short Journey to England for her Health and Amusement: I propose to accompany her to Calais: Lord Holderness meets her at Dover: The Duke of Bedford proposes to attend her on her return to Paris. She sets out in a few days.

I beg you to communicate this Piece of good Fortune to our Sister; and my other Friends. My Compliments to Mrs Home. Write me soon, and as particularly as you can. Mr and Mrs Ker left this Place two days ago. I think his Scheme chimerical, but it is suitable to a man who was never contented with the Respect payd him in any Place. Yours affectionately

David Hume

Paris. 24 of June 1765
