It is well for you, you have the Gout: You wou'd other wise be in a much worse Condition: You wou'd have disoblig'd me by many Topics of your Letter: But I excuse you as being a man in distress and consequently peevish.

I really sympathize with you for having the Gout so early. You have reason to complain with some Bitterness of your Lot in this particular. But do not apprehend that the Distemper is continually to encrease upon you as you grow older. I was yesterday visiting a Gentleman in a Fit of the Gout, who is near seventy, & who had that Malady above forty Years ago. He has still but a slight Fit once a Year; and considers this Suffering as the Price he pays for entire Health during the rest of the Year.

It gives me great Satisfaction to find, that you are on so good a Footing with your Father, and that every thing is so happily settled. You ought now to be entirely contented with his Conduct: In my Opinion, You cannot in reason demand or expect any thing farther. I applaud you for that Prudence & Management & Submission by which you have brought about so desirable an End. This Behaviour is your Duty as well as Interest; nor can there ever be any thing mean in a Son's studying his Father's Humour, and complying with his Desire and preventing his Wishes, and expressing to the full his Regard & Deference to him. Such Arts of Adulation, as they ought to be practicd sparingly to others, can scarce ever be carry'd too far in that Relation.

I am very sensible of the Honour, which has been done me by your Society. I desire you may express to them my Sentiments on this head, and notify my Acceptance. There are surely some Dues to pay, which I desire you to advance for me, and to inform me of the Amount of them. I shall now think myself secure of good Company, when any Accident brings me to London. I am settled at present in this place, and am not displeas'd, after Years of so much Dissipation, to return to Study & Retreat & Indolence & Privacy. I know not whether I shall soon leave it. London at least can appear very little tempting to one, who believes he is there hated as a Scotsman and despisd as a Man of Letters.

I am not surpriz'd, that you are displeas'd with what I have done with regard to Jean-Jaques: I am not pleas'd with it myself. But reflect, that properly speaking I have done nothing: I only gave a discretionary Power to my Friends at Paris to act as they thought proper; because I consider'd, that they were from their Situation much better judges than myself of the Propriety & Necessity of the Step I took. I forsaw, that many wou'd doubt of the Propriety of my Conduct: But I was told, that many, from want of Information, believ'd me to have been a Calumniator and a false perfidious Friend. You will own, that there was no Proportion between the one blame & the other.

You may remember, that there were two pieces publishd in the News pap[ers] of which this Madman accuses me of being the Author; and with regard to the last he says, that he has an intimate and certain Conviction of it. He says they were Libels against him. I cou'd reply nothing but that I had never seen nor read those Pieces. Above a Fortnight ago, I had a Letter from a Swiss Gentleman, who resides in London, one D'yverdun, a man of Character as I am told: For I never saw him nor heard of him before. This Gentleman informs me, that he was very much surprizd to meet with this Passage in Rousseaus Letter to me: For that he was the Author of the two Pieces; and is willing to acknowlege it to all the World. And he gives me leave, in my own Justification, to publish his Letter in any of the public Papers, if I think proper. I sent a Copy of it to Mr Davenport to be deliverd to Rousseau, but shall not print it; because I do not think that any body pretends to justify my Adversary or to blame me; and any farther Apology seems to be superfluous: I have besides a mortal Aversion to these Publications.

I cannot approve of your most unnatural Sentiments towards your Mother Country. I wish you woud come down and pass the Winter here, in order to open your Eyes. The Men have Sense & Knowledge: The Women have a great deal of Virtue: But you will think, perhaps, that that is of small Resource in Society.

Pray, who is this new Beauty, whom you are so desperately in love with? Is your Love honourable? I shall suppose it so, from the Office you are pleasd to assign me.

I am very proud of having a Share in Lord Ossory's Memory. I desire my Compliments to him as well as to Lord Bolingbroke; together with my Thanks for their good Offices in recommending me to their Society.

Edinburgh 20th of Decr 1766
