Sir

You were much in the Right, when you conjectur'd that your Letters had miscarry'd. I have been so unfortunate as to receive none from you for above a Year & a half; & I very often regreated the Interruption of our Correspondence by the War. Your last Letter gives me still more sensible Affliction by informing me, that the Course of your Studies had been interrupted by Business & bad Health, and that you had been oblig'd to abandon all Thoughts of translating my History; an Undertaking, from which I expected so much Credit. However as a Friend of Yours has begun the Work under your Eye, I hope the Performance will not be altogether defective. In order to enable the Gentleman, who does me this Honour, to make his Work as correct as possible, I have subjoin'd a List of a few Alterations, which I have made in different Parts of that Work. As to the Political Discourses, I have not made any of Moment since those I sent you: There is only one, which, I believe, I then forgot to send. Tis in Vol. 2d, page 294 of your first Edition of Paris, in the Notes; where I call Rapin the most judicious of our Historians. Instead of that please to say. "And Rapin, suitable to his usual Partiality & Malignity, seems etc." To tell the Truth, I was carry'd away with the usual Esteem pay'd to that Historian, till I came to examine him more particularly, when I found him altogether despicable; & I was not asham'd to acknowledge my Mistake.

I am every day more sensible of the Honour & Advantage, which I have reap'd from the Translation, which you gave of my Political Discourses. In particular, the good Opinion of Monsr Du Clos is an Honour, which I highly value. That Gentleman's Performances are well known to me; and as they appear'd always to give Proofs of the Man of Sense & Virtue, as well as of the elegant Writer, I cannot but receive a great Pleasure from his Approbation. I shou'd not despair of being able to cultivate in Person the Friendship of a Man, whom I so much value, wou'd our Sovereigns but agree to make Peace together. I have had an Intention of making a Journey to Paris; and I shall then be beholden to you for introducing me to the Acquaintance of Monsr Du Clos. Meanwhile, I beg of you to make him my Compliments, and to assure him of my Esteem & Respect.

I have a very great Desire to peruse a copy of L'Ami de l'homme of which you give me so advantageous a Character: I hope also to receive Instruction from it. For I am far from being positive in any of my Opinions; and Monsr le Marquis de Mirabaut may very probably perswade me to change my Sentiments in all the Points, that are controverted between us. A French Gentleman of his Rank cou'd not fail of Politeness towards an Adversary; and I owe him Acknowledgements for thinking my Performance worth of his Attention. I meet with many Answerers in this Countrey; some of whom treat me with Civility, others in the usual Style of Controversy. I have never yet been engag'd to make a Reply to any of them: But if I still continue unconverted after reading L'Ami de l'homme, I shall probably take an Opportunity of proposing my Doubts in the way you mention; were it only in hopes of drawing more Instruction from Monsr de Mirabaut to myself & to the Public.

I have wrote to London to get a copy of L'Ami de l'homme; but as it is probable, that the War, by interrupting all Communication with Paris, has renderd Copies of it very scarce in our Capital, I must beg of you to send me a Copy of it. Please desire Monsr de la Rouviere to deliver one to Mr Crawford, Banker of Rotterdam, who has Orders to send it to me.

I have desir'd my Bookseller in London to send over to Monsr de la Rouviere three Copies of my History. I hope Madame du Pré de St. Maur and you will not refuse me the Honour of accepting from me this small Present. I have also order'd the Bookseller to join in the same Parcel three Copies of another Work of mine publish'd this Winter. It is calld, Four Dissertations, viz, the natural History of Religion, Of the Passions, Of Tragedy, of the Standard of Taste. I have destin'd one Copy for Madame Du Pré, another for yourself, a third for Monsr le Marquis de Mirabaut, if he reads English; as I have heard he does. I learn by Yours that Monsr Du Clos does not read that Language, which is the Reason, that I have not sent him a Copy by the same Parcel.

I have also desir'd another Book to be joind in the Parcel; tis Douglas, a new Tragedy, wrote by Mr John Hume, a very ingenious, young Gentleman, a Friend & Relation of mine. The Fate of this Gentleman's Performance was very extraordinary. It was refus'd by the Manager of Drury-Lane Theatre; and for that Reason was oblig'd to be brought on in our Theatre in this City. In order to raise it from Obscurity, I wrote to the Author the Dedication, prefix'd to the Four Dissertations, which had so good an Effect, that the Tragedy was brought on in Covent Garden, and extremely well received by the Public. I am perswaded, that there is not any Tragedy in the English Language so well adapted to your Theatre, by reason of the Elegance, Simplicity, & Decorum, which run thro' the whole of it. I wou'd be much pleas'd to see it translated into French, and to find it successful with those good Critics who so much abound in Paris.

I am giving just now a new Edition of all my philosophical & political Pieces in one Volume Quarto. As soon as it is finish'd, I shall take care to send to you a Copy by Monsr de la Rouviere, if I find that this Method of Conveyance has been successful with regard to these Copies of my History; of which I beg of you to give me Information.

I have the Honour to be

 Sir 
Your most obedient & most obliged 
humble Servant





David Hume

Edinburgh 22d July, 1757
