Dr Sir

I am entirely of your opinion, that Mr Balfour's ill humor on this Occasion has no manner of Foundation. Mr Millar seems to me to have all along us'd him very well; Only, I thought the Price offerd for the large Paper Copies a little too low; and I see you have rais'd it. He has disoblig'd me very much at present, by spreading about a Story, that, when we made our Bargain for the first Volume, I had promis'd he shoud have the second at the same Price. This was demanded, and positively refus'd by me: I only said, that I was not accustomd lightly to change the People whom I dealt with; but that I woud not bind myself. Accordingly, when all the Articles of our Bargain, even the most trivial, were written over, I woud not allow this to be inserted. Baillie Hamilton, who is a very honest Man, remembers and acknowledges this Fact. Indeed, it was very lucky I had that Precaution: For if I had entangled myself in such a Bargain, I never shoud have wrote a second Volume which I coud not hope ever to see succeed in their Management. I am very well pleas'd with the State of the Sale; and hope it is the Prognostic of good Success. I certainly deserve the Approbation of the Public, from my Care and Disinterestedness, however deficient in other Particulars. I shall regard myself as much oblig'd to you, if you inform me of all the Objections, which you hear made by Men of Sense, who are impartial, or even who are not: For it is good to hear what is said on all Sides. It was unlucky, that I did not publish the two Volumes together: Fools will be apt to say, that I am become more whiggish in this Volume: As if the Cause of Charles the 1 and James the 2 were the same, because they were of the same Family. But such Remarks as these, every one, who ventures on the Public, must be contented to endure. Truth will prevail at last; and if I have been able to embellish her with any Degree of Eloquence, it will not be long before she prevail.

 I am Dr Sir Your most obedient Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 30 of November, [1756].

P.S.

It is easy for me to see, that Mr Millar has certainly offerd to take from Baillie Hamilton 900 copies at nine Shillings. He never woud have offerd seven at the beginning. It was a strange Infatuation in the Baillie to refuse it.
