Paris 22 Sept. 1764.

As soon as I receivd Yours from Brussels, I set on foot my Enquiries. I spoke to Abbé Hooke, to Père Gordon, to Clairaut, to Madame du Pre, and to others, with a View of finding some proper Settlement for your young Gentleman. Every body told me, as they did you, of the Difficulty of succeeding in my Scheme; and nothing yet has been offer'd me, that I woud advise you to accept of. I went to Madame Anson's, and found that Family a very decent, sensible kind of People: I came in upon them about seven o'clock, and found a Company of eight or nine Persons assembl'd, whose Aspects pleasd me very much. The only Objection that occur'd to me with regard to this Family, is the Quarter of the Town, which is not only so unfashionable, that my Coachman was astonish'd when I order'd him to drive thither, but, what is worse, it is far from all Walks & Places of Exercise. However, it is near the University; and, consequently, it is in that Quarter where all the Youth of France are educated.If nothing better present itself, I shall conclude a Bargain with this Family for a thousand Crowns a Year, without firing or washing, according to the Terms proposd to you, which they said they coud not depart from. The Misfortune is, that I must go to Fontainebleau in about a fortnight, and, consequently, am straiten'd in my time of Enquiry. But, in all Cases, I shall certainly conclude with some body before my Departure. We stay six Weeks at Fontainebleau, during which time, if you send your Sons to Paris, I shall take a Journey thither to receive them, and to settle them. In all Cases, they must come immediatly to the Hotel de Brancas, where they will not want Friends.

I do not like the talking Man more than you do; and a flattering Letter I have since receivd from him, does not augment my good Opinion. I went to Monsieur Bastide, he who proposd the Scheme for ten thousand Livres a Year. He seems to be a genteel, well bred Man, lives in a very good House in an excellent Quarter of the Town, is well spoke of by D'Alembert & others, and has with him two very agreeable Boys, Russian Princes, who speak French very well. I shoud have given him the Preference, had it not been the Price: He asks ten thousand Livres a Year for your two Sons and their Governor, without supplying them either with Cloaths or Masters. You know his ten thousand a piece included all Expence. If you can resolve to go so far in point of Expence, it is the best Place that occurs, or is likely to occur.

Since I wrote the above, I went to see Mademoiselle L'Espinasse, D'Alembert's Mistress, who is really one of the most sensible Women in Paris. She told me that there coud not be a worthier, honester, better Man, than Bastide. I told her that I had entertaind the same Opinion of him; but was afraid his Head-piece was none of the best. She own'd that he did not excel on that Side; and a Proof of it was, that he had wrote several Books, all of which were below middling. On my return home, I found the enclosd Letter from him. I have promisd him an Answer by the Return of the Post from England. On the whole, the chief Advantage, as it appears to me, which his House will have above Anson's, consists in the Air & Situation. It lies on the Skirts of the Town, in an open Street near the Rampart; but five thousand Livres a Year Difference is paying too dear for the Advantage.

I cannot imagine what you mean by saying that I am on a Precipice. I shall foretell to you the Result of my present Situation almost with as great Certainty as it is possible to employ with regard to any future Event. As soon as Lord Hertford's Embassy ends, which probably may not continue long, some Zealot, whom I never saw, & never coud offend, finding me without Protection, will instantly fly, with Alacrity, to strike off that Pension which the King & the Ministry, before I woud consent to accept of my present Situation, promisd shoud be for Life. I shall be oblig'd to leave Paris, which I confess I shall turn my Back to with Regret. I shall go to Thoulouse, or Montauban, or some Provincial Town in the South of France, where I shall spend, contented, the rest of my Life, with more Money, under a finer Sky, & in better Company than I was born to enjoy.

From what human Motive or Consideration can I prefer living in England to that in foreign Countries? I believe, taking the Continent of Europe, from Peterburg to Lisbon, & from Bergen to Naples, there is not one that ever heard my Name, who has not heard of it with Advantage, both in point of Morals & Genius. I do not believe there is one Englishman in fifty, who, if he heard that I had broke my Neck to night, woud not be rejoic'd with it. Some hate me because I am not a Tory, some because I am not a Whig, some because I am not a Christian, and all because I am a Scotsman. Can you seriously talk of my continuing an Englishman? Am I, or are you, an Englishman? Will they allow us to be so? Do they not treat with Derision our Pretensions to that Name, and with Hatred our just Pretensions to surpass & to govern them? I am a Citizen of the World; but if I were to adopt any Country, it woud be that in which I live at present, and from which I am determin'd never to depart, unless a War drive me into Swisserland or Italy.

I must now inform you what pass'd with regard to my Affair at L'Ile Adam. My Friend show'd me a Letter, which she had very lately receiv'd from Lord Tavistock, by which it appeard he had fallen into great Friendship, and bore a great Regard to Lady Sarah Bunbury. I instantly forbid her to write to England a Line about my Affair. I bear too great a Respect to her, to expose her to ask a Favour, where there was so little Probability of Success. Thus have vanish'd the last hopes of my obtaining Justice in this point: Here is surely a new Ground of Attachment to England.
