London 4 of August, 1767.

As Lady Tavistoke, Dear Madam, receives no Company, I was obliged to employ Lord Ossory to make Enquiries about M. de Barbantane's Commissions: He told me, that they were found in the House after poor Lord Tavistoke's Death; and no-body knowing what to do with them, they were restored to the Joiner. Ossory left the Town next day: the Duke and Dutchess of Bedford are in the Country: But as they will come to Town next Month to attend Lady Tavistoke's Lying-in, I shall then endeavour, if possible, to recover these pieces of Furniture, and to find a method of conveying them to Italy; that is, provided you at present desire it. I am happy in the most trifling Occasion to mark my Attachment to you.

Your present retired Life, you say, is not disagreable to you: But do you know, that it is not likely to continue long, and that your Pupil may probably be Empress? If you have not heard of this design before, say not a Word of it to her, or any body else. I hope in God such an Event, shou'd it happen, will not carry you to Vienna, to pass your life there in tiresome State and Dignity. It would be a great Disappointment to me to come to Paris, and find you a thousand Miles distant.

I believe that Mde de Verdelin is in the same Convent with you. Please make my Compliments to her. Tell her, that the reason of my not answering her Letter last Summer was, that a Report then prevailed, that Mr Melville, Governor of the Granades, was dead; and before that mistake was cleared up, I had left London. But if I can do any thing for her Service at present, she may command me.

I hope I am not lost altogether to Mde de Mauri's memory. If so, she is very ungrateful.

You have heard probably that our Ministry was on the Eve of a Revolution. We were so; I thought once that I shou'd have been out of Office in two days: But all is come about again; and we seem to be more settled than ever. I had made a Party with the Chevalier Darcy to pay you a visit at Paris, if I had been an Ex-Minister. That journey would have been sufficient to comfort me from much greater Affliction. Believe me to be, Dear Madam, with the most sincere Regard and Attachment, Your most obedient and humble Servant

David Hume.
