Paris 15 May, 1764.

I shall not tell you, Madam, whether or not I regret very much your absence, or feel a great blank on account of my not seeing you from time to time. You will believe in this matter as you please: what I can say will pass for nothing; you may judge upon the evidence before you: I am afraid that, as I sit down at present to write to you without any subject, you willl conjecture that I think of you often, and that the pleasure of your society, (shall I say, of your friendship?) is not easily made up by other connexions or conversation.

But I write to you not so entirely without a subject as you may perhaps imagine. I must inform you, Madam, not in the style of a petit ministre, as you used to call me sometimes, but in that of a man who lives in the grand monde, that the journey to St. Hubert is fixed for this evening, and all the Ladies named by the King, who are to attend him on this critical occasion. Try your sagacity to guess them, and I shall name them afterwards; they are four; Madame de Mirepoix, Madame de Grammont, D'Aiguilly, and De Chateau Renaut. The two last are not supposed to be of any consequence, and Madame de Chateau-Renaut has declined the journey on account of her health. What glory for you, and by consequence for me, if this piece of important intelligence reaches your hands before it comes to those of the French Ambassador in Holland! There was an idle story spread about in Paris before you left it, and I suppose that you have before-hand known the falsity of it — it was, that Madame de Mirepoix had wrote to the King, offering graciously to occupy the apartment, and consequently to accept of the credit of the deceased favourite, and that his Majesty was very much offended with the proposal. An old courtier, well informed (for I must talk mysteriously) told me to-day the foundation of this rumour, which, he said, he knew as certainly as if he had been present at the whole transaction. The lady wrote a letter to the King, without mentioning a word of the matter, either to her brother or sister in law, or any soul living. This letter contained, first a condolence for their loss of a common friend; secondly, assurances of attachment both from duty and inclination; thirdly, (but I know not if it was divided so regularly like a sermon) some regret that her age would thenceforth deprive her of the pleasure which she had always felt of paying her court to His Majesty: she begged at the same time, that if in any future time she had any application to make, not in her own behalf, for she neither expected nor desired any thing, but in behalf of her friends, she might be allowed to address herself immediately to His Majesty, without having recourse to any of his ministers.

Next day the King said to the Prince de Beauvau, who was in waiting, Here is an answer to the Maréchale: pray deliver it to her. The Prince, not looking at the address, replied, Is it to the Maréchale de Luxembourg, Sir? No, replied the King, to your sister. He accordingly carried it to her, not without expressing some marks of surprize at this secret transaction. The lady immediately told him that he should know the whole of the matter. She read to him a copy of her own letter, and then opened the King's before him. It contained, after a proper return of the compliments, an expression of the pleasure which he always reaped from her company; and he opposed himself at the same time to the notion, that her age would thenceforth deprive him of that satisfaction: but as to the other point, he kept a profound silence, which, I suppose, does not imply consent. For silence has that privilege only where a gentleman addresses himself to a lady. But, Madam, I have another circumstance more interesting to inform you of: I mean, a circumstance more interesting to me and your friends in Paris. I am just now told, that Lord Holdernesse has bespoke two dinners at the Hotel de Brancas, one on the 15th, and the other on the 16th of June. This is such a base piece of treachery, so contrary to all good faith, to all compact and agreement by which we delivered you into his hands, that I cannot exclaim sufficiently against it. Is such a precious trust to be dallied with in this manner? Are days or even hours and minutes of no consequence in these matters? What may be dreaded from a man, who can sport with the most sacred ties, by which a person of honour can be bound? In short, Madam, I suspect no less than an enlèvement in the case. My only comfort is, that, as both France and England are so deeply interested to wrest his prey from him, he will find protection no where but among the Turks or Tartars; and these are too distant to be of any service to him. Be only assured, dear Madam, and with the greatest seriousness, though at the end of a foolish letter, that were he to carry you farther, my wishes for your welfare would still follow you, and that nothing can diminish, and scarce augment, my respectful attachment towards you.
