My Dear Baron

Since I was favourd with Yours, I saw your young Man, (who sends you the enclos'd) and as he intends to set out for Edinburgh about the End of the Month, and I shall set out with the Ambassador for Compiegne in a few days, I thought proper to give him 100 Crowns for the Expences of his Journey, according to your Direction. It amounts to 13 Pounds some odd Shillings. I drew upon Jemmy Coutts for it, and desird him to place it to your Account. I desird Meuron to go to Dunkirk and there wait for a Ship either for Newcastle or Leith. I hope you will be content with him: At least, I like his Looks & Behaviour. Your Project is good: The French Language is very useful; and if not acquird when one is young, never is thoroughly learn'd.

A few days ago I din'd with the Dutchess of Perth, which was the first time I had seen that venerable old Lady, who is really a very sensible Woman. Part of our Conversation run upon the Douglas Affair. That Lady, as well as all the Company, as well as every body of common Sense here, shows her entire Conviction of that Imposture; and there was present, a Gentleman, an old Friend of yours, a Person of very good Understanding and of undoubted Honour, who laid open to us a Scene of such deliberate Dishonesty on the Part of her Grace of Douglas & her Partizans as was somewhat new & surprizing. I suppose it is all known to poor Andrew, whom I heartily love & pity. Tis certain, that the Imposture is as well known to her Grace & her Friends as to any body; and Hay, the Pretender's old Secretary, the only Man of common honesty among them, confessd to this Gentleman, that he has frequently been shockd with their Practices, and has run away from them to keep out of the way of such Infamy; tho' he had afterwards the Weakness to yield to their Sollicitations. Carnegy knows the Roguery as well as all the rest; tho' I did not hear any thing of his Scruples. Lord Beauchamp and Dr Trail, our Chaplain, passd four Months last Summer at Rheims, where this Affair was much the Subject of Conversation. Except one Curate, they did not meet with a Person, that was not convinc'd of the Imposture. Monsr de Puysieulx, whose Country Seat is in the Neighbourhood, told me the same thing. Can any thing be more scandalous and more extraordinary than Frank Garden's Behaviour? Can any thing be more scandalous & more ordinary than Burnet's? I am afraid, that notwithstanding the palpable Justice of your Cause, it is yet uncertain whether you will prevail.

I continue to live here in a manner amusing enough, and which gives me no time to be tir'd of any Scene. What between public Business, the Company of the learned and that of the Great, especially of the Ladies, I find all my time fill'd up, and have no time to open a Book, except it be some Books newly publishd, which may be the Subject of Conversation. I am well enough pleasd with this Change of Life, and a Satiety of Study had beforehand prepard the way for it. However, time runs off in one Course of Life as well as of another; and all things appear so much alike, that I am afraid of falling into to total Stoicism and Indifference about every thing. For Instance, I seem every moment to be touching on the time, when I am to receive my Credential Letters of Secretary to the Embassy with a thousand a Year of Appointments: The King has promisd it; all the Ministers have promisd it: Lord Hertford earnestly sollicits it: The plainest Common Sense & Justice seem to require [it]: Yet have I been in this Condition above six Months; and I never trouble my head about the Matter, and have rather laid my Account that there is to be no such thing.

Please to express my most profound Respects to Mrs Mure, & my Sense of the Honour she did me: If I have Leizure before the Courier goes off, I shall write her, & give her some Account of my Adventures: But I woud not show her so little Marks of my Attention as to write her only in a Postscript. I am Dear Baron

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

Paris 22 June 1764.
