Edinburgh, 25 February 1763

Sir

By Dr Blair's means, I have been favour'd with the Perusal of your Performance, which I have read with great Pleasure & Attention. It is certainly very rare that a Piece so deeply philosophical is wrote with so much Spirit and affords so much Entertainment to the Reader; tho' I must still regreat the Disadvantages under which I read it, as I never had the whole Performance at once before me, and could not be able fully to compare one Part with another. To this Reason chiefly I ascribe some Obscurities, which, in spite of your short Analysis or Abstract, still seems to hang over your System. For I must do you the Justice to own, that, where I enter into your Ideas, no Man appears to express himself with greater Perspicuity than you do; a Talent, which, above all others, is requisite in that Species of Literature, which you have cultivated. There are some Objections, which I would willingly propose to this fourth Chapter of Sight, did I not suspect that they proceed from my not sufficiently understanding it: And I am the more confirm'd in this Suspicion, as Dr Blair tells me, that the former Objections I made had been deriv'd chiefly from that Cause. I shall therefore forbear till the whole can lie before me, and shall not at present propose any farther Difficulties to your Reasonings I shall only say, that if you have been able to clear up these abstruse & important Subjects, instead of being mortifyd, I shall be so vain as to pretend to a share of the Praise, and shall think, that my Errors, by having at least some Coherence, had led you to make a more strict Review of my Principles which were the common ones, and to perceive their Futility. As I was desirous to be of some Use to you, I kept a watchful Eye, all along, over your Style; but it is really so correct and so good English, that I found not any thing worth the remarking. There is only one Passage in this Chapter, where you make use of the Phraze hinder to do instead of hinder from doing, which is the English one; but I could not find the Passage when I sought for it. You may judge how unexceptionable the whole appeard to me, when I could remark so small a Blemish. I beg my Compliments to my friendly Adversaries, Dr Campbell & Dr Gerard; and also to Dr Gregory, whom I suspect to be of the same Disposition, tho' he has not openly declard himself such. I am with Sincerity Sir

Your most obedient humble Servant 
David Hume
