Dear Doctor

After great wavering and uncertainty between Paris and Edinburgh (for I never allow'd London to enter into the Question) I have at last fix'd my Resolution to remain some time longer in Paris. Perhaps, I may take a Trip to Rome next Autumn. Had I return'd to Edinburgh, I was sensible that I shut myself up in a manner for Life; and I imagine, that I am even yet too young and healthy and in too good Spirits to come to that Determination. If you please, therefore, you may continue in my House, which I am glad pleases you: If you leave it, as you thought you woud, Nairne may have it for 35 pound, as we agreed: If he does not chuse it, it must be let to some other. Be so good as to inform my Sister of this; and at the same time, let her know, that I shall write her by the first Post.

I must however be in London very soon, in order to give an Account of my Commission, to thank the King for his Goodness to me, and to settle the celebrated Rousseau, who has rejected Invitations from half of the Kings and Princes of Europe, in order to put himself under my Protection. He has been at Paris about twelve days; and lives in an Apartment prepard for him by the Prince of Conti, which he says gives him Uneasyness by reason of its Magnificence. As he was outlawd by the Parliament, it behov'd him to have the King's Pass-port, which was at first offerd him under a feignd Name, but his Friends refusd it, because they knew, that he woud not submit even to that Falshood. You have heard that he was banishd from Neuf-chatel by Preachers, who excited the Mob to stone him. He told me, that a Trap was laid for him with as much Art as ever was employ'd against a Fox or a Poll cat. In the night time a great enormous Stone was suspended above his Door, in such a manner that in opening it in the Morning the Stone must have fallen, and have crushd him to Death. A man passing bye early perceivd it, and calld in to him at the Window to be on his Guard. He also told me, that last Spring, when he went about the Mountains, amusing himself with Botany, he came to a Village at some Distance from his own: A Woman met him; who, surpriz'd at his Armenian Dress (for he wears and is resolvd to wear that Habit during Life) ask'd him what he was and what was his Name. On hearing it, she exclaimd; Are you that impious Rascal, Rousseau: Had I known it, I shoud have waited for you at the End of the Wood with a Pistol in order to blow out your Brains. He added, that all the Women in Switzerland were in the same Dispositions; because the Preachers had told them, that he had wrote Books to prove that Women had no Souls. He then turnd to Mde de Boufflers, who was present, and said, Is it not strange, that I, who have wrote so much to decry the Morals and Conduct of the Parisian Ladies, shoud yet be belov'd by them: While the Swiss Women, whom I have so much extolld, woud willingly cut my Throat. We are fond of you, reply'd she, because we know, that, however you might rail, you are, at the bottom, fond of us to Distraction: But the Swiss Women hate you; because they are conscious that they have not merit to deserve your Attention.

On leaving Neuf-chatel, he took Shelter in a little Island, about half a League in Circumference, in the midst of a Lake near Berne. There livd in it only one German Peasant with his Wife and Sister: The Council of Berne, frightend for his Neighbourhood, on account of his democratical, more than his religious Principles, orderd him immediatly to withdraw from their State. He wrote the Letter of which I send you a Copy, as it is very curious. The Council in Answer re-iterated their Orders for him to be gone. He then apply'd to me: I have made an Agreement with a French Gardener in Fulham for boarding him. We set out together in a few days.

It is impossible to express or imagine the Enthusiasm of this Nation in his favour. As I am suppos'd to have him in my Custody, all the World, especially the great Ladies teaze me to be introduc'd to him: I have had Rouleaus thrust into my hand, with earnest Applications, that I woud prevail on him to accept of them. I am perswaded, that were I to open here a Subscription with his Consent, I shoud receive 50,000 Pounds in a fortnight. The second day after his Arrival, he slipt out early in the Morning to take a Walk in the Luxembourg Gardens. The thing was known soon after. I am strongly sollicited to prevail on him to take another Walk, and then to give warning to my Friends: Were the Public to be informd, he coud not fail to have many thousand Spectators. People may talk of antient Greece as they please; but no Nation was ever so fond of Genius as this; and no Person ever so much engag'd their Attention as Rousseau. Voltaire and every body else, are quite eclipsd by him. I am sensible, that my Connexions with him, add to my Importance at present. Even his Maid, La Vasseur, who is very homely and very awkward, is more talkd of than the Princess of Monaco or the Countess of Egmont, on account of her Fidelity and Attachment towards him. His very Dog, who is no better than a Coly, has a Name and Reputation in the World.

As to my Intercourse with him, I find him mild, and gentle and modest and good humourd; and he has more the Behaviour of a Man of the World than any of the Learned here, except M. de Buffon who in his Figure and Air and Department answers your Idea of a Mareschal of France rather than that of a Philosopher. M. Rousseau is of small Stature; and wou'd rather be ugly, had he not the finest Physiognomony in the World, I mean, the most expressive Countenance. His Modesty seems not to be good Manners; but Ignorance of his own Excellence: As he writes and speaks and acts from the Impulse of Genius, more than from the Use of his ordinary Faculties, it is very likely that he forgets its Force, whenever it is laid asleep. I am well assurd, that at times he believes he has Inspirations from an immediate Communication with the Divinity: He falls sometimes into Ecstacies which retain him in the same Posture for Hours together. Does not this Example solve the Difficulty of Socrates's Genius and of his Ecstacies? I think Rousseau in many things very much resembles Socrates: The Philosopher of Geneva seems only to have more Genius than he of Athens, who never wrote any thing; and less Sociableness and Temper. Both of them were of very amorous Complexions: But a Comparison in this particular turns out much to the Advantage of my Friend: I call him such; for I hear from all hands that his Judgement and Affections are as strongly byass'd in my favour as mine are in his: I shall much regreat the leaving him in England: But even if a Pardon cou'd be procur'd for him here, he is resolved, as he tells me, never to return; because he never will again be in the Power of any man. I wish he may live unmolested in England: I dread the Bigotry and Barbarism which prevail there.

When he came to Paris, he seem'd resolv'd to stay till the 6t or 7t of next Month: But at present the Concourse about him gives him so much Uneasiness, that he expresses the utmost Impatience to be gone. Many People here will have it, that this solitary Humour is all Affectation, in order to be more sought after; but I am sure that it is natural and unsurmountable. I know, that two very agreeable Ladies breaking in upon him, discomposd him so much, that he was not able to eat his dinner afterwards. He is short sighted; and I have often observd, that while he was conversing with me in the outmost good humour (for he is naturally gay) if he heard the Door open, the greatest Agony appeard on his Countenance, from the Apprehension of a Visit, and his Distress did not leave him, unless the Person was a particular Friend. His Armenian Dress is not affectation. He has had an Infirmity from his Infancy, which makes Breeches inconvenient for him; and he told me, that when he was chacd into the Mountains of Switzerland he took up this new Dress, as it seemd indifferent what Habit he there wore. I coud fill a Volume with curious Anecdotes regarding him, as I live in the same Society which he frequented while in Paris: But I must not exhaust your Patience. My kind Compliments to Ferguson, Robertson, & all the Brethren.

I am Dear Dr Yours sincerely and affectionately

David Hume

Paris 
 28th of Decr 
1765





P.S.

Be not surpriz'd that I am going to say in my Postscript, the direct contrary to what I said in my Letter. There are four days of Interval between my writing the one and the other; and on this Subject of my future Abode, I have not, these four Months, risen and gone to bed in the same Mind. When I meet with Proofs of Regard & Affection from those I love & esteem here, I swear to myself, that I shall never quit this Place: An hour after, it occurs to me, that I have then for ever renouncd my native Country and all my antient Friends; and I start with Affright. I never yet left any place but with regreat: Judge what it is natural for me to feel on leaving Paris, and so many amiable People, with whom I am intimately connected; while it is in my power to pass my Life in the midst of them. Were I not indispensable oblig'd to go to London, I know that it woud be impossible for me to leave this Place; but it is very probable, that, being once there, and fairly escap'd from the Cave of Circe, I may reconcile myself again to the Abode of Ithaca. I left Edinburgh with great Reluctance: To return to it, after having tripled my Revenue in less than three Years, can be no Hardship. I must therefore fairly warn you to remove from my House at Whitsunday: I have taken a House at Paris; but I will have one also in Edinburgh; and shall deliberate in London which of them I shall occupy. I shall not go to Ireland. The Arrival of the Duke of Richmond was late; and this Engagement with M. Rousseau protracts my Return so long that it will not be worth while to go to Dublin. Lord Hertford has been so good as to excuse me. You have heard of the great Fortune of Trail who is I believe your Acquaintance and a very honest Fellow. Nothing is so agreeable to an irresolute Man, says the Cardinal de Retz, as a measure which dispenses him from taking an immediate Resolution. I am exactly in the Case. I hope your resigning my House will be no Hardship to you.

Paris 1 of Jany 1766
