Dear Sir,

Your letter gave me a great deal of Satisfaction; and I am much oblig'd to you for it. I must own, that, in my private Judgement, the first volume of my History is by far the best; The Subject was more noble, and admitted both of greater Ornaments of Eloquence, and nicer Distinctions of Reasoning. However, if the Public is so capricious as to prefer the second, I am very well pleas'd; and hope the Prepossession in my Favor will operate backwards, and remove even the Prejudices formerly contracted.

I assure you, that, tho' Mr Millar has probably had an Intention of writing me to the Purpose he told you, yet he never did it, and his Memory has fail'd him in this Particular. On the contrary, he said to me, that he intended to put this Volume of my philosophical Writings into the same hands with the Dissertations, which are soon to be publish'd, who is, I think, one Bowyer. I did not oppose him, because I thought, that was a Matter, which it did not belong me to meddle with. However, you will see by the enclos'd, which I have left open, what woud be my Choice in such a Case; and I hope henceforth he will never think of any but you, wherever any of my Writings are concern'd.

I cannot think of troubling you so far in this new Edition as I did in my History; but I woud be extremely oblig'd to you, as you go along to mark any Doubts that occur to you, either with regard to Style or Argument. Mr Millar thinks of making very soon another Edition in Twelves, and these Observations woud then serve me in good Stead. These Writings have already undergone several Editions, and have been very accurately examind every Impression; yet I can never esteem them sufficiently correct.

You will see by my Letter to Mr Millar that I mention a Dedication, which may perhaps surprize you, as I never dealt in such servile Addresses; But I hope it will not surprize you, when you hear it is only to a Presbyterian Minister, my Friend, Mr Hume, the Author of Douglas. I was resolv'd to do what lay in my Power to enable a Youth of Genius to surmount the unaccountable Obstacles, which were thrown in his Way. You will probably see it publishd in a few Days. I hope the Goodness of the Intention will apologize for the Singularity of the undetaking .

 I am Dear Sir Your most obedient Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 1 Feby. 1757.
