Dear Sir

I am very glad, that you are in so good a way, and that you think so soon of making a new Edition. I am running over both the antient History & the Tudors, and shall send you them up by the Waggon as soon as they are corrected. Please tell Mr Strahan to keep carefully this Copy I send up, as well as that which I left of the Stuarts: For if you intend to print an Octavo Edition next Summer, it will be better to do it from these Copies which are corrected, than from the new Edition, where there will necessarily be some Errors of the Press.

I give you full Authority to contradict the Report, that I am writing or intend to write an eclesiastical History: I have no such Intention; & I believe never shall. I am beginning to love Peace very much, and resolve to be more cautious than formerly in creating myself Enemies. But in contradicting this Report, you will be so good as not to impeach Mr Mallet's Veracity: For tis certain I said to Lord Chesterfield (from whom Mr Mallet first had it), that I had entertain'd such a Thought. But my saying so proceeded less from any serious Purpose, than from a View of trying how far such an Idea would be relishd by his Lordship.

I have not laid aside thoughts of continuing my History to the Period after the Revolution. It is not amiss to be idle a little time; but it is probable I shall tire of that kind of Life; and if I then find that the Public desires to see more of me, and that the Great will not shut up their Papers from me, I shall set to work in earnest.

I never thought that Lord Kaims's Elements would be a popular Book; but I hop'd, that, as you engage for no copy Money, it wou'd certainly defray the Charge of Paper & Print; and on that footing alone I recommended it to you. I find the Author's Expectations rais'd up to a vast Pitch, and indeed there are some parts of the Work ingenious & curious: But it is too abstruse & crabbed ever to take with the Public. As to the Advice you desire me to give him, it is certainly very salutary; but I fancy neither I nor any other of his Friends will ever venture to mention it. The Admonitions, which come from you, are commonly the most effectual; and if this Book do not sell, I think it were not amiss, that you tell him the plain Truth, without Disguise or Circumlocution.

I find the Booksellers here have sold off all their Share of my Essays, and are desirous of another Edition, which, however, I told them, I believd you was not ready for. I desire to be informd two or three Months before you put it in the Press: Because I intend to make some considerable Alterations on some Parts of them.

I hope Mrs Millar intends to pay us a Visit next Summer, and that you will be of the Party. Please make my most sincere Respects to her.

I am Dear Sir

 Your affectionate Friend & Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 
 15 March 1762
