Edinburgh 2 of February, 1767.

Mr Ainslie was mistaken. The house in which I live, was purchased by me five or six years ago. I was prevented by a singular accident from disposing of it a very little before I left Paris. Do you not remember, that I set out to pass the Christmas with you at L'Isle Adam, but could get no farther than Moselle, where I staid all night, and returned next day, with great difficulty, to Paris? There was a great fall of snow, which rendered the roads quite impracticable. I had wrote a letter, to dispose of my house, and I had left this letter with my landlord at Paris, to be sent to the post-house on the post-day. Happily, or rather, I believe, unhappily, the letter had not gone off; upon which I kept it, as thinking that if any affair called me to this country, it would be very inconvenient for me not to have a house to retire to. Had not this unexpected accident happened, my house would have been disposed of; and as this is a growing town, where it is very difficult to find lodgings, I should never more have thought of returning to it.

I kept, however, my resolution of establishing myself at Paris; and for that purpose, I hired no less than two houses; one was in the Fauxbourg St. Germain, which Madame Geoffrin was so good as to undertake to furnish for me. But this I found, on reflection, too small; and though I paid rent for it, I was resolved not to make use of it. I hired another house in the quarter of the Palais-Royal, which Baron d'Holbach undertook to furnish before I could return from London. Had this bargain taken place, I should at this time have been established at Paris, and probably for life. But the proprietor of the house was absent, being the head of the commission sent down to Brittany: I made the contract with his agent, who had a power from him; but in the mean time, somebody had wrote to the proprietor himself, and had hired the house immediately from him. This event happened only two days before my departure; and being hurried by the Duke of Choiseul's order to M. Rousseau, I had not time to look for another house.

You see then, dear Madam, what a complication of accidents has prevented me from being at present a Parisian, and I hope your constant guest and attendant.

But I am now in Edinburgh, and finding myself at my own fire-side, amid my books, conversing with company who are both estimable and agreeable, my former passion for study, derived both from nature and habit, has seized me with greater violence, by reason of so long an interruption, and I am so occupied with present things, that I form no distant resolution; at least, none that I shall speak of, lest I should not be believed, and lest my not executing it should expose me to the reproach of levity.

But what terms shall I employ to express my gratitude and acknowledgments to the Prince of Conti, for the honour which he intends me? You must here come to my assistance, and aid me with your usual eloquence, otherwise I shall never be able to do justice to my internal sentiments. But unfortunately, instead of corresponding to marks of distinction so honourable to me, I may even be thought wanting in my due regard to the Prince.

It was certainly my duty to have fixed sooner my resolution, and to have notified it to you; but by the letters which passed between us when I was at London, it appeared to me that I had sufficiently explained my passion for retreat and solitude, and that you had made the Prince sensible that nothing but my sincere regard for him made me worthy of the honour he intended me. In other respects, my habits of life disqualified me from profiting by it. I beseech you, dear Madam, give me your aid, where you can do it so much justice, and where I stand so much in need of it.

I am almost vexed to find, that my Fridays are too well supplied, and still more that I myself cannot enjoy the good company which assemble with you on that day. I desire to be remembered to all and sundry of them. Please to tell M. D'Alembert, that if I were not as lazy as he is at writing letters, I should certainly have taken care not to allow our correspondence to drop. I am right in my conjecture, that we are not to expect any answer from Rousseau: Mr Davenport writes me, that he is entirely occupied in writing his Memoirs, which will be a very bulky book, where M. D'Alembert and I will probably make a great figure. But that affair is now so totally ridiculous, that it can no longer give us the least shadow of anxiety. Agreeably to the licence of this country, there has been a great deal of raillery on the incident, thrown out in the public papers, but all against that unhappy man. There is even a print engraved of it: M. Rousseau is represented as a Yahoo, newly caught in the woods; I am represented as a farmer, who caresses him and offers him some oats to eat, which he refuses in a rage; Voltaire and D'Alembert are whipping him up behind; and Horace Walpole making him horns of papier maché. The idea is not altogether absurd.

I interest myself very much in Madame de Barbantane. I fancy that the way of life you mention will not be disagreeable to her, considering the sobriety of her disposition and character. I am obliged to you for the intelligence you give me of our other common friends and acquaintances, by whom I have a great ambition to be remembered. I need not tell you what share you have in my attachment and regard.
