Dear Sir

You seem'd desirous of knowing what may have become of your old Guest, the wild Philosopher: I heard by a Letter yesterday from Paris, that he had appeard at Meudon, in the neighbourhood of that City, and had there shown himself in a pretty public manner: My Friend adds, that from the late Transactions, all the World looks on him as absolutely mad; yet it was to be fear'd if he continu'd to appear publickly, he wou'd either be put in arrest, or banish'd the Kingdom. However, if you have any thing to write to him, I believe I cou'd find the means of conveying it; and you will therefore be so good as to send it to me. He is much to be pity'd, particularly from the strange unhappy Turn that his Madness has taken: And I doubt he may remain long in his present melancholy Situation, too wise to be confind, too mad to govern himself. Some People will even question, whether he ever was otherwise, notwith-standing the great Genius and Talents, that appear in his writings.

I know not, what can be done with regard to his Pension: It has pass'd all the Forms in the Treasury; but unless he appoint some Person to receive it, it never can be pay'd. Be so good as to mention that Matter to him, and desire him to write a Letter to Charles Lowndes Esqr Secretary to the Treasury, appointing him to pay the Money to some Person, whom he, Rousseau, shall chuse.

I shall be glad to have a Copy of his Letter to you on leaving you. I do not know, if you heard, that he said to a Gentleman in Lincolnshire, that your Housekeeper had quarreld with his Gouvernante, and that the former threw Cinders and Ashes into his Pot, which was the Reason of his leaving you. By all Accounts, the same Demoiselle is a very mischievous Creature: I have been assur'd, that she was the Cause of all the Fray between him and me.

We shall, no doubt, have his Memoirs soon publish'd, which will be a curious Performance. But you think his chief Occupation while at Wootton was of a different Nature. Have you any Notion what it was?

Lord Holdernesse has thank'd me much for your Civility to his Steward, who is much satisfy'd with your Machine. Yesterday, I was giving to Charles Turner of Yorkshire an Account of its Operation: He stands much in Need of such a Machine in his part of the World; and I may perhaps have occasion to give you the same Trouble with regard to him. But I know that you do not regard the Propagation of Improvements in Husbandry as a Trouble.

You will probably see in a few Posts an Account of General Conway's Resignation: However, I shall not immediatly leave London; and shall be glad to hear from you. I am Dear Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

London 1 of July 1767

P.S.

Please direct to me at Miss Elliots in Brewer Street.
