July 4. 1727.

D. M.

I receivd all the Books you writ of & your Milton among the rest; when I saw it I perceivd there was a difference betwixt preaching & practizing; You accuse me of niceness & yet practize it most egregiously your self; What was the Necessity of sending your Milton wch I knew you were so fond of? Why! I lent yours & cant get it. But would you not in the same manner have lent your own? Yes. Then Why this Ceremony & Goodbreeding? I write all this to show you how easily any Action may be brought to bear the Countenance of a Fault; you may justify your self very well by saying it was kindness & I am satisfy'd wt it & thank you for it. So in the same manner I may justify my self from your Reproofs. You say That I would not send in my papers because they were not polishd nor brought to any form; wch you say is Nicety. But was it not reasonable? Would you have me send in my loose, uncorrect thoughts? Were such worth the transcribing? All the progress that I made is but drawing the Outlines, in loose bits of Paper; here a hint of a passion, there a Phenomenon in the mind accounted for, in another the alteration of these accounts; sometimes a remark upon an Author I have been reading, And none of them worth to any Body & I believe scarce to my self. They only design I had of mentioning any of them at all was to see what you would have said of your own, whether they were of the same kind & if you would send any & I have got my End for you have given a most satisfactory reason for not communicating them, by promising they shall be told viva voce; a much better way indeed & in wch I promise my self much satisfaction; for the free Conversation of a friend is what I would preferr to any Entertainment; just now I am entirely confind to my self & Library for Diversion, since we parted

... ea sola voluptas

Solamenq mali & indeed to me they are not a small one; for I take no more of them than I please, for I hate task-reading, & I diversify them at my Pleasure; sometimes a Philosopher, sometimes a Poet; wch change is not unpleasant nor disservicable neither; for what will more surely engrave upon my mind a Tusculan Dispute of Cicero's de ægritudine lenienda than an Eclogue or Georgick of Virgils; the Philosophers Wiseman, & the Poets husbandman agree in peace of mind, in a Liberty & Independancy on Fortune, & Contempt of Riches, Power & Glory. Every thing is placid & quiet in both; nothing perturbd or disorderd.

At secura quies & nescia fallere vita 
Speluncae, viviq laci; at frigida Tempe 
Mugitusq boum mollesq sub arbore somnos 
Non absint — 







These Lines will in my Opinion come nothing short of the Instruction of the finest Sentence in Cicero. And is more to me; as Virgils Life is more the Subject of my Ambition, being what I can apprehend to be more wtin my power. For the perfectly Wise man that outbraves Fortune is surely greater than the Husbandman who slips by her; And indeed this pastoral & Saturnian happyness I have in a great measure come at, just now; I live like a King pretty much by my self; Neither full of Action of Action nor perturbation, Molles somnos. This State however I can forsee is not to be rely'd on; My peace of Mind is no sufficiently confirmd by Philosophy to wtstand the Blows of Fortune; This Greatness & Elevation of Soul is to be found only in Study & contemplation, this can alone teach us to look down upon upon humane Accidents. You must allow [me] to talk thus like a Philosopher; tis a Subject I think much on & could talk all day long off, B[ut] I know I must not trouble you. Wherefore I wisely practice my Rules; wch prescribe to check our Appetite; And for a Morification shall descend from these Superior Regions to low & ordinary Life; & so far as to tell you. That John has bought a horse he thinks it neither cheap nor dear, it cost 6 Guineas but will be sold cheaper agst winter, wch he is not resolv'd on as yet; it has no fault but bogles a little; It is tolerably well favord. And paces naturally. Mamma bids me tell you yt Sir John Home is not going to Town, but he saw Eccles in the Countrey who says he will do nothing in yt Affair. for he is only taking off old Adjudications; So it is needless to let him see the papers; She desires you would trouble yourself to enquire about the Earle's Affairs & Advise us what to do in this Affair. If it were not breaking the formal Rule of Connexions I have prescribed my self in this Letter; & it did not seem unnatural to raise my self from so low Affairs as Horses and papers to so high & elevate things as Books & Study I would tell you yt I read some of Longinus already & I am mightily delighted wt him; I think he does really answer the Character of being the great Sublime he describes, he delivers his precepts wt such force as if he were enchanted wt the Subject; And is himself an Author that may be be cited for an Example to his own Rules by any who shall be so adventurous [?] as to write upon his Subject.
