London 13 February 1739

Sir

I thought to have wrote this from a Place nearer you than London, but have been detain'd here by contrary Winds, which have kept all Berwick-Ships from sailing. Tis now a fortnight since my Book was publish'd; & besides many other considerations, I thought it wou'd contrivute very much to my Tranquillity, & might spare me many Mortifications, to be in the Countrey, while the Success of the Work was doubtful. I am afraid twill remain so very long. Those, who are accustom'd to reflect on such abstract Subjects, are commonly full of Prejudices; & those, who are unprejudiz'd, are unacquainted with metaphysical Reasonings. My Principles are also so remote from all the vulgar Sentiments on this Subject, that were they to take place, they wou'd produce almost a total Alteration in Philosophy; & you know Revolutions of this kind are not easily brought about. I am young enough to see what will come of the Matter; but am apprehensive lest the chief Reward I shall have for some time will be the Pleasure of studying on such important Subjects, & the Approbation of a few Judges. Among the rest, you may believe I aspire to your Approbation; & next to that, to your free Censure & Criticism. I shall present you with a Copy as soon as I come to Scotland, & hope your Curiosity as well as Friendship will make you take the Pains of perusing it.

In looking over your Letters I find one of a twelve-month's Date, wherein you desire me to send down a great many Copys to Scotland. You propos'd no doubt to take the Pains of recommending them, & pushing the Sale. But to tell the Truth there is so little to be gain'd that way in such Works as these, that I wou'd not have you take the Trouble. If you know any body that is a Judge, you wou'd do me a sensible Pleasure in engaging him to a serious Perusal of the Book. Tis so rare to meet with one, that will take Pains on a Book, that does not come recommended by some great Name or Authority, that, I must confess, I am as found of meeting with such a one, as if I were sure of his Approbation. I am, however, so doubtful in that particular, that I have endeavour'd all I cou'd to conceal my Name; tho' I believe I have not been so cautious in this respect as I ought to have been.

I have sent the Bishop of Bristol a Copy; but cou'd not wait on him with your Letter after he had arriv'd at that Dignity: At least I throught it wou'd be to no purpose after I begun the Printing.

You'll excuse the natural Frailty of an Author in writing so long a Letter about nothing but his own Performances. Authors have this Privilege in common with Lovers, & founded on the same Reason, that they are both besotted with a blind Foundness of their Object. I have been upon my Guard against this Frailty; but perhaps this has rather turn'd to my Prejudice: The Reflection on our Caution is apt to give us a more implicite Confidence afterwards, when we come to form a Judgement. I am

 Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume

London February 13. 1739
