Dear Doctor

I send you enclos'd M. Suard's Letter, that you may see I am not singular in my Opinion of your Work. He has now all the second Volume, a great part of the third, and some of the first. I shall supply him regularly.

I wish the public may not in one particular, meet with a Dissappointment in your Work: They seem to expect, that it is to be more a History of the Age than of the Reign of Charles V; and that the Wars & Negotiations and usual historical Transactions will fill but a small part of it: This Expectation may make them less relish your very elegant Narration: However, you will have something too of what they look for.

My Commission in France was a mere fancy of the News Writer. Mr Walpole Son of Lord Walpole, continues in that Employment; and it cou'd not be otherwise. He is a young man, of parts, as they say, and was very lately calld from Spain to be settled in France. It woud have been a great Injustice to remove him. If the Office had been offerd me, I know not but I shoud have been idle enough, even at my Years, to be pleas'd with it. At present, I think every day more seriously of retiring to Edinburgh for Life. Every Event here fills me with Indignation, which I cannot command and care not to conceal; and yet to a Philosopher & Historian the Madness and Imbecillity & Wickedness of Mankind ought to appear ordinary Events.

Lord Chatham immediately upon his Resignation took, or thought proper to take, a real Fit of the Gout, and is now declard to be perfectly recoverd, and is reconcild in form to the Grenville's. People are in amaze what this may prognosticate.

Crawford speaks of going abroad every day, but is still here. His Health certainly is not good; but he might recover if he woud trust a little more to the Lord, and less to the Physicians. In other respects, he is as you say.

Have you seen Priestly's Grammar? In his Censure of me, he is wrong nine times in ten, as I am assurd by consulting the best Judges; and his Friend, Johnson, is even commonly against him; so negligently did he write. However, you may look into it. The People in this Country wou'd wish to be hypercritical on these points, if they knew how.

 Lord & Lady Holdernesse desire to be rememberd to you; as I do to Dr Blair & your Family.

D. H.

Brewers Street. 27 of November 1768
