Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 27 February, 1766.

As I seldom have occasion to hear of gentlemen's setting out for Ireland, I have checked my inclination of writing to your Lordship concerning the late transactions, which are certainly very curious, and seemingly unaccountable. For what can be more extraordinary, than an Opposition which insists on the rigorous support of Government, and a Ministry which recommends lenity towards resistance? We have seen the King's favorite and his Ministers vote on different sides; and men uncertain which was the surest way of paying court to his Majesty. Some wags have remarked that the Bench of Bishops itself was obliged to vote according to conscience, for want of better direction; and their numbers were in one vote pretty equally divided. As the causes of these events are now pretty generally known, or at least publicly talked of, it may be less imprudent to write to your Lordship what is no longer mentioned in a whisper.

The first day after reassembling, the Parliament opened by a very extraordinary speech of Mr. Pit's. Besides asserting that England had no right to her Colonies, and that it was unconstitutional to take money from free-born subjects without their consent, he ran into many other topics, which much astonished his audience. He seemed even to treat the Parliament with contempt; he used many severe expressions against the last Ministry; he employed some unkind ones towards the present: and men were thrown into such wonder at the lofty and intrepid style of his discourse, that nobody had courage or presence enough of mind to answer him. But when gentlemen were retired to their private societies, they began to compare their sentiments and to find that they had rather been ill used by the orator. The effects of this general indignation appeared two days after, when Sir Fletcher Norton attacked him with great severity, and even threatened to move that he should be sent to the Tower. He was heard with infinite applause by the House; and when Mr Pit answered him, his discourse was received with a cold and universal silence. He soon perceived that he had gone too far, and like an able man, he has ever since lowered his tone, and talked with great submission and deference to the House, so that he has entirely recovered the good will of his audience.

Meanwhile the question which he had started, was brought on in the House of Peers: it was disputed, whether the English Parliament had a right to tax the Colonies. Lord Camden in a long and artful speech maintained the contrary; and was answered by Lord Mansfield, who spoke two hours, in the most masterly manner: it is agreed on all hands that nobody ever remembers such a discourse for matter, for style, and for delivery. On the division of the House, there were only found to be four with Lord Camden, among whom was Lord Shelburn. The debate was maintained on the same subject in the House of Commons by Mr Pit almost alone: the House did not divide, but it was thought that not above five would have followed him in the vote. But these events were not esteemed any way decisive on the state of parties; because Mr Pit had carried the matter farther than almost anybody was inclined to follow him. There soon came on in the House of Peers a more trying vote. It was proposed by the Ministry that the House should address his Majesty to recommend to the Assemblies of the Colonies the making reparation to such persons as had suffered from the populace on account of the Stamp Act: the Opposition insisted that the word require should be used instead of recommend. The difference seemed not very material; but as the word recommend suited the lenity of the ministerial measures, and the other word was more agreeable to the intended rigor of the Opposition, the two parties chose to make trial of their force on this occasion. Lord Bute spoke on the anti-ministerial side; and his example had such influence that the word require was carried by four voices. But matters went otherwise in the House of Commons. It was moved by Mr Grenville that the House should address his Majesty to inforce the laws in America. The previous question was carried against him by a majority of 140; a number which surprised the Ministers themselves, who expected to prevail only by a small majority. There are three reasons assigned for the great success, First, Lord Rockingham published everywhere that the King had said to him that he was for the repeal of the Stamp Act, which was understood to be a general declaration in favour of his Ministers, and brought them an accession of force. The King has since said, that this was a mistake in Lord Rockingham; for that the question between them was only whether the law should be strictly inforced in its present shape or be repealed; in which case, his Majesty declared for the repeal: but there was no mention made of lenitives and mediums, which he would rather approve of. Secondly, Lord Bute in his speech to the House of Lords had said, that in doing his duty as a Lord of Parliament he would lie under no influence; he would not be swayed even by the opinion of a Master whom he loved and adored. This was understood as if the King and he entertained different sentiments on the present question; tho Lord Bute has since declared that he meant nothing but to express in general the independence of his conduct. The third reason, which brought the Ministry such an accession of force, was the general cry of the public, which loudly demanded a repeal of the Stamp Act. It was foreseen, that the countenance given the Americans by Mr Pit and Lord Camden's appearance for them would increase, if possible, their obstinacy. The bad effects on trade began already to be sensibly felt. Many manufacturers all over England had threatened to dismiss a half or two-thirds of their tradesmen, which must have produced infinite confusion, and been dangerous to Government itself. These motives were so strong, that I am persuaded no one voted against the repeal but from party and in full hopes and confidence of being out-voted. Some have confessed it to me. The repeal was carried by a majority of 104, which in subsequent votes mounted to 107. It is not doubted but the House of Peers will concur with the Commons, notwithstanding the former majority of the anti-ministerial party. Every one is sensible, that an invidious law, repealed by one branch of the legislature, can never possibly be carried into execution.

Thus I have endeavoured to give your Lordship a sketch of the public transactions of Parliament, in which it is universally acknowledged that Mr Conway did his duty as an able speaker and statesman. The intrigues of the Cabinet ought to have been more mysterious and more uncertain; but according to the genius of this country, everything is talked of and nothing remains long a secret: sometimes indeed matters are misrepresented; and I shall not affirm but this may sometimes be the case, in what I am going to add to your Lordship, tho I think I draw my intelligence from good sources. It is known, that Lord Bute was extremely dissatisfied with a considerable part of the present Ministry, from their first entry into power. They not only declared publicly, that they had no connexions with him, and would not in anything be subjected to his influence: but what is worse, this public declaration (which might only be meant to avoid the odium of these connexions) they actually carried into execution: his brother was not restored to his office: his friends, Lord Despenser, Sir Fletcher Norton, and Dr Hay, were turned out: it was supposed to be a sufficient reason for refusing any competitor that he was known to be Lord Bute's friend: and some of the Ministers had even publicly refused to drink his health when it was proposed at their table. Meanwhile they courted Mr Pit with all the assiduity imaginable, who kept aloof from any particular connexions with them. These measures which are ascribed to the younger part of the Ministry are thought to have been imprudent; both because they could never reasonably expect to support themselves by popularity alone, contrary to the Cabinet; and because the taking in Mr Pit was receiving a master still more domineering than, it was likely, Lord Bute would prove. However this may be, it is esteemed certain that Lord Bute projected to overthrow the Ministry, tho without having concerted any plan for a new administration, and without any formal alliance with the late Ministry. If he could, by his interest, have prevented the repeal in the House of Commons, it was supposed that the present ministers would have thrown up and a new plan would have been instantly formed. Men began to lay wagers, whether the frost or the Ministry would last longest, but the great majority in the House of Commons suspended these projects, tho it is not doubted that they are still in agitation. It is known that the Duke of Bedford and Mr Grenville met Lord Bute at Lord Eglinton's, where they made acknowledgements to him of their past errors, and begged the return of his friendship. He answered that he was glad to stand well in their good opinion, but nothing was concluded. I am assured that the present Ministry have also made advances to him, tho with no greater success, and every thing appears still doubtful and uncertain. It seems happy that the Stamp Act is repealed, for if the motion for that repeal had been rejected, and if the Ministry had thereupon been changed, the Americans, seeing all their friends turned out merely from friendship to them, would have been reduced to despair, and would probably have made an obstinate resistance, attended with the most fatal consequences. The frightful idea they have been taught to entertain of the old Ministry would have made them expect nothing but blood and slaughter, and the most severe executions.

It is remarkable that Lord Chesterfield, who had never gone to the House of late years and had not even taken the oaths during this reign, qualified himself a few days ago in order to vote for the repeal. He said he was a non-juror, and repented of his disaffection. It is equally remarkable that the Dukes of York and Gloucester voted against the King's ministers, in the only trying vote that has been in the House of Peers that session. There is however no manner of doubt that the repeal will pass that House; because, among others, I hear that the Chancellor and Lord Mansfield have strongly declared for it, since it has passed the Commons.

I give your Lordship and Lady Hertford joy upon this agreeable incident in your family. I learn from Lady Aylesbury that another of the same kind is soon expected. Some mention a third: but I should be sorry to find your Lordship robbed at once of so considerable and so agreeable a part of your family, tho in so agreeable a manner. In all cases, I take part most sincerely in whatever incident can interest your Lordship.
