St Andrews Square 17 of January 1774

Some time ago, I had an Answer from Madame De Duffan, which was very friendly, and, as you may imagine, very clever. She seems entirely to have forgiven me; and even offers to be my Correspondent for French Literature: But she adds, that I had already established at Paris a much better Correspondent. This concluding Stroke seem'd to me curious, and marks, that there is still some little Poyson, festering in the bottom of the Wound. She pretends to be very angry with you.

I send you Bradshaw's Letter to me, with my ostensible Letter to you which you may communicate to the Duke of Grafton, if you find it altogether proper and convenient. I own, I expect nothing from it: I only wish, that Lord North may expressly refuse my Claim, and not lay the Blame on Mr Robinson's Negligence in not informing him of it. If Morley be alive, I shall wait patiently till the Vacancy: If he be dead, and the Place be supply'd, and if Lord North appear sorry for the Oversight (which I do not flatter myself with) he can easily make me Reparation: The Office of Gentleman of the Police is vacant in this Country, by the Succession of Lord Garlies to the Peerage, and is an Office nearly of the same amount. If the Duke of Grafton takes up my Claim, either as belonging to him, or on your account or on mine (you see I deal much in Ifs) and if he finds Difficulty with Lord North, I coud wish you wou'd communicate my Letter to Lord Beauchamp, who will probably communicate the Matter to Lord Hertford and General Conway; and in that Case, Lord North wou'd find it difficult to resist their Application, join'd to that of the Duke of Grafton. I wish, however, you woud let Lord Beauchamp know, that, from the Friendship of his Family, I am already placd in such a State of Opulence, that the half of my Income suffices me; and therefore there is no Necessity for straining their Interest to procure me any Accession. But as it was their Intention to obtain me this Addition, I thought it woud not be improper to inform them of the Danger I run of a Dissappointment.

I am sorry to hear that your other is not likely at present to have Liberty of purchasing; and I have advisd your Father to send him up the Money in the mean time, rather than keep it lying idly by himself. But tho I have assurd him, that the Captain, aided by your Advice, woud make a good Use of the Trust, I have not yet been able to perswade him. Such are the inveterate and unreasonable Prejudices of these old People! I hope you are in perfect Health; or rather, that you have only such small Ails, as may give you Ground of Complaint without giving you much Molestation. All your Friends here are well. Andrew Stuart thinks himself secure of his Election; and I believe with Reason. What do you hear of his Brothers Success? I have return'd to my Studies with fresh Appetite; but shall be so tird of them before next Summer, that an Interruption from you will then come very seasonably. I am very sincerely Yours

David Hume
