Paris [11] of Septr 1765

Sir

The Assembly of the Clergy have at length publish'd their Act or Declaration, which had been so long expected. It consists of three Articles. The first contains a strong Remonstrance against many impious and irreligious Books lately publish'd, which the Assembly strictly prohibits all the Faithful to read, even for the sake of gratifying their Curiosity: And warns them against the Danger they incur from the Perusal of Works, which partly by the Seduction of Novelty, partly by that of their Style and the Reputation of their Authors, have made such Progress as visibly to threaten the Kingdom with some great & sudden Revolution.

The second Article regards the Rights of the Spiritual Power, which is there represented as entirely independant of the civil Authority and co-ordinate with it. Under this head, the Clergy complain of many late Encroachments on their Privileges; particularly by the Edict which enjoin'd Silence with regard to the Bull unigenitus; by the Order, issu'd from the Parliament enjoining them to administer the Sacrament even to such as had not accepted that Bull; and by the Parliament's annulling, without the Intervention of any eclesiastical Authority, the monastic Vows of the Jesuites. The Clergy rather point out these Grievances than mark them directly: And they support their Cause, by Authorities, and by the constant, unalter'd Principles and Practices of the Roman Catholic Religion.

The third Article declares the Bull unigenitus an inviolable and eternal Article of Faith, which it is incumbent on every Christian to receive, in order to his being worthy of participating in the Sacraments. They subjoin a Letter of the late Pope, Benedict the XIV, to the same Purpose; and they call the Church of Rome the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, the Center of Unity, and the Guardian of that holy Doctrine, which the Apostles, with their Blood, had consign'd to her Custody.

These Acts of the Clergy, considering the extreme Delicacy of the Subject, are fram'd with great Prudence and Reserve; and are thought to have been compos'd by the Arch-bishop of Toulouse, one of the Men of best Understanding in France. The Intention of the Clergy was not to publish their Acts, till immediatly after the Vacation of Parliament, which commencd on Saturday last. But the Secret had been betray'd, probably by some of the Printers; the Parliament was suddenly assembled on Friday, and passd a Decree, which was also very moderate, and which only order'd the Suppression of these Acts of the Assembly.

But the Assembly on Sunday last, after summoning such Prelates as were at that time resident in Paris and the Neighbourhood, to accompany them, went in a Body to Versailles, and laid their Acts before his most Christian Majesty. The King gave them a general and a dilatory Answer; but order'd them immediatly to finish the temporal Affairs for which he had summon'd them. They meet to day in order to deliberate on the Execution of the King's Orders; and it is thought that the Clergy of France were never in a more critical Situation than at present. If they proceed, notwithstanding the King's evasive Reply, to grant him the twelve Millions demanded as a free Gift, the whole Force of their Acts is eluded; the Assembly will immediatly be dissolvd; and the Parliaments will proceed in their Encroachments on the spiritual Authority. If they refuse to vote the Free Gift, till they receive Satisfaction with regard to their Privileges, the King, who must have the Money, and who will not be brav'd by the weakest Order in the State (for such the Clergy are now become) will probably levy the Imposition by his own Authority, conjoin'd with that of the Parliament; which will be a mighty Innovation in a Roman Catholic Country. It is thought probable, that the Prelates of greatest Moderation and Prudence will prevent this Extremity, by engaging the Assembly to pay Submission to the King's Orders.

Yesterday, I waited on M. de Praslin at Paris; and ask'd him, whether he knew the Duke of Choiseul's Sentiments with regard to Booth's Return to Dunkirk: He told me that the Matter had been omitted in the Hurry of Business. But there is a Fact, added he, of greater Importance, of which I can inform you, tho'not ministerially: It is, that the Chevalier de Mezières is to be recalld from the Government of Dunkirk. He had probably, said the Duke, been too violent in the Execution of his Orders: The People were terrify'd for him: He was irritated against them: And we have thought it more prudent to compose all Matters by giving him a Successor. I suppose, that, after this Incident your Excellency may safely assure all Englishmen, that, provided they live obedient to the Laws, they may reside without Danger in Dunkirk.

It is thought, that France will soon acknowledge the new elected King of Poland. The late King of Poland had given his Nomination of Cardinal to the young Abbé de Broglie, Brother to the Mareschal: The present King continues the same Nomination; and the Family of Broglie, whose Credit is reviving, will on that account be more active to engage the Court of France to embrace this pacific Measure, to which it is of itself sufficiently inclin'd.

Some days ago, I met with M de Bougainville, who is return'd from settling his new Colony in one of the Mariane Islands near Cape Horn. He told me, that he had left all his Planters in perfect Health: They consist, as he said, of 120 Men and 20 Women. The only Support of the new Settlement is Oil, extracted from Fish; and it is not easy to imagine what cou'd be the Purpose of the French Government in undertaking it: Unless it be, to make that Place a Stage for such Expeditions, as, in case of War with Spain, they may send into the South Sea. This Project ought to give Umbrage to the Spaniards; and accordingly, it is pretended, that the Court of Madrid has challeng'd the Property of those Islands. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard, Sir

 Your Excellency's Most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

P.S.

The Acts of the Assembly form too great a Volume to be sent by the Post: But if I can procure a Copy, which is somewhat difficult, I shall have the Honour of transmitting it to your Excellency by a private hand or by a Messenger.

M. Secretary Conway
