My dear Sir,

I believe I shall write you a very short letter, and yet have a great deal to say. I have not absolutely leisure to look about me: what between business and company, what between receiving and returning civilities, between the commerce of the great and the learned, it is scarce possible for me to think of an absent friend . . . .

I reconcile myself daily to this course of life, and nothing leads more to familiarise me to a scene so different from that to which I had so long been accustomed, than the amiable manners and the cordial friendship of the family with whom I live. I find, likewise, the use of the French tongue gradually returns to me, though I am still somewhat awkward in returning a compliment. The scene which passed to-day really pleased without embarassing me. I attended Lord Hertford to Versailles in order to be presented to the Dauphiness and the young Princes, the only part of the royal family whom we had not yet seen. When I was presented to the Duc de Berry, a child of ten years of age, he said to me, 'Monsieur, vous avez beaucoup de réputation dans ce pays-ci: votre nom est très bien connu; et c'est avec beaucoup de plaisir que je vous vois'. Immediately upon which his brother the Comte de Provence, who is two years younger, advanced to me and said, with great presence of mind, 'Monsieur, il y a longtems que vous êtes attendu dans ce pays-ci avec beaucoup d'impatience; je compte avoir bien du plaisir quand je pourrai lire votre belle histoire'. But what is more remarkable, when we were carried to make our bows to the Comte d'Artois, who is about five years of age, and to a young Madame of between two and three, the infant prince likewise advanced to me in order to make me his harangue, in which, though it was not very distinct, I heard him mumble the word Histoire, and some other terms of panegyric. With him ended the civilities of the royal family of France towards me; and I may say it did not end till their power of speech failed them: for the Princess was too young to be able to articulate a compliment. You may see, by this instance alone, what you could not fail to remark in many other instances, how much greater honour is paid to Letters in France than in England. I do not mean with regard to me alone, whom some factious barbarians, under the appellation of Whigs, are fond to decry; but with regard to every other person. And the effects are visible by the different state of Letters in the two countries.

 I am, dear Wedderburn, Yours sincerely,

David Hume.

Paris 23d Nov. 1763

P.S. I daily reconcile myself more to this place, and expect soon to be a Parisian. I have so often changed my places of abode, that I am come to think that, as far as regards happiness, there is no great difference among them. But yet, if there is a preference to be given, this city seems entitled to it.
