London, 9th of May 1767.

Dear Sir:



I cannot say that I am in the least surprised at the fact of which you give me information. Above two months ago I was told that your philosopher wanted to break loose from you, though I concealed the matter from you for fear of disgusting you against him. It seems he wrote to a gentleman in Lincolnshire, whose name I have forgot, and offered to come and live with him — an honour which the gentleman declined. His unhappy inquietude of temper must always hinder him from resting in any place where he is not molested. But I wonder where he will now find any body to take him up after your example and mine; I am even doubtful whether he is to accept of his pension. He must be arrived in London some days, yet General Conway has not heard of him. I fancy he dares not approach a house in which he expects to meet with me.



So you are a traitor, too, it seems; pray, do you speak in your sleep? But you may cry as loud as you please, je tiens Jean-Jaques. He has got out of your clutches, and is now in the wide world. For God's sake let me have a copy of his letter; I suppose it is very elegant and very absurd like his to me. Whether do you think he has brought his memoirs to town in order to publish them? There will be a thousand lies in them, about which you need no more trouble yourself than I shall.



The Bishop of Cloyne was with me this morning, and told me that his curiosity led him to Neufchatel in order to visit your philosopher; and he returned to the same place, by accident, just after Rousseau had left it. There were a thousand stories, which our friend has frequently told me, and, indeed, has published to all the world, concerning his being stoned by the populace; and particularly that a great stone had been erected over the door, like a trap, in such a manner that the moment he set his head out of the house it must have fallen upon him, and have crushed him. All these stories, the Bishop said, were absolutely false. The magistrates of the place examined into the matter: they found only one stone in the house, and one pane broke; but the matter had been so ill contrived by the master and maid, that the stone was too big for the hole in the pane, and could not have entered by it. Upon the whole, though a poor unhappy wretch like this is an object of pity, I think you have got a very fair riddance: for I take it for granted he will never look near you more.

I am, dear Sir, your most obedient humble servant,

David Hume



P.S. I shall be glad to hear of the alleviation of your gout, for we must not wish for an entire cure of this fit so soon.
