Compiègne 16 of July 1764.

Dear Collonel

For you are still a Collonel, notwithstanding your Fall, and on that Footing it is allowable for me to entertain a Correspondence with you: I repeat it then, Dear Collonel, and I say it with Truth, whether you be a Collonel or not, that I am very sorry, I was not in Paris, when you arriv'd in that City, the Center of Arts, of Politeness, of Gallantry, and of good Company. I shoud have rejoic'd to have embrac'd you and to have congratulated you on your arrival in your native Country. I am also sorry, that you propose to remain so little time in Paris, that I cannot propose to see you there, on your first Appearance. I hope, on your Return, to meet you, and to make myself Amends for the present Dissappointment.

I suppose the Marigny you mean, is Monsr Marigny, Brother to Madame Pompadour, who dyd in Spring last, and carryd with her all the Credit and Authority and Reputation, tho' not all the Money, of her Brother. The Courtiers at present begin to recollect that he is a person of mean Birth and low Education; a Fact which they had forgot during the twenty Years preceding; and they now turn their Backs upon him with equal Care as formerly they met him with open and smiling and caressing Faces: For such are the Manners, My Dear Collonel, of your native Country. You know, that we, on the other Side of the Water, make no Difference whether a Man be in Credit or not, possess Power or not, be in Office or not, be a Governor or not: Nothing but personal Merit is regarded: Past Professions of Friendship are inviolable: Virtue and public Good are held alone in estimation: &c &c.

With regard, then, to Monsr Marigny, I know not who coud tell you, that his Recommendation coud be of use to you in your Journey thro' the Provinces of France. When I first arrived in France, as I was a Man in Vogue and he a Man in Power, he made me some fine flourishing Speeches, and I made him some awkard  Bows; and our Correspondence did not go much farther. But the Case is, at present, he is neither at Compiegne nor at Paris: He is retird to a Seigneurie, about sixty Leagues Distance, which was left him by his Sister; and in that place or in some other, he will pine away the rest of his Life, full of Regret, that the Dukes and Mareschals and Blue Ribbons, who formerly caress'd him, do now conspire to neglect him; and all his Riches will be of no Avail to give him any Enjoyment. Put not your Trust, Dear Collonel, in Princes nor in the Sons of Men: For in them there is no Salvation.

I do not mean, but you might have safely put your Trust in me, had it been in my Power to serve you: I coud easily have given or procurd you recommendations to Marigny: Vaille qui vaille. But you see, by the present Situation of Affairs, that it is impracticable, and I believe that you have not much reason to regreat the want of them. You will make your way by means of Gold and Silver — and Brass, thro all the Towns of France. I wish, however, I knew in what Towns you proposd chiefly to reside: For it might not be impossible for me to procure you an Introduction, which your personal Merit wou'd afterwards improve to your Advantage and to the future Advantage of your adopted Country.

Pray, in what sphere does that Meteor, Clarke, move at present? What excentric Motions, more excentric than any in the Ptolemaic System, does he form? Is he any wise regulated by the Newtonian Theory, or is sensible of any Attraction to the Hotel de Beaupréau? But these and a hundred other idle Questions, I propose to put to you on your Return. — Lord Hertford was in Paris when you wrote me. I hope you waited on him or will wait on Lady Hertford and Lord Beauchamp. — I wish you good Weather, good Health, a good Journey, and a safe Return: And so I bid you heartily adieu: I have not room to make a bow; but can only Shake you by the hand.

David Hume
