[. . .]

P.S.

So far I had wrote in answer to your Ladyship's of the 29th of May, when I was again honoured with yours of the 14th of June. Good God! Madam, how much I regret my being absent from London on this occasion, which deprives me of an opportunity of shewing in person my regard for your recommendation, and my esteem, I had almost said veneration, for the virtue and genius of M. Rousseau. I assure your Ladyship there is no man in Europe of whom I have entertained a higher idea, and whom I would be prouder to serve; and as I find his reputation very high in England, I hope every one will endeavour to make him sensible of it by civilities, and by services, as far as he will accept of them. I revere his greatness of mind, which makes him fly obligations and dependance; and I have the vanity to think, that through the course of my life I have endeavoured to resemble him in those maxims.

But as I have some connexions with men of rank in London, I shall instantly write to them, and endeavour to make them sensible of the honour M. Rousseau has done us in choosing an asylum in England. We are happy at present in a king, who has a taste for literature; and I hope M. Rousseau will find the advantage of it, and that he will not disdain to receive benefits from a great monarch, who is sensible of his merit. I am only afraid that your friend will find his abode in England not so agreeable as may be wished, if he does not possess the language, which I am afraid is the case: for I never could observe in his writings any marks of his acquaintance with the English tongue. The French nation will soon regret the loss of so great a man, and will be sensible that it is some dishonour to them to have lost him. We were in hopes that philosophical liberty had made greater advances in that country; and such of us as have indulged the freedom of the pen, had need be careful how they entrust their persons to such as profess these rigorous maxims, and do not think that any indulgence is even due to foreigners. I assure your Ladyship that this reflection gives me some uneasiness; but I will not allow myself to think that I shall always be condemned to admire you at a distance, and that I shall never have an opportunity of enjoying that conversation, of whose charms I have heard such frequent accounts.
