St David's Street 27 of Octr 1775

Oh! Dear Baron, you have thrown me into Agonies and almost into Convulsions by your Request. You ask what seems reasonable, what seems a mere trifle; yet am I so unfit for it, that it is almost impossible for me to comply. You are much fitter yourself. That Address, by which you gain'd immortal honour, was done altogether without my Knowledge, I mean, that after the Suppression of the late Rebellion. Here is Lord Home teizing me for an Address from the Merse; and I have constantly refus'd him. Besides, I am an American in my Principles, and wish we woud let them alone to govern or misgovern themselves as they think proper: The Affair is of no Consequence, or of little Consequence to us. If the County of Renfrew think it indispensably necessary for them to interpose in public Matters, I wish they woud advise the King first to punish those insolent Rascals in London and Middlessex, who daily insult him and the whole Legislature, before he think of America. Ask him, how he can expect, that a form of Government will maintain an Authority at 3000 Miles distance when it cannot make itself be respected or even treated with common Decency at home. Tell him, that Lord North, tho in appearance a worthy Gentleman, has not a head for these great Operations, and that if fifty thousand Men, and twenty Millions of Money were entrusted to such a lukewarm Coward as Gage, they never coud produce any Effect. These are Objects worthy of the respectable County of Renfrew, not mauling the poor infatuated Americans in the other Hemisphere.

In return for my thus sketching out to you the Object of an Address, I have a favour to ask of you. Dr Trail, the Professor of Divinity, is dead, and knows now whether there be any Truth in all those Doctrines, which he taught, and of which he did not believe a word while alive. Dr Wight is a Candidate for the Chair. I know you wish him well, and will favour him: But will you do it with sufficient Zeal? I wish you woud exert Yourself. He is a sensible, good humourd, Gentleman-like Fellow, and as sound and orthodox as you coud wish. If you can engage the Principal in his Interests, it will be a great Point gaind. Wight is much connected with all our Friends here, whom I know you wish to oblige.

You are to be at Hamilton, I hear, some day next week.

Tell me the day; I will meet you at Coltness, that is, Weather Health & Humour serving. Yours

D H
