Edinburgh 17 April, 1775.

Your entering, dear Madam, into so particular a detail of your situation, was very satisfactory and agreeable to me; and I give you my sincere thanks for it. I applaud extremely your way of thinking. It is both generous and discreet, and will contribute no less to your honour than your tranquillity of mind. I thought that the event you hint at, had been public and avowed. The lady I cannot recollect, though it is probable I did know her, either more or less. I should be sorry to see you even seemingly put on a level with such a person. Your letter came safely to hand, and untouched: it was conveyed under a frank of Lord Stormont's; and no private letters are ever opened here. I have observed your orders with regard to it.

You are mistaken, my dear Madam: I am sufficiently of an age to feel the decline of life, and I feel it sensibly. I have, however, been always and still am very temperate. The only debauches I ever was guilty of, were those of study; and even these were moderate; for I was always very careful of my health, by using exercise. I own that this country does not entirely please me, particularly the climate. I sometimes entertain the notion of returning to France; but as I could not now, at my years, bear the tumult of Paris (and all provincial towns are unknown to me), I shall never probably carry this idea into execution.

You make me prick up my ears, and lend attention, when you speak of coming over to England. I beseech you, inform me some time before you put that design in execution. I should endeavour to meet you there; which would be much better than your taking so long a journey to so remote a part of the world, where there is little worthy your curiosity.

I have a nephew, a brother's son, who will pass through Paris some time in the month of June. I have given him orders to pay his respects to you. He is an officer of cavalry; and, in the interval of his duty, proposes to pass eight or nine months in a garrison town in France, for his improvement in the language and in his profession. Metz is the place fixed on. He has, as you will see, an agreeable figure; and if he could speak the language, his behaviour and conversation is very good; so that I doubt not but he will be acceptable to the good company of the place. But, in order to his reception, it will be necessary to have him recommended to the governor of the province, who, I hear, is M. Darmentieres, and to the governor of the town, M. de Conflans. The former I know but a very little; the second not at all. I use the freedom to apply to you for procuring him letters of recommendation. Be so good as to ask them of any of your acquaintance, if the governors be not known to you. In case you should not be at Paris, when my nephew passes, I have directed him to leave a letter for you. When you receive it, be so good as to send him up the letters; and I have directed him to call again at your hotel in the Temple, where he may receive them. He will be so little time at Paris, and speaks the language so imperfectly, that I dare not recommend him to your more particular notice, though I am persuaded you would like him very much, upon farther acquaintance. He is a piece of a scholar too, and passes for a prodigy of learning in his regiment. I doubt not but he will make a figure in that respect among the young officers.

You never mention to me Madame de Barbantane. Does she live with her pupil, and has she much satisfaction in that course of life? I beg my best respects to her.
