Dear Sir

I am very glad to have heard from you, and have sent you my Letter to Lord Hertford under a flying Seal. I wish you good Success in your Project; tho‘ I cannot easily imagine how an Estate on the Ohio can ever turn to great Account. The Navigation down the Mississipi is indeed expeditious and safe, except at the Mouth; but the return is commonly so slow, by the violence of the Current, that the Communication of that Country with the rest of the World, will always be under great Obstructions, and be carry'd on under considerable Disadvantages. But these Matters you have undoubtedly weighd and calculated, from better Information than I have had access to.

There was an Error in the page in the Errata I sent you, which I have corrected and I return you the Copy. I own, that this quick Sale of my philosophical Writings is as unexpected as the slow Sale of my historical, which are so much better calculated for common Readers. But this proves only, that factious prejudices are more prevalent in England than religious ones. I shall read over several times this new Edition; and send you a corrected Copy by some safe hand. With regard to the History, I only desire to hear from you three or four Months before you put it to the Press.

Dr Henry's History is undoubtedly liable to the Objection you mention. It will be of enormous Size; and he himself, tho‘ a laborious Man, never expects to finish it. I think also the Price he demanded exorbitant. It is however writ with Perspicuity and Propriety of Style, as I told you; but neither sprightly nor elegant; and it is judicious, but not curious: There is danger of its appearing prolix to ordinary Readers: The Subject of his next Volume will be still more uninteresting than that of his first.

I am totally detachd from all concern about public Affairs; and care not tho all the Ministry were at the Devil. This Spanish War is so enormously absurd, unjust, and unreasonable that I think it never had its parralel. If we be savd from it, it will not be owing to our own prudence, but to the determind Resolution of the King of France, who acts a very laudable part: But his Brother of Spain is as freakish and as obstinate as a Mule; and our Ministry are more afraid of the despicable London Mob than of all Europe: Had they punishd that insolent Rascal, Beckford, as he deserved; we shoud have been in no danger of a Spanish War; or rather of a general War: For Hostilities never continue limited between two Nations; but soon draw in all their Neighbours: In which case, France begins with declaring a public Bankruptcy; and we make it the third Year of the War. An Event which is indeed inevitable; but might have been delay'd, had it not been for this Quarrel about Falkland Island. You think we shall have peace: I am glad to hear it; but cannot allow myself to think, that any Chance will save Men so infatuated as our Ministry. It is a pleasure however that the Wilkites and the Bill of Rights-men are fallen into total and deservd Contempt. Their Noise is more troublesome and odious than all the Cannon that will be fird on the Atlantic.

I am here employ'd in building a small House: I mean a large House for an Author: For it is nearly as large as Mr Millar's in Pall-mall. It is situated in our new Square; where I hope to receive you, on your first Excursion to this Country. I beg my Compliments to Sir John Pringle: I think you are not likely to send us anything worth reading this Winter.

 I am Dear Strahan Yours sincerely

David Hume

Edinburgh 21 of Jany 1771.
