[. . .] I know not, whether you have heard of the late Incidents which have happened to the poor unfortunate Rousseau, who is now plainly delirious and an Object of the greatest Compassion. About three Weeks ago, he ran off, without giving the least Warning, from Mr Davenport's, carrying only his Gouvernante along with him, leaving most of his Baggage, and above thirty Guineas of Money: There was also a Letter found on his Table, abusing his Land-lord, and reproaching him as an Accomplice with me in the Project of ruining and affronting him. He took the Road towards London; and Mr Davenport begged me to find him out, and to discover how his Money and Baggage might be sent after him. He was never heard of for a fortnight; till at last a most extravagant Letter of his was delivered to the Chancellor, dated at Spalding in the County of Lincoln. He there tells the Magistrate that he was on his Road to Dover, in order to leave the Kingdom (tho' Spalding is entirely out of the Road). But he dares not proceed a Step farther, nor stir out of the House; for fear of his Enemies: He entreats therefore the Chancellor to send him an authorized Guide to conduct him; and this he demands as the last Act of Hospitality from the Nation towards him. A few days after, I learned from Mr Davenport that he had received a new Letter from Rousseau dated still at Spalding, in which he expresses great Contrition, speaks of his miserable and unhappy Condition, and marks his Intention of returning to his former Retreat at Wootton. I was then hopeful, that he had now recovered his Senses; when behold! a few hours after, General Conway received a Letter from him dated at Dover above two hundred Miles distant from Spalding: This great Journey he had made in about two days. Nothing can be more frenzical than this Letter: He supposes himself to be a Prisoner of State in the hands of the General at my Suggestion, entreats for Leave to depart the Kingdom, represents the Danger of assassinating him in private, and while he owns that he has been rendered infamous in England during his Life he fortells that his Memory will be justifyed after his Death. He says that he has composed a Volume of Memoirs, chiefly with regard to the Treatment he has met with in England, and the State of Captivity, in which he has been detained; and if the General will fairly give him Permission to depart, this Volume, which is deposited in safe hands, shall be delivered to him, and nothing ever appear to the Disgrace of the Nation or of its Ministers. He adds, as if a Ray of Reason then broke in upon his Soul, speaking of himself in the third Person: 'Il abandonne pour toujours le projet d'écrire sa vie et ses mémoires; mais qu'il ne lui échappera jamais ni de bouche ni par écrit un seul mot de plainte sur les malheurs, qui lui sont arrivés en Angleterre; qu'il ne parlera jamais de M. Hume ou qu'il n'en parlera qu'avec honneur; et que lorsqu'il sera pressé de s'expliquer sur quelques indiscrètes plaintes qui lui sont quelquefois échappées dans le fort de ses peines, il les rejettera sans mystère sur son humeur aigrie et portée à la défiance et aux ombrages par ce malheureux penchant, ouvrage de ses malheurs, et qui maintenant y met le comble.'

I inform you of all these particulars, that you may see the poor Man is absolutely lunatic and consequently cannot be the Object of any Laws or civil Punishment: He has certainly passed over to Calais; and being within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris, he will probably be seized and may be treated without any Regard to his unhappy Condition. When I was at Paris, I saw Instances of the uncommon Animosity borne against him by several Members of that illustrious Body; and I am afraid that his Appearance may again revive the same zealous Spirit among them. It appeared to me, therefore, of Importance that a Person of your Weight and Merit should be acquainted from the first hand, with the true State of the Case; and that the Enemies of this unhappy Man may have their Vengeance fully satiated by his past Misfortunes, and may no longer aggravate Afflictions too heavy to be borne. I have spoke to Mr de Guerchy that he may represent Matters in this Light if he writes any thing concerning them to his Court: This letter I have sent under a flying Seal to M. de Montigny, in case you should have left Paris and gone to your Intendance. Either you or he will inform the President de Malesherbes. M. de Trudaine will join his good Offices; and I doubt not but your united Endeavours added to the plain Reason of the Case woud procure him Security. If he coud be settled in any safe and quiet Retreat, under a discreet Keeper, he has wherewithall to bear all Charges for his Support: He has, if I conjecture right, about a hundred pounds a Year of his own: The King of England has granted him lately a hundred a Year more, and some Person might be found in a private Place in France who from regard to his Genius wou'd treat him tenderly and keep him from doing any harm either to himself or others. It would be proper that his Gouvernante shoud enter into the Scheme, tho' I find that Mr Davenport had entertained no very advantageous Idea of her Character or Conduct while they lived with him. But he has been accustomed to her and she knows better to humour him than any other Person can do. It is suspected that she has nourished all his Chimeras in order to chace him out of a Country where having no Person to speak to, she tired most desperatly. I beg you to believe me with the most sincere Attachment, My Dear Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servt

David Hume
