Compiègne 6 July, 1764.

I know not how it came into my head, dear Madam, that you was to write to me first, after my arrival in this place; whether because you said so, or because I wished it, or because I thought it requisite, in order to assure me that I was not troublesome by my frequent and long letters. Certain it is, that I have had a great inclination for some days past to pay my addresses to you, but have restrained myself, from reason, as I imagined, but really I believe from pride and humour, surely the most misplaced in the world. But it has happened very luckily, that the Maréchale de Mirepoix has given me a commission for you, which saves my countenance, and affords me a plausible pretence for writing; and I believe really, without giving myself too great airs of fortitude, that, were it not for so great a handle, I could have held out two or three days longer at the least. For you must not imagine, but I make advantage of the ten leagues of interval that lie between us, and feel already some progress in the noble resolution I have formed of forgetting you entirely before the end of summer.

But if I succeed in this project, I shall have all the glory to myself, and shall owe nothing to the pleasure and amusements of the Court.

We live in a kind of solitude and retirement at Compiegne; at least I do, who, having nothing but a few general acquaintance at Court, and not caring to make more, have given myself up almost entirely to study and retreat. You cannot imagine, Madam, with what pleasure I return as it were to my natural element, and what satisfaction I enjoy in reading and musing, and sauntering, amid the agreeable scenes that surround me. But yes, you can easily enough imagine it; you have yourself formed the same resolution: you are determined this summer to tie the broken thread of your studies and literary amusements. If you have been so happy as to execute your purpose, you are almost in the same state as myself, and are at present wandering along the banks of the same beautiful river, perhaps with the same books in your hand, a Racine, I suppose, or a Virgil, and despise all other pleasure and amusement. Alas! why am I not so near you, that I could see you for half an hour a day, and confer with you on these subjects?

But this ejaculation, methinks, does not lead me directly in my purposed road, of forgetting you. It is a short digression, which is soon over: and that I may return to the right path, I shall give you some account of the state of the Court; I mean, the exterior face of it; for I know no more; and if I did, I am become so great a politician, that nothing should make me reveal it. The King divides his evenings every week after the following manner: one he gives to the public, when he sups at the grand convent: two he passes with his own family: two in a society of men: and to make himself amends, two he passes with ladies, Madame de Grammont, usually, Madame de Mirepoix, and Madame de Beauvau. This last Princess passed three evenings in this manner at the Hermitage immediately before her departure, which was on Monday last. I think her absence a great loss to that society: I am so presumptuous as to think it one to myself. I found her as obliging and as friendly as if she had never conversed with kings, and never were a politician. I really doubt much of her talent for politics. Pray what is your opinion? Is she qualified, otherwise than by having great sense and an agreeable conversation, to make progress in the road to favour? And are not these qualities rather an encumbrance to her? I have met her once or twice, with another lady, in whose favour I am much prepossessed: she seems agreeable, well behaved, judicious, a great reader, speaks as if she had sentiment, and was superior to the vulgar train of amusements. I should have been willing, notwithstanding my present love of solitude, to have cultivated an acquaintance with her, but she did not say any thing so obliging to me as to give me encouragement. Would you conjecture that I mean the Countess of Tessé? I know not whether you are acquainted with that lady. But I shall never have done with this idle train of conversation; and therefore, to cut things short, I kiss your hands most humbly and devoutly, and bid you Adieu.

P.S.

I had almost forgot the Maréchale's commission. It is, that she is to be at Paris on Tuesday next, in order to stay till Sunday: she would be glad to see you there, especially as I told her, that you intended to be in town about the same time, for the same purpose, of paying a visit to the Maréchale de Luxembourg.
