Dear Doctor

The Case of poor Blacklocke gives me great Distress; and so much the more, as, I am afraid, it is not in the Power of any human Being to relieve him: His unhappiness seems to proceed from the Infirmity of his Body and the Delicacy, not to say, Weakness of his Mind. He has wrote to me Letters, full of the Bitterest Anguish, on account of the Treatment he meets with from his Parishioners: I believe it is not good; but it is impossible not to think it exaggerated by his Imagination; and I am of your Opinion, that the same Persecution, partly real, partly imaginary, woud follow him in every other Settlement. I had concerted with Baron Mure a very likely Scheme for his Removal; but to what purpose wou'd this Serve, if the same Complaints must return in his new Situation? I agree with you, that a small Pension, could it be obtain'd, might bestow on him some Degree of Tranquillity; but how to obtain it, I profess I do not know, as I suppose you will readily believe. That Door was never very wide for men of Letters; and is become still narrower than ever.

Please make my Compliments to Dr Wight. By the bye, I din'd at the French Ambassador's with a foreign Gentleman, who told me, that he had met with you & Dr Wight last Summer in Yorkshire. He had taken down your Names very carefully in his Pocket Book; and he said you were des braves gens, which I readily agreed to.

We leave this Place in about three Weeks, and I shall probably pass some Years at Paris in a Situation, which will, or certainly ought to be very agreeable to me. The chief Circumstance is, that nothing can be more estimable than the Character, nor more amiable than the Manners of both Lord & Lady Hertford; and I also hear Lord Beauchamp, who is now at Paris, spoke of as the most promising young Nobleman in England. My Fortune receives a certain & great Addition: I go to a Place of the World which I have always admird the most; and it is not easy to imagine a Reception better than I have reason to expect. What then can be wanting to my Happiness? I hope, nothing; or if any thing, it will only be an Age & Temper better adapted to Vanity & Dissipation.

I beg of you to embrace Mrs Carlysle in my Name, and to assure her of my sincere Respects. I write no Politics, having now become a Politician. Please address yourself to John Hume for Information on that head. Let him explain to you his Patron's Situation!!!! Pray is there any body such an Idiot at present as to be a Partizan of the Douglas? I am dear Dr

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

Lisle Street Leicester Fields 15 Septr 1763.
