20th Nov. 1754.

My Lord,

Reflecting on the conversation which I had the honour to have with your Lordship yesterday, I remember that your Lordship asked whether I insisted that these three books must be in the Library? I believe I answered that the books were indifferent to me, and that being once expelled I did not see how they could be restored except by being bought anew. This answer was the effect of precipitation and inadvertence. I take this opportunity of retracting it; that if your Lordship be so good as to interpose your authority in this affair, you may be informed of the grounds on which I conceive the matter to stand. The expelling these books I could conceive in no other light than as an insult on me, which nothing can repair but the re-instating them. Mr Wedderburn and Mr Miller, who certainly had no bad intentions, will not, I hope, regard my insisting on this point as any insult on them. And if any of the Curators had bad intentions, which I hope they had not, there cannot in the world be a more rejoicing spectacle, nor one more agreeable to the generality of mankind, than to see insolence and malice thrown in the dirt. These qualities, which are always dirty, must in that case appear doubly so.

There is a particular kind of insolence which is more provoking as it is meaner than any other, 'tis the Insolence of Office, which our great poet mentions as sufficient to make those who are so unhappy as to suffer by it, seek even a voluntary death rather than submit to it. I presume it is chance, not design, which has exposed some of the Curators to the reproach of this vice. But I am sure no quality will be more disagreeable to your Lordship, for if I may judge by the affable manner in which you received me, your late promotion will operate no such effect upon you.

As to the three books themselves, your Lordship has little leizure from more grave and important occupations to read them; but this I will venture to justify before any literary society in Europe, that if every book not superior in merit to La Fontaine be expelled the Library, I shall engage to carry away all that remains in my pocket. I know not indeed if any will remain except our fifty pound Bible, which is too bulky for me to carry away. If all worse than Bussi Rabutin, or Crebillon, be expelled, I shall engage that a couple of porters will do the office. By the bye, Bussi Rabutin contains no bawdy at all, though if it did, I see not that it would be a whit the worse. For I know not a more agreeable subject both for books and conversation, if executed with decency and ingenuity. I can presume, without intending the least offence, that as the glass circulates at your Lordship's table, this topic of conversation will sometimes steal in, provided always there be no ministers present. And even some of these reverend gentlemen I have seen not to dislike the subject. I hope your Lordship will excuse this freedom, and believe me to be, with great regard, My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble servant,

David Hume.
