Paris 5 Nov 1765

Dear Smith

I have been whirled about lately in a strange Manner; but besides that none of the Revolutions have ever threatend me much, or been able to give me a Moment's Anxiety, all has ended very happily and to my wish.... Nothing coud be more to my Mind: I have now Opulence & Liberty: The last formerly renderd me content: Both together must do so, as far as the Encrease of Years will permit.

I stay here till the Arrival of the Duke of Richmond, which will be sometime in October; after which I must soon return to England: I shall set out thence in a Visit to Ireland. I decline all farther Engagements. Lord Hertford wrote me, that the Office of Usher to the House of Commons in Ireland commonly yielded 900 during a Session: He coud get one to serve for 300 and destind the rest for me, if I pleas'd: But I have refusd this Emolument, because I woud not run into the Ways of the World and catch at Profit from all hands. I am sure you approve of my Philosophy.

As a new Vexation to temper my good Fortune, I am much in Perplexity about fixing the Place of my future Abode for Life. Paris is the most agreeable Town in Europe, and suits me best; but it is a foreign Country. London is the Capital of my own Country; but it never pleasd me much. Letters are there held in no honour: Scotsmen are hated: Superstition and Ignorance gain Ground daily. Edinburgh has many Objections & many Allurements. My present Mind, this Forenoon the fifth of September, is to return to France. I am much pressd here to accept of Offers, which woud contribute to my agreeable Living, but might encroach on my Independance, by making me enter into Engagements with Princes & great Lords & Ladies. Pray give me your Judgement.

I regreat much I shall not see you. I have been looking for you every day these three Months. Your Satisfaction in your Pupil gives me equal Satisfaction.

You must direct to me under the Title of Chargé des Affaires d'Angleterre a la Cour de France, without anything farther.

I cannot by the Post enter into a Detail of our late strange Revolutions: But it is suspected, that the Accession of Mr Pit will be necessary to give Stability to the present Ministry.

The Duke of Richmond coud not appoint me Secretary.

He coud appoint none but his Brother, without affronting Sir Charles Bunbury, his Brother in law, who had been rejected by Lord Hertford. Yours most sincerely

David Hume
