Edinburgh 2d December, 1766.

I have had one of your letters, dear Madam, too long before me unanswered. I have been of late in a way of life somewhat unsettled: I came down to visit my friends here and put some affairs in order; but find myself so entangled with friends and affairs, that I know not when I shall get rid of them. I agree heartily to what you say, when you wish you had not allowed me to depart from Paris: it was not so necessary as I imagined to depart from it; and notwithstanding my inclination, I find unexpected difficulties in returning. I am confined here for the greater part of this winter.

I had a letter from Miss Becket, wrote by your order, concerning a Negro, who called himself son to an African king at Annamaboüe. I wrote to a gentleman who had been governor of an English fort on that coast; and having transmitted him Miss Becket's letter, desired him to tell the truth of the matter. His answer only came to me lately. He says, that it is an abuse to call any of these miserable heads of tribes, kings; but even allowing them to be such, the person in question is not the son of a king; his mother only, after his birth, was married to a king, that is, was one in fifty slaves, whom he lay with, when his caprice led him. His black Majesty gave his son-in-law as a pledge to one Hamilton, captain of a trading vessel on that coast, and received some goods in exchange. As he afterwards refused to ransom the young man, Captain Hamilton had a right to do as he did: he carried him off, and sold him with the rest of his slaves at Barbadoes. He was there found by a projecting fellow, one Creighton, or Creiton, a surgeon, who purchased him, brought him over to London, passed him for the son of a king, and got a small pension for his subsistence. The pension was afterwards withdrawn, and the young man sent back to his own country. This is the only story of note, which has passed of late years on the coast of Annamaboüe. The person you mean, either is this young man, or desires to pass himself for such. The time, the place, and some circumstances of his adventures, all concur: but as far as I can learn, he never had any thing to do with the Secretary of the Royal Society.

Thanks to God, my affair with Rousseau is now finally and totally at an end, at least on my part: for I never surely shall publish another line on that subject. It was with infinite reluctance I consented to the last publication. I lay my account that many people will condemn me for it, and will question the propriety or necessity of it: but if I had not published, many people would have condemned me as a calumniator, and as a treacherous and false friend. There is no comparison between these species of blame; and I underwent the one, to save me from the other.

There is a concluding circumstance in this affair, which has given me some vexation: you are named, as well as Madame de Verdelin, in the English translation. I sent up to a bookseller in London copies of my original letters, that they might be inserted in the English translation. I had erased your name; but it seems not so, but that it was legible; and it is accordingly printed. The bookseller, the printer, and the compositor, all throw the blame on each other, for this accident. I ask you ten thousand pardons: but as I had the delicacy on your account to erase your name even from the manuscript copy you sent over to my friends at Paris; you may easily believe, that I would never willingly have allowed it to be printed contrary to your orders.

A few posts ago I received a very curious letter from a Swiss gentleman, who resides in London, but whom I never either saw or heard of before: his name is Deyverdun, and he calls himself a native of Lausanne. He says, that he was extremely surprized to find that Rousseau had, in page 85–86, and in page 92–96, accused me for being the author or accomplice of the two libels wrote against him; and he says, with regard to the last, that he has an intimate and a certain conviction of it: I was not able to give any other answer, than that I had never so much as seen either of these pretended libels. Now the Swiss gentleman tells me, that he himself was the author of them; and gives me leave to publish his letter for that purpose to the whole world. But my aversion to farther publications on that head is so great, that I shall not give this letter to the press. I have only sent a copy of it to Mr Davenport, to be delivered to Rousseau. If he has the least remains of a sentiment of honour, he must fall on his face before me, upon the perusal of this letter.

I have not heard any thing, of a long time, that has given me more pleasure than what you write me, that you are perfectly satisfied with the character and conduct of your son. It is a delicious sentiment, and will be a consolation to you through life. Adieu, my dear friend: my regrets for parting with you are as lively as they were at the first moment. Please to direct to me as before — to the care of Mr Coutts, banker, in the Strand, London.
