Dear Sir

On seeing me begin so early, you will certainly expect that I shall prove either a very good or a bad Correspondent. But I beg you to consider, that this is the only Letter you will receive from me, that will cost you nothing, & to which you are, therefore, oblig'd to give some Indulgence. You shou'd excuse it, did it contain no more, than that we arriv'd safe in this Place. Mr Wilson, indeed, who sat next me in the Coach, complain'd grievously, at every Jolt we receiv'd, of the enormous Weight, that was thrown on his little Carcass, & swears, that all his Body, especially his Shoulders, are as black as his Beard; and he has beg'd me fifty times to put any thing, were it Treason, to the Press, & only spare him. But as this is only one Jest of a thousand, to which we fat People are expos'd, I have born it with great Patience: tho I confess, it has frequently excited my Admiration, why fat People shou'd be so much the Object of Mirth, rather than lean, & am at a Loss, whether to ascribe it to the Cowardice or Benevolence of Mankind. Perhaps, we are not commonly so witty as you, & consequently Men think they will have an easy Conquest in attacking us. Perhaps, we are better naturd, & Men think they run no Risque of offending us. I leave this as a Problem for you to discuss.

There is a Favour I intended to have askt of you when I was in London; but was hinder'd, partly by the Want of Opportunity, partly by the pudor malus. You must know, that Andrew Millar is printing a new Edition of certain Essays, that have been ascrib'd to me; and as I threw out some, that seem'd frivolous & finical, I was resolv'd to supply their Place by others, that shou'd be more instructive. One is against the original Contract, the System of the Whigs, another against passive Obedience, the System of the Tories: A third upon the Protestant Succession, where I suppose a Man to deliberate, before the Establishment of that Succession, which Family he shou'd adhere to, & to weigh the Advantages & Disadvantages of each. I hope I have examin'd this Question as coolly & impartially as if I were remov'd a thousand Years from the present Period: But this is what some People think extremely dangerous, & sufficient, not only to ruin me for ever, but also throw some Reflection on all my Friends, particularly those with whom I am connected at present. I have wrote to Millar to send you the Sheets and I hereby make you entire Master to dispose of this last Essay as you think proper. I made Oswald Master in the same manner, & he gave me his Approbation, & thought none but Fools cou'd be offended at my Candour: And indeed, were I alone concernd, I have Courage enough to acquiesce in his Verdict. I have established it as a Maxim never to pay Court to my Superiors by any of my Writings; but tis needless to offend them, especially where my Sentiments might by any man of Sense be thought to throw a Reflection on others, to whom I lye under the greatest Obligations. If you esteem it altogether improper to print this Essay, keep this copy of it till I see you, it being the only one I have. I have desir'd you to read the other two, not that I have any Scruple with regard to them; but that I hope the Candour, which you'll see run thro the whole, may serve as an Atonement for any Liberties I use in the last. I do not conceal my great Desire, that you may find it innocent: Tho' I beg of you to act according to your Judgement, without Favour & without Mercy.

I have also order'd the Bookseller to send you two Copies of the whole after they are printed: One I desire you to accept of as a Mark of my Regard; and another to present, in my Name, to the Duke of Argyle. His Grace is oblig'd to me, that I have not dedicated them to him, & put him out of Countenance, by the usual Fawning & Flattery of Authors. He is also oblig'd to me, that having once had the Honour of being introducd to him, I have not incumber'd his Levees, but have left him the free Disposal of all his Favours to Voters, & Cabballers, & Declaimers, & Spies, & such other useful People. I have a Regard for his Grace, & desire this Trifle may be considerd as a Present, not to the Duke of Argyle, but to Archbald Campbell, who is undoubtedly a Man of Sense & Learning.

If Millar do not immediatly send you these Papers, pray send your Servant for them. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Harwich. 13th of February 1748.
