[le 15 novembre 1766]



I cannot sufficiently express, My Dear Sir, all the Acknowledgements, which I owe you, for the Pains you have taken in translating a Work, which so little merited your Attention or the Attention of the public. It is done entirely to my Satisfaction; and the Introduction in particular is wrote with great Prudence & Discretion, in every point except where your Partiality to me appears too strongly. I accept of it, however, very willingly as a Pledge of your Friendship. You and M. Dalembert did well in softening some Expressions, especially in the Notes; and I shall take care to follow these Corrections in the English Edition. My Paper, indeed, was not wrote for the public Eye; and nothing but a Train of unforseen Accidents cou'd have engaged me to give it to the Press. I am not surprized, that those, who do not consider nor weigh those Circumstances, shou'd blame this Appeal to the Public; but it is certain, that, if I had persevered in keeping Silence, I shou'd have passed for the guilty Person, and those very People, who blame me at present, wou'd,  with the Appearance of Reason, have thrown a much greater Blame upon me. This whole Adventure I must regard as a Misfortune in my Life, and yet even after all is past, when it is easy to correct any Errors, I am not sensible, that I can accuse myself of any Imprudence; except in accepting of this Man when he threw himself into my Arms: And yet it wou'd then have appeared cruel to refuse him. I am excusable for not expecting to meet with such a Prodigy of Pride and Ferocity, because such a one never before existed. But after he had declared War against me in so violent a Manner, it cou'd not have been prudent in me to keep Silence towards my Friends, and to wait till he shou'd find a proper time to stab my Reputation. From my Friends, the Affair passed to the Public, who interested themselves more in a private Story, than it was possible to imagine, and rendered it quite necessary to lay the whole before them. Yet after all, if any one be pleased to think, that by greater Prudence I cou'd have avoided this disagreeable Extremity, I am very willing to submit: It is not surely the first Imprudence I have been guilty of.



I agree with you, that Rousseau will probably reply, and yet it is very difficult to imagine what he can possibly say, after having already entered into so long and minute and tedious a Detail. It will be ridiculous for him to bring out any new Facts of Consequence, which he may pretend to have omitted, after he has already mentioned the Looks of my Land-ladies and my own, as Grounds of Complaint. But whatever he may say, I am resolute to keep an absolute Silence for the rest of my Life, and allow everyone to entertain what Opinion they please with regard to this Story. I fancy the only Dispute  in the World will be whether Rousseau is more wicked or mad, or whether he be not both in nearly equal proportions. You say, that he has Enthusiasts, who still pretend to excuse him. Do they pretend then, that Dalembert, Horace Walpole, and I entered into a Conspiracy against him to lead him into England, and ruin him, by settling him in a most commodious and agreeable Manner, and by doubling his Income? For if this be not asserted, how can his outrageous Behaviour towards me admit of any Apology?



Cou'd I look on Rousseau as one of the Classics of your Language, I shou'd imagine, that this Story, silly as it is, might go to Posterity, and interest them as much as it has done our Contemporaries: But really his Writings are so full of Extravagance, that I cannot believe their Eloquence alone will be able to support them. He has a Suspicion himself, that this is the Case: I shall tell you the Story because I think it for his Credit: For otherwise I wou'd not repeat any thing that passed between us during the time of our Familiarity. When we were on the Road, he told me, that he was resolved to improve himself in English: and as he heard, that there were two English Translations of his Emile; he wou'd procure them,  he said, & read them and compare them: His Knowledge of the Subject wou'd facilitate his Advances in the Language. Immediately on our Arrival, I  procured the Books for him. He kept them two or three days, and then returned them, by telling me, that they cou'd be of no Use to him. He had not patience, he said, to read them; he was in the same Case with regard to the Original and all his other Writings, which, after their Publication, he cou'd never take into his hand without Disgust. It is strange, I reply'd, that Pieces so much admired for their Eloquence cou'd give no Satisfaction to their Author: Why! said he, with regard to their Style & Eloquence, I am not altogether dissatisfy'd with them; but I dread always qu'ils pechent par le fond; and that their Lustre is only the Blaze of a day.



I am sensible of your great Partiality & Friendship, in offering to become my Translator for any Work, which I may hereafter give to the Public: Surely I cou'd not desire to be introduced to foreign Countries in a more advantageous Manner, than I shou'd be by your elegant Pen. But my Scritoire is at present exhausted, and I have no Prospect of filling it: I am even unsettled as to my Views of establishing myself; and I indulge myself in the humour of living from day to day, partly in Reading, partly in Company, partly in Indolence. I am afraid, that you indulge yourself too much in this last Enjoyment: Otherwise, why do you, who have Taste & Knowlege in so eminent a Degree, desire to translate the Works of any other Person, and not rather give some original Performance to the Public? You say, perhaps, that the Constraints, under which you labour in France, discourages you; and you envy the Liberty of England. But be assured, that the Indifference and I may say, Barbarism of England is more discouraging than all the Persecutions of France, which sometimes tend only to give a Lustre to an Author, and to render him more interesting.



I beg my Compliments to all my Friends of your Society: They may be assured that I shall never give up the Thoughts of revisiting them but with my Life. I am with the greatest Sincerity My Dear Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh [1] 5 of November 1766
