Edinburgh 22 May, 1770.

Dear Sir

A few days ago, Lord Home told me, that, in consequence of a new Arrangement of his Affairs, he shou'd stand in need of a large Sum of Money, which he propos'd to bring from England at lower than legal Interest; and he hop'd his Friend, Strahan, woud be able to assist him on that Occasion. I said, that, tho' Mr Strahan was a rich Man, yet he had such great Enterprizes in hand, that I did not believe he had much ready Money to lend. My Lord replyed, that he expected more your good Offices than your Money, and that he was too well acquainted with the Opinion, entertained by the World of his Situation, to hope for borrowing Money at low Interest upon his own Security: But that Mr Hay of Drumelzier and Mr Gavin of Langtoun propos'd to bind with him: Upon which he took my Promise, that I shoud write to you upon the Subject. It is certain that Mr Hay is a Man of above 4000 pounds a year clear, and Mr Gavin above 5000; and both of them frugal Men, so that there cannot be better Security in Britain; and that they intend to bind with him, My Lord's Writer, who is a man of Character, assur'd me. I think, therefore, that the Scheme is far from being inadmissible. I wish really, (as you no doubt do yourself) that you coud assist him on this Occasion; but in all cases, I must beg the favour of you to write me an ostensible Letter, which may satisfy him that I have not neglected his Request.

I find, that your great Reluctance to write me on a certain Subject proceeds from your Unwillingness to retract every thing that you have been telling me these seven Years: But your silence tells me the Truth more strongly than any thing you can say. Besides, I know not why you shoud have a Reluctance to retract. What you told me was for a good End, in order to excite my Industry, which might be of Advantage both to myself and the Proprietors of the former Volumes. And if there has been any Misconduct with regard to the Octavo Edition, you are entirely innocent of it. So that I see not any Reason why I may not now be told the Truth; especially as you see, that I am fully determind never to continue my History, and have indeed put it entirely out of my power by retiring to this Country, for the rest of my Life. However, this is as you think proper: Only, it is needless for Mr Cadel to give me Accounts, which are presently refuted by the Event. I say this without the least resentment against him, who is a very obliging, and I believe a very honest man.

Nothing coud be more agreeable than your political Intelligence. I have always said, without Flattery, that you may give Instructions to Statesmen. We are very happy, that this Session is got over without any notable disaster. Government has, I believe, gain'd Strength; tho' not much Authority nor Character by its long suffering and forbearance. But the Request of the Country Gentlemen, who joind them, was a very plausible Motive; besides, I am told, that their Lawyers, particularly Lord Mansfield, deserted them on this Occasion. But these are Matters that very little concern me; and except from Indignation at so much abominable Insolence, Calumny, Lyes, and Folly, I know not why I shoud trouble my head about them: These Objects too, being at a distance, affect me the less. We are happily in this Country united as in a national Cause, which indeed it has become, in some measure, by the Virulence of this detestable Faction.

We expect to see Lady Grant soon in this Country; and I suppose, that I must pay my Respects to her Ladyship. I intend to give her Her Ladyship very often, that she may at least have some Pennyworths for her Money.

I suppose that the Edition of my Essays in Twelves is now finishd or nearly so. As soon as it is finishd, pray, put Mr Cadel in mind to send me six Copies in any Parcel to Balfour or Kincaid.

 I am Dear Strahan Yours sincerely

David Hume.

P.S. Please to tell Mr. Cadel that if a Volume of the Dictionaire de Commerce comes over for me from Paris, he pay a Guinea for it, which I shall refund him.
