Dear Madam

Our Friend, at last, pluckt up a resolution, & has ventur'd on that dangerous encounter. He went off on Monday morning; and this is the first action of his life, wherein he has engag'd himself without being able to compute exactly the consequences. But what Arithmetic will serve to fix the proportion betwixt good & bad Wives, & rate the different classes of each? Sir Isaac Newton himself, who cou'd measure the courses of the Planets, and weigh the Earth as in a pair of scales, even he had not Algebra enough to reduce that amiable Part of our species to a just equation: and they are the only heavenly bodies, whose orbits are as yet uncertain.

If you think yourself too grave a Matron to have this florid part of the speech addrest to you, pray lend it to the Collector, & he will direct it to Miss Nancy.

Since my Brother's departure, Katty & I have been computing in our turn; and the result of our deliberation is, that we are to take up house in Berwick, where if Arithmetic & Frugality dont deceive us (& they are pretty certain Arts) we shall be able, after providing for Hunger, Warmth, & cleanliness, to keep a stock in reserve, which we may afterwards turn either to the purposes of hoarding, Luxury or charity. But I have declar'd beforehand, against the first. I can easily guess which of the other two, you and Mr Dysart will be most favourable to. But we reject your Judgement. For nothing blinds one so much as inveterate Habits.

My Compliments to his Sollicitorship. Unfortunately, I have not a horse at present to carry my fat carcass to pay its respects to his superior Obesity. But if he finds travelling requisite either for his health or [the] Captains, we shall be glad to entertain him here, as long as we can do it at anothers expence: In hopes, we shall soon be able to do it at our own.

Pray tell the Sollicitor, that I have been reading lately in an old Author called Strabo, that in some cities of ancient Gaul, there was a fixt legal standard establish'd for corpulency, & that the Senate kept a measure, beyond which, if any Belly presum'd to encrease, the Proprietor of that Belly was oblig'd to pay a fine to the Public, proportionable to its rotundity. Ill wou'd it fare with his Worship & I, if such a law shou'd pass our Parliament. For I am afraid we are already got beyond the statute.

I wonder, indeed, no Harpy of the Treasury has ever thought of this method of raising money. Taxes on Luxury are always most approv'd of: and no one will say, that the carrying about a portly Belly is of any use or Necessity. Tis a mere superfluous ornament and is a proof too, that its Proprietor enjoys greater plenty than he puts to a good use: and therefore, 'tis fit to reduce him to a level with his fellow-subjects by Taxes & impositions.

As the lean people are the most active, unquiet, & ambitious, they every where govern the world, & may certainly oppress their antagonists whenever they please. Heaven forbid that Whig & Tory shou'd ever be abolish'd: For then the Nation might be split into Fat and Lean & our Faction, I am afraid, wou'd be in piteous taking. The only comfort is, if they opprest us very much, we shou'd at last change sides with them.

Besides, who knows, if a tax were impos'd on Fatness, but some jealous Divine might pretend, that the Church was in danger.

I cannot but bless the memory of Julius Caesar, for the great esteem he exprest for Fat men, and his aversion to lean ones. All the World allows, That that Emperor was the greatest Genius that ever was; and the greatest Judge of mankind.

But I shou'd ask your Pardon, Dear Madam, for this long dissertation on Fatness & Leanness, in which you are no way concern'd. For you are neither Fat nor lean; and may indeed be denominated an arrant Trimmer. But this letter may all be read to the Sollicitor. For it contains nothing, that need be a secret to him. On the contrary, I hope he will profit by the example; & were I near him, I shou'd endeavour to prove as good an encourager as in this other instance. What can the man be afraid of? The Mayor of London had more courage, who defy'd the Hare.

But I am resolv'd some time to conclude: by putting a grave Epilogue to a Farce, and telling you a real, serious truth; That I am with great esteem,

Dear Madam Your most obedient humble Servant 
David Hume.



Ninewells March 19 
1751.



Pray let the Sollicitor tell Frank that he is a bad Correspondent, the only way in which he can be a bad one, by his silence.
