London, 28th of May 1767.

Dear Sir:



The letter of poor Rousseau to the general was so far obliging that it considered him as only led astray by evil council: but it still supposed him to be engaged in the conspiracy against him; and he even insinuates that Mr. Conway may be induced to cut his throat in private, which, he says, will not be a safe attempt, considering that he is unhappily but too well known, and enquiries will be made after him if he disappear. In short, he is plainly and throughly mad. I have used all my persuasion with Monsieur de Guerchy to represent him in that light to his court; I have wrote to several of my friends in Paris, and represented him as an object of compassion rather than of anger: yet I am afraid that such is the rage of bigots, that he may be seized, and the law put in execution against him. I hope he may possibly pass disguised and concealed through France. But whither will he go? If to Geneva, as is probable, it will be worse for him; for both parties are there in a rage against him. It was unlucky he left Wootton, or did not return to it; for he ought really, for his good, to be, what he imagines himself, a captive; and he could not have fallen into the hands of a person more prudent and humane than yourself.



As to his pension, it will undoubtedly be reserved to him; but we are at a loss to know to whom it can be paid, he never gave any directions about the matter, as you know, since he fled from Wootton before you could give him intelligence of my last letter. But he will be heard of in some part of the world, and must at last fall under some guidance and direction, in which case, it is probable, his Majesty will continue his bounty to him, in order to be a relief to him in his present unhappy condition.



He said to General Conway that he had wrote his memoirs, and had deposited them in safe hands, who would deliver them up to the general in case he would grant him his liberty. It appears that the chief object of them is to give a relation of the treatment he met with in England; and they seem to be a satire on the ministers and people: neither of whom he can know any thing about. I suppose they will be published.



I cannot tell the date of his letter to the chancellor, but it came to hand on Friday the 15th: it had probably been wrote on the 13th.



I wish you had an amanuensis, for I should be sorry to give you the trouble of copying his letters. I should send you a copy of his to the general, but it is very long; and, besides, Mr. Conway scruples to give a copy, till it be quite determined, as he says, whether he be quite mad or only whimsical. But the affair appears very clear to me, and, I suppose, to you also.



I hope your gout is now a good deal easier.

I am, dear Sir, your most obedient humble servant,

David Hume



P.S. Mr. Fitzherbert had in his hands Rousseau's letter to the chancellor.
