Dear Sir

To show you that I am not such an Affecter of Singularity as to entertain Prejudices against Ministers of State, I have resolv'd to congratulate you on your Return to Power, and to express my Wishes, that, both for your Sake and the Public's your Ministry, & that of your Friends, may be more durable than it was before. We even hope it will, tho' the strange motley Composition which it consists of, gives us some Apprehensions. However, we are glad to find, from past Experience, that you can neither rise nor fall, without Credit & Reputation. You know that, according to the whimsical way of thinking in this Country, it is more difficult to rise than fall with Reputation.

I suppose that, by this time, you have undoubtedly read & admir'd the wonderful Production of the Epigoniad, and that you have so much Love for Arts, & for your native Country, as to be very industrious in propagating the Fame of it. It is certainly a most singular Production, full of Sublimity & Genius, adorn'd by a noble, harmonious, forcible, & even correct versification. We generally think the Story deficient & uninteresting; but perhaps the new Fancy of crossing the Invention of all modern Romance Writers may make some Atonement, and even bestow an Air of Novelty on the Imitation of Homer. As I cannot but hope that this Work will soon become a Subject of Conversation in London, I shall take this Opportunity of supplying you with some Anecdotes with regard to the Author, besides such as you already know, of his being a very worthy & a very entertaining man, adorn'd with all that Simplicity of Manners, so common to great Men, & even with some of that Rusticity & Negligence which serve to abate that Envy to which they are so much expos'd.

You know he is a Farmer's Son, in the Neighbourhood of this Town, where there are a great Number of Pigeon Houses. The Farmers are very much infested with the Pigeons, and Wilkie's Father planted him often as a Scarecrow (an Office for which he is well qualify'd) in the Midst of his Fields of Wheat. It was in this Situation that he confesses he first conceiv'd the Design of his Epic Poem, and even executed Part of it. He carry'd out his Homer with him, together with a Table, & Pen & Ink, & a great rusty Gun. He compos'd & wrote two or three Lines, till a Flock of Pigeons settled in the Field, then rose up, ran towards them, & fir'd at them; return'd again to his former Station, & added a Rhyme or two more, till he met with a fresh Interruption.

Two or three Years ago, Jemmy Russel put a very pleasant Trick on an English Physician, one Dr Roebuck, who was travelling in this Country. Russel carry'd him out one day on horseback to see the Outlets of the Town, and purposely led him by Wilkie's Farm. He saw the Bard at a small Distance sowing his Corn, with a Sheet about his Shoulders, all besmear'd with Dirt & Sweat, with a Coat & Visage entirely proportion'd to his Occupation. Russel says to his Companion, Here is a Fellow, a Peasant, with whom I have some Business: Let us call him. He made a Sign, & Wilkie came to them. Some Questions were ask'd him with regard to the Season, to his Farm & Husbandry, which he readily answer'd; but soon took an Opportunity of making a Digression to the Greek Poets, and enlarging on that Branch of Literature. Dr. Roebuck, who had scarce understood his rustic English, or rather his broad Scotch, immediatly comprehended him, for his Greek was admirable: And on leaving him, he coud not forbear expressing the highest Admiration to Russel, that a Clown, a Rustic, a mere Hind, such as he saw this Fellow was, shou'd be possest of so much Erudition. Is it usual, says he, for your Peasants in Scotland to read the Greek Poets? O yes, replies Russel, very coolly, we have long Winter Evenings; and in what can they then employ themselves better, than in reading the Greek Poets? Roebuck left the Country in a full Perswasion that there are at least a dozen Farmers in every Parish who read Homer, Hesiod, & Sophocles, every Winter Evening, to their Families; and, if ever he writes an Account of his Travels, it is likely he will not omit so curious a Circumstance.

Wilkie is now a settled Minister at Ratho, within four Miles of the Town: He possesses about 80 or 90£ a year, which he esteems exorbitant Riches. Formerly, when he had only 20£, as Helper, he said that he coud not conceive what Article, either of human Convenience or Pleasure, he was deficient in: Nor what any man coud mean by desiring more Money. He possesses several Branches of Erudition, besides the Greek Poets; and, particularly, is a very profound Geometrician, a Science commonly very incompatible with the lively Imagination of a Poet. He has even made some new Discoveries in that Science; and he told me, that, when a young Man, he threw Cross & Pile, whether he wou'd devote himself chiefly to Mathematics or to Poetry, & fears that he rather crost the Bent of his Genius in taking to the latter. Yet this man, who has compos'd the second Epic Poem in our Language understands so little of Orthography, that, regularly thro' the whole Poem, he always spelt the Word yield in this manner, ealde; and I had great Difficulty to convince him of his Mistake.

I fancy our Friend Robertson will be able to publish his History next Winter. You are sufficiently acquainted with the Merit of that Work; and really it is admirable how many Men of Genius this Country produces at present. Is it not strange that, at a time when we have lost our Princes, our Parliaments, our independent Government, even the Presence of our chief Nobility, are unhappy, in our Accent & Pronunciation, speak a very corrupt Dialect of the Tongue which we make use of; is it not strange, I say, that, in these Circumstances, we shou'd really be the People most distinguish'd for Literature in Europe?

Having spoke so much to Mr Elliot, the Man of Letters, you must now allow me to say a few Words to Mr Elliot, the Lord of the Admiralty. There is a Cousin german of mine, Alexander Edgar, who is a Midshipman in the Vestal, off Harwich, and has past his Trials, above four Months ago, for a Lieutenancy. He always behav'd well in all his Service, which has been very long & almost from his Infancy; he has had the good Will, & even Friendship, of all his Captains; is modest, sober, frugal, & attentive, & very deserving of Promotion. I recommended him to Mr Oswald, who always protected him, but can no longer be of Service to him. He is of a very good Family, tho' his Father spent his Estate & dy'd a Bankrupt; and the poor Lad has now scarce any other Friends than what I can procure him. Permit me the Freedom of recommending him to your Protection. If I did not think him worthy of it, I should not venture to do so, notwithstanding his near Relation to me. I think I ought to make some Apologies for this Liberty I use with you; but I think it woud be wringing our Friendship to make too many.

I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 2 July 1757.
