Compiegne. 23 July 1764

My Lord

Soon after my Arrival in Paris, my Curiosity carry'd me to inspect King James's Memoirs, which are containd in 13 or 14 thin folio Volumes, all wrote with his own hand, but not digested into any exact Form of Narration. Some Passages are more compleat than others; and one of the most compleat is the Account of the Negociations, preceding the second Dutch War; a Passage of History, which to me always appear'd obscure and involved in great Difficulties. Father Gordon, the Principal of the Scots College, a very obliging, communicative Man, made however some Difficulty of allowing me to peruse this Passage; but upon my informing him, that I had apply'd to the Secretary of State, and expected to have an Allowance for inspecting the French Records, where the Treaty between Charles II & Louis 14 woud certainly appear; he drop'd all Scruple and communicated to me the whole Manuscript. I must speak of it, My Lord, from Memory; because I left at Paris, the Extracts which Father Gordon allowd me to make.

The Treaty was concluded in the End of 1669 or beginning of 1670 (for the Memoirs do not mark very distinctly the time) and Lord Arundel of Wardour was the Person, who secretly sign'd it, in a Journey, which he made to Paris for the Purpose. The Restoration of the Catholic Religion in England; and a Confederacy against Holland were the two chief Articles. Lewis pay'd Charles 200.000 Pounds a Year; and oblig'd himself to furnish him with 6000 Men in case of any Insurrection: Holland was to be divided pretty much in the manner mentiond by L'Abbé Primi. England was to have Zealand & the Sea Ports; the rest was to be shar'd out between the French King and the Prince of Orange. There is no mention of establishing arbitrary Power in England; but the King probably thought that Event a necessary Consequence. The Scheme of Charles & his Brother was, that this great Project shoud begin with the Change of Religion in England; but Lewis had no such View; and he therefore sent over the Duchess of Orleans, who perswaded the King to begin with the Ruin of the Dutch Commonwealth; after which the Confederates were to impose their Religion upon England: The Duke of York always oppos'd this Alteration of the original Plan.

I must own, My Lord, that I see from these Memoirs, that I have in one particular somewhat mistaken K. Charles's Character. I thought that his careless negligent Temper had renderd him incapable of Bigotry; and that he had floated all his Life between Deism & Popery: But I find, that Lord Halifax better knew his Sentiments, when he says, that the King only affected Irreligion in order to cover his Zeal for the Catholic Religion. His Brother informs us, that when this Negotiation was set on foot, the King calld together his secret Council, and spoke with such Ardor of restoring the true Religion that Tears came into his Eyes.

I was somewhat surprizd to find, that the two Brothers thought, at that time, that the Church of England & the Cavaliers had such a Propensity to Popery, that the smallest Inducement woud engage them to embrace it. And on this Disposition, they chiefly trusted for Success in their Enterprizes. They were probably much mistaken: For no Writings of that Age, inform us of any such Propensity.

I shall probably take soon Advantage of a new Edition of my History to correct my Mistakes in this particular; and in a few others of no great Moment. Mean-while, I am happy in having an Opportunity of gratifying your Lordship's Curiosity, and of expressing my Sense of your obliging Deportment to me, when engag'd in writing the Reign of Elizabeth. I shall think myself very fortunate, if your Lordship will afford me frequent Opportunities of the same kind. I cannot at present answer your Question with regard to the Gallery of Fortifications, but as soon as I get to Paris, I shall make Enquirys, and shall inform your Lordship. I have the Honour to be My Lord

 Your Lordship's most obedient 
& most humble Servant



David Hume.

PS.

Lord Hertford desires me to present his Respects to your Lordship
