Edinburgh 30 June 1743

I have read Mr Leechman's Sermon with a great deal of Pleasure, & think it a very good one; tho' I am sorry to find the Author to be a rank Atheist. You know (or ought to know) that Plato says there are three kinds of Atheists. The first who deny a Deity, the second who deny his Providence, the third who assert, that he is influenc'd by Prayers or Sacrifices. I find Mr Leechman is an Atheist of the last kind.

I think the Language very correct; tho' there occurd to me a few doubts as I went along, which I shall here mention, that if you or he think them well founded you may make Use of them. I think myself very ill qualify'd to advise Mr Leechman; but as he was once pleas'd to desire my Sentiments, with regard to his Language, I am resolv'd not to lose the Honour of such a Pupil, tho the Subject be but a Trifle & tho I owe that Advantage more to his Modesty than my superior Skill.

P. 5. L. penult. for we do see them approaching us, read we foresee them. P. 6. L. 2 add also. P. 8. L. 12 add that (this is to prevent a construction louche, as the French call it, or a squint ey'd construction. For you may observe, that the Words following viz Acts of Faith may at first be taken for the Accusative of the verb find, whereas they are really the Nominative of the verb are) P. 10. L. 8. Besides, nothing etc. The Parts of this Construction are too remote, & may be corrected either by leaving out a part of the middle, or by recapitulating the beginning, in this manner, Nothing, I say, can be more agreable to this perfect Character, than & c. Id L. 26, For so it should, & c. Read, so is there no reason to suspect & c. (this is to prevent the two Infinitives). P. 13. L. 26 Say, There seem to me two Ends or Designs of Prayer. The first is to express (I do not think the division can be properly made in the Sentence, unless the other member of the Division were to follow in the next Sentence.) The Construction [is] also too wide in this Sentence. P. 15. L. 5. Dele. with ourselves. P. 20. L. 13 for it read that Providence. P. 21. L. ult. add is it supposable I say. P. 24. L. 11 say, yet are sometimes more uniformly. P. 26. L. 11 for of them read of the world. P. 31. L. 22 say nothing defective or blameable. P. 33. L. antepenult dele. one. L. penult. for some read a. L. ult. dele. he had in his view. P. 34. L. 2 say, he resembles a Traveller in a mountanous Countrey, who, this hour, sees nothing beyond a neighbouring Hill, which terminates his View; the top of which he no sooner gains, than a new Extent of Mountains fills & c. (Tho the Simile might be justify'd as it stands, yet it seems defective, in this respect, that it needs to be justify'd.) P. 39. L. 16, say what Ground then is there. P. 50. L. 9. say feel that the Violence of Temptation is abated, that & c. (The Construction of the two parts of the Sentence ought to be similar.) P. 51, L. 19. dele with ourselves. P. 53. L. 25. for who is read that is. P. 55. L. 8 read over us. P. 56. L. 6. for desires read wishes. Id. L. 20 for the like read like. P. 57. L. 8 for this read the.

These are all the minute Faults I cou'd observe in the Sermon. Mr Leechman has a very clear manly Expression, but in my humble Opinion he does not consult his Ear enough, nor aim at a Style that may be smooth & harmonious; which, next to Perspicuity is the chief Ornament of Style. Vide Cicero, Quinctilian, Longinus & c, & c. If this Sermon were not a popular Discourse, I shoud also think it might be made more concise.

As to the Argument I cou'd wish Mr. Leechman wou'd in the second Edition answer this Objection both to Devotion & Prayer, & indeed to every thing we commonly call Religion, except the Practice of Morality, & the Assent of the Understanding to the Proposition that God exists.

It must be acknowledg'd that Nature has given us a strong Passion of Admiration for whatever is excellent, & of Love & Gratitude for whatever is benevolent & beneficial, & that the Deity possesses these Attributes in the highest Perfection & yet I assert he is not the natural Object of any Passion or Affection. He is no Object either of the Senses or Imagination, & very little of the Understanding, without which it is impossible to excite any Affection. A remote Ancestor, who has left us Estates & Honours, acquir'd with Virtue, is a great Benefactor, & yet tis impossible to bear him any Affection, because unknown to us; tho in general we know him to be a Man or a human Creature, which brings him vastly nearer our Comprehension than an invisible infinite Spirit. A man, therefore, may have his Heart perfectly well disposd towards every proper & natural Object of Affection, Friends, Benefactors, Countrey, Children &c, & yet from this Circumstance of the Invisibility & Incomprehensibility of the Deity may feel no Affection towards him. And indeed I am afraid, that all Enthusiasts mightily deceive themselves. Hope & Fear perhaps agitate their Breast when they think of the Deity: Or they degrade him into a Resemblance with themselves, & by that means render him more comprehensible. Or they exult with Vanity in esteeming themselves his peculiar Favourites. Or at best they are actuated by a forc'd & strain'd Affection, which moves by Starts & Bounds, & with a very irregular disorderly Pace. Such an Affection can not be requir'd of any Man as his Duty. Please to observe, that I not only exclude the turbulent Passions, but the calm Affections. Neither of them can operate without the Assistance of the Senses, & Imagination, or at least a more compleat Knowledge of the Object than we have of the Deity. In most Men this is the Case; & a natural Infirmity can never be a Crime. But secondly were Devotion never so much admitted, Prayer must still be excluded. First The Addressing of our virtuous Wishes & Desires to the Deity, since the Address has no Influence on him, is only a kind of rhetorical Figure, in order to render these Wishes more ardent & passionate. This is Mr Leechman's Doctrine. Now the Use of any figure of Speech can never be a Duty. Secondly this Figure, like most Figures of Rhetoric, has an evident Impropriety in it. For we can make use of no Expression or even Thought, in Prayers & Entreaties, which does not imply that these Prayers have an Influence. Thirdly. This Figure is very dangerous & leads directly & even unavoidably to Impiety & Blasphemy. Tis a natural Infirmity of Men to imagine, that their Prayers have a direct Influence, & this Infirmity must be extremely foster'd & encouragd by the constant Use of Prayer. Thus all wise Men have excluded the Use of Images & Pictures in Prayer; tho they certainly enliven Devotion; because tis found by Experience, that with the vulgar these visible Representations draw too much towards them, & become the only Objects of Devotion. Excuse this Long Letter, make my Compliments to Mr Leechman & all Friends, & believe me to be Yours sincerely

D. H.

 June. 30 [1743]

I have frequently in Edinburgh enquir'd for the Dialogues on Devotion publish'd at Glasgow some time ago; but coud not find them. If you have a Copy send it me, & I shall restore it with the first Occasion. It may be a means of my Conversion.
