Compiegne 14 of July 1765

Dear Brother

There arrivd yesterday a Messenger from England with my Commission under the great Seal. My Appointments, as I told you, are 1200 a year: I have also 300 pounds for my Equipage, and 300 Ounces of Plate for my Table. This is the fair Side of the picture. The Misfortune is, that General Conway, the Ambassador's Brother, is Secretary of State: The Duke of Grafton, his Nephew, is the other Secretary. You still say; better and better. Not at all: My Lord Hertford goes for England in a few days, and leaves the Burthen of the Embassy upon me. Still you say; Where is the harm of all this: You are come to Years of Discretion and can govern Yourself. Wait a little, Dear Brother: Lord Hertford goes Lord Lieutenant to Ireland, and there is an End of the Ambassador, and probably of the Secretary.

It is true; I can count upon Lord Hertfod's Friendship as much as on any man's in the World. One day, last Spring, he came into my Room; and told me, that he heard of many People, who endeavourd, by their Caresses, to perswade me, that I ought to remain in France: But he hop'd, that I woud embrace no Scheme of Life, which wou'd ever seperate him and me: He now lovd me as much as ever he esteemd me; and wishd we might pass our Lives together. He had resolvd several times to have opend his Breast so far to me; but being a man of few words and no Professions, he had still delayd it; and he now found himself much reliev'd by this Declaration of his Desires and Intentions. I know that Lord Hertford will not go to Ireland unless he be allowd to name the Secretary for that Kingdom. Perhaps, he may think, his Son, Lord Beauchamp, too young for that Office. In which Case, I may very probably expect it; and it is an Office of between 3 & 4000 a Year, and stands next in Dignity to all the great Offices of the State. In all Cases, the Lord Lieutenant for Ireland has many & great Things to give, of which I shou'd certainly expect one.

Still you say; this is all better and better: Not at all. You know the Fluctuation of English Politics. Perhaps, before you receive this, the whole present System is overturn'd. Lord Hertford, who, while he remaind here, was a Man of no Party, is involvd with his Friends: All is turn'd topsy-turvy; and before next Winter, perhaps, I am at your Fireside without Office or Employment. Here indeed I allow you to say; So much the better. For I never had much Ambition, I mean, for Power & Dignities; and I am heartily cur'd of the little I had. I believe a Fireside & a Book, the best things in the World for my Age & Disposition.

I write in some hurry: And therefore can only add, that, if the old Ministry return, I can look upon the Duke of Bedford alone as my Friend, by means of the Lady I mentiond to you. If the present Ministry stand, I have, by Lord Hertford's Means, many and great Friends; and the King, I have been well assurd, honours me particularly with his good Opinion. In all Cases, it is a great Point for me to have obtaind this Commission, to a Place of so much Trust and Credit, and silences all Objections against me, whether they arose from Religion or Politics. Direct your Letters to me as Secretaire d'Ambassade d'Angleterre a Paris. I hate any thing that disturbs so agreeable a Settlement as I had obtained before these great Events. My Compliments to Mrs Home & to Katy. Keep this Letter to Yourself; but write part of it to our Sister.
