My Lord,

I am very much obliged to you for allowing me a reading of Mr Tucker's papers; in all that gentleman's productions, which have come to my hand, I can perceive a profound knowledge of the theory of commerce, joined to an enlarged acquaintance with its practice; and I own I have received both pleasure and instruction from the perusal of them. The papers which your Lordship has been pleased to communicate to me, do not belie this character. All the advantages which the author insists upon as belonging to a nation of extensive commerce, are undoubtedly real: great capital, extensive correspondence, skilful expedients of facilitating labour, dexterity, industry, &c., these circumstances give them an indisputed superiority over poor nations, who are ignorant and unexperienced. The question is, whether these advantages can go on, increasing trade in infinitum, or whether they do not at last come to a ne plus ultra, and check themselves, by begetting disadvantages, which at first retard, and at last finally stop their progress. Among these disadvantages, we may reckon the dear price of provisions and labour, which enables the poorer country to rival them, first in the coarser manufactures, and then in those which are more elaborate. Were it otherwise, commerce, if not dissipated by violent conquests, would go on perpetually increasing, and one spot of the globe would engross the art and industry of the whole. I am pleased when I find the author insist on the advantages of England, and prognosticate thence the continuance and even further progress of the opulence of that country; but I still indulge myself in the hopes that we in Scotland possess also some advantages, which may enable us to share with them in wealth and industry. It is certain that the simpler kind of industry ought first to be attempted in a country like ours. The finest arts will flourish best in the capital: those of next value in the more opulent provinces: the coarser in the remote countries. The carriage of provisions to the capital is a tax upon them; and a great many of them are of such a nature as cannot at all be transported. It is then great encouragement to settle in the countries where they are produced; and tho a rich country, by its other advantages, may long maintain its ground against a poorer, which makes attempts towards commerce, it will not be able entirely to annihilate or oppress it.

The author, conformable to the character both of a divine and a philosopher, draws an argument from the goodness of Providence; but I think it may be turned against him. It was never surely the intention of Providence, that any one nation should be a monopolizer of wealth: and the growth of all bodies, artificial as well as natural, is stopped by internal causes, derived from their enormous size and greatness. Great empires, great cities, great commerce, all of them receive a check, not from accidental events, but necessary principles.

There is a hint thrown out in the papers, which gave me great satisfaction, because it concurs with a principle which I have thrown out to your Lordship, and which you seemed not to disapprove of. I was indeed so pleased with it, that, as I told you, I intended to make it the subject of a political discourse, as soon as I should have occasion to give a new edition of that work. My principle is levelled against the narrow malignity and envy of nations, which can never bear to see their neighbours thriving, but continually repine at any new efforts towards industry made by any other nation. We desire, and seem by our absurd politics to endeavour to repress trade in all our neighbours, and would be glad that all Europe were reduced to the same state of desolation as Turkey: the consequence of which must be, that we would have little more than domestic trade, and would have nobody either to sell or buy from us. I remember, that in a conversation on this head with your Lordship, I asked whether a man who opened a shop in Tartary was likely to meet with many customers. This narrow spirit of nations, as well as individuals, ought carefully to be repressed; and I am glad to find that Mr Tucker is likely to employ his talents and abilities in so useful a manner.

 I am, &c &c.,

David Hume.

Edinburgh 4th March 1758
