Rheims, Septr. 12, 1734. N.S.

Dear Sir,

I remember when I came from Bristol you desir'd me to inform you of my Travels in France, & particularly of the Place in which I settled, because you had yourself a design of coming thither, for Study & Diversion. If I had met with any thing very curious before this, I wou'd have been sure to inform you of it; but as every thing has happen'd in the ordinary Course of Nature; that the Sun has set & risen again, & that I have gone to Bed, & risen a little after him, with other particulars of the same kind, which are common to Travellers with others, I thought I cou'd spare you the trouble of reading a Letter, which cou'd contain nothing more valuable. But now since I am settled at Rheims in Champaign, which I think wou'd be a place to your Mind, I shall now give you a Description of it, & an Account of my Adventures, since I parted from you.

Rheims is a very famous & antient Town & University, situated about 34 Leagues from Paris, which makes an easy days Journey by Post. It is a large Town, containing as they say about 40,000 people; but its Buildings are not very beautiful; which proceeds from this, that the People of Fashion choose to build their Houses off the Streets, & by that means they are conceal'd. There are about 30 Families that keep Coaches, tho' as they tell me there is not one of 500£ a year in the whole Town. They are a polite Sociable People, & what is of considerable Advantage to a Stranger, are easily made acquainted with. For having got Letters of Recommendation to two of the best Families in Town, I am every Day in some of their Houses, they make Parties of Diversion to show me more Company, & if I cou'd but speak their Language perfectly I wou'd immediately be acquainted with the whole Town. But that is a Difficulty, which will soon be got over; so that when you come, I shall have the Satisfaction of showing you the best Company in Town.

These Letters I got from the Chevalier Ramsay, who receiv'd me when I was in Paris with all imaginable Kindness. I have another Letter from him, which I have not yet deliver'd because the Gentleman is not at present in Town, tho' he will return in a few days. He is a man of considerable Note, & as the Chevalier told me, one of the most learned in France. I promise myself abundance of Pleasure from his Conversation. I must likewise add, that he has a fine Library, so that we shall have all Advantages for Study.

As I know you understand French, I shall copy what the famous Fontaine says of Rheims.

Il n'est Citè que je prefere a Rheims: 
c'est l'ornement & l'honneur de la France: 
Car sans compter & l'Ampoule & les bons vins, 
Charmans objets y sont en abondance. 
Par ce point-la je n'entends quant a moi 
Tours ni porteaux; mais gentiles Galoises; 
Ayant trouvè telle de nos Remoises 
Friande assez pour la bouche d'un Roi















This I know will be a great Encouragement to you. I hope you'll b[e so good] as to give me a Letter in any Case; but if you have any thoughts of coming I shall write you an exact account of the Method of Travelling to Paris & shall meet you there.

I remain dear Jemmy 
Your most affectionate Friend & humble Servt 
David Hume.





Will Younge will give you my Direction. I forgot to mention that I think we cannot live under 80£ a year, & that may do. Make my Complements to Mr Peach, and all Friends.
