Dear Sir

I went, on Wednesday last, to be present at the Examination of l'Abbé Choquart's School, with which I was very well satisfy'd; especially for the part your young Folks had in it. There were several People present who came to hear their Children & Relations; and when Gilbert was going thro' some Demonstrations of Geometry, with a very good Grace, I askd some who sat next me, whether they coud perceive him to be a Foreigner? They all declar'd that they coud not, and were very much surpriz'd when I told them that he had not yet been in the Country six Months. Hugh retains still a little of a foreign Accent, but it is wearing out gradually. Mr Liston speaks so well as to be able to pass himself for a Gascon!

There was also one Circumstance of your young Gentlemen's Behaviour with which I was much pleasd; but whether you will take the Praise of it to yourself, or ascribe it partly to the Imitation of French Manners, I cannot determine. I arrivd a little before the Commencement of the Examination; and, walking into the Garden, I took Shelter, from the Heat, under some Trees. Your young Gentlemen, as soon as they saw me, ran & brought me a Chair, which they plac'd carefully in the most shady Spot they coud find. I doubt this Attention woud not be very common among mere English Schoolboys.

Lord Hertford has receivd, from George Greenville, a final Answer to a very earnest, and very pressing Letter he had wrote in my Favour. Never was any Refusal so decisive, so cold, so positive, so determind: Not the least Circumstance of Apology, of good Manners, or of Regard. He even gives it as a Reason why I cannot be appointed; because Sir Charles Bunbury has never yet desird to change his Situation. In short, the Letter is so different from all Letters usually wrote on such Occasions, and so different from those which Mr Greenville was accustomd to write to Lord Hertford, that my Lord concludes there is some particular Reason of Coldness, tho' he cannot conjecture what it is. But there are also, in the Letter, some Expressions which mark the most extreme Animosity against me; Lord Hertford thinks, they will admit of another Sense; and desires me to write to you, in order to ask whether you have ever perceivd such Sentiments in that Gentleman. I know that I have affirmd, and, what is worse, have provd, that Q. Elizabeth's Maxims of Government were full as arbitrary as those of the Stuarts; I know that this Proposition, tho' now an undoubted & acknowleg'd Truth, is contrary to the Principles of sound Whiggery; I know also, that Mr Greenville, as a sound Whig, bore me no good Will on that account; but I did not really think his Quarrel coud have gone to such an Extremity. You are sensible of the Consequences which I apprehended, and which you did not, last Summer, think so dangerous as I imagind. I have now, for the first time, explained to My Lord the Nature of my Situation, which somewhat surprizd him, being so contrary to the Assurances given him by Mr Greenville. But he told me that my Interest was secure; for that he thought himself oblig'd to make me Reparation from his private Fortune, for any Breach of Faith which I might apprehend from the Public. If this point were fix'd, it woud probably stop the Malignity of my Enemies, who will see that they can only do a small Ill to Lord Hertford, instead of a great one which they might intend against me. However, my Lord being desirous to know, from you, Mr Greenville's Sentiments, as far as you coud discover them, I am engag'd to enter into this Detail, which otherwise I might have desird to avoid.

 I am with great Sincerity My Dear Sir 
Your most obedient Servant



David Hume.

Paris 12 May 1765.
