Dear Brother

I never prognosticated well of Josey's Genius for the Mathematics from his great Slowness in learning Arithmetic; and I am not surpriz'd to find, that his Progress in Euclid has not been so great as might have been expected from his Quickness and his Capacity in other particulars. There is indeed something very unaccountable in his Turn; so childish in many Cases, and yet so manly and quick and sensible in others. The Presence of Strangers, above all, seems to make him recollect himself, and he is exceedingly taking among them. His Address in particular is remarkably good, and he seems to have a Turn for the World and for Company: However, I do not think him by any means deficient in his Talents for Literature: It appeard to me that he always read his Books with a very good Taste, Latin as well as French and English, and I imagine that he will make at least a very Gentleman like Scholar. I wish therefore he had a farther Trial of the Greek; and if that will not do, I think with you that the Italian is an easy and genteel Acquisition, which will furnish him with Occupation for this Winter.

I shall send down two or three hundred Pounds to be joind to Haliburtons Money, as soon as it can be got; with such Interest as shall be pay'd it may all be put in a Bond together. Meanwhile, you may put such Money as comes to be, into the hands of Coutts's House. I am of your Opinion, that Macbyehills Bond shoud be registerd.

Paty Home of Wedderburn has just now left me. I askd him what he was doing with regard to his Fishery at Paxton: He desird me to recollect that last Winter I told him he must make me Referee, and he had promisd to do so, and he woud stand to his Word. I do recollect it; but scarce thought he was in earnest. However, he assures me he will not stir a Step in the Affair, till I shoud come down and coud examine the Question. My Compliments to all your Family.

 I am Your affectionate Brother

David Hume

London 13 Oct 1767

P.S.

I need not tell you that you are welcome to the use of my Books or any thing my House can afford.
