Portsmouth June 6, 1746.

Dear Sir,

I have always sympathiz'd very cordially with you, whenever I met with any of the names, wherein you was interested, in any of the public papers; but I hope that one of the persons is now safe by his escape, and the other protected by her sex and innocence. We live not now in a time, when public crimes are suppos'd to cancel all private tyes, or when the duties of relation, even tho' executed beyond the usual bounds, will render the persons criminal. I am willing, therefore, to flatter myself, that your anxiety must now be in a great measure over, and that a more happy conclusion of so calamitous an affair, cou'd not be expected, either for private individuals, or for the public. Some little time ago, we had here a conversation with regard to L— and other persons in her condition, when General St Clair say'd that he heard from some of the ministers, that the intentions of the menaces, or even of the intended prosecutions (if they went so far), were not to proceed to execution; but only to teach our country-women (many of whom had gone beyond all bounds), that their sex was no absolute protection to them, and that they were equally expos'd to the law with the other sex. However, I doubt not but your friend has no occasion for their clemency, whatever may be the case with the other ladies in the same situation, who had particularly valu'd themselves upon their activity and courage.

As to the dispute I mention'd, you will easily comprehend it, when I inform you, that I enter'd with your friend on the 1st of Aprile, 1745; that on the 29th of March, 1746, I had a letter from V., offering me £150 pr. ann. for the ensuing year, which I answer'd on the 3d of Aprile, as we had agreed; and that on the 16th of Aprile, I was oblig'd to leave your friend. Now, it was an article of our first agreement, that a quarter begun should be consider'd as altogether finisht, and this article was a part of Mr Young's agreement, and offer'd to Dr Pitcairn; and by these terms, any of us might have voluntarily left him the second day after the commencement of the quarter, even tho' he had desir'd our stay; whereas, I offer'd to stay out the quarter, and neither he nor V. wou'd allow me, but positively threaten'd me with violence.

The only pretext for refusing the execution of these terms, is, that V. sent me a letter before the conclusion of the last quarter, offering me new terms; and this, he says, dissolv'd the former agreement, and leaves me a claim of £35 only, instead of £75, which I demand upon the former agreement. I desire that this affair may be consider'd with a view to justice or equity.

With regard to the former, I say, that the first agreement could not be dissolv'd, but by the persons who made it, viz., the consent of your friend, and your and V.'s approbation, all of whom are positively mention'd in the paper he wrote me. Let him look unto the powers he receiv'd; he is only empower'd to pay me £300 a-year during my attendance, not to alter the terms, nor dissolve the agreement. With regard to equity, I was offer'd to have the bargain made secure for two years, which wou'd have made my claim £225 more. I us'd not the precaution to draw this into writing; but is it reasonable, upon this account, to refuse me so much more moderate terms? Tho' £475 may seem an exorbitant sum for little more than 14 months, yet £100 was a voluntary present for my journey, which ought not to be consider'd, and my offer of staying 3 months longer, is the same as if I had stay'd; so that I really receive £475 for near 18 months attendance, which is pretty near the sum that your friend has always pay'd in such cases. Can it be suppos'd, that even this sum cou'd be worth engaging any man to leave his course of life, and throwing himself loose of other views and pursuits? I am sure it was not to my advantage, considering my situation at that time. Justice and equity must be here the same; for can it be imagin'd that I am in a condition to make the M. of A. a present of £75 that of right belongs to me?

I receiv'd a sudden invitation from General St Clair, to go with him as secretary to this expedition, a few hours before I was setting out for Edinburgh, where I intended to have convers'd with our friends, Mr Home and Mr Ferguson, in order to satisfy myself, whether I was partial in thinking my claim so undoubted as I imagine. I was therefore oblig'd to send the papers (viz., the first agreement, and V.'s promise to submit to your verdict, and that of L—y A—e) to Harry Home, whom I have made, by my letter, entirely master to act on my side as he thinks proper. I was a little suspicious of the frugal turn of my L—y, as well as of the dependence which she must henceforth have upon V.; for which reason, I desir'd him to draw up the case as strong as the reasons will admit. He will alter whatever terms you will think improper in so delicate a situation.

I believe I told you, that I no way blam'd either V., or his emissaries, with regard to this last caprice. I never thought myself on better terms with your friend; and had a commission to go to London, in order to deliver a certain portrait. I came to him before I set out, and askt him, S'il n'avoit rien d'autre chose à m'ordonner. He immediately flew into a passion, say'd I was mocking him, as if he treated me like a servant, and gave me orders or commands, wou'd admit of no explanation, and thenceforth wou'd neither eat, speak, nor converse with me. I never thought him capable of so steady a caprice; and as he is resolv'd to live alone, and his director is resolv'd to have no controul, I do not see how it is possible to be otherwise. I was told by V. (what I am afraid is the case) that he (I mean your friend) is at present master of his current revenues, and that no man need account to any but himself for the disposal of them. However, as long as he remains in Britain, his friends will always have some resource.

I doubt not but you will be glad to hear, that I have not chang'd my situation for the worse. The office is genteel: I have 10 sh. a-day, besides perquisites, which may be considerable; and can be put to little expense, because I live with the General. The invitation I receiv'd, was as unexpected as that which your friend gave me.

I was sorry to leave London without having an opportunity of seeing your son, and of testifying to him (as I shall to all the world) my sincere regard and gratitude to you. I am, Dear Sir, your most obedient humble Servant,

David Hume.

P.S. The first fair wind carries us away, so that I cannot propose to have the pleasure of hearing from you.
