I remember I have frequently told you, that this way of Life was so melancholy & unsociable, that I did not think it would be possible for me to continue in it longer than one year; but that as things sometimes turn'd out differently from what one expected, & that a Man often reconcil'd himself by Habit to what at first he thought was intolerable, I always added that I should make a Tryal this Winter, & should tell you my Determination early in the Spring. I said the same to Sir James Johnstone. My Lord told me, that he desired to live altogether alone, without any Friend or Companion which was the sole Reason of his opening his Mind in that manner to you there. And I had Panaiotty inform you & Sir James of all this; because I thought it fair that everything should be told, on the one side as well as the other. You see, therefore, I have never given up my Attendance on L. A., but only talkt of what might probably happen. And I confess, that the Professions of Esteem & Friendship I met with on all Sides, as well as the Steps I was engag'd to take, in consequence of these, seem'd to require I should be left to take my own time in leaving him. That is, provided I did nothing afterwards to forfeit his or his Friends good Opinion of me.

With regard to him, I believe you are sensible that I have always liv'd with him and continue so to do, in a more equal way of Complaisance & good Humour than cou'd well have been expected. Some little Disgusts & Humours could not be prevented, & never were propos'd to be of any Consequence.

As to his Friends, & you, in particular, tho' I have been once of a different Opinion from you, I always manag'd the Argument with Decency & good Manners, as far as I remember, & as you acknowledged to me very lately. If any contrary expressions have escapt me, which I do not remember, they were the Effects of Melancholy & Chagrin, for which I am sorry, & which I am willing to acknowledge. I conclude, that it is not improbable, but I may, of myself, come to the Determination you point at, with regard to the time of my Stay here; but that I have not yet done it; And that in all Cases I desire to stay or go, in the same or a greater Degree of Friendship & Regard with you & all my Lord's Friends, than what we first met with. The momentary Effects of Passion I can forgive in others & acknowledge in myself, and the keeping of Rancour on these Accounts, without Explanations or mutual Forgiveness, is a Conduct I shall never observe myself, or expect from your good Sense & candour.

As this Frankness is worthy of honest Men, I hope you will approve of my applying to Sir James Johnstone on this Occasion & my desiring the Interposal of his good Offices in order to effect it.

I am Sir 
etc.



P.S.

My Lord, so far from having a Quarrel with me, said this evening that he wished one could form a Plan, by which we might go together to some foreign Country, change our Names, & remain absolutely conceal'd & unknown. You see then, that his Proposals proceed only from his excessive Love of Solitude.
