Hotel de Brancas 30 Sept. 1764

After acknowledging that I receiv'd both your Letters, that from Brussels, and that from Calais, I shou'd be asham'd to appear before you with so late a Letter. This day sennight, Lord March & Selwin appointed to go off. I sent March a very long Letter for you, and enjoin'd him, as he liv'd next Door to you, to deliver it the Instant he arriv'd; and having thus done my Duty, I went very contentedly to L'Ile Adam, where I remain'd for four Days. On my return to Paris, I was much surprizd to hear that March, after his Post Horses were yok'd, had chang'd his Mind, and was still in Paris. When I appeard alarmed at this Piece of Intelligence, I was told that he had sent off an Express to London with Letters, which composd my Mind. Next day I saw him, and he fairly confess'd, that from Forgetfulness, he had not sent off my Letter. I begg'd him to send it me: He promisd it, delay'd it, promisd again; and now at last owns that he has lost it; which gives me great Vexation, both on your Account, and my own. For I spoke to you with great Freedom, and am infinitely uneasy lest my Letter shoud fall into bad hands. When I rail at March, I get no other Reply than, God damn you: If your Letter was of Consequence, why the Devil did you trust it to such a foolish Fellow as me? I am therefore oblig'd, in a great Hurry, to give you some imperfect Account of what I have done. I went to Ansons, who seem a discreet, sober Set of People: I came in upon a mix'd Company, whose Looks pleasd me. The only Objection is the Quarter of the Town, which is straiten'd: But it is near the University, & consequently where all the Youth of France are educated. I do not like the talking Man more than you; and a very flattering Letter he wrote me, helps farther to disgust me. La Bastide, the 10,000 Livres man, I went to see. He seems a genteel agreeable Man, & is well spoke of. He lives in an agreeable House, & in a good Air, & has two young Russian Princes with him, who speak very good French. He offers to take your two Boys & Preceptor for 8000 Livres on the whole, but without paying either Cloaths or Master. I suppose you woud not choose to pay 5000 Livres a Year, merely for the Advantage of a better Air. I have heard a very good Character of one Erivot, Professor of Rhetoric in the Collège de Beavais, who offers to take them; they woud live in the House with him alone; but he proposes that they shoud go to all the Classes of the University, where they woud make Acquaintance with French Boys, and nobody would ever ask Questions about their Religion: But as I heard you declare against their going to the University (which yet I shoud highly approve of), I cannot make any Bargain with Erivot. The misfortune is, I go to Fontainebleau to morrow sennight, and must conclude a Bargain without hearing from you, by this fine Trick Lord March has play'd me. It is probable, therefore, it will be with Anson, because you yourself did not disapprove of that Plan; and I shoud be afraid to depart from it considerably, without your Authority. If you give me Information in time, I shall come from Fontainebleau to settle your Boys: In any Case make them come immediatly to the Hotel de Brancas, where they will not want Friends if any of the Family be in Town.

Since I wrote the above, one of my numerous Scouts came to me, and told me, that within a Gunshot of the Hotel de Brancas, there was to be found all I coud wish, and more than I coud have imagind. It is calld La Pension Militaire. I immediatly went to see it. I found there an excellent airy House, with an open Garden belonging to it. It is the last House but one in Paris; has a Prospect & Access into the large open space of the Invalides, & from thence into the Fields. The Number of boys is limited to thirty five, whom I saw in the Court, in a blue Uniform with a narrow silver Lace: They left off their Play, and made me a Bow with the best Grace in the World, as I pass'd. I was carry'd to their Master, the Abbé Choquart, who appeard to me a sensible, judicious, sedate Man, agreeable to the Character I had receivd of him. He carry'd me through the Boys' Apartments, which were cleanly, light, spacious, & each lay in a small Bed apart. I saw a large Collection of Instruments for experimental Philosophy. I saw an ingenious Machine for teaching Chronology. There were Plans of Fortification. While I was considering these, I heard a Drum beat in the Court: It was the hour for assembling the Boys for their military Exercises. I went down. They had now all got on their Belts, and had their Muskets in their hands. They went thro' all the Prussian Exercise with the best Air & greatest Regularity imaginable. Almost all were about your Sons' Age; a Year or two more or less. They are the Youth of the best Quality in France: a Nephew of M. de Choiseul: two Nephews of M. de Beringhen. In short of the first Families. Their Air & Manner seem to bespeak it. The Master askd only about thirteen hundred Livres a Year for each of your Boys, five hundred for the Preceptor: He supplies them with all Masters, except those of Dancing, Music, & Designing. For these they have Masters that come in, who take only eight Livres a month, tho' they require from others three Louis d'ors. There is a riding Master belonging to the House. Your Sons need never go to Mass unless they please, and nobody shall ever talk to them about Religion. The Master only requires, that you shoud write him a Letter, which he will read to every body, by which you desire...
