Edinburgh 17 December, 1754.

My Lord,

I did really intend to have paid my respects to your Lordship this harvest; but I have got into such a recluse, studious habit, that I believe myself only fit to converse with books, and, however I may pretend to be acquainted with dead kings, shall become quite unsuitable for my friends and cotemporaries. Besides, the great gulf that is fixed between us terrifies me. I am not only very sick at sea, but often can scarce get over the sickness for some days.

I am very proud that my History, even upon second thoughts, appears to have something tolerable in your Lordship's eyes. It has been very much canvassed and read here in town, as I am told; and it has full as many inveterate enemies as partial defenders. The misfortune of a book, says Boileau, is not the being ill spoke of, but the not being spoken of at all. The sale has been very considerable here, about four hundred and fifty in five weeks. How it has succeeded in London I cannot precisely tell. Only, I observe that some of the weekly papers have been busy with me. I am as great an atheist as Bolingbroke; as great a Jacobite as Carte; I cannot write English, &c. I do indeed observe that the book is in general rather more agreeable to those they call Tories; and, I believe, chiefly for this reason, that, having no places to bestow, they are naturally more moderate in their expectations from a writer. A Whig, who can give hundreds a year, will not be contented with small sacrifices of truth; and most authors are willing to purchase favour at so reasonable a price.

I wish it were in my power to pass this Christmas at Balcarres. I should be glad to accompany your Lordship in your rural improvements, and return thence to relish with pleasure the comforts of your fireside. You enjoy peace and contentment, my Lord, which all the power and wealth of the nation cannot give to our rulers. The whole Ministry, they say, is by the ears. This quarrel, I hope, they will fight out among themselves, and not expect to draw us in, as formerly, by pretending it is for our good. We will not be the dupes twice in our life.

I have the honour to be, my Lord,

Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble servant, 
David Hume.
