My Lord

I hope your Lordship remembers my Prophecy, that the Echo of Mr Elliot's Eloquence wou'd be as loud as that of the Captain's Cannon. I think the Prophecy (tho' I pretend not to Inspiration) is now entirely fulfill'd. The Accounts we receive from all hands of your Son's Appearance in this Affair of the Militia exceed any thing of the kind we have ever heard of; and it seems to be agreed, that no Man in the House was capable of such an Exertion of Eloquence, Reason, & Magnanimity; nay, that it probably never was surpassd by any one Member. We hear, that Mr Fox, tho' an Adversary, is very loud in declaring his Sentiments to this Purpose. I partake very heartily of the Joy, which your Lordship must feel on this Occasion.

I have seen on your Table a Copy of Voltaire's Universal History: I must beg the Favor of your Lordship, if it be in the Country, to bring it to Town with you on the Summer Session; at least, those Volumes that precede the Year 1500. I know that Author cannot be depended on with regard to Facts; but his general Views are sometimes sound, & always entertaining.

There has been publish'd here within these few days a Collection of Poems by the King of Prussia, under the title of Le Philosophe de Sans-Souci. They are certainly genuine; tho' they seem not to have been publish'd by himself, they are so defective in point of Numbers & Language, not to mention, that they want Lines in many Places. Surely nothing can be more imprudent than these Productions: he insults most of the Ministers of State in Europe, Count Bestuchef, Count Bruhl, L'Abbé Bernis, not to mention the King of Poland, the Queen of Hungary, and the whole Nation of Muscovy. He seems also to have entertain'd a great Hatred of the English; and that Nation may probably be cur'd of their Enthusiasm for him. They were all wrote before the War; and Copies of them had been handed about in Manuscript some Years ago. I remember Shawfield show'd me a Copy, for which, as he told me, he pay'd a considerable Sum to the Keeper of the King's Library. I am perswaded these Pieces have been a great Cause of his Misfortunes, and of this general Combination against him. There is Spirit & Merit in the Work, but it is not equal nor finish'd; and the King will not in the main reap great Honor by it. It consists of Odes & Epistles, & an Art of War in six Cantos. Throughout the whole, there are Insults on Religion, particularly one Letter to Manupertuis, in which he ridicules the Idea of a particular Providence, and another to General Keith in which he explodes the Belief of a future State, and in plain Terms expresses great Contempt of Christianity: He says also, that the General agreed with him in these Sentiments. These Freedoms surely belong not to any body; much less, to People that are in such a precarious & dependant Situation as Kings: They ought at least to leave them to their Betters. I beg my Compliments to Lady Minto; & am

 My Lord 
Your Lordship's most obedient & most humble Servant



David Hume .

Edinburgh 1st May 1760.
