Dear Baron

I believe you knew, before you left London, that I had wrote to Dr Smith of Oxford, desiring him to look out for a young Man, who might be Usher to Graffigni: He sent up one, whom he recommended strongly, and who seemd to me a Man of Sense and Knowledge; but he coud not come to any Agreement with Graffigni, because he desird six Weeks or two Months Vacation, in order to keep his Degrees in the University, which Graffigni refus'd. The young Man told me, that it woud be impossible for Graffigni to find any body fit for his Purpose on these Conditions; since no one of Spirit woud lay a plan to be a Schoolmaster all his Life, and give up every other Pretension. However this may be, here is Graffigni without either a French or Latin Master; and likely so to continue for some time.

But this is not the worst Circumstance. I believe I told you, that D'alembert disclaimd all sort of Acquaintance with him: I have this Moment receiv'd a Letter from Helvetius doing the same. It was in Answer to one I wrote him at Lord Hertford's Desire. I know not from what Quarter we had heard, that he had given a good given to Lord Harcourt or Lord Newnam a good Character of Graffigni; but it must have been a Mistake. For to me he says, that he knows no such Man; that his Wife, who was Niece to the famous Mde de Graffigni and educated with her never saw or heard of such a Man; nor can they imagine who he may be. After this second Imposture, it is certain that Lord Hertford will not put his Sons to him; nor do I think it fit yours shoud longer remain. He is an empty, conceited Fellow; full of Chimeras and Pretensions; and I think you are at no great Loss for parting with him.

The Question [is] what to do next. Sir Gilbert had an Idea of proposing to Rose to diminish the Number of his Boarders: I shall mention the same think to Lord Hertford: What do you think of it? I am very anxious to hear of the Hamilton Cause. I have laid my Account with the worst. My Compliments to Mrs Mure and your Sister. I am Dear Baron

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 7 of July. 1767.

P.S.

We know nothing of the Ministry. Some People now say, that, instead of our being the only Part of the Ministry that will turn out, we are the only that will remain. I believe no body knows.
