Sir

I was somewhat surprizd to receive the enclos'd from Mr Vincent to day. I wrote him an Answer of which the enclos'd is a Copy; & I beg of you to read them both before you read any more of this Letter, that you may know our Situation.

As this Measure is taken, without communicating it to you, tho you be in Town, it shows the same Spirit & Intentions, which I have explain'd to you. How far you will think it proper to oppose them, now in the Beginning, or what Measures you will take for that Purpose, I am not a proper Person to determine. You see he wants to put it upon me, that I leave your Friend, which is false, as I explain'd the Matter to him & to you. Indeed he has no other Pretext; & therefore, if he be opposd in this Point, he must have Recourse to his absolute Will & Pleasure: And his sole Motive is, that I lookt beyond him, & thought other Persons ought also to be consulted concerning your Friend's Situation.

If you cannot prevail as to the making up of this Breach entirely (which I must consider as altogether affected on his Side) I woud humbly desire you to make him this Proposal: That I shall stay out the Year & the next Quarter; & as about the time when that shall terminate, he will be thinking of coming out here, your Friend may continue without any Companion all Summer, & against next Winter you or he, or rather indeed he may look out for one. By this means, there will be a considerable Saving to your Friend: All Eclat or Rupture will be prevented: And some time gain'd to look for better Incidents & Opportunities.

I doubt not but you will also think so small a Request due, in some measure, to me, who depended upon your goodwill & Friendship, & who am sacrifizd for no other Reason but that I had a Regard to you.

You may add as an additional Reason, that by the Terms of our Contract, if I leave your Friend, by the second of Jany, I am entitled to my whole Years Sallary. For tho' it was always far from my Intention to take any such Advantages, & I shall faithfully compleat the time, yet it is in my Power; & my Behaviour in this particular merits some Consideration.

I was told by Panaiotty, my Lords Valet, that he had a Commission to you & Mr Vincent, chiefly with regard to the Retrenchment of his Family, and by the bye with regard to me, that he desird to live alone, without any Friend or Companion. Mr V. told him, (when he desird to know your Lodgings, in order to deliver you his Commission also) that that was not necessary, & that he himself wou'd answer it.

With regard to me, he answers very neatly & clearly: With regard to the other point, he will not move a Step. Your Friend repeated to me to day, that he had a great Regard & Friendship for me; & that nothing induc'd him to make such Proposals but his Desire of an absolute Solitude.

In Compliance with your Desire, I have put it absolutely upon Mr V. to tell me, that there is no farther Occasion for my Service. This Step, I see he is unwilling to take; & still more unwilling to declare the Reason.

I hope you will allow me when I shall see you, to put into your hands the Paper I read you, that all Friends may see the Point, in which we differd; as the other Paper with these Letters will show the manner in which this Difference has been conducted.

You see, by the enclosd Copy of my Letter, what Compliances I have made to this Man, in order to soften Matters. I shall surely never go any farther, with one whom I have so bad an Opinion of; & I hope you will never desire me.

I wou'd desire to know the Result of your Conference, as well as your own Opinion, as soon as convenient by the Bearer, if possible: Both because he is to be here next week, & I wou'd know upon what Footing to speak to him, & because I shall take my Measures according to the Issue you have fixt.

One Advantage of adding a new Quarter to my Years Attendance is that you may have an Opportunity of knowing my Lady's Opinion & of informing her yourself of all Matters, which will not at present be proper to write by the Post.

I must desire you, from my Knowledge of the Man's Character, to beware of all ambiguous & equivocal Answers. You may tell him positively that I have not given up Attendance on your Friend; & ask him whether he intends to turn me off & for what Reason.

I assure you, he talks at present, in a much higher Style than he did, before you came hither: But perhaps a little Firmness may make him abate of his Arrogances.

As I heard you were to have a Conference with him to morrow, I dispatcht a Servant with these Letters, that you might be instructed in all particulars. I have orderd him to wait for your Answer, if you thought proper. I am Sir Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

 Wednesday. 
Novr. 26. 1745.
