Dear Sir,

You'll be surpriz'd, perhaps, that I date my letters no longer from Weldehall; this happen'd from an accident, if our inconstancies and uncertainties can be call'd such.

You may remember in what humour you saw your friend a day or two before you left us. He became gay and good-humour'd afterwards, but more moderately than usual. After that, he return'd to his former disposition. These revolutions, we have observ'd, are like the hot and cold fits of an ague; and, like them too, in proportion as the one is gentle, the other is violent. But the misfortune is, that this prejudice continu'd even after he seem'd, in other respects, entirely recover'd. So that, having try'd all ways to bring him to good humour, by talking with him, absenting myself for some days, &c., I have at last been oblig'd yesterday to leave him. He is determin'd, he says, to live altogether alone; and I fancy, indeed, it must come to that. As far as I can judge, this caprice came from nobody, and no cause, except physical ones. The wonder only is, that it was so long a-coming.

There was a most villainous trick endeavour'd to be play'd me by my old friend, who, after stating justly and fairly the sum due to me, in order to engage me to go away more easily, immediately afterwards pretended to have chang'd his opinion, and endeavour'd to defraud me of £75. But I got it under his hand (because I told him I wou'd not trust his word for a farthing), to stand to your award and Lady Annandale's. There is no haste in the determination, so I shall write you more fully afterwards.

I shall always retain a grateful regard and memory of your friendship. I have found in this whole affair that some men are honest and sincere, and others not so. A very slender discovery you'll say; but which, however, may be useful to me, by teaching me not to trust too much to professions and appearances. I am, Dear Sir, your most obedient humble Servant,

David Hume

London April 17, 1746.

If you favor me with any letters, please direct them under cover to Mr Oswald.
