Dear Baron

I wrote Mrs Mure an ostensible Letter, which however, contain'd nothing but Truth: Lord Hertford is not decided, but intends to ask of Lord Harcourt, who are the Persons that recommended Graffigni, since it now appears, that Helvetius was none of them, as he had apprehended: We shall then make farther Enquiries. I see no Inconvenience in your boys remaining till that time: For they are really well in every thing that concerns Health and Exercise: They seem to be improving in English and also in French, and will now go on in Latin. Graffigni's Conceits, tho' they appear to me nonsensical, can do them no hurt. I fancy it was only Vanity, which engag'd him to cite those two celebrated Philosophers. Lord Hertford intends to inform Lord Bute of this Incident.

We are still in Confusion: The Report is, that the Grenvilles, the Rockinghams, and the Bedfords, have enterd into a sworn Confederacy to adhere to each other, till Lord Bute be banish'd from his Majesty's Person and Councils, for ever, and all his Friends turn'd out of all Offices, as a Pledge of His Majesty's entire Submission. It is certain, that my Principal, who has great Credit and Authority with all Parties, is the most moderate Man of the whole. From the present Aspect of things (which I own is very changeable) he is the most likely Person of the present Ministry to remain in power, and even to gain Ground.

You may easily conceive my Satisfaction on Hamilton's Victory: This incident puts you in entire Security, whatever becomes of the Decision here. But I think you run very little Chance to lose it in the House of Peers. The Triumph of Reason over Prejudice was very signal even in that small Majority among your Judges; but things having once taken a Turn, such strong Reason, aided by time, must certainly overcome weaker Prejudices. Lord Mansfield, the same day he heard of the Presidents Declaration, gave him very high Praises to a Friend of mine; and protested, that he himself was as yet totally ignorant of the Merits of the Cause. I am Dear Baron

 Yours sincerely,

David Hume.

London. 18. of July 1767
