Edinburgh, 3 July, 1763

. . . I was favoured, some time ago, with a letter from M. Rousseau, dated a Neufchâtel, and also one from Lord Marischal with regard to him. It is with great concern I find, that Neufchâtel is not the place which he would choose for his retreat, that the King of Prussia's authority is scarce able to protect him against the bigots, and that the philosopher persists in his usual maxims, of refusing all the supplies, with which the monarch intended to gratify him. At the same time, both Lord Marischal and M. Rousseau speak very doubtfully of any intention which the latter may have, of seeking his retreat in this island.

I am afraid, that the liberty which we enjoy here, is counterbalanced by so many inconveniences, as to discourage him from any project of settling among us. The chief inconvenience I can foresee is in our language, with which, I doubt, he is entirely unacquainted, and without which he could scarce find a tolerable society any where but in London; a place which may probably be too expensive for him. In many respects, this town would suit him better: there is here a very good society of men of letters, who would be ambitious of his acquaintance; and though living is not so cheap as in the provincial places of France, it is more reasonable than at London. But I am sorry to find, that the people, whose company he would like best, have not the familiar use of the French tongue, and though he is a lover of solitude, it would be agreeable for him, and probably necessary, to have a few, with whom he could unbend his mind, and dissipate his cares and anxieties. Even to be acquainted with the language of the common people, is a great relief in every country, and supplies many scenes of observation and amusement to a person of a philosophical turn.

Nothing could make me happier than to contribute any way to the convenience and amusements of his retreat; and I even ventured to mention to Lord Marischal, that I had an apartment in my house, which was not occupied, and which I would think myself happy, if so illustrious a fugitive would be pleased to accept of. I dared not to proceed any farther with a person of his turn; especially as the situation of my house in the midst of a city, joined to the circumstances of our climate, which is not favourable, made me doubtful how far such an offer, even if accepted, might in the issue prove agreeable to him. Your Ladyship, by passing some time in England, will be enabled to judge what advice it would be proper to give him; and surely no case could more strongly interest a person of your generosity and humanity than that of M. Rousseau, whose genius and virtue, attended with such bad health and harassed with such violent persecution, seem peculiarly to challenge attention . . . .
