Sir,

I had not time nor Leizure yesterday to write to you all the Reflections, which this last extraordinary Incident might occasion, and therefore use the Freedom to give you this fresh Trouble.

I must own it was with excessive Reluctance I wrote so softening & obliging a Letter to this man; but as I knew, that such a method of proceeding was conformable to your Intentions, I thought it my Duty to comply. However I easily saw 'twou'd all be in vain, & wou'd only fortify him in his Arrogance; Do you think, that the absolute Possession of so ample a Fortune, to which this is the first requisite Step, is a Prize to be resign'd for a few fair Words or flattering Professions? He deals too much in that Bait himself ever to be caught with it by others.

I think this the last Opportunity that will ever offer of retrieving the Family, and yourself, (as far as you are connected with the Family) from falling into absolute Slavery to so odious a Master. If in the beginning, and while he is watcht by jealous Eyes, he can attempt such things, what will he not do when he has fixt his Authority, & has no longer any Inspector over him? Tis lucky, therefore, that this, as it seems the last, is so good an Opportunity. Nothing was ever so barefac'd as his Conduct. To quarrel with me merely because I civilly supported a most reasonable Project: To threaten me with his Vengeance, if I open'd my Lips to you concerning your Friends Affair: To execute that threat, without a Pretext and without consulting you: These Steps give us such Advantages over him as must not be neglected.

I hope you will not take it amiss, if I say, that your conduct with regard to your Friend & to those who have at different times been about him, has all along, been too gentle & cautious. I had considerably shaken the Authority of this man (tho I had no Authority myself) merely by my Firmness and Resolution. He now assumes more when he observes your Precautions.

But as I do not believe, that tho your Firmness may daunt him, it will ever engage him to loose hold of so fine a prize, it will be requisite to think of more effective remedies. Happily, there is time enough both to contrive and to execute. For tho he makes me the offer of present payment (which I hope you observ'd) in order to engage me to leave you presently, he shall not get rid of me so easily.

The only Difficulty, you know, is with regard to a third person, who must be pleas'd and satisfy'd; and unhappily all intercourse with her is cut off at present. But as we may hope it will soon be open'd it will be proper for you, in my humble Opinion, to write to her strongly in my Favour, and at the same time, defy him to say anything to the contrary. You may, if you please, ask of her only a Reprieve till you can see her, and then you may lay before her all I told you, and whatever more this winter shall produce; as I doubt not but it will produce several Incidents to our purpose. For tis improbable such a man can be a month without betraying himself.

If our intercourse with her shou'd still continue to be interrupted, you may tell him plainly that he has no Authority to take such Steps of himself, and that you are resolv'd I shall remain til my Lady be satisfy'd. When you have fortify'd me with this Declaration, he shall be a very bold man who will offer to gainsay it.

I doubt not but you are convinc'd that nothing will ever be gain'd by yielding to so much Arrogance. I might, I believe, by compliance have remain'd as long as I pleas'd; because he cou'd entertain no Jealousy of me: But he knows that your title to Authority is so much better than his own, that he will never think himself fully secur'd till you are entirely remov'd. For this reason, he does not pretend to act in conjunction with you, nor will admit you to any Share of his Councils; but has from the very beginning, even before he had any Occasion to find you of a different Opinion from him, erected Altar against Altar, or rather attempted to erect a Throne over your Footstool.

He told one of the servants here, that he said to you, that he was the nearest relation, and that he wou'd admit of no Interference in these Affairs. I do not believe he was so impudent. He only says such things behind your back at present. A month hence, he will say them to your face, if yielded to.

He pretends to have great Deference to the Solicitor General; because he knows he has too much business to mind these Matters, or give a deligent Inspection to his Conduct: May it not be proper to prepossess him in my Favour?

You have some reason to take amiss my asking so small a Boon as that of a Quarter's prolongation of my term of Banishment. But I dreaded, and still dread, your Gentleness & Caution.

You may be assur'd that tis absolutely impossible for any body to live better with your Friend, than I have done all along & still continue to do. Even our Usurper has remark'd it, with Surprize. How happens it, says he, a little before his Departure hence, that you are never the Object of any of his Satyre and oblique Raillery, to which we are all so much expos'd? Your Friend made me remark last night (what indeed is pretty obvious) that he possesses his Faculties much more, and has a more easy Conversation with me than with any body else; after which he nam'd particularly V. & his Wife. These Proposals, as he confesses, himself, come only from his excessive Love of Solitude; which ought to be comply'd with, to a reasonable degree. Tis with Horror he thinks of that Couple's coming out again to live with him. Yet if their projects take place, they will never be absent from him.

By the bye how does this Offer of paying me presently three hundred pounds agree with the Scarcity of Money, and Mr V.'s being oblig'd to advance of his own for the Maintenance of the Family? I hope you will examine that Fact.

I shall conclude, with putting you in Mind, that the Papers, which were too easily granted this man in the Spring, only empower'd him to pay me (by Name) 300£ a year; but not to turn me off or conclude a Bargain with any body else. So that none of his Contracts of this kind will be binding.

I shall not however conclude without telling you, that when I became absolutely certain of this man's Character, I was curious to know the Character he bore in the World; and for that purpose write to Mr Oswald (with whom I live in great Intimacy) to desire him to inform himself of the Matter; which he was easily enabl'd to do, by his Connexions in the Navy. He answer'd me, that he was universally regarded as a low, dirty, despicable Fellow; and particularly infamous for pimping his wife to another Peer. That is a Fact, I have also some reason to know; and tallies exactly with what I told you. You may ask Oswald.

I must conclude at last, which I shall do, by asking your pardon for so long a Letter. I am Sir

 Your most oblig'd humble Servant

David Hume.

 Nov. 27. 1745.

P.S.

When I put this Letter (or one to the same purpose) into Mr Vincent's hands, telling him, that, tho' I had wrote it I did not intend to send it at present, he told me, he was glad of that, because he desir'd you shou'd intermeddle as little as possible in these Affairs: Adding, that he intended, by keeping my Lord's person and his English Affairs in his own hands, to free my Lady from all Slavery to you.

Ever since no entreaties, no threatenings have been spar'd to make me keep silence to you: To which my constant Answer was, that I thought not that consistent with my Duty. I told him freely, that I wou'd lay all the foregoing reasons before you when you came to London, and hop't you wou'd prevail with him to alter his Opinion. If not, we shou'd all write if you thought proper, to my Lady Marchioness, in order to have her Determination. The endeavouring, then, to make me keep Silence to you, was also to keep my Lady in the Dark, about such material points, since I cou'd not have Access to let her know the Situation of our Affairs, by any other means.

He offer'd to let me leave your Friend in the beginning of Winter, if I pleas'd, provided I wou'd make no Opposition to his plan, that is, wou'd not inform you: For I was not capable of making any other Opposition. He added, that he wou'd allow me my Sallary for the whole year, and that he wou'd himself supply my place, leave his house in London, and live with your Friend. Can all this pains be taken, merely for the difference betwixt one house and another?

An evening or two before his departure from Weldehall he offer'd me the continuance of the same Friendship, which had always subsisted betwixt us, if I wou'd promise not to open my Lips to you about this Matter.

The morning of his departure he burst out all of a sudden, when the Subject was not talk't of, into threatenings, and told me, that, if I ever enter'd upon this subject with you, I shou'd repent it. He went out of the house presently, and these were almost his last words.

I presume, if my whole Conduct and Behaviour, since I attended your Friend, have been in other respects unexceptionable (which I hope Mr V. will allow), I shall never incur any Blame upon that account.

I never open'd my Lips, directly or indirectly, to your Friend upon this Topic, nor encourag'd his Humours and Fancies. He gave Mr Vincent his Word of Honour before me that till within a few days, he did not so much as know I was of the same Opinion with himself. I did then indeed, in order to pacify him, give him hopes that your good Sense and Compassion wou'd bring him some relief, by removing this Cause of Anxiety which is so prejudicial to his health and temper. I have never since mention'd the Subject to him.

This repeated Vehemence and my constant refusal to be silent to you, was the Cause of that alarming Letter to my Lady, where she was told that her Son was become altogether ungovernable, and that nothing but her presence here cou'd compose matters. A very extraordinary reason to make a sickly Lady travel three hundred Miles in the Depth of Winter, and to throw such a useless Alarm into the Breast of a tender parent! Is it so great a Matter to remove a Family twelve or fourteen Miles?

You see by my letter what a Scheme is push'd, so expensive to the Family, so dangerous to your Friend, and so cruel both to him and to me, without the least Shadow of Reason, so far as I can judge. You see also what Arts are employ'd to render this Scheme effectual, viz Entreaties and Threatenings and even Bribes offer'd to make me keep Silence, and huddle up all Matters in the dark. It may now be proper to inform you what End is propos'd by all this, and what Interest engages Mr Vincent into so unaccountable a method of proceding.

When the Design of continuing here began to break out by Chance and by Degrees (for a contrary Resolution seem'd to be taken in the beginning of Summer) I told him, that I was sorry for it, that that was a Course of Life, which I cou'd not approve of for your Friend, and to which, for my own part, I never cou'd be reconcil'd, that I wou'd endeavour to make out the year; but that I believ'd it wou'd be impossible for me to stay any longer. He reply'd, that a man of my Sense & Judgement never took a Resolution but upon good Grounds, and that 'twas needless to endeavour to dissuade such People. This was telling me, in his very civil way, that I was welcome to be gone, if I pleas'd.

This past in August. As Winter was yet distant, and I saw no present Remedy, I remain'd very quiet, and always talkt upon the Footing, as if I was to depart very soon & without making any Opposition. One day, I told him, that since he had alter'd his Scheme so considerably as to the place of our Abode, he ought also to alter it farther, and not place a Gentleman about your Friend, but one who cou'd eat & converse with the Servants & neighbouring Farmers, and by that means enjoy some Society, without which no human Creature cou'd live. He reply'd: That is my Intention, if you prosecute your Resolution of leaving us.

You see then what Dissimulation and Artifice is here employ'd with regard to the Family. For if such a Scheme was advisable, why not propose it directly? Why employ so many Fetches & Artifices to render it effectual?

What Cruelty with regard to your Friend, whom he keeps in Torment meanwhile, and exposes to the greatest Danger.

What Deceit, & I may say, Treachery with regard to me, whom he loaded with Professions of Friendship, and yet was undermining all the time.

May I not safely say, that this Scheme is very improper? Your Friend has still remaining so much Spirit & Taste of every thing, especially of Books, as to require the Company of a man of Education.

This Situation exposes him to the Artifices of Sharpers, from which the Attendance of a common Servant will never sufficiently secure the Family.

Mr Vincent may be call'd to Sea in a day. What becomes of your Friend?

What I have said above consists of Facts, which I know: The rest is only my own Conjecture. He always declares his Resolution of leaving this Countrey very soon, which he says is neither agreeable to his Health nor Humour. I have heard him say to your Friend, that he may probably show him again those foreign Countries, of which he is so fond: He drop'd a hint, in his Letter to you, as if travelling with a sure Hand (which I suppose is himself) wou'd not be improper for your Friend: May we not conjecture that this Scheme is an Addition to his other Projects?

I have put all this in writing, for greater Exactness, and permit you to make whatever use of it you think proper.

David Hume.
