Edinburgh 30 Jany 1773

Dear Sir

I find you must reprint all that Note about the Northumberland House-hold Book. The Alterations I make are very little material; but being requir'd in a very obliging manner by Dr Piercy, and, I suppose, by the Family, I could not now refuse them, without giving them great Offence, which I wish to avoid.

I have likewise sent you one Addition to the Errata. The Passage at present is Nonsense, tho' I find it has escaped me in three Editions, notwithstanding it was printed right at first. Be so good as to insert it in its proper place; as I suppose the Errata is not printed.

I never, that I remember, mention'd to Capn Braidon any particular Sum which he might expect, as I receivd his Manuscript in Parcels and coud form no Estimate of its Bulk. His Journey over Mount Etna is the most curious part of it; and I wish it be not anticipated by a late German Work which is translated, but I have not read it. I recommended to Mr Braidon to obliterate some Levities, too much in the Shandean Style, which he promis'd to do. I do hope with these Corrections, it will be thought a good readable Book and curious.

Considering the Treatment I have met with, it woud have been very silly for me at my Years to continue writing any more; and still more blameable to warp my Principles and Sentiments in conformity to the Prejudices of a stupid, factious Nation, with whom I am heartily disgusted. I wish my Continuators good Success; tho' I believe they have sence enough not to care whether they meet with it or not. Macpherson has Style and Spirit; but is hot-headed, and consequently without Judgement. The Knight has Spirit, but no Style, and still less Judgement than the other. I shoud think Dr Douglas, if he woud undertake it, a better hand than either. Or what think you of Andrew Stuart? For as to any Englishman, that Nation is so sunk in Stupidity and Barbarism and Faction that you may as well think of Lapland for an Author. The best Book, that has been writ by any Englishman these thirty Years (for Dr Franklyn is an American) is Tristram Shandy, bad as it is. A Remark which may astonish you; but which you will find true on Reflection.

I admire very much this Work of Andrew Stuart; tho I was at first exceedingly alarmd at the Imprudence of the Attempt. I am less so, after perusing it; tho still it appears imprudent, according to the vulgar Rule of estimating these Matters.

I woud have you publish this new Edition as soon as it is ready; and rather submit to some Loss than allow the Book to be any longer discredited by that abominable Edition, which has given you and me so much Vexation, and has been one Cause why I have thrown my Pen aside for ever.

 Believe me ever Yours

D. H.
