Edinburgh 1 March 1774.

Dear Sir

I have heard of the Event of your great Cause concerning literary Property, which is indeed no other than I expected: For the former Decision of the King's Bench was certainly contrary to the natural Sense of the Act of Queen Anne, and was deriv'd entirely from a groundless, tho' well-meant Subtlety of Lord Mansfield. I am sorry to hear, that the Triumph of his Enemies has been so great on the Occasion. Were it possible to revive another Cause you wot of, their Triumph woud be much greater and much better founded.

I shoud be glad to know, whether you think your Interest will be much affected by this Decision, or the Interest of such as may be my Successors in the barren and perilous Adventure of Bookmaking. As to my Writings, I think it will be possible for me to prolong your Lease of them, even according to the Statute. I have never made a new Edition without Alterations, and even Additions, sometimes of considerable Length. If it were thought worth while, I coud transfer to you anew the Property of these; and if no Body can reprint these passages during fourteen Years after the first Publication, it woud effectually secure you so long from any pyrated Edition. I have writ a new Essay, which I intended to add to the Collection; and shoud give it you in the same manner. Pray, ask of Mr Cadell, if there be any prospect of a new Edition of these pieces.

I think you ought, both for your own Interest and that of Learning, to apply for a new Law; as the Penalties, granted by the Statute of Q. Anne, are quite insufficient for your Protection.

I hope you can tell me something in justification, at least in alleviation of Dr Franklyn's Conduct. The factious Part he has all along acted must be given up by his best Friends: But I flatter myself there is nothing treacherous or unfair in his Conduct; though his Silence with regard to the method, by which he came by these Letters, leaves room for all sorts of malignant Surmizes. What pity, that a man of his Merit shoud have fallen into such unhappy Circumstances!

I remember, one day, at Lord Bathurst's, the Company, among whom was his Son, the present Chancellor, were speaking of American Affairs; and some of them mention'd former Acts of Authority exercisd over the Colonies. I observd to them, that Nations, as well as Individuals, had their different Ages, which challeng'd a different Treatment. For Instance, My Lord, said I to the old Peer, you have sometimes, no doubt, given your Son a Whipping; and I doubt not, but it was well merited and did him much good: Yet you will not think proper at present to employ the Birch: The Colonies are no longer in their Infancy. But yet I say to you, they are still in their Nonage; and Dr Franklyn's wishes to emancipate them too soon from their mother Country. I am Dear Sir

 Your sincere Friend and humble Servant

David Hume
