London end of June, 1747

Dear Sir

I have intended every day to write to you, since I came to London, but delay'd it; in expectation every day of being able to tell you, that I was fixt in some way of Life, that wou'd have been an easy Settlement to me. I dont remember, if ever I informd you, that about the Beginning of August last, the General gave me the Commission of Judge-Advocate, which had before been possess'd by a young Officer, whom he made his Aide de camp. As the Continuance of the Expedition seem'd then to be very uncertain, he was willing to use the present Opportunity of giving me this Commission chiefly on account of the half pay, a crown a day, to which it was entitled. But on our Arrival in London, we find that the Ministers scruple to give any of us half pay; under Pretext that the Expedition to North America did not take place. We expect a definitive Answer in a few days; tho' even if this Difficulty were got over, there will remain a Difficulty with regard to me, which is, that there is no Precedent that any Judge-Advocate has had half-pay. But it appears evidently that the sole Reason has been, that this Office has always been conjoind with another Office, generally that of Commissary of Musters, or has been possest by an Officer, who cou'd not have half-pay. But as it has the King's Commission, and as all the Kings Commissions in the military way are attended with half pay, we think it impossible, if half pay be granted to the rest, that they can refuse me; especially as the General will make a Point to prevail in this Matter; and I hope for Assistance from my other Friends. Mean-while I am a little irresolute what Measures to take in case of my Failure, whether to remain in London, & endeavour to push my Fortune some other way, or return to my Studies at Ninewells. On the one hand, I consider, that I am at a critical Season in Life; & that if I retire into a Solitude at present I am in danger of being left there, & of continuing a poor Philosopher for ever. On the other hand, I am not able to form any distinct Project of pushing myself in any particular Profession; the Law & Army is too late, the Church is my Aversion. A travelling Tutor, some better, but not agreeable. Any Office uncertain, & precarious. Mean-while I lose my time, spend my Money; fall into necessity, perhaps, & Dependance, which I have sought all my Life to avoid. I am not a good Courtier, nor very capable of pushing my Fortune by Intrigue or Insinuation: Whereas if I wait till I shall be able to make my Name more generally known; something may offer of itself, & even seek me in my Solitude; as every thing that has yet presented itself has done. I believe if I wait in London, I shall not for some time spend much, being well provided of good Cloaths, & I am in other Respects a good Oeconomist. Oswald is very much for my staying in London, & so are many others of my Friends; but the Ballance of my Inclinations lies the other way: Tho I confess, that I felt the Solitude in the Country rather too great, especially as I was so indifferently provided of a Library to employ me. You'll easily see, that I give you this long Detail in expectation of your Advice and Opinion.

Our Friend, Sir James Johnstone, had a great Desire, that I shou'd return to my old Station with his Chieftain; but on his proposing the Matter to the Marchioness, he found that she had Views somewhere else. We have agreed to referr our Dispute with regard to the 75£ to the Sollicitor General; and as he tells me, that you was so kind as to draw up a Memorial of my Case, which you once gave him; & which he restor'd to you, I must desire you to send it up to me with the very first Opportunity, under Cover to General Stclair, Coventry Street. He show'd me a Letter of yours, which, he said, does not put the Matter in the same Light as in the Memorial. It appears to me, that as my Bargain was made with my Lord, & with his Friends Sir James, & Vincent (who all agreed that I shou'd have the same Terms with Mr Young) and as My Lord & Sir James both positively oppos'd the Diminution of my Sallary; it was not in Vincent's Power alone to break the Bargain; tho as a Friend to the Family he might make that or any other Proposal he thought proper to me or any other of the Friends. But, it may be said, that by my consenting to refer the Matter to Lady Annandale, I gave up the former Bargain. But observe, that I did not make that Reference till the 3d of April; & on the first of that Month I might, if I pleas'd, have left my Lord, and claim'd the whole Quarter's Sallary, upon the old Bargain, which still subsisted if it was not in Vincents Power alone to dissolve it. So that when on the third of April, I said, that I referrd the Matter to Lady Annandale, I can never be suppos'd to have given up what I was then legally intitled to, but only to stand to her Determination with regard to what shou'd be my future Sallary. You'll please to observe, that even if I chose to leave my Lord any time after the beginning of the Quarter, I might claim the whole Sallary; much more when I am willing to stay, & am driven away by sudden Caprice in one, & premediated Knavery in another. — But if there be any Solidity in these Topics, I doubt not but you have comprehended them in your Memorial, which I shall deliver in to Mr Murray.

 You have never spoke to me of the Essays on British Antiquities; and therefore I shou'd not in Decency speak of them to you. But as it wou'd be more indecent to employ so long a Letter in talking entirely of myself, I shall only say, that I read them with great Satisfaction, the Reasonings are solid, the Conjectures ingenious, & the whole instructive. The Stile is also very good; correct & nervous, & very pure; only a very few Scotticisms as conform for comformable; which I remarkt. You do me the Honour to borrow some Principles from a certain Book. I wish they be not esteem'd too subtile & abstruse.

I had the Pleasure to see Mrs Home frequently when in London. I hear the Bath Waters agree with her. What a Pity is it that her bad State of Health shou'd be the only Allay of your mutual Happiness! But something is still wanting.

Our Friend, Oswald, has made a fine Appearance in the Jurisdiction Bill. I fear much he will not have a Seat in the next Parliament; tho it were a thousand Pities. He sets out for Scotland in a few days, with his Wife, who seems to be a sensible Woman but old & also dry & reserv'd, like the foolish English women. She keeps, as they say, all in her own Power: So that, to tell truth, I am not excessively fond of this Marriage; tho he is. But if it were not for the Advantage of its enabling him to throw up his Office, and continue in Parliament, I wish him rather a Batchelor.

I hope this Letter will find you in the Country; otherwise I am sure you never will have Patience to read it. I am Yours most affectionately & sincerely

David Hume
