My dear Sir

Not finding your young Gentlemen in Church last Sunday, I went to see them; where I found them both confin'd to the House with a light Fever, which has since turnd out the Measles in form; but with all the most favourable Symptoms. I find Mr Liston very attentive & very careful: The young Gentlemen are attended by the Physician of the Academy. I use the Freedom to tell Lady Hertford of the Method in which they are governd; and she tells me that she woud not act otherwise in the Care of her own Children; so that Mrs Murray, if you please to communicate to her this Intelligence, can have no Reason for Anxiety. Gilbert has a greater Quantity than Hugh; and greater Strength to bear them.

You know, I suppose, that I am appointed Secretary to the Embassy, tho' I have not yet receivd my credential Letter: The present Confusions in the Court may perhaps retard them for some time; but Mr Greenville has informd the Ambassador that the Matter is concluded, and the King has given his Consent: So that in spite of Atheism & Deism, of Whiggism & Toryism, of Scoticism & Philosophy, I am now possess'd of an Office of Credit, and of 1200 Pounds a Year; without Dedication or Application, from the Favour alone of a Person, whom I can perfectly love & respect. I find it has cost my Lord a very hard Pull; and when I consider the Matter alone, without viewing the Steps that led to it, I am sometimes inclind to be surprizd how it has happen'd.

Shall I tell you another Circumstance that is not disagreeable to me; a certain Lady, who is at present in London, hearing there was some Delay, wrote in the most earnest Terms to the Duke of Bedford, desiring his Interest in my Favour. He answerd her he woud soon be in Town, and if he then possessd any Credit or Authority, she might depend upon the Success of her Friend. You know that he is not a Man that makes vain Profession; nor is he a Man easy to be refusd. If you guess the Lady, you will conclude that it will not cost me a great Effort to be grateful. The Share you have also been pleasd to take is not forgot, and strengthens our ancient Friendship. I am My Dear Sir,

 Yours sincerely

David Hume.

Paris 3 July 1765
