Lisle Street, Leicester Fields, 12 of Augt 1766

My dear Sir

I have used the Freedom to send to you in two Pacquets by this Post the whole Train of my Correspondence with Rousseau, connected by a short Narrative. I hope you will have Leizure to peruse it. The Story is incredible as well as inconceivable, were it not founded on such authentic Documents: Surely never was there so much Wickedness and Madness combined in one human Creature; nor did ever any one meet with such a Return for such signal Services, as those I performed towards him. But I am told, that he used to say to Duclos and others, that he hated all those to whom he owed any Obligations: In that Case, I am fully entitled to his Animosity.

I am really at a Loss what use to make of this Collection. The Story, I am told, is very much the Object of Conversation at Paris: Tho' my Conduct has been entirely innocent, or rather indeed very meritorious, it happens, no doubt, as is usual in such Ruptures, that I will bear a Part of the blame; from which a Publication of these Papers woud entirely free me: Yet I own I have an Antipathy and Reluctance to appeal to the Public; and fear that such a Publication woud be the only Blame I cou'd incur in this Affair. You know that no-body's Judgement weighs farther with me than Yours: Think a little of the Matter: if Mde Dupré were in Town, I wou'd desire her to give these Papers a Perusal, and tell me her Opinion. Unhappily Monr Trudaine woud only understand the French Part, which is by far the most considerable. What wou'd his Friend, Fontenelle, have done in this Situation? I am as great a Lover of Peace as he, and have kept myself as free from all literary Quarrels: But surely, neither he nor any other Person was ever engaged in a Controversy with a Man of so much Malice, of such a profligate Disposition to Lyes, and such great Talents. It is nothing to dispute my Style or my Abilities as an Historian or a Philosopher; My Books ought to answer for themselves, or they are not worth the defending: To fifty Writers, who have attacked me on this head, I never made the least Reply: But this is a different Case: Imputations are here thrown on my Morals and my Conduct; and tho' my Case is so clear as not to admit of the least Controversy, yet it is only clear to those who know it, and I am uncertain how far the Public in Paris are in the Case. At London, a Publication woud be regarded as entirely superfluous.

I must desire you to send these Papers to D'Alembert after you have read them. M. Turgot will get them from him: I shoud desire that he saw them before he sets out for his Government.

Does not Mde de Montigny laugh at me, that I shoud have sent her but a few Weeks ago the Portrait of Rousseau done from an Original in my Possession and shoud now send you these Papers, which prove him to be one of the worst Men that perhaps ever existed; if his Frenzy be not some Apology for him. I beg my Compliments to M. & Mde de Fourqueux: And am with great Truth & Sincerity My Dear Sir

 Your most affectionate humble Servant

David Hume

P.S.

I am sorry to tell you, that our Accounts of the poor Chevalier Macdonald are very bad.
