London 10 March 1767

Dear Ferguson

It is with a sincere Pleasure I inform you of the general Success of your [xxx] Book . I had almost said universal Success; and the Expression wou'd have been proper, as far as a Book can be suppos'd to be diffus'd in a Fortnight, amidst this Hurry of Politics and Faction. I may safely say, that I have met with no body, that has read it, who does not praise it; and these are the People, who by their Reputation and Rank commonly give the Tone on these Occasions. Lord Mansfield encreases his Style of Approbation; and is very loud to that Purpose in his Sundays Societies. I heard Lord Chesterfield and Lord Lyttleton express the same Sentiments; and what is above all, Caddel, I am told, is very happy; and is already projecting a second [xxx] Edition  of the same Quarto Size. You ought to have sent up more Copies to this Place; tho' I doubt not but you will easily dispose of all those which you retained for Edinburgh.

Lord Shelburn is in the southern Department: I shall have no Difficulty by his means of sending over your Copy to Paris. I had almost forgot to tell you, that this noble Lord, as well as Lord Bute, are among your most zealous Partisans. The last says, that your Book is one of the best he ever read. 

Last Night, Horace Walpole desir'd me to make his Compliments to you: He has receiv'd your Book, in a Present from you, as he supposes. He gives you many thanks, approves extremely of what he has read, but delays writing you till he has read the Whole.

I shall tell you all our domestic Politics, in which there is no Secret. The Ministry on Friday was Sennight lost the Vote of the Land tax by a Majority of eighteen, very unexpectedly both to themselves and to their Antagonists The Country Gentlemen, to save themselves a shilling a pound [xxx], and to please the Counties whom they represent, joind the Opposition. Every body blames extremely the Measure: Even many of those who voted for it, are frank in declaring their Dissapprobation [xxx]; and some scruple not to say, that if they had thought it possible for them to have prevail'd, they woud not voted for it have have been on that Side. But tho' these were unlucky Circumstances for the Opposition, and their Majority had proceeded merely from an Accident, they were extremely elated with their Success, and express'd their Confidence of finally prevailing. The General Opinion of Dissensions among the Ministry encreas'd their Hopes; and as it was generally universally known that my Patron and Charles Townsend differ'd in Opinion from the rest with regard to the Conduct of the East Indian Affairs, they muster'd up all their Force on Friday last, in order to make a  Trial of Parties. But it then appeard, that the Difference was only of Opinion, not of Affections. The General and the Chancellor of the Exchequer supported the Measures of Administration, and the Opposition did not think proper to call a Vote. But yesterday they thought to have stolen a March upon us. They introduced into the House a small Branch of the same East Indian Affair; and had given the Rendezvous to each other. Mr C. Townsend was accidentally absent: But Mr Conway (and this I tell you from universal Testimony) exerted himself with so much Eloquence and Ability that he retained the Majority to the Number of thirty-three. This is thought a great and deservd Victory for the present Session; and the Majority, it is believd, will be daily encreasing. Sr Gilbert Elliott also spoke admirably, as I am told. But Burke did very ill, which I am sorry for. It is pretended, that he rather sinks in Reputation. Wedderburn is always in Opposition, but rises in Character.

I am not hurry'd with Business. I commonly attend in the Secretary's House from ten to three; but often read a Book of my own, and see Company there, and have indeed no more Business than woud be requisite for my Amusement in this place, while I am not engag'd in any literary Occupation.

[David Hume]
