Ίητρὸς γὰρ ἀνηρ πολλῶν ἀντάξιος ἄλλων.

Dear Doctor,

I have here received a great many thanks from an honest man, who tells me that he and all his family have been extremely obliged to me. This is my brother's gardener, who showed me a letter from his son, wherein he acknowledges that he owes his life to your care; that you placed him in an hospital, and attended him with as much assiduity as if he had been the best nobleman in the land; that all he shall ever be worth will never be able to repay you: and that therefore he must content himself with being grateful: at the same time desiring his father to give me thanks, by whose means he was recommended to you.

These thanks I received with great gravity, and replied, that one must always endeavour to do good when it is in one's power. In short, I took upon me your part, and gave myself as many airs as if I had really shown the same beneficent dispositions. I considered that you have good deeds to spare, and are possessed of greater store of merits and works of supererogation, than any church, Pagan, Mahometan, or Catholic, ever was entitled to, and that, therefore, to rob you a little was no great crime: —

— cui plura supersunt, 
Et fallunt dominum, et prosunt furibus.



I hope, dear Doctor, you find virtue its own reward — that, methinks, is but just — considering it is the only reward it is ever likely to meet with — in this world I mean; at least you may take your own reward yourself for me. I shall never trouble my head about the matter, and you need not expect that I shall even like or esteem you the better for this instance of your charity and humanity. You fancy, I suppose, that I already liked and esteemed you so much, that this makes no sensible addition. You may fancy what you please: I shall not so much as speak another word upon this subject, but proceed to a better. You shall see.

You would perhaps ask, how I employ my time in this leisure and solitude, and what are my occupations? Pray, do you expect I should convey to you an encyclopedia, in the compass of a letter? The last thing I took my hand from was a very learned, elaborate discourse, concerning the populousness of antiquity; not altogether in opposition to Vossius and Montesquieu, who exaggerate that affair infinitely; but, starting some doubts, and scruples, and difficulties, sufficient to make us suspend our judgment on that head. Amongst other topics, it fell in my way to consider the greatness of ancient Rome; and in looking over the discourse, I find the following period. 'If we may judge by the younger Pliny's account of his house, and by the plans of ancient buildings in Dr. Mead's collection, the men of quality had very spacious palaces, and their buildings were like the Chinese houses, where each apartment is separate from the rest, and rises no higher than a single story.' Pray, on what authority are those plans founded? If I remember right, I was told they were discovered on the walls of the baths, and other subterraneous buildings. Is this the proper method of citing them? If you have occasion to communicate this to Dr Mead, I beg that my sincere respects may be joined.

I think the parsons have lately used the physicians very ill, for, in all the common terrors of mankind, you used commonly both to come in for a share of the profit: but in this new fear of earthquakes, they have left you out entirely, and have pretended alone to give prescriptions to the multitude. I remember, indeed, Mr Addison talks of a quack that advertised pills for an earthquake, at a time when people lay under such terrors as they do at present. But I know not if any of the faculty have imitated him at this time. I see only a Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of London, where, indeed, he recommends certain pills, such as fasting, prayer, repentance, mortification, and other drugs, which are entirely to come from his own shop. And I think this is very unfair in him, and you have great reason to be offended; for why might he not have added, that medicinal powders and potions would also have done service? The worst is, that you dare not revenge yourself in kind, by advising your patients to have nothing to do with the parson; for you are sure he has a faster hold of them than you, and you may yourself be discharged on such an advice.

 You'll scarcely believe what I am going to tell you; but it is literally true. Millar had printed off some Months ago a new Edition of certain philosophical Essays; but he tells me very gravely, that he has delay'd publishing because of the Earthquakes. I wish you may not also be a Loser by the same common Calamity. For I am told the Ladies were so frightend that they took the Rattling of every Coach for an Earthquake, & therefore wou'd employ no Physicians but from amongst the Infantry: Insomuch that some of you Charioteers had not gain'd enough to pay the Expences of your Vehicle. But this may only be Waggery & Banter, which I abhor. Please remember to give my Respects to the General, & Sir Harry & Captain Grant; who I hope are all in good Health. Indeed as to the Captain, I do not know what to hope or wish. For if he recovers his Health, he loses his Shape; & must always remain in that perplexing Dilemma. Remember me also to Suncey Glassaugh. And remember me yourself.

Ninewells near Berwick April 18. 1750.

P.S.

Pray, did Guidelianus get his Money allow'd him by the Pay Office? I suppose he is in Ireland; poor Devil! so I give you no Commission with regard to him.

Pray tell Glassauch, that I hope he has not suppressd the Paper I sent him about the new Year. If he has, pray ask for a Sight of it. For it is very witty. I contriv'd it one Night, that I coud not sleep for the Tortures of Rheumatisms: And you have heard of a great Lady, who always put on Blisters, when she wanted to be witty. Tis a Receipt I recommend to you.
