[London] 20 [February?] 1759.

. . . I am afraid that my letters will be tedious and disagreeable to you by their uniformity. Nothing but continued and unvaried accounts of the same thing must in the end prove disgusting. Yet since you will hear me speak on this subject, I cannot help it, and must fatigue your ears as much as ours are in this place by endless, and repeated, and noisy praises of the History of Scotland. Dr Douglas told me yesterday that he had seen the Bishop of Norwich, who had just bought the book from the high commendations he heard of it from Mr Legge. Mallet told me that Lord Mansfield is at a loss whether he shall most esteem the matter or the style. Elliot told me, that being in company with George Grenville, that gentleman was speaking loud in the same key. Our friend pretended ignorance; said he knew the author, and if he thought the book good for anything, would send for it and read it. Send for it by all means, (said Mr Grenville) you have not read a better book of a long time. But, said Elliot, I suppose, although the matter may be tolerable, as the author was never on this side of the Tweed till he wrote it, it must be very barbarous in the expression. By no means, cried Mr Grenville; had the author lived all his life in London, and in the best company, he could not have expressed himself with greater elegance and purity. Lord Lyttleton seems to think that since the time of St Paul there scarce has been a better writer than Dr Robertson. Mr Walpole triumphs in the success of his favourites the Scotch, &c. &c. &c . . . .

The great success of your book, beside its real merit, is forwarded by its prudence, and by the deference paid to established opinions. It gains also by its being your first performance, and by its surprising the public, who are not upon their guard against it. By reason of these two circumstances justice is more readily done to its merit, which, however, is really so great, that I believe there is scarce another instance of a first performance being so near perfection.
