Dear Sir

We are still dependent on Winds & Ministers of State, & consequently in a very uncertain Condition. The Probability seems now to be against our sailing; & every day we remain here, encreases it. The Wind is at present a violent South-west, & the General is ill; tho we hope, that his Distemper will prove only a fit of the Gout & be no way dangerous. The Season, in which we can safely sail is declard to be limited to 10 days or a fortnight; & the Admirals Ship is still in the Harbour, & tis a great Chance if she can get out to the Road in that time. This join'd to the declard Aversion of the greatest Part of the Ministry to this Project, renders our Condition very uncertain, not to say worse; tho how our Governors will justify their Conduct to the Nation or the Nation save itself from the Ridicule of Foreigners, on account of such ill-concerted & vain Attempts I am at a Loss to determine. The Revolutions, that have occur'd in this Affair, & the Dissappointments we have met with & forsee, prepare us to bear indifferently any Accident; tho' they no way relax the Diligence of the General in the Execution of what depends on him.

The Project, upon which we are sent, is certainly very likely to succeed & to bring great Advantage to the Nation; provided our Affairs were so well manag'd or so successful in Europe as to give us hopes of maintaining our remote Conquests. The King of Spains Death, & the Austrian Successes in Italy bring us nearer this Prospect; and as the great Aim of France seems to be the Enlargement of her Frontiers in Flanders, tis probable she may rest contented with Advantages on that Side, & abandon her Trade & Colonies, which have never been her chief Concern. However these Matters may turn out, tis certainly best to be in Action while we are in War, & to attack the Enemy on her weak Side; especially if we consider, that all the Force of Europe can never wrest our Conquests from us, & nothing can ever oblige us to resign them but a generous Concern for the common Cause, to which we have been already too frequently the Dupes.

I shall mention as the chief Circumstance, that prognosticates Success, that the General is undoubtedly the only Officer of his Rank in Britain fit for this Undertaking. Tho rigorous in exacting Obedience from those he commands, he has Insinuation & Address to gain the Sea Officers & Colonies. All our Captains were exceedingly taken with his Civilities; & Mr Lestock has publickly declar'd, that the World shall see in one Instance, that tis possible for a Land & Sea Commander to agree. The Admiral is known to have great Sense and Parts; & tis altogether his Interest to act in Harmony with the General because the Public, who cannot well judge of his long & intricate Quarrel with Mathews, will be apt to acquit or condemn him, according to his Behaviour in this Undertaking. As to myself, my way of Life is agreeable; & tho’ it may not be so profitable as I am told, yet so large an Army, as will be under the General's Command in America, must certainly render my Perquisites very considerable. I have been askt, whether I wou'd encline to enter into the Service. My Answer was, that at my Years, I cou'd not decently accept of a Commission in the Army, except I got a Company. The only Prospect of working this Point, wou'd be to procure at first a Company in an American Regiment, by the Choice of the Colonies: But this I build not on, nor indeed am I very fond of it.

I likt exceedingly your Method of explaining personal Identity as more satisfactory than any thing that had ever occur'd to me. As to the Idea of Substance, I must own, that as it has no Access to the Mind by any of our Senses or Feelings, it has always appeard to me to be nothing but an imaginary Center of Union amongst the different & variable Qualitys that are to be found in every Piece of Matter. But I shall keep myself in Suspence till I hear your Opinion.

 I am told by John Williamson, that he was recommended by Mclaurin as his Successor. I wish the Controversy may be betwixt him and Robin Hamilton; because in either Case we shou'd be sure of a good Professor.

You mention nothing of Mrs Home to me: From whence I hope she is in good Health, & free from those nervous Illnesses with which she was afflicted.

You do not say, whether you think my Claim on the M. of A. well grounded. Such a Sum will be of consequence to me, in case of the Failure of this Undertaking. A Letter directed as your last will always be sure to find me. Adieu My Dear Friend.

D. H.

Portsmouth July. 24. 1746

Sandy Home is here upon a Project which I hope will succeed & turn out very much to his Advantage.
