⟨London 15 July 1766⟩

Dear Sir

I receiv'd to day a Letter from Rousseau, which is as long as wou'd make a two Shillings Pamphlet; and I fancy he intends to publish it. It is a perfect Frenzy. He says, that M. d'Alembert, Horace Walpole and I had entered into a Conspiracy to ruin him, and have ruined him. He says, that his first suspicions arose in France, while we lay in two beds in the same room of an Inn. There I talked in my Sleep, and betrayed my bad Intentions against him. He says, that young Tronchin of Geneva, son to the Physician of that Name, his mortal Enemy, lodged in the same house with me at London: and he adds, that my Landlady looked cold on him, as he went by her in the Passage. He says, that I am in a close Confederacy with Lord Lyttleton, his mortal Enemy, and that tho'the English Nation were fond of him on his first Arrival, Mr Walpole and I had totally alienated their Affections from him. He allows, however, that his Belief of my Treachery went no farther than suspicion, till he arrived at Wootton, but then it rose to Certainty. For there were several Publications in the Papers against him, which could proceed from nobody but me or my Confederate, Mr Walpole. I am really sorry for him; so that, tho'I intended to be very severe on him in my Answer, I have been very sparing; as you may see. I wou'd not, however, have you imagine that he has such an extreme Sensibility as he pretends. He wrote to General Conway, that he was oppress'd with such a grievous Calamity as deprivd him of the Use of his Senses and Understanding: This was about the time of your first Arrival at Wootton; when you wrote me, that he was perfectly gay, good-humourd and sociable: So that these Complaints of his Misery and Sufferings are a mere Artifice. I find in many other Respects that he lies like the Devil: You cannot imagine what a false and malicious Account he has the Assurance to give me of the Transaction between him and me the last Evening he was in Town, which I related to you. I am afraid indeed you have a very bad Pennyworth of him; but if I may venture to give my Advice, it is, that you wou'd continue the charitable Work you have begun, till he be shut up altogether in Bedlam, or till he quarrel with you and run away from you. If he show any Disposition to write me a penitential Letter, you may encourage it; not that I think it of any Consequence to me, but because it will ease his Mind and set him at rest. I write you in some hurry, as I set out to day for the Duke of Bedford's. I shall, if possible, pay my Respects to you in my way North. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

15 of July 1766

P.S.

The grievous Calamity, which he spoke of to General Conway, he now tells me was his Discovery of my Treachery.

I thought to have wrote to him by this Post; but really have not Leizure and scarce Patience. I shall perhaps write him some time after.
