Edinburgh, 22 January, 1763

Madame,

[. . .] I had a letter lately from my friend, Lord Marischal, Governor of Neufchâtel, by which I learned that M. Rousseau had taken shelter with him from the persecution of his enemies. My Lord praises extremely the politeness and agreeableness of M. Rousseau's conversation, and seems very desirous to detain the honest savage, as he pleasantly calls him, in his government: but I suspect, that the King of Prussia's authority is so limited in that republic, as scarcely to afford the philosopher sufficient protection from the bigots, who still continue to harass him. Meanwhile that great Prince ordered My Lord to build him a hermitage, to lay out a small garden for him, and to supply him with all his necessaries. But Rousseau, with his usual dignity, refused all these gratuities, though at the same time he desired My Lord to learn from me, whether it were possible for him to gain from the London booksellers as much money as would suffice for his maintenance; and this recompence, being the fruit of his own industry, he would have no scruple to accept of. I think this instance of conduct a kind of phenomenon in the republic of letters, and one very honourable for M. Rousseau. One is only apt to wish that he could practise this virtue with less hardship and difficulty; though we must also confess, that the difficulty adds to the lustre of it. I have heard, that the circumstance which deterred him from coming over to England, as he first intended, was a harsh reflection, which he threw out on the people in his Treatise of Education: if this was his motive, I am persuaded that he would find it a vain fear, and that every one would rather have been anxious to show respect to his merit. Perhaps also he might have seen reason to retract the opinion which he had formed of the nation; and might have observed the English to be more hard in their exterior than their interior. He would have seen many instances of humanity very honourable to their character: besides the magnificent charities, which are supported by voluntary contributions, where superstition has little share, they practised, during the late war, a piece of humanity which was very commendable. We had sometimes near 30,000 French seamen prisoners, who were distributed into different prisons, and whom the Parliament maintained by a considerable sum allotted them. They received food from the public, but it was thought that their own friends would supply them with clothes, which however was found, after some time, to be neglected. The cry arose, that the brave and gallant men, though enemies, were perishing with cold in prison: a subscription was set on foot; great sums were given by all ranks of people; and, notwithstanding the national foolish prejudices against the French, a remarkable zeal every where appeared for this charity. I am afraid that M. Rousseau could not have produced many parallel instances among his heroes, the Greeks; and still fewer among the Romans.

You deign, Madam, to ask my opinion of the new performance of M. Rousseau. I know that it becomes me better to form my judgment upon yours; but in compliance with your commands, I shall not make a secret of my sentiments. All the writings of that author appear to me admirable, particularly on the head of eloquence; and if I be not much mistaken, he gives to the French tongue an energy, which it scarce seems to have reached in any other hands. But as his enemies have objected, that with this domineering force of genius there is always intermingled some degree of extravagance, it is impossible for his friends altogether to deny the charge; and were it not for his frequent and earnest protestations to the contrary, one would be apt to suspect, that he chooses his topics less from persuasion, than from the pleasure of showing his invention, and surprizing the reader by his paradoxes. The Treatise of Education, as it possesses much of the merit, seems also exposed to the faults of his other performances; and as he indulges his love of the marvellous even in so serious and important a subject, he has given a pledge to the public that he was in earnest in all his other topics. If I dared to object any thing to M. Rousseau's eloquence, which is the shining side of his character, I should say, that it was not wholly free from the defect sometimes found in that of the Roman orator; and that their great talent for expression was apt to produce a prolixity in both. This last performance chiefly is exposed to this objection; and I own, that though it abounds in noble and shining passages, it gave me rather less pleasure than his former writings. However, it carries still the stamp of a great genius; and, what enhances its beauty, the stamp of a very particular genius. The noble pride and spleen and indignation of the author bursts out with freedom in a hundred places, and serves fully to characterize the lofty spirit of the man.

When I came to peruse that passage of M. Rousseau's Treatise which has occasioned all the persecution against him, I was not in the least surprized that it gave offence. He has not had the precaution to throw any veil over his sentiments; and as he scorns to dissemble his contempt of established opinions, he could not wonder that all the zealots were in arms against him. The liberty of the press is not so secured in any country, scarce even in this, as not to render such an open attack of popular prejudices somewhat dangerous. [. . .]

I have the honour to be, with the greatest regard, Madam,

Your Ladyship's obedient and most humble servant, 
David Hume
