Dear Sir

I had a Letter from Mr Mallet, in which he tells me, that he has run over carefully the two Volumes of my History last publishd, and has wrote all his Remarks, as well on the Language as Matter on the Margin. He said, that he woud find an Opportunity to send them to me. I replyd to him, that I was extremely obligd to him; (as I certainly am) and that if he sent them to you, you woud soon find an Opportunity of conveying them to me. I wish you wou'd speak to him on that Subject, as you have Occasion to meet with him; and wou'd send the Books carefully to me by the first Parcel you send to Edinburgh. I shoud desire you also to give him a new Copy in place of this which he has sacrific'd; but if there be only a word here & there, I can efface them, after transcribing them into my own Copy, and can afterwards restore the Book as good as ever.

In the same Letter, he complains much of a Report, that I was writing the English History since the Revolution; which he says, he cannot believe, because it would be a very invidious Task to him. I answerd him, that by his former Letter I imagind his History was just ready for the Press. That I had not wrote a Line of the History of that Period; but if I undertake it, one great Inducement woud be the hopes of seeing his Volumes publishd before me by which means, I could hope for much Light & great Materials, that as he was near twenty Years advancd before me, it was ridiculous to fear that I could overtake him, and that I was glad of the Report he mentiond, if it would prove a Spur to his Industry. I find Mr Mallet woud fain be like the Dog in the Manger, neither eat himself, nor allow others to eat. I shoud have a Breach with him, & might expect all ill Offices from him, if I pursue my Plan: But this would be a frivolous Consideration, where his Anger would be so ill founded.

As soon as the Octavo Edition of my History is finishd, please send me a Copy of it. I should be pleasd to run it over; and make an Errata to it. I am Dear Sir

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

Edinr 
 21 April 1763
