Dear Sir

I am very sorry I am not able to satisfy your Curiosity by giving you some general Notion of the Plan upon which I proceed. But my Opinions are so new, & even some Terms I am oblig'd to make Use of, that I cou'd not propose by any Abridgement to give my System an Air of Likelyhood, or so much as make it intelligible. Tis a thing I have in vain attempted already at a Gentleman's Request in this Place, who thought it wou'd help him to comprehend & judge of my Notions, if he saw them all at once before him. I have a greater Desire of communicating to you the Plan of the Whole, that I believe it will not appear in publick before the beginning of next Winter. For besides that it wou'd be difficult to have it printed before the rising of the Parliament; I must confess I am not ill-pleas'd with a little Delay, that it may appear with as few Imperfections as possible. I have been here near 3 months alwise within a Week of agreeing with Printers, & you may imagine I did not forget the Work itself during that Time, where I began to feel some Passages weaker for the Style & Diction than I cou'd have wisht. The Nearness & Greatness of the Event rouz'd up my Attention, & made me more difficult to please than when I was alone in perfect Tranquillity in France. But here I must tell you one of my Foibles. I have a great Inclination to go down to Scotland this Spring to see my Friends, & have your Advice concerning my philosophical Discoveries; but cannot over-come a certain Shamefacedness I have to appear among you at my Years without having yet a Settlement or so much as having attempted any. How happens it that we Philosophers cannot as heartily despise the World as it despises us? I think in my Conscience the Contempt were as well founded on our Side as on the other.

Having a frankt Letter I was resolv'd to make Use of it, & accordingly enclose some Reasonings concerning Miracles, which I once thought of publishing with the rest, but which I am afraid will give too much Offence even as the World is dispos'd at present. There is Something in the turn of Thought & a good deal in the Turn of Expression, which will not perhaps appear so proper for want of knowing the Context: But the Force of the Argument you'll be judge of as it stands. Tell me your Thoughts of it. Is not the Style too diffuse? Tho as that was a popular Argument I have spread it out much more than the other Parts of the Work. I beg of you show it to no Body, except to Mr Hamilton, if he pleases; & let me know at your Leizure that you have receiv'd it, read it, & burnt it. I wou'd not even have you make another nameless Use of it, to which it wou'd not be improper, for fear of Accidents.

Your Thoughts & mine agree with Respect to Dr Butler, & I wou'd be glad to be introduc'd to him. I am at present castrating my Work, that is, cutting off its noble Parts, that is, endeavouring it shall give as little Offence as possible; before which I cou'd not pretend to put it into the Drs hands. This is a Piece of Cowardice, for which I blame myself; tho I believe none of my Friends will blame me. But I was resolv'd not to be an Enthusiast, in Philosophy, while I was blaming other Enthusiasms.

If ever I indulge any ‘twill be when I tell that I am,

Dear Sir Yours. 
David Hume



December 2.1737
