Dear Sir,

I was very sensibly touch'd with your letter, both on account of the friendly disposition which appears in it; and of the infirm state of your health, particularly with regard to your eyes, which, I remember, were always weak, yet so as that you could amuse yourself with reading and other occupations. I am very desirous to spare you such a disagreeable task, as looking for old papers; and therefore shall briefly recapitulate to you all my transactions with the Marquess of Annandale, which are as fresh in my memory, as if they past yesterday.

In January, 1745, I receiv'd a letter from the Marquess, inviting me to come to London in order to live with him; and was told, at the same time, by Ronald Crawfurd, that my Lord propos'd to grant me the same terms, which had been given to Mr Peter Young, viz., three hundred a year. I immediately went to London, where my Lord told me the same thing; and it was confirm'd to me by you and Mr Vincent. I took lodgings near him, and saw him every day, till we went out together to Weldehall, on the first of Aprile. While we stay'd at London, some time either in the month of February or March (but I think in the latter), my Lord gave Captain Vincent powers to act for him. The powers were drawn in concert with you; and you, as well as I, was present at the reading and signing of them. The article which regards myself, I remember perfectly. After giving him powers to hire and discharge servants, and order his family, he proceeded in these or terms to the same purpose: ‘And I also empower the said Philip Vincent to fulfill my agreement with David Hume, and pay him 300 pounds a year.’ You explain'd to me aftewards the meaning of these terms in a very obliging manner; that my Lady Annandale, and you, and all the friends of the family, as well as Captain Vincent, had a confidence in my integrity; that tho' Mr Vincent, in the first scrawl of these powers, had drawn them in such terms as to give him authority over me, as well as over the rest of the people about the Marquess, yet you had prevail'd with him to alter them; and that, therefore, I was to look upon myself as entrusted by the family, and answerable to them, as well as to Mr Vincent, for my conduct.

When I was in the Country that summer, it occur'd to Mr Vincent, as well as to me, that I had nothing under any body's hand, expressing the terms of our agreement. He accordingly wrote me a letter to that purpose, engrossing a copy of the terms with Mr Young, and adding, that, by virtue of his powers, and with the Marquess's consent and yours, he granted me the same terms. One article of Mr Young's agreement was, that, if he left the Marquess any time after the commencement of a quarter, he shou'd be pay'd the whole quarterly appointments in the same manner as if the quarter was finish'd. This condition was repeated and granted to me; and it seems a reasonable condition, that I either shou'd have some warning beforehand, or an equivalent for it.

I enter'd with the Marquess on the 1st of Aprile 1745, and left him on the 16th of Aprile 1746, from a sudden caprice, which left it not in my power to stay any longer. Mr Vincent, who told me several times, that that quarter was due to me, and that he wou'd pay it me, at last, on parting, took a scruple, that he might be answerable for the money, if he pay'd it where no service was perform'd; but he promis'd me, if my Lady Annandale and you agreed to it, and thought it reasonable, he wou'd pay it afterwards. I immediately wrote to you; and desir'd you both to consider the matter yourself, and lay it before my Lady Marchioness. My Lady and you thought it the best course to lay the matter before Mr James Graham, my Lord's lawyer; because, as you told me afterwards, tho' you thought my claim just, yet the sanction of his opinion wou'd best secure you and every body from blame. His opinion, as you told me, was also favourable to my claim; but, before he had time to reduce it to writing, he dy'd suddenly.

I went abroad soon after with General St Clair; and for that reason receiv'd no answer from you to my letter, at least I remember none, and have not any at present. I staid abroad some years. On my return home, I open'd a lawsuit, by Lord Kaims's directions, against the estate of Annandale. I was stopt by Lord Hopton's desire, who said, that, as soon as he took on him the management of that estate, he wou'd do me justice. The affair lay over till that time, when I repeated my claim; and my Lord seems entirely inclin'd to satisfy me. He only desires the sentence of a Lord Ordinary to secure him against any after-claims from the executory; and in order to that, I must produce some kind of proof of facts, which my Lord, and his agent Mr Crawfurd, both know to be true, but which cannot regularly be taken upon my bare assertion. Of this nature is the fact, that Captain Vincent had some powers, or at least that he took upon him to do business for the Marquess: which is the reason that I apply'd to you.

Now, there is nothing, Dear Sir, to which I have a greater reluctance than to give you trouble. But, if your papers be arrang'd in order, according to their dates, the Marquess's powers were granted either in February or March 1745; or, at farthest, on some of the first days of Aprile; and my letter to you (which likewise wou'd be material) was certainly dated in the end of Aprile 1746. But if it be difficult for you to find these papers, your recollection of some of the material facts here recapitulated, might probably serve the same purpose; as my Lord's lawyers will not be anxious to chicane my proofs, which cannot be expected to be very regular, after so long an interval. I am particularly desirous you wou'd recollect this fact (which seems now to have escap'd you), that Captain Vincent did business for the Marquess; because, in that case, his letter, expressing the terms of the agreement, will have authority; and I have that letter by me. If you find my letter to you, please to write on the bottom of it, that it is the same letter which I wrote you at that time.

I was extremely sensible of your obliging behaviour to me thro' the whole course of these transactions, and retain a very grateful acknowledgment of it. It is but a bad return to give you so much trouble. But you see the necessity of the case. I still am desirous of saving you the trouble of searching into a heap of papers, which are, perhaps, in confusion, as you never expected that it would become requisite to produce any of them; and, therefore, shall be contented with your ascertaining from your memory as many of the facts as you can recollect, after I have thus run them over to you. Only, as it is uncertain, whether the Lord Ordinary may not think the producing these powers requisite, I know it wou'd give you uneasiness, if a neglect of this kind shou'd happen to lose me the money, which otherwise he wou'd think due to me. I beg my compliments to Lady Johnstone, and remain, with great sincerity, Dear Sir,

 Your most obedient humble servant,

David Hume.

Edinburgh, Jack's Land 
 1st Jan. 1761



P.S.

I beg of you to receive my compliments of the season.
