Paris 18th of September 1765

Sir

Yesterday, I began the Conversation with the Duke of Praslin, by making Complaints, as I was instructed by your Excellency's of the 10th Instant, against the Conduct of M. de Ramsault, in proceeding so slowly in the Demolition of the Jettees of Dunkirk; a Work, which had so lately been agreed on between the two Courts, and which we expected to see immediatly carry'd into Execution. Surely, reply'd the Duke, M. de Ramsault is the most unhappy of all Mortals: Here, you make Complaints against the Slowness of his Operations; and he has already receiv'd a very severe Reprimand from the Duke of Choiseul, on account of his Precipitancy in that Undertaking; and positive Orders have been sent him to put a stop, for some time, to any farther Demolition. In what respect, said I, do you complain of his Precipitancy. Why, plainly in this, reply'd he; The Work, of demolishing the Jettees, was agreed on as a Trial or Experiment: You wish to destroy the Harbour of Dunkirk; we willingly consent to it: We wish to preserve the neighbouring Country; you express the same Desire: Both of us seek a Method of conciliating these Objects, which are equally requir'd by Treaty; and we hope that the Demolition of the Jettees will answer that Purpose. But in order to make the Experiment with Certainty, M. de Ramsault ought to have ascertain'd the preceding State of the Harbour and the Depth of the Water in every part of it; and to have return'd to us an account of the whole. This he has neglected to do; so that we shall, after all, be at a Loss to determine positively the Effects of this new Operation. Our Enginiers, I said, were entirely of Opinion, that the Effect cou'd never possibly be, the stopping the back-water; and till they agreed on that point, we expected, conformably to the Plan settled with M. de Guerchy, that no Stop shou'd have been put to the Demolition of the Jettees. Upon which I read to him your Excellency's Letter to M. de Guerchy, of which you had been pleas'd to send me a Copy, and which, the Duke told me, had already been communicated to him. And I desir'd him to remark the Words, convenu et prouvé, which evidently imply'd, that the Consent of the Court of England was requisite, before the French cou'd desist from the Demolition projected. He reply'd, that the best Interpretation of Words was the Context and the Nature of the Subject. It was plain, even from the Tenor of this Letter, that the Demolition propos'd was meant only as an Experiment; and no body ever thought of making an Experiment, which he cou'd not recall, in case the Success of it did not answer Expectation. It was always suppos'd, that the French were to advance gradually in this Work; and if the present Demolition succeded to mutual Wishes and Hopes, the French Court wou'd give Orders to proceed, according to the Plan concerted with your Excellency. But it requir'd time to judge of Effects, which were to be the Result of time; and the English Enginiers surely cou'd not take upon them to pronounce, immediatly and before-hand, concerning future and contingent Events, which no human Understanding cou'd forsee. On the whole, he told me flatly, that we shou'd in vain urge them to precipitate this Measure; and that they were determind to wait the Result of the present Demolition, before they proceeded any farther.

I took thence occasion to repeat my former Application for granting Permission to some English Sea Officers to inspect the Works of Dunkirk, in order to assist our Enginiers in their Judgment of the Effects, which might be expected from the Demolition agreed to. I told him, that the Intention of this Proposal was not to invent any new Project, but to form an Opinion of the present one, and of all its possible and probable Consequences: That as he appeal'd from the Opinion of our Enginiers, it was natural for us to dispute the Sentiments of theirs; and we were desirous of gathering Information from all Quarters: That perhaps the Communicating our Intentions in this respect to the Court of France was more the Result of Civility than of Necessity; since nothing cou'd justly hinder an English Officer from entering Dunkirk, and cou'd hinder our Enginiers from carrying him along with them, in inspecting the Place: And that their Refusal of admitting him wou'd naturally beget a strong Suspicion of the Sincerity of those Intentions, which they profess'd, of executing the Treaty. The Duke seem'd to be convinc'd by this Reasoning; but he said, that he was only a Minister, and must take the Opinion of the King and Council, which he promis'd to communicate to me at our next Conference.

To turn to the other Affairs of this Country: As the Assembly of the Clergy have delay'd to vote their free Gift, the King sent yesterday some Commissaries, in order to repeat to them his positive Orders to that Purpose. Most People think, that they will comply; because they have been threaten'd, that, in case of their Refusal, the King will renew the Project of the late Monsr Machault; and after taking an Estimation of all the Church Revenues, will impose Taxes on the Clergy, by his own Authority, seconded by that of the Parliament. It is certain, that the Church is not at present in a Situation to resist the Crown; but it is probable, that the King will scruple to crush them entirely, lest he leave the Parliament without any Counter poize in their Usurpations, which of late have given great Uneasyness to the Court. The Council last week annull'd the Sentence of the Parliament, which had annulld the Acts of the Clergy.

The present Sickness of the Dauphin is a great Blow to the Church. That Prince is in a very languishing Condition; and I am sorry to find it the general Opinion, that he cannot possibly live long; tho'his bad State of Health is as much conceald as possible. The Preparations for the King's usual Journey to Fontainebleau are said to be already put off for three Weeks; and people scruple not to say at Court, that it is uncertain, whether the royal Family go at all this Year.

Prince Galiczin, the Russian Envoy, told me yesterday that he heard by the last Post, that the Treaty between England and Russia was just signd at Petersbourg. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard

 Sir Your Excellency's 
Most obedient & most humble Servant



David Hume

Mr Secretary Conway.
