My Lord

In reply to the Letter with which your Lordship has honourd me I shall endeavour to be as clear and as concise as possible. Your Lordship shou'd never have heard of the short & slight Disgust between your Brother and me, had he not told Sir James Macdonald, that you was in such a Passion against me on account of my Conduct towards him, that you intended instantly to compose a Pamphlet against me on the Subject of Q. Mary and to publish it as a full Revenge upon me. You see that he insinuates the same thing in his Letter, and he says that you was formerly my Friend. But this whole Story, I have now Reason to see, was without Foundation; both from the Tenor of your Lordship's present Letter and from a Letter of Yours, deliverd to me by Monsr Calvet, and which is wrote in the usual friendly Strain, that had so long subsisted between us. But not doubting at that time of Mr Murray's Story, I dreaded the Consequence of a Pamphlet compos'd and publishd by one of your Lordship's Temper, in a Fit of Rage, on a Subject where you are naturally heated: I knew that it woud be full of Expressions of the utmost Acrimony, which you yourself coud not forgive, even were I dispos'd to do so; and I may now add, that this last Letter proves you to be an excellent Proficient in that Style. I wrote my Letter, in a Spirit of Cordiality and Amity, that I might prevent a Rupture, most disagreeable to me. I have no Objection to the publishing any thing in opposition to my Opinions: On the contrary, there is nothing I desire more than these Discussions. I was far from threatening your Lordship with the Loss of my Friendship, which I was sensible cou'd never be of any Consequence to you: I only fortold, with infinite Regreat, that if you wrote against me, in a Heat, without allowing your Temper to compose itself, it woud be impossible for us to be any longer Friends. I employ'd every pathetic, every engaging Sentiment and Expression to induce your Lordship to embrace this way of thinking. I shall venture to say, that you have never in your Life receiv'd a more friendly & more obliging Letter. I leave your Lordship to judge of the Return it has met with.

I compos'd my Letter with great Care, because I set a Value on your Lordships Friendship. I was so much satisfy'd with it myself, that I read it to a Friend, who told me that it woud be impossible for your Lordship to resist so many mollifying Expressions, and that they wou'd certainly bring you back to our usual State of Friendship. Under what Power of Fascination have your Eyes lain, when you cou'd see every thing in a Light so directly opposite?

I come now to the other Ground of your Complaint, my Indifference in the Case of Mr Murray. When I arriv'd in Paris, the first Question he asked me was, whether Lord Bute or Mr Stuart Mackenzie had recommended him to Lord Hertford, that he might be receivd in the Ambassador's House, like other British Subjects. I askd my Lord, who told me, that neither of these Persons had ever mentiond Mr Murray to him: He wishd they had; he desird to show all manner of Civilities to Mr Murray: But he was afraid, that a Person against whom a Public Proclamation had been issu'd and who had openly liv'd so many Years with the Pretender, coud not be receivd in his House, unless he had previously receivd some Assurances, that the Matter woud give no Offence. I told this to Mr Murray: He was entirely satisfyd: He only said, that he woud write again to Mr Stuart Mackenzie, who never wrote to Lord Hertford. In this Affair then Mr Murray receivd all the Favour, which he either desird or expected.

But perhaps your Lordship means, that I ought to have befriended him in his Law-suit with Mrs Blake; I suppose, by taking his Part in Company. But who told you, that I did not? I have frequently desird People in general to suspend their Judgement: For as to any particular Justification of him, I was not capable of it, because I was & still am ignorant of all particulars of his Story. Whence coud I learn them? From himself or from his Antagonist or from both? I assure your Lordship, that I was otherwise employd, and more to my Satisfaction, than in unravelling an intricate Story, which the Parliament of Paris coud not clear up in much less than two Years, and which, it is pretended, they have not cleard up at last.

But I need say no more on this head; since your Brother, a few days after I wrote you, sent me a Letter, in which he askd Pardon for his former Letter, acknowledgd his Error, and desird a Return of my Friendship. His only Ground of Quarrel indeed was a small Negligence in returning his Visits; an Offence, which operating on a Man of his Vanity, has engagd him to do all this Mischief.

I have said, that your Lordship never receivd a Letter more friendly & obliging than my former Letter: I hope you will also acknowlege that this is wrote with sufficient Temper & Moderation. Adieu.

I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard & Consideration

 My Lord 
Your Lordship's most obedient & most humble 
Servant





David Hume

Fontainebleau 3d of Nov 1764
