Paris 1 July, 1765.

I did indeed flatter myself, dear Madam, that you would take some part in my good fortune. I thank you for the assurances you have given me of it. They give me a sensible satisfaction, proportioned to the esteem and regard which I bear you. I have now got somewhat of a durable establishment in France; and shall have leisure to cultivate your friendship, with which, I hope, you will deign to favour me.

Have you heard of the share which Madame de Boufflers had in this event? As soon as she heard that there was a vacancy, by means of the promotion of Sir Charles Bunbury, my predecessor, she wrote to the Duke of Bedford, intreating him, in the most earnest terms, to befriend me in my pretensions, and setting all my claims in the most favourable light. The Duke answered her, that he would soon be in London; and if he had any credit or authority with the ministry, her friend should not fail of success. The Duke is not a man that ever promises in vain, nor is he a man that is ever to be refused; so that, from this interest alone, I was sure to have prevailed. But happily the same post brought intelligence to the Ambassador, that the affair was already finished. But do you not think, that I owe the same obligations to our friend? or will you tell me, that I seek only a pretence for indulging my inclinations?

I am sorry to inform you, that our friend left this place, full of the same sentiments, which she expressed to me in the most lively terms; and though her journey and a new scene and new company may occasion some dissipation, I foresee that, on her return, she will take up the matter precisely where she left off, and may perhaps feel her disagreeable situation more sensibly on account of the interval. I can hope for no event that will restore her peace of mind, except one, which is not likely to happen; and she herself is sensible of it. I have wrote in the terms, which the Prince desired; though I wonder he should expect a great effect from any thing that can be wrote or said by any body on that head. If he does not choose to apply the proper remedy, he need expect no cure. Those ideas have made such deep impression on her, that nothing can efface them; not even her own efforts, which, she assures me, she has employed to the utmost. I can readily believe her; if one could, at his wish, change his sentiments of things, I should have desired long ago, for the sake of my own tranquillity, not to have taken so sensible a part in her distress.

I shall be at Compiegne on Saturday next, and shall soon after take advantage of the permission you give me to pay my respects to you at Villers-Cotterets. I beg of you to make my compliments to Madame de Vierville; and I am, with the greatest regard,

 Dear Madam, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant,



David Hume.
