Sir

I find, that I am extremely unfortunate. I have receiv'd none but one Letter of yours from Dresden. I have wrote you two to Dresden under Cover to Monsr Heineken Conseillier des Finances: I wrote you also one to Paris, which wou'd arrive about the time you left it last Year. I had enclos'd two Copies of the Alterations I had made on the political Discourses: And also two Copies of a Letter, which I was desirous you shou'd publish in the literary Journals, by which every one wou'd see that we were in Correspondence together. But all this I find has miscarry'd. I also sent you three Copies of the first Volume of my History; one by Courier to Dresden; one under Cover to Monsr Jannel; one to be deliver'd at your Lodgings at Paris. There was along with this last, a Copy of all the newest Editions of my philosophical Writings in four Volumes. You may see by this, that I have a just Sense of the Honour you did me by your excellent Translation of my political Discourses; & that it is my bad Fortune, not any Negligence of mine, that has so long interrupted our Correspondence.

The last Letter, with which you honour'd me, has unluckily no Date; so that it is is  only by Conjecture I know, that you are at Paris: However I send this under Cover to Monsieur Jannel, which seems to me the safest Direction; tho' I am afraid that the breaking out of the War will beget still further Interruptions betwixt us.

I am extremely oblig'd to you for continuing your Resolutions to translate my History. You wou'd see, that it was not intended to please any Party; & it has here been extremely run down by Faction, but it has met with such Indulgence by good Judges, that I have no Reason to repent of my Undertaking. The second Volume will be printed about a Twelve-month hence; and if you undertake the first, I engage that you shall receive the second, Sheet by Sheet, as it comes from the Press.

It was a Gentleman, a Friend of mine, who told me, that he had himself sent a Copy of my History, along with my other Works, to your Lodgings, rue neuve des bons enfans a Paris: I wou'd fain flatter myself that these may have come to hand. If you have got more than one Copy of my History, & have any Correspondence with Monsr Voltaire, I wou'd consider it as a singular Favor, that you wou'd transmit it to him, along with my Compliments. In this Countrey, they call me his Pupil, and think that my History is an Imitation of his Siecle de Louis XIV. This Opinion flatters very much my Vanity; but the Truth is, that my History was plan'd, & in a great measure compos'd, before the Appearance of that agreeable Work.

I have never in my Life receiv'd greater Satisfaction, than by the Passages of Monsr Maupertuis Letters, which you have been so good to transmit to me. You observe well, it is laudari a laudato. I have long been a great Admirer of Monsr Maupertuis. He is the only great Geometer in the World, who ever was a man of Eloquence and fine Imagination. Not to mention his Talents of a profound Metaphysician, and as I hear, an accomplish'd Gentleman & a man of Worth. To be known to such a man is a farther Obligation, which I owe you.

If you entertain thoughts of translating my other Works, I shall order a new Edition to be sent to you of my philosophical Essays. It is the third, & contains some Amendments. I am afraid it is too bold for you to venture on. My Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals wou'd probably be more popular; and indeed, it is my favorite Performance, tho' the other has made more Noise. The best Edition of it is the second. The best Edition of my Essays moral & political is the fourth.

That you may be sure against the Intrusion of hireling Translators, I have again enclos'd another Copy of that Letter, which I formerly sent you. I hope it will be to your Satisfaction, & may be inserted in the literary Journals.

I write you at present in a Hurry; but shall again write to you in a few Posts, & give you an Account of all the Alterations I had made on the political Discourses, along with a few Remarks on your Translation, with which I am extremely pleas'd. This other Letter I shall direct to you, rue neuve des bons enfans. So that one way or other, I hope to reach you.

I had heard of the Dutch Translation of my political Discourses before yours; but have never yet seen it. I sent a Copy of my other Writings (except the History) to the Bookseller at Amsterdam. This I wou'd not have done, had I known, that you had any Thoughts of translating them: But it is of no Consequence. I have the Honor to be

 Sir Your most obedient & most humble Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 5th of Novr 1755.
