Dear Sir

In this new Edition, I have corrected several Mistakes & Oversights, which had chiefly proceeded from the plaguy Prejudices of Whiggism, with which I was too much infected when I began this Work. I corrected some of these Mistakes in a former Edition; but being resolv'd to add to this Edition the Quotations & Authorities for the Reigns of James I & Charles I, I was oblig'd to run over again the most considerable Authors who had treated of these Reigns, and I happily discover'd some more Mistakes, which I have now corrected. As I began the History with these two Reigns, I now find that they, above all the rest, have been corrupted with Whig Rancour, and that I really deserv'd the Name of a party Writer, and boasted without any Foundation of my Impartiality: But if you now do me the Honour to give this part of my Work a second Perusal, I am perswaded, that you will no longer throw upon me this reproachful Epithet, and will acquit me of all Propensity to Whiggism. If you still continue to upbraid me, I shall be oblig'd to retaliate on you, and cry, Whig vous-même.

 In page 33, vol 5 you will find a full Justification of the Impositions laid on by James I, without Authority of Parliament; on p. 113, 114, 389, a justification of persecuting the Puritans; in p. 180 a justification of Charles I for levying Tonnage & Poundage with consent of parliament: In p. 100 I acquit James I of prevarication with which I had before rashly charged him. This last mistake, indeed was innocent, and I can easily account for it; I had read Buckingham's Narrative in Rushworth & Franklyn, the two opposite Collectors. I saw what I thought the same paper in the parliamentary History but I did not attend to a line at the bottom, in which it is said that the paper is taken from the Records more full than in the preceding Collection. When I read it lately, I found the Article here quoted. So that this blunder proceeded not from any Spirit of Whiggery.

I now justify James II more explicitly in his Exercise of the dispensing Power, which was intimately interwove with the Constitution & Monarchy — see vol 6 p. 393, 394, 395, 400. In Volume 4 p. 322, 323, I mention a very remarkable Piece of Tyranny or of Exertion of arbitrary Power practised in that Period, and which came to my Knowledge since the first publication of that Volume.

There are many other Improvements & Alterations throughout the whole; and I am glad, that Millar has of himself made you an Offer of this Edition. Without flattering you, I must say, that there is no body, whom I more desire to see my Writings as correct as I can make them; and I was thinking to desire Mr Millar to make you this Offer.

But there is no End of correcting. In this new Edition, vol. 5 p. 205, I have inserted a pretty curious Story of Sir George Markham, which I took from Lord Landesdowne, whom I esteem'd a safe Authority for a Whig Story. But I have since been shown Hobard's Reports, which is infinitely more authentic than Lord Landesdowne, and the Story is there told so as entirely to justify the King & the Star Chamber. So that you may still reproach me, that the villainous Leaven is not entirely purg'd off.

I am engag'd in no work at present: But if I tire of Idleness, or more properly speaking, of reading for Amusement, I may probably continue my History. My only Discouragement is, that I cannot hope to finish this Work in my Closet, but must apply to the Great for Papers & Intelligence; a thing I mortally abhor.

Is it not hard & tyrannical in you, more tyrannical than any Act of the Stuarts, not to allow me to publish my Dialogues? Pray, do you not think that a proper Dedication may atone for what is exceptional in them? I am become much of my friend, Corbyn Morrice's Mind, who says, that he writes all his Books for the sake of the Dedications.

I am very glad to hear from Lord Minto, that you intend to pass a great Part of the ensuing Summer in this Country. Tho' you be now become a great Man, I doubt not but I shoud receive very much Satisfaction from your Society & Conversation: That is, if I be not justled out by Suitors who will press in upon you.

 Meanwhile I am Dear Sir 
Your affectionate Friend & Servant



David Hume.

Edinburgh 12 March 1763
