Edinburgh 1 July, 1762.

Madam,

Had I the least propensity towards superstition, the incident your Ladyship mentions, would have revived that passion in me; and I should certainly have imagined, that I was secretly attended by a fairy, a sylph, or a good genius, who knew my inmost purposes, and was industrious to prevent my most earnest intentions from being frustrated. I was a short time in London last autumn, when I gave that work to the press which your Ladyship is pleased to mention; and having a great ambition that it should be conveyed to your hands, I spoke to more than one person to point out to me some sure method for that purpose, but was not able to satisfy myself before I was obliged to leave England. In this part of the world, I found that the war laid me under still greater difficulties to procure a safe conveyance to Paris. But whether any of my friends, who knew the uneasiness, which I had felt from these disappointments, has been more happy in fulfilling my intentions, is, what I shall make it my business to enquiry; and I surely owe him, whoever he be, the greatest obligations for executing in my behalf, a duty which I was so earnest to perform, and which nothing but obstructions, arising from these unhappy hostilities between the two nations, could have prevented me from having the honour to fulfil.

But, Madam, what new wonder is this which your letter presents to me? I not only find a Lady, who, in the bloom of beauty and height of reputation, can withdraw herself from the pleasures of a gay Court, and find leisure to cultivate the sciences; but deigns to support a correspondence with a man of letters in a remote country, and to reward his labours by a suffrage the most agreeable of all others, to a man who has any spark of generous sentiments or taste for true glory. Besides these unusual circumstances, I find a Lady, who, without any other advantages than her own talents, has made herself mistress of a language commonly esteemed very difficult to strangers, and possesses it to such a degree as might give jealousy to us who have made it the business of our lives to acquire and cultivate it.

I cannot but congratulate my country on this incident, which marks the progress made by its literature and reputation in foreign countries.

My vanity would also suggest to me some share in this happy event, did I not reflect, that your Ladyship's partiality towards my feeble writings, has proceeded entirely from the spirit of disinterestedness which I endeavoured to maintain in composing them. But the more I must abate of self-conceit on the occasion, the more I find myself obliged to redouble my sentiments of gratitude and respect towards your Ladyship, who have been pleased to confer so great an honour upon me.

I am, with the truest regard, Madam,

 Your Ladyship's most obedient and most humble servant,

David Hume.

P.S.

So far I had wrote in answer to your Ladyship's of the 29th of May, when I was again honoured with yours of the 14th of June. Good God! Madam, how much I regret my being absent from London on this occasion, which deprives me of an opportunity of showing in person my regard for your recommendation, and my esteem, I had almost said veneration, for the virtue and genius of M. Rousseau. I assure your Ladyship there is no man in Europe of whom I have entertained a higher idea, and whom I would be prouder to serve; and as I find his reputation very high in England, I hope every one will endeavour to make him sensible of it by civilities, and by services, as far as he will accept of them. I revere his greatness of mind, which makes him fly obligations and dependance; and I have the vanity to think, that through the course of my life I have endeavoured to resemble him in those maxims.

But as I have some connexions with men of rank in London, I shall instantly write to them, and endeavour to make them sensible of the honour M. Rousseau has done us in choosing an asylum in England. We are happy at present in a king, who has a taste for literature; and I hope M. Rousseau will find the advantage of it, and that he will not disdain to receive benefits from a great monarch, who is sensible of his merit. I am only afraid that your friend will find his abode in England not so agreeable as may be wished, if he does not possess the language, which I am afraid is the case: for I never could observe in his writings any marks of his acquaintance with the English tongue. The French nation will soon regret the loss of so great a man, and will be sensible that it is some dishonour to them to have lost him. We were in hopes that philosophical liberty had made greater advances in that country; and such of us as have indulged the freedom of the pen, had need be careful how they entrust their persons to such as profess these rigorous maxims, and do not think that any indulgence is even due to foreigners. I assure your Ladyship that this reflection gives me some uneasiness; but I will not allow myself to think that I shall always be condemned to admire you at a distance, and that I shall never have an opportunity of enjoying that conversation, of whose charms I have heard such frequent accounts.
