Ninewells 13 June 1742

I agree with you, that Cicero's Reasonings in his Orations are very often loose, & what we shou'd think to be wandering from the Point; insomuch that nowadays a Lawyer, who shoud give himself such Liberties, wou'd be in danger of meeting with a Reprimand from the Judge or at least of being admonish'd of the Point in Question. His Orations against Verres, however, are an Exception; tho that Plunderer was so impudent & open in his Robberies, that there is the less Merit in his Conviction & Condemnation. However these Orations have all a very great Merit.

The Oration for Milo is commonly esteem'd Cicero's Masterpiece; & indeed is in many Respects very beautiful; but there are some Points in the Reasoning of it, that surprize me. The true Story of the Death of Clodius, as we learn from the Roman Historians was this. It was only a causal Rencontre betwixt Milo & him, & the Squabble was begun by their Servants, as they past each other on the Road. Many of Clodius's Servants were killd, the rest disperst, & himself wounded, & oblig'd to hide himself in some neighbouring Shops; from whence he was dragg'd out by Milo's Orders, & kill'd in the Street. These Circumstances must have been largely insisted upon by the Prosecutors, & must have been prov'd too, since they have been receiv'd as Truth by all Antiquity. But not a Word of them in Cicero, whose Oration only labours to prove two Points, that Milo did not way-lay Clodius, and that Clodius was a bad Citizen, & it was meritorious to kill him. If you read his Oration, you'll agree with me, I believe, that he has scarce spoke any thing to the Question, as it wou'd now be conceivd by a Court of Judicature.

The Orations for Marcellus & Ligarius as also that for Archias are very fine, & chiefly because the Subjects do not require or admit of close Reasoning. Tis worth your while to read the Conclusion of the Oration for Plancius, where I think the Passions are very well touch'd. There are many noble Passages in the Oration for Murena; tho' tis certain, that the Prosecutors (which however were Servius Sulpicius & Cato) must either have said nothing to the Purpose, or Cicero has said nothing. There is some of that Oration lost.

Twou'd be a Pleasure to you to read & compare the two first Phillipics, that you may judge of the Manners of those times, compar'd to modern Manners. When Cicero spoke the first Phillipic Anthony & he had not broke all Measures with each other, but there were still some Remains of a very great Intimacy & Friendship betwixt them; And besides Cicero liv'd in a close Correspondence with all the rest of Caesar's Captains; Dolabella had been his Son in Law; Hirtius & Pansa were his Pupils: Trebatius was entirely his Creature. For this Reason Prudence lay'd him under great Restraints at that time in his Declamations against Anthony: there is a great Elegance & Delicacy in them; & many of the Thoughts are very fine, particularly where he mentions his Meeting with Brutus, who had been obligd to leave Rome, I was asham'd, says he, that I durst return to Rome after Brutus had left, & that I cou'd be in Safety where he cou'd not. In short, the whole Oration is of such a Strain, that the Duke of Argyle might have spoke it in the House of Peers against my Lord Orford; and Decency wou'd not now allow the greatest Enemies to go farther. But this Oration is not much admir'd by the Antients. The Divine Phillipic, as Juvenal calls it, is the second, where he gives a full loose to his Scurrillity; & without having any Point to gain by it, except vilifying his Antagonist, & without supporting any Fact by Witnesses (for there was no Tryal or Accusation) he rakes into all the Filth of Anthony's Character, reproaches him, with Drunkenness, & Vomiting, & Cowardice & Sodomy, & every sort of Debauchery & Villany. There is great Genius & Wit in many Passages of this Oration; but I think the whole turn of it wou'd not now be generally admir'd.

I thank Mrs Home for her Intelligence, & have employ'd my Brain to find out the Person she means. It cou'd not be the Widow: For she toasts always the Duke of Argyle or Lord Stairs, & never wou'd name a young Man, whom she may reasonably enough suppose to be in Love with her. I shall therefore flatter Myself it was Miss Dalrymple. It is now Exchequer Term: She is among the few very fine Ladies of Mrs Home's Acquaintance, whom I have the Happiness of knowing: In short, many Circumstances, besides my earnest Wishes, concur to make me believe it was she who did me that Honour. I will persevere in that Opinion; unless you think it proper to disabuse me; for fear of my being too much puft up with vanity by such a Conceit.

I am oblig'd to you for Vaugelas & the Pamphlets. I fancy I have been misinform'd with Regard to Kincaid. The Essays are all sold in London; as I am inform'd by two Letters from English Gentlemen of my Acquaintaince. There is a Demand for them; & as one of them tells me, Innys the great Bookseller in Paul's Church Yard wonders there is not a new Edition, for that he cannot find Copies for his Customers. I am also told that Dr Butler has every where recommended them. So that I hope they will have some Success. They may prove like Dung with Marle, & bring forward the rest of my Philosophy, which is of a more durable, tho of a harder & more stubborn Nature. You see, I can talk to you in your own Style.  Adieu.

 June. 13. 1742.
