Dear Sir

You give me a great deal of Pleasure in affording me so near a Prospect of perusing your History of the Duke of Marlborough, which, to tell you the Truth, I did not think, was in so great Forwardness. I scarce know any Historian, except those who were engag'd in the Scene of Action, they describe, who has had the Opportunity of writing from such excellent Materials; and as the Subject is interesting, and you have conducted the Work with all imaginable Care and Deliberation, the Public has reason to expect, as I do, a Work of uncommon Merit. Happily, the Factions seem now to be almost entirely appeas'd, which might otherwise have given you Disturbance, and the Nation will be equally pleas'd to see you do Justice to the Tory as to the Whig Party. For my Part, the Knowledge I have been able to form of that Period is but imperfect; but it has always appear'd to me, that the Whigs, as they resembled the Antients in the Greatness of their Views & in their Zeal for Liberty, so they copy'd but too nearly the same Models, in the Violence & Atrocity of some of their Projects. Both Parties, no doubt, were alternately in the Wrong as to afford you an ample Opportunity of showing your Impartiality.

The Undertaking you mention was rather founded on an Idea I was fond of, than on any serious, at least any present Purpose of executing it. The Truth is, I am entirely idle at present, so far as regards writing; and I am very happy in that indolent State. My Friends tell me, that I will not continue long so, and that I will tire of having nothing to do but read and converse; but I am resolvd to resist, as a Temptation of the Devil, any Impulse towards writing, and I am really so much ashamd of myself when I see my Bulk on a Shelf, as well as when I see it in a Glass, that I would fain prevent my growing more corpulent either way. To keep my Mind at rest & my Body in motion seems to be the best Recipe for both Maladies.

You make me very happy in telling me, that you have marked the Negligences of Style, particularly the Scotticisms, that have escap'd me in these two last Volumes. You could not have laid me under a more sensible Obligation: But you must add to it, by sending me a List of them, that I may correct them in some future Edition: I will not say, may avoid them in any future Performance, for fear you laugh at me for departing so soon from my Resolutions. Lord Lyttleton was so good as to mark on the Margin some Oversights of that kind, which had occur'd to him in reading but they were so few, that, I was sensible, he had been over-indulgent to me. I believe, indeed, that a Scotsman, who, by Care & Attention, has corrected all the Vices of Expression, incident to his Country, is the best Critic, whom one could have recourse to; and as you are entirely in that Situation, I propose to myself much Information from your Remarks. I beg it of you, therefore, not to with-hold them from me. I beg my Compliments to Mrs Mallet; and am with great Sincerity

 Dear Sir 
Your most obedient Servant



David Hume.

Edinburgh 8 Novr. 1762.
