Park Place 28 March 1769

Dear Doctor

The fatal Discovery succeeded, and deservd it: It has feeling, tho' not equal to Douglas, in my Opinion. The Versification of it is not enough finish'd. Our Friend escaped by lying conceal'd: But the Success of all plays, in this Age, is very feeble; and the people now heed the Theatre almost as little as the Pulpit. History, I think, is the Favourite Reading, and our other Friend, the favourite Historian. Nothing can be more successful than his last Production, nor more deservedly. I agree with you; it is beyond his first Performance; as was indeed natural to expect. I hope, for a certain Reason, which I keep to myself, that he does not intend, in his third work, to go beyond his second: Tho' I am damnably afraid he will: For the Subject is much more interesting. Neither the Character of Charles V, nor the Incidents of his Life are very interesting; and were it not for the first Volume, the Success of this work, tho' perfectly well writ, woud not have been so shining.

This Madness about Wilkes excited first Indignation, then Apprehension; but has gone to such a Height, that all other Sentiments with me are bury'd in Ridicule. This exceeds the Absurdity of Titus Oates and the popish Plot; and is so much more disgraceful to the Nation, as the former Folly, being derivd from Religion, flow'd from a Source, which has, from uniform Prescription, acquird a Right to impose Nonsense on all Nations & all Ages: But the present Extravagance is peculiar to Ourselves, and quite risible. However, I am afraid my Mirth will soon be spoilt, and Affairs become quite serious: For I am well assurd that Lord Chatham will after the holy days creep out from his Retreat, and appear on the Scene. Depositis novus exuviis, nitidusque juventa Volvitur ad solem et linguis micat ore trisulcis. (I know not if I cite Virgil exactly, but I am sure I apply him right.) This Villain is to thunder against the Violation of the Bill of Rights, in not allowing the County of Middlesex the Choice of its Member. Think of the Impudence of that Fellow; and his Quackery; and his Cunning; and his Audaciousness; and judge of the Influence he will have over such a deluded Multitude.

I was struck with a very sensible Indignation at the Decision of the Douglas Cause; though I forsaw it for some time. It was abominable with regard to poor Andrew Stuart, who had conducted that Cause with singular Ability & Integrity; and was at last expos'd to reproach, which unfortunately never can be wip'd off. For the Cause, tho' not in the least intricate, is so complicated, that it never will be review'd by the public, who are besides perfectly pleas'd with the Sentence; being sway'd by Compassion and a few popular Topics. To one who understands the Cause, as I do, nothing coud appear more scandalous than the pleadings of the two Law Lords. Such gross Misrepresentations, such impudent Assertions, such groundless Imputations never came from that place: But all was good enough for their Audience, who, bating their Quality, are most of them little better than their Brethren, the Wilkites, in the Streets.

I am very much obligd to you for giving me the Acquaintance of your Cousin, Mr Blair, who seems indeed to me a very accomplishd young Man. The Death of your Brother in law is a great Loss to you, and even to us all: I comprehend myself: For I intend to visit you soon, and for good and all. Indeed, I know not what detains me here, except that it is so much a matter of Indifference where I live; and I am amus'd with looking on the Scene, which really begins to be interesting. I had taken one of Allan Ramsay's Houses, but gave it up again, on the Representation of some of my Friends in Edinburgh, who said that a House on the North Side of a high Hill, in the 56 Degree of Latitude coud not be healthful: But I now repent it: Tho' I have my old House to retreat to, till I get a better. I am glad you like my Nephew: He is indeed clever, tho I am afraid a little giddy.
