Paris 27th of August 1765

Sir

When I met with M. de Fontanieu and M. de la Rochette on Saturday last, in order to confer with them about the Canada Paper, I observed to them, that the Reasoning, upon which we were now going to enter, wou'd have been conducted with more Propriety, had it taken place before the Liquidation was fix'd by the Court of France: For it gave great Offence in England, that an Arrangement, in which we were so much interested, and which France was bound by Treaty to make, had never been communicated to the English Minister before the Operation was concluded; and that no Opportunity had been given us to urge any Reasons in our own Favour. They reply'd, that this Secrecy, of which I complain'd, had not proceeded, either from any Desire of concealing the Reasons of their Conduct or from any Neglect towards England; but was calculated merely to elude the Artifices of Stock-jobbers, who, if the Operations of the Commissioners had been known, wou'd not have fail'd to take Advantage of the unwary, and either to purchase or sell, as Appearances were more or less favourable to the Possessors of that Paper. Notwithstanding the Secrecy enjoin'd, the Subtelty, they said, of that kind of People had penetrated or guess'd at the Intentions of the Commissioners; and Opportunities had thereby been given to practice upon the ignorant and necessitous.

They then began by showing me a Table, which was sent over to France before the Peace, and which contain'd the gradual and enormous Rise of Prices from 1754 to 1760. Beef, for Instance, was in the former Period sold at 3 Sous a Pound; in the latter Period, it rose to two Livres; and every thing in the same proportion. I remarkd to them, that this rise of Prices cou'd afford no good reason for the Reduction made on the Canada Bills; because the Rise might proceed from a Concurrence of many different Causes, beside the Discredit of the Paper Money. The War employ'd almost all the hands and took them off from the Cultivation of the Land, which produc'd a great Scarcity of Provisions. There were Troops in considerable Numbers sent over from France, which bred a great Consumption: And above all, the great Quantity of circulating Paper, even without any Diffidence of its Solidity, cou'd not fail to raise the Prices, since a great Quantity of Gold & Silver had necessarily the same Effect. But these were no Reasons for the present Liquidation; nor was it equitable to say to the Canadian Planter, 'You must submit to such a Reduction, because at other times you wou'd have been contented with such a Price.' This trifling Advantage of an additional Price was but a small Compensation for the great Calamities, with which the War had overwhelm'd him: And no-one ever thought of reducing Contracts made for Provisions during a Famine, by an Estimation drawn from Years of Plenty. The only Principle of Equity, which cou'd be pleaded for the present Liquidation, must be deriv'd from the Discredit of the Paper, which had made it be receiv'd by the Planter or Merchant at a much lower Value than Money and which wou'd render him no Loser by a proportional Reduction.

These Gentlemen reply'd, that, tho' they cou'd not admit my Reasoning in its full Extent, they were willing to submit to the Terms requir'd. They then produc'd Authority to prove, that a Diffidence concerning the Paper Currency commenc'd so early as 1756, when the Intendant first began to give Bills on Europe payable at a distant Term: They endeavour'd to prove, that this Diffidence gradually encreas'd during the Years 1757, 1758, & 1759; till in the Year 1760, after Payment was stopt in Europe, it went beyond all bounds. They observ'd, that this continual Encrease of Distrust was the necessary Case in every Evil, for which no Remedy was provided. They produc'd Letters, wrote during the time, which prov'd both that the Money was commonly lockt up in the Colony, and that wherever it accidentally appear'd, it always bore a much higher Value than the Paper. And they appeal'd to the Notoriety of the Fact, as a Confirmation of all their other Arguments.

I reply'd to them, that even allowing the Fact, their Liquidation wou'd be liable to great Objections. It suppos'd the Paper to have fallen in 1759 to a half; because the Bills of Exchange, drawn in October that Year were now only pay'd at 50 per cent: It suppos'd the Discredit to have doubled in the subsequent Year; because the Billets d'Ordonnance were only pay'd at 25 per cent. This proportional Fall of Credit, I shou'd not dispute, as it was a natural Consequence of the Stopping of Payment made in Europe in October 1759. The only Error consisted in supposing, that all the Billets d'Ordonnance now subsisting, had been issu'd after the Draught of Bills in 1759; whereas there was Reason to think, that a great Part of them had remain'd over the preceding Year, and had never been converted into Bills of Exchange. It was known, that the Intendant had once shut up his Office and had refus'd Bills: And it was not likely, that the Merchants and Planters of Canada cou'd all of them be ready at his Call, when he again open'd his Office, and that they anew presented all their Billets d'Ordonnance to be converted into Bills.

These Gentlemen answer'd, that the Merchants and Planters had employ'd Agents, who never quitted the Intendant, and whose Clamours had at last oblig'd him to change his Measures. And to prove that this was really the Case, and that almost all the Billets d'Ordonnance subsisting had actually been converted into Bills in October 1759, they made use of the following Arguments.

First. They show'd me the Accounts of the Expences of the Colony from October 1758 to October 1759, which amounted to about thirty Millions: They then show'd me the Account of the Bills drawn, which amounted to nearly the same Sum: They inferr'd, that little more was then due to the Inhabitants of Canada, and that almost all the Billets had been converted into Bills. And they confirm'd this Inference by showing me the Expences of all the preceding Years, which corresponded pretty exactly to the Draughts made on Europe at the End of each Year.

Secondly. They show'd me, that the Intendant had granted Bills to about 4000 Persons: They concluded, that, in so narrow a Colony, this Number wou'd comprehend almost every Person, who possess'd any Property or coud possibly have a Demand for Bills.

Thirdly. They show'd me Computations made of the whole Amount of the Billets d'Ordonnance, whether in French or English hands; and it appear'd, that they might form a Sum of about 24 Millions: They then showd me the Accounts taken of the Expences of the Colony from October 1759 to its final Reduction; and these Expences amounted to nearly the same Sum. They infer'd, that almost all the Billets had been issu'd during that Period.

Fourthly: They show'd me Accounts of old Billets issud, and new Billets struck, after October 1759: The whole did not differ materially from the Sum above-mention'd.

They concluded by saying, that they did not however question but some Billets might remain in the hands of the Canadians after the Draught in October 1759; and by the best Computation, they thought, that these Billets might amount to one Million, which was not so considerable a Sum, compar'd to the whole, as to engage the Court of France to change its Operations, which were founded on solid Principles: Especially as particular Redress was promis'd and might easily be given to the Persons injur'd. They added, that the Facts, which they produc'd to me, were most of them founded on authentic Papers, which were committed to Record, and which admitted not of any Controversy. They desir'd me to transmit an Account of the Whole to your Excellency, that you might communicate it to the London Merchants and to the Persons concernd. And Excellency. He was present at all this Conversation. He is a Member of the Committee of Merchants concernd in this Paper Money and is agent for the Canadians. He also past some time in Canada. Your Excellency may probably get from him Satisfaction in such Questions as you shall please to ask him. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard

 Sir 
Your Excellency's most obedient and most humble Servant



David Hume

P.S. I suppose I need not inform your Excellency that the Emperor dy'd suddenly at Inspruek  on the 11th of this Month. The News arrivd on Saturdy  last to this Court by a Courier of M de Chatelet; tho' M de Staremberg has as yet had no certain Account of it.

Mr Secretary Conway
