Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 15 July, 1766.

After an instance of your friendship, dear Madam, so charming, so agreeable to me, I should not have delayed a moment the making you the warmest acknowledgments; but before I have ended this letter, you will find me but too well justified in my long silence. I shall only say, therefore, that, if I can find fault with any thing, it is a circumstance which renders your method of proceeding the more obliging; I mean, your going too far and too hastily in your arrangements for me. How many accidents might have deprived me of all means of profiting by them! I have twice thought myself on the brink of returning to Paris, in the same station which I occupied before: and it was for this reason I told you, that this was a subject on which it were better for us to converse together, when I should have the happiness to see you. I now continue my narration with regard to Rousseau.

I left off by telling you, that I intended, by Mr Conway's advice, to remonstrate with him on account of his bad usage of the King, of Lord Marischal, of General Conway, and above all of me, whom he had allowed to solicit a pension merely that he might have the ostentatious glory of refusing it. But when I reflected further on the strange character and unaccountable proceedings of the man, I thought that the pressing him so hard might with him be a sufficient ground of quarrel; and I therefore contented myself with remarking to him, that this circumstance of secrecy, to which he now seemed to object, was once most agreeable to him; that I hoped he would return to the same way of thinking, and that, if ever he did, he might inform Mr Conway, who would endeavour to keep the matter still open for him. To this prudent and cautious letter I received no answer for three weeks, upon which I began to suspect that he was really ashamed to write to me; and being determined to take nothing amiss, and being desirous of consummating my good work, I went to General Conway, and persuaded him to engage the King to depart from the circumstance of secrecy, which seemed to give offence. He consented at my request to humour this whimsical man in his whimsies; only, said he, let us be sure beforehand, that he will accept of the pension in this form.

I immediately wrote to Rousseau to that purpose; and in four days, I received the following answer, dated at Wootton, the 23d of June . . . . This letter needs no commentary; I only desire you to remark with what impudence and malice he has perverted that story which I formerly told you, and which I then thought to his advantage. I mean the disgust about the hiring of his chaise. I immediately wrote him the following answer, dated 26th of June . . . .

I shall now for your satisfaction transcribe to you his letter to me, wrote immediately on his arrival in the country: you will see in what a friendly strain it is composed, and how lucky it is that I have kept it . . . .

The whole interval between this friendly letter and the other outrageous one was filled up by repeated and successful acts of friendship on my part. Though I have, from decency, supposed in my letters to him, that some calumniator had belied me, I know it could not be so, both because he receives no letters by the post, and because he could receive no letters from any part of the world which would not give him new proofs of my friendship towards him. What is worse, this is a deliberate and a cool plan to stab me; for here is the great distress which he mentioned to General Conway, and which neither you nor I could understand.

This distress and affliction was entirely a counterfeit and a lie; for Mr Davenport wrote me at the very same instant, that he was very cheerful, and gay, and sociable, and enjoyed himself extremely, and was in no distress at all. But to return to my narration; Mr Davenport delivered him my letter: he was in the utmost confusion; but upon that gentleman urging to him the absolute necessity of his giving me an answer, he promised to do it. He attempted also to tell him the story, but the only thing which he could understand was, that I lived in friendship with some philosophers at Paris who were his enemies. Several posts have since passed, and I have received no answer, nor do I indeed expect any. It is impossible that he can make me any apology for so black a proceeding. I should have wrote you of this matter sooner, had I not been desirous of sparing you the vexation of it till all was finished. You was besides absent from Paris. But as you may now be returned, and perhaps may have heard some surmises of the story from other hands, I was willing to give you a perfect account of it.

I must now, my dear friend, apply to you for consolation and advice in this affair, which both distresses and perplexes me. Should I give the whole account to the public, as I am advised by several of my friends, particularly Lord Hertford and General Conway, I utterly ruin this unhappy man. Every one must turn their back on so false, so ungrateful, so malicious, and so dangerous a mortal. I know not indeed any place above ground where he could hide his shame; and such a situation must run him into madness and despair.

Notwithstanding his monstrous offences towards me, I cannot resolve to commit such a piece of cruelty even against a man who has but too long deceived a great part of mankind. But on the other hand, it is extremely dangerous for me to be entirely silent. He is at present composing a book, in which it is very likely he may fall on me with some atrocious lie. I know that he is writing his memoirs, in which I am sure to make a fine figure. Suppose that these memoirs are wrote, and are published after his death. My justification must lose a great part of its authenticity, both because several of the persons concerned may then be no more, and because every one may say, that it is easy to advance any thing against a dead man.

My present intention, therefore, is to write a narrative of the whole affair, and to insert all the letters and original papers: to draw this in the form of a letter to General Conway: to make several copies of this narrative: to leave one in your hands, one with Lord Marischal, one with General Conway, one with Mr Davenport, and perhaps one or two with other persons: to send also a copy to Rousseau, and tell him in what hands the other copies are consigned; that if he can contradict any one fact, he may have it in his power. These copies then will lie safe, till he attack me in some way or other, and then, whether he be dead or alive, whether I be dead or alive, they will be published with all the authenticity, as if they had been committed to the press instantly. This is my present idea, which I hope you will approve of. But is it not very hard that I should be put to all this trouble, and undergo all this vexation, merely on account of my singular friendship and attention to this most atrocious scélérat? Was there ever another instance in human nature that obligations alone, without other pretences, became a ground of quarrel? Surely such diabolical pride was never seen in any other mortal.

You need not be surprized to hear rumours of this story flying about Paris. I told it to all my friends here, which I thought necessary for my own justification against so dangerous a man: and I wrote some hint of it to Baron d'Holbach, whom I desired to examine Rougemont's books with his own eyes. I know not but the inserting that story may be to my purpose. You always forget to execute your intention on this head; or perhaps you have done it, but have concealed the issue from me, as not being willing to disgust me with my good friend. I must beg of you to communicate this whole affair to the Prince of Conti, and desire his advice and orders for my conduct in it. If the Maréchale de Luxembourg's health and spirits permit her to enter into it, I should not be displeased that she were acquainted with it.

I know that I shall have Madame de Barbantane's sympathy and compassion, if she be at Paris; and should be glad to have her opinion.

I have not yet wrote to Lord Marischal; but must soon. I am glad you have taken my friend Smith under your protection: you will find him a man of true merit; though perhaps his sedentary recluse life may have hurt his air and appearance, as a man of the world.
