Dear Sir.

I receiv'd your very agreeable Present; for which I esteem myself much oblig'd to you. I think it needless to express to you my Esteem of the Performance, because both the Solidity of your Judgement, & the general Approbation your Writings meet with, instruct you sufficiently what Opinion you ought to form of them. Tho your Good Nature might prompt you to encourage me by some Praises, the same Reason has not place with me, however Justice might require them of me. Will not this prove, that Justice & Good-nature are not the same? I am surpriz'd you shou'd have been so diffident about your Latin. I have not wrote any in that Language these many Years, & cannot pretend to judge of particular Words & Phrazes: But the Turn of the whole seems to me very pure, & even easy & elegant.

I have subjoind a few Reflections which occurd to me in reading over the Book. By these I pretend only to show you, how much I thought myself oblig'd to you for the Pains you took with me in a like Case, & how willing I am to be grateful. P. 9. L. ult: & quae seq: These Instincts you mention seem not always to be violent & impetuous, more than Self love or Benevolence. There is a calm Ambition, a calm Anger or Hatred, which tho' calm, may likewise be very strong, & have the absolute Command over the Mind. The more absolute they are, we find them to be commonly the calmer. As these Instincts may be calm, without being weak, so Self-love may likewise become impetuous & disturb'd, especially where any great Pain or Pleasure approaches. P. 21. L. 11. In opposition to this, I shall cite a fine Writer, not for the sake of his Authority, but for the Fact, which you may have observ'd. Les hommes comptent presque pour rien toutes les vertus de cœur, & idolatrent les talens du corps & de l'esprit: celui qui dit froidement de soi, & sans croire blesser la modestie, qu'il est bon, qu'il est constant, fidele, sincere, equitable, reconoissant, n'ose dire qu'il est vif, qu'il a les dents belles ou la peau douce; cela est trop fort. Le Bruyere, I fancy however this Author stretches the Matter too far. It seems arrogant to pretend to Genius or Magnanimity, which are the most shining Qualities a man can possess. It seems foppish & frivolous to pretend to bodily Accomplishments. The Qualities of the heart, lye in a medium & are neither so shining as the one, nor so little valu'd as the other. I suppose the Reason why Goodnature is not more valu'd is its Commonness, which has a vast Effect on all our Sentiments. Cruelty & Hardness of Heart is the most detested of all Vices. I always thought you limited too much your Ideas of Virtue; & I find, I have this Opinion in common with several that have a very high Esteem for your Philosophy. P. 30 L. antepen: & quae seq. You seem here to embrace Dr Butler's Opinion in his Sermons on human Nature; that our moral Sense has an Authority distinct from its Force and Durableness, & that because we always think it ought to prevail. But this is nothing but an Instinct or Principle, which approves of itself upon reflection; and that is common to all of them. I am not sure that I have mistaken your Sense, since you do not prosecute this Thought. P. 52. L. 1. I fancy you employ the Epithet œrumnosam more from Custom than your settled Opinion. P. 129 & quae seq: You sometimes, in my Opinion, ascribe the Original of Property & Justice to public Benevolence, & sometimes to private Benevolence towards the Possessors of the Goods, neither of which seem to me satisfactory. You know my Opinion on this head. It mortifies me much to see a Person, who possesses more Candour & Penetration than any almost I know, condemn Reasonings, of which I imagine I see so strongly the Evidence. I was going to blot out this after having wrote it, but hope you will consider it only as a Piece of Folly, as indeed it is. P. 244 L. 7. You are so much afraid to derive any thing of Virtue from Artifice or human Conventions, that you have neglected what seems to me the most satisfactory Reason, viz lest near Relations, having so many Opportunities in their Youth, might debauch each other, if the least Encouragement or Hope was given to these Desires, or if they were not early represt by an artificial Horror, inspird against them. P. 263, L. 14. As the Phraze is true Latin, & very common, it seem'd not to need an Apology, as when Necessity obliges one to employ modern Words. P. 266. L. 18. & quae seq: You imply a Condemnation of Locke's Opinion, which being the receiv'd one, I cou'd have wisht the Condemnation had been more express.

These are the most material things that occurd to me upon a Perusal of your Ethics. I must own I am pleas'd to see such Philosophy & such instructive Morals to have once set their Foot in the Schools. I hope they will next get into the World, & then into the Churches. Nil desperandum Teucro duce & auspice Teucro.

Edinr Jany. 10 1743
