⟨London 20 July 1767⟩

My Dear Crawford

You have certainly mistaken the whole Affair of Dr Smollet. Before I receiv'd Yours, I had spoke to Lord Shelburne at Smollet's Desire. His Lordship told me, not that the Person to whom he had promis'd the Consulship of Nice had got Intelligence of the new Engagement to Smollet, and was very unreasonable in his Demands of Satisfaction (which you imagine) but that his Lordship had long ago promis'd that Office to the Recommendation of the Spanish Ambassador and cou'd not now depart from his Engagement. Besides, said he, how coud I send Smollet to Nice? The People woud rise upon him and stone him in the Streets on his first Appearance. I then mentiond the Consulship of Leghorn. He said it was promisd to a Friend or Relation of Dunning, the Lawyer. Besides, said he, how can I take on me the Patronage of a Person, so notorious for libelling as Dr Smollet? I shoud disoblige every one whom he has abus'd. In short, I do not see any great hopes of Success from that Quarter.

But you'll say, Lord Sheburne  may be out of Office and his Successor be more indulgent. Nothing is more possible. His Lordship's chief, if not sole Connexion is with Lord Chatham, whose Recovery is totally despair'd of, and no farther Account is made of him. The King desird by a Message to know his Sentiments on the present State of Affairs: An Answer was returnd by Lady Chatham, that her Lord was not in a Condition to think of such Matters. We are still in the same Confusion as ever. It is reported, that the Greenvilles, the Rockinghams, and the Bedfords have sworn an Alliance together and none of them are to accept of any Office, except the Favourite be totally banishd from his Majesty's Person and Councils for ever; and as a Pledge of Performance, it is insisted on, that all his Friends, and particularly, that all the damn'd Scots, by whom we have been so long infested, shall immediatly be turnd out of all Offices. The Duke of Grafton is not only willing but desirous to resign: People imagine, that the sole Difficulty lies in engaging Lord Rockingham to quit his Pretensions on the Treasury to Mr Greenville and to accept of the Lieutenancy of Ireland. It is allowd that my Principal is the most moderate man of the whole, and employs all his Interest to mitigate the Arrogance of his Friends. I shall not answer for to-morrow, or even for this Afternoon; but according to the present Aspect of things on Monday the 20 of July eleven o'clock of the Forenoon, he is the most likely to remain in Office of any of the present Ministry.

I am very sorry to learn by yours to Lord Shelburne that you are in a worse State of Health than when you left us. I know, Dear Crawford, that some of your Friends comfort themselves very readily, by saying that you are apt to be apprehensive: And it may be so; but I wish you were quite free from all Grounds of Apprehension. I entreat you, if you tender your own Health or give any Attention to the Entreaties of those that love you, to pay no regard to Physicians: That is a considerable part of your Distemper. You cannot pay a moderate Regard to them: Your only Safety is in neglecting them altogether.

I had a Letter from D'Alembert who tells me, that Jean Jaques  is in the neighbourhood of Paris, and acknowledges to every body he sees (who are not many) that he was in the wrong with regard to me.

The Douglas Cause is at last decided in favour of the Hamilton Family, by the President's casting Vote. Even that Majority, small as it is, must be regarded as very extraordinary; being gain'd by Force of Reason against the most violent Torrent of Prejudice that ever was heard of in a private Cause. The President was jostled more than once, as he went in & out of Court, and his Life has since been threatened by incendiary Letters. I make no Question, that Hamilton will gain it here: Lord Mansfield, I am told, was extremely alarmd at the Decision below. He will now probably think twice before he indulges his Propensity to Douglas.

 I had a Letter from Ossory who proposes to be at Ampthill all the Mon[th] of August.
