Dear Sir

I must trouble you to write that Letter you was so kind as to offer to Longman the Bookseller. I concluded somewhat of a hasty Bargain with my Bookseller from Indolence & an Aversion to Bargaining, as also because I was told that few or no Bookseller wou'd engage for one Edition with a new Author. I was also determin'd to keep my Name a Secret for some time tho I find I have fail'd in that Point. I sold one Edition of these two Volumes for fifty Guineas & also engag'd myself heedlessly in a Clause, which may prove troublesome, viz, that upon printing a second Edition I shall take all the Copys remaining upon hand at the Bookseller's Price at the time. Tis in order to have some Check upon my Bookseller, that I wou'd willingly engage with another, & I doubt not but your Recommendation wou'd be very servicable to me, even tho you be not personally acquainted with him.

I wait with some Impatience for a second Edition principally on Account of Alterations I intend to make in my Performance. This is an Advantage, that we Authors possess since the Invention of Printing & renders the Nonum prematur in annum not so necessary to us as to the Antients. Without it I shoud have been guilty of a very great Temerity to publish at my Years so many Noveltys in so delicate a Part of Philosophy: And at any Rate I am afraid, that I must plead as my Excuse that very Circumstance of Youth, which may be urg'd against me. I assure you, that without running any of the heights of Scepticism, I am apt, in a cool hour, to suspect, in general, that most of my Reasonings will be more useful by furnishing Hints & exciting People's Curiosity than as containing any Principles that will augment the Stock of Knowledge that must pass to future Ages. I wish I cou'd discover more fully the particulars wherein I have fail'd. I admire so much the Candour I have observd in Mr Locke, Yourself, & a very few more, that I woud be extremely ambitious of imitating it, by frankly confessing my Errors: If I do not imitate it, it must proceed neither from my being free from Errors, nor from want of Inclination; but from my real unaffected Ignorance. I shall consider more carefully all the Particulars you mention to me; tho' with regard to abstract Ideas, tis with Difficulty I can entertain a Doubt on that head, notwithstanding your Authority. Our Conversation together has furnish'd me a hint, with which I shall augment the 2d Edition. Tis this. The Word, simple Idea, is an abstract Term comprehending different Individuals that are similar. Yet the point of their Similarity from the very Nature of such Ideas is not distinct nor separable from the rest. Is not this a Proof, among many others, that there may be a similarity without any possible Separation even in thought?

I must consult you in a Point of Prudence. I have concluded a Reasoning with these two Sentences. When you pronounce any Action or Character to be vicious, you mean nothing but that from the particular Constitution of your Nature you have a Feeling or Sentiment of Blame from the Contemplation of it. Vice & Virtue, therefore, may be compar'd to Sounds, Colours, Heat & Cold, which, according to modern Philosophy, are not Qualitys in Objects but Perceptions in the Mind: And this Discovery in Morals, like that other in Physicks, is to be regarded as a mighty Advancement of the speculative Sciences; tho' like that too, it has little or no Influence on Practice. Is not this laid a little [too stro] ng? I desire your Opinion of it, tho I cannot entirely promise to conform myself to it. I wish from my Heart, I coud avoid concluding, that since Morality, according to your Opinion as well as mine, is determin'd merely by Sentiment, it regards only human Nature & human Life. This has been often urg'd against you, & the Consequences are very momentous. If you make any Alterations on your Performances, I can assure you, there are many who desire you woud more fully consider this Point; if you think that the Truth lyes on the popular Side. Otherwise common Prudence, your Character, & Situation forbid you touch upon it. If Morality were determind by Reason, that is the same to all rational Beings: But nothing but Experience can assure us, that the Sentiments are the same. What Experience have we with regard to superior Beings? How can we ascribe to them any Sentiments at all? They have implanted those Sentiments in us for the Conduct of Life like our bodily Sensations, which they possess not themselves. I expect no Answer to these Difficultys in the Compass of a Letter. Tis enough if you have patience to read so long a Letter as this. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinr. March. 16 1740

Please to direct to me as usual.
