Dear Mure

I hope you do not think yourself oblig'd, by saying civil things, to make Atonement for the too homely Truths, which you told me formerly. I will not believe so. I take for granted that you are equally sincere in both: Tho' I must own, that I think my first Volume a great deal better than the second: The Subject admitted of more Eloquence, and of greater Nicety of Reasoning, and more acute Distinctions. The Opposition, I may say the Rage with which it was receiv'd by the Public, I must confess, did not a little surprize me. Whatever Knowlege I pretend to in History & human Affairs, I had not so bad an Opinion of men as to expect, that Candor, Disinterestedness, & Humanity cou'd entitle me to that Treatment. Yet such was my Fate. After a long Interval, I at last collected so much Courage as to renew my Application to the second Volume, tho' with infinite Disgust & Reluctance; and I am sensible that in many Passages of it, there are great Signs of that Disposition, & that my usual Fire does not every where appear. At other times, I excited myself, & perhaps succeeded better.

Exul earm requiesque mihi, non fama petita est; 
Mens intenta suis, ne foret usque malis. 
Nam simul ac mea caluerant pectora musæ, 
Altior humano spiritus ille malo est.







I leave you to judge, whether your Letter came in a very seasonable time. I own, that I had the Weakness to be affected by it; when I found, that a Person, whose Judgement I very much valu'd, could tell me, tho' I was not asking his Opinion — But I will not proceed any farther. The Matter gave me Uneasyness at the time, tho' without the least Resentment: At present, the Uneasyness is gone; and all my usual Friendship, confirmd by Years & long Acquaintance, still remains.

Pray, whether do you pity or blame me most, with regard to this Dedication of my Dissertations to my Friend, the Poet? I am sure I never executed any thing, which was either more elegant in the Composition, or more generous in the Intention: Yet such an Alarm seiz'd some Fools here (Men of very good Sense, but Fools in that Particular) that they assaild both him & me with the utmost Violence; and engag'd us to change our Intention. I wrote to Millar to suppress that Dedication: Two Posts after I retracted that Order. Can any thing be more unlucky, than that in the Interval of these four days, he shoud have opend his Sale, & dispos'd of 800 Copies; without that Dedication, whence, I imagin'd, my Friend wou'd reap some Advantage, & myself so much Honor. I have not been so heartily vexd at any Accident of a long time. However, I have insisted that the Dedication shall still be publish'd.

I am a little uncertain what Work I shall next undertake: For I do not care to be long idle. I think you seem to approve of my going forward, and I am sensible, that the Subject is much more interesting to us, & even will be so [to] Posterity than any other I coud chuse: But can I hope, that there are Materials for composing a just & sure History of it? I am afraid not. However, I shall examine the Matter. I fancy it will be requisite for me to take a Journey to London, and settle there for some time, in order to gather such Materials as are not to be found in Print. But if I shoud go backwards, and write the History of England from the Accession of Henry the 7th, I might remain where I am; and I own to you, at my time of Life, these Changes of Habitation are not agreeable, even tho' the Place be better to which one removes.

I am sorry, my fair Cousin does not find London so agreeable as perhaps she expected. She must not judge by one Winter. It will improve against next Winter, & appear still better the Winter after that. Please make my Compliments to her, & tell her that she must not be discourag'd. By the bye, Mrs Binnie tells me that she writes her a very different Account of Matters; so that I find my Cousin is a Hypocrite.

I shall make use of your Criticisms, and wish there had been more of them. That Practice of doubling the Genitive is certainly very barbarous, and I carefully avoided it in the first Volume: But I find it so universal a Practice, both in writing & speaking, that I thought it better to comply with it; and have even chang'd all the Passages in the first Volume in conformity to Use. All Languages contain Solecisms of that kind.

Please make my compliments to Sir Harry Erskine, & tell him that I have executed what I propos'd. I am Dear Mure

Your most affectionate Friend & Servant

David Hume.

 [Feby. 1757.]
