Dear Sir

You wou'd perceive by the Sample I have given you, that I make Cleanthes the Hero of the Dialogue. Whatever you can think of, to strengthen that Side of the Argument, will be most acceptable to me. Any Propensity you imagine I have to the other Side, crept in upon me against my Will: And tis not long ago that I burn'd an old Manuscript Book, wrote before I was twenty; which contain'd, Page after Page, the gradual Progress of my Thoughts on that head. It begun with an anxious Search after Arguments, to confirm the common Opinion: Doubts stole in, dissipated, return'd, were again dissipated, return'd again; and it was a perpetual Struggle of a restless Imagination against Inclination, perhaps against Reason.

I have often thought, that the best way of composing a Dialogue, wou'd be for two Persons that are of different Opinions about any Question of Importance, to write alternately the different Parts of the Discourse, & reply to each other. By this Means, that vulgar Error would be avoided, of putting nothing but Nonsense into the Mouth of the Adversary: And at the same time, a Variety of Character & Genius being upheld, would make the whole look more natural & unaffected. Had it been my good Fortune to live near you, I shou'd have taken on me the Character of Philo, in the Dialogue, which you'll own I coud have supported naturally enough: And you woud not have been averse to that of Cleanthes. I believe, too, we coud both of us have kept our Temper very well; only, you have not reach'd an absolute philosophical Indifference on these Points. What Danger can ever come from ingenious Reasoning & Enquiry? The worst speculative Sceptic ever I knew, was a much better Man than the best superstitious Devotee & Bigot. I must inform you, too, that this was the way of thinking of the Antients on this Subject. If a Man made Profession of Philosophy, whatever his Sect was, they always expected to find more Regularity in his Life and Manners, than in those of the ignorant & illiterate. There is a remarkable Passage of Appian to this Purpose. That Historian observes, that notwithstanding the establish'd Prepossession in Favour of Learning, yet some Philosophers, who have been trusted with absolute Power, have very much abus'd it; and he instances in Critias, the most violent of the Thirty, & Ariston, who govern'd Athens in the time of Sylla. But I find, upon Enquiry, that Critias was a profest Atheist, & Ariston an Epicurean, which is little or nothing different: And yet Appian wonders at their Corruption, as much as if they had been Stoics or Platonists. A modern Zealot woud have thought that Corruption unavoidable.

I cou'd wish that Cleanthes' Argument coud be so analys'd, as to be render'd quite formal & regular. The Propensity of the Mind towards it, unless that Propensity were as strong & universal as that to believe in our Senses & Experience, will still, I am afraid, be esteem'd a suspicious Foundation. Tis here I wish for your Assistance. We must endeavour to prove that this Propensity is somewhat different from our Inclination to find our own Figures in the Clouds, our Face in the Moon, our Passions & Sentiments even in inanimate Matter. Such an Inclination may, & ought to be controul'd, & can never be a legitimate Ground of Assent.

The Instances I have chosen for Cleanthes are, I hope, tolerably happy, & the Confusion in which I represent the Sceptic seems natural. But si quid novisti rectius, &c.

You ask me, If the idea of Cause & Effect is nothing but Vicinity, (you shoud have said constant Vicinity, or regular Conjunction), I would gladly know whence is that farther Idea of Causation against which you argue? This Question is pertinent; but I hope I have answer'd it. We feel, after the constant Conjunction, an easy Transition from one Idea to the other, or a Connexion in the Imagination. And as it is usual for us to transfer our own Feelings to the Objects on which they are dependent, we attach the internal Sentiment to the external Objects. If no single Instances of Cause & Effect appear to have any Connexion, but only repeated similar ones, you will find yourself oblig'd to have Recourse to this Theory.

I am sorry our Correspondence shou'd lead us into these abstract Speculations. I have thought, & read, & compos'd very little on such Questions of late. Morals, Politics, & Literature have employ'd all my Time; but still the other Topics I must think more curious, important, entertaining, & useful, than any Geometry that is deeper than Euclid. If in order to answer the Doubts started, new Principles of Philosophy must be laid; are not these Doubts themselves very useful? Are they not preferable to blind, & ignorant Assent? I hope I can answer my own Doubts: But if I coud not, is it to be wonder'd at? To give myself Airs, & speak magnificently, might I not observe, that Columbus did not conquer Empires & plant Colonies?

If I have not unravell'd the Knot so well, in these last Papers I sent you, as perhaps I did in the former, it has not, I assure you, proceeded from Want of good Will; but some Subjects are easier than others: At some Times one is happier in his Researches & Enquiries than at others. Still I have Recourse to the si quid novisti rectius. Not in order to pay you a Compliment, but from a real philosophical Doubt & Curiosity.

I do not pay Compliments, because I do not desire them. For this Reason, I am very well pleas'd you speak so coldly of my Petition. I had, however, given Orders to have it printed, which perhaps may be executed: Tho' I believe I had better have left it alone. Not because it will give Offence, but because it will not give Entertainment: Not because it may be call'd profane; but because it may perhaps be deservedly call'd dull. To tell the Truth, I was always so indifferent about Fortune, & especially now, that I am more advanc'd in Life, & am a little more at my Ease, suited to my extreme Frugality, that I neither fear nor hope any thing from any man, and am very indifferent either about Offence or Favour. Not only, I woud not sacrifice Truth & Reason to political Views, but scarce even a Jest. You may tell me that I ought to have revers'd the Order of these Points, & have put the Jest first: As it is usual for People to be the fondest of their Performances on Subjects on which they are least made to excel. And that, consequently, I woud give more to be thought a good Droll, than to have the Praises of Erudition, & Subtility, & Invention. — This malicious Insinuation, I will give no Answer to, but proceed with my Subject.

I find, however, I have no more to say on it, but to thank you for Strabo. If the Carrier who will deliver you this do not find you at home, you will please send the Book to his Quarters. His Name is Thomas Henderson, the Berwick Carrier. He leaves the Town on the Thursdays, about the Middle of the day; he puts up at James Henderson, Stabler, betwixt the Foot of Cant's Close & Blackfriars' Wynd.

After you have done with these Papers, please return them by the same Carrier. But there is no Hurry. On the contrary the longer you keep them, I shall still believe you are thinking the more seriously to execute what I desire of you. I am Dear Sir

 Yours most sincerely

David Hume.

Ninewells, near Berwick. March 10, 1751.

If you'll be persuaded to assist me in supporting Cleanthes, I fancy you need not take Matters any higher than Part 3. He allows, indeed, in Part 2, that all our Inference is founded on the Similitude of the Works of Nature to the usual Effects of Mind. Otherwise they must appear a mere Chaos. The only Difficulty is, why the other Dissimilitudes do not weaken the Argument. And indeed it woud seem from Experience & Feeling, that they do not weaken it so much as we might naturally expect. A Theory to solve this would be very acceptable.

I hope you intend to be in this Country this Season. I am sorry to hear Mrs Murray has been ill. But I hope she is now better.

I make no Scruple to push you to write me something regular on this Subject. It will be a kind of Exercise to you; & improve your Style & Invention.
