Compiegne 19 of July, 1765

I am much afraid, dear Madam, that it will not be in my power to pay my respects to you at Villers-Cotterets this season. You have probably heard of our revolutions in England; that the Ambassador's brother is one Secretary of State, his nephew the other, and himself appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. He has not yet accepted of that employment, and wishes to decline it; but he is obliged to set out for London in two days, which leaves the functions of the Embassy entirely upon me, and confines me to the Court. I regret very much my not seeing you on this occasion; and so much the more, because, if Lord Hertford goes to Ireland, I shall be obliged to accompany him, and may not afterwards have frequent opportunities of seeing you. I say this with much regret, dear Madam, on your account, on account of others of my friends, and on account of the country in general, whose amiable and sociable manners made me wish never to leave it. But all the ties of gratitude and friendship oblige me to attend the Ambassador, who desires to carry me along with him; and that the sacrifice may not have too much merit in it, he makes it extremely my interest to return with him: the office which he proposes to me, is very considerable for profit, and credit, and dignity. But I assure you I still wish that all those projects may fail, and that my Lord and I may, both of us, remain in our present stations. I am glad to think that there is a possibility it may be so.

I had yesterday a letter from our friend in England, who is as melancholy and disconsolate as ever. She is even displeased that I had thrown a little gaiety into a letter which I wrote to her. I foresee that all the former disputes and vexations will return, never to have an end. Before her arrival in London, Lord Holderness wrote me a very reasonable letter, in which he promises to conform himself, as far as possible, to the views suggested to him; but he did not expect that she would give him an opportunity, by opening the subject with him. She leaves London the 25th of the month; so that I look for her at Compiègne in ten or twelve days. I beg my sincere compliments to Madame de Vierville.

 I have the honour to be, 
Dear Madam, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant,





David Hume
