Sir

I was yesterday honour'd with a Letter from a Lady of great Merit, and one who has a very particular Regard for you, the Countess of Boufflers; and this Letter, I find, was wrote upon the Supposition of my being in London, and was probably brought over by you. There is nothing I more regreat, than my being at so great a Distance, by which I am depriv'd of an Advantage that I have long coveted, the Pleasure of your Acquaintaince; and in time, as I wou'd fain flatter myself, the Honour of your Friendship. For I will use the Freedom of telling you bluntly, without affecting the Finesse of a well-turnd Compliment, that, of all men of Letters in Europe, since the Death of President Montesquieu, you are the Person whom I most revere, both for the Force of your Genius and the Greatness of your Mind. Had I been in London, I shou'd not have despair'd, that, tho' I be there little less a Stranger than Yourself, I might have been of some small Use to you; and I shou'd at least have been able, by my Regard & Attentions, to show you, that persecuted Merit becomes but the more precious in the Eyes of every one who knows how to value it. But I am sensible, that the extensive Reputation, which you have acquir'd by your eloquent Writings, will engage more People to offer you their Civilities and Services than your Taste for Privacy & Solitude will allow to admit of: I could only hope to be receiv'd by you with Some Distinction on account of that Lady, who seems desirous to establish a Friendship & Connexion between us. Permit me also some Liberty of boasting on this Occasion while I pretend, that my Conduct & Character entitle me to a Sympathy with Yours; at least, in my Love of philosophical Retreat, in my Neglect of vulgar Prejudices, and in my Disdain of all Dependance: And if these Circumstances had happily prov'd the Foundation of an amicable Connexion between us; I shou'd have entertain'd the Project of engaging you to honour this part of the World with your Company, and to make you overlook the Disadvantages of Climate and other Circumstances, under which it labours. There are here several Men of Letters & Merit, who wou'd have been proud of your Acquaintaince, and whom you wou'd have found not unworthy of your Esteem: And I shou'd have valu'd myself on being the Person who had the Happiness of making them known to you. In the mean time, will you permit me to send some of my Friends in London to wait on you, and not think it strange, if they cite my Name & Authority for paying their Respects to you? I have wrote to one or two, who, I hope, are at present in that City, and who, I am confident, will perform to much better Purpose the good Offices, which I should have been proud to execute towards you in Person. You may be confident, that the Virtue & Probity of the Persons whom I recommend to your Friendship, will be principally attended to; much more than their Rank, or even their Genius and Knowlege; tho' they are also eminent in this latter particular.

I have us'd the Freedom to write to you in English; because it is the only Language in which I can express myself with tolerable Propriety, tho' I am uncertain whether you will be able to understand my Letter without an Interpreter. I remain, with sincere Regard, Sir

 Your most obedient & most humble Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh James's Court. 2 July 
1762
