Dear Sir

I came to Town about six Weeks ago, & have been very busy during that time, in adding the Authorities to the Volumes of the Stuarts. I find this a very laborious, but not unentertaining Occupation. I find myself oblig'd to read over again almost all my old Authors; & besides adding the References, I take an Opportunity to correct a few Mistakes, to add some new Facts, & to make Improvements on the whole. I fancy that I shall be able to put my Account of that Period of English History beyond Controversy. I am glad you have so near a Prospect of a new Edition.

As soon as this Task is finish'd, I undertake the antient English History. I find the Advocates Library very well provided of Books on this Period; but before I finish I shall pass a considerable time in London, to peruse the Manuscripts in the Musæum.

There is one Dr Mackenzie here (the same Gentleman who wrote on Health & long Life) who has compos'd a Book against me with regard to Q. Mary, where he treats me very roughly, as a virulent, determin'd Whig. I am not displeasd to be abusd by the violent of both Parties. The Book is not yet publishd. But the Booksellers will probably propose to you to take some Copies. I own that I think the Book will rather do me good.

I think that an Index will be very proper; and am glad, that you free me from the Trouble of undertaking that Task, for which I know myself to be very unfit.

I am surprizd that Strahan had not printed the Essay on the Coalition of Parties. He was very near it when I left London; & his Press must have stopd other wise it had been printed off in a week after. It will be necessary to add the two new Essays to what remains of the Quarto Edition. Please send down half a dozen of Copies of the new Edition in Sheets for me, along with Kincaid & Donaldson's Parcel.

I shall always desire to be remember'd to Mrs Millar; and hope to have the Pleasure of playing a Game of Whist with her in my House here next Summer. I fancy these long Journies will do you both a great deal of Service.

Please make my Compliments to Mr Strahan, & Dr Douglas. I congratulate you, as a good Citizen, on the late Successes of our Arms, & on our Prospect of a good Peace, which, I hope, will give the Public more Leizure to read Books, & cultivate Literature. I am with great Sincerity Dr Sir

 Your most obedient Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh. 18 Decr. 1759

P.S.

I desire the Favour of you to convey the enclosd to Dr Franklyn.
