Edinburgh 25 of June, 1771.

Dear Sir

I have receivd both your favours, for which I am oblig'd to you. I shall be able to send off by the Waggon, in less than a Month, a corrected Copy of my History; and shall write you at the time, that you may send for it, if it be not immediatly sent to you. It gives me a sensible pleasure, that I shall now have an Edition of that work, corrected nearly to my mind. I have taken incredible pains on this Edition. It puts me in mind of a saying of Rousseau's, that one half of a man's life is too little to write a Book and the other half to correct it. Most of my Corrections fall upon the Style; tho‘ there are also several Additions and Amendments in the Subject and in the facts.

I have got about a hundred Franks directed to you; and we shall proceed in the manner you desire. I think, however, it will not be amiss to have some of Mr Fraser's, for large Parcels; and for this purpose you may send him the enclos'd, with twenty Covers, which he will not grudge to frank to you. The rest you may get from your Acquaintance or mine, Lord Beauchamp, Mr Wedderburn, Mr Pulteney, Mr Adam, Mr Stewart of Buckingham Street &c, informing them by a short Note of the reason of your applying to them.

I return you Warburton's Letter, which diverted me. He and all his gang, the most scurrilous, arrogant, and impudent Fellows in the world, have been abusing me in their usual Style these twenty Years, and here at last he pretends to speak well of me. It is the only thing from them, that coud ever give me any mortification. We have all heard of the several Schools of Painters and their peculiar manners. It is petulance, and Insolence and abuse, that distinguish the Warburtonian School, even above all other Parsons and Theologians. Johnson is abusive in Company, but falls much short of them in his writings. I remember Lord Mansfield said to me that Warburton was a very opposite man in company to what he is in his Books; then, replyd I, he must be the most agreeable Companion in Europe, for surely he is the most odious Writer.

I wish to tempt you into a Discourse of Politics, because I get Information from you. I own, that I am inclind to have a good Opinion of Lord North, but his Insolence to the House of Bourbon, and his Timidity towards the London Mob appear unaccountable. Only consider how many Powers of Government are lost in this short Reign. The right of displacing the Judges was given up; General Warrants are lost; the right of Expulsion the same; all the co-ercive Powers of the House of Commons abandon'd; all Laws against Libels annihilated; the Authority of Government impair'd by the Impunity granted to the Insolence of Beckford, Crosby, and the common Council: the revenue of the civil List diminishd. For God's sake, is there never to be a stop put to this inundation of the Rabble? We shall have fine work next Elections, if the people above and below continue in the same dispositions, the one insolent and the other timid. For my part, I can account for Lord North's Conduct only by one supposition. He will not expose himself even in the best cause to the Odium of the populace, because he feels that he has no sure hold of the Cabinet, but depends for all his power on some invisible secret Being, call him Oberon, the fairy or any other, whose Caprices can in a moment throw him off, and leave him no Resources either in popularity or authority. In this Light his caution is excusable: He bullies Spain and France and quakes before the Ward of Farringdon without; because, if he shoud be suddenly displaced, he will still retain it in his power to become popular and formidable. But all these Inconveniences are slight, in comparison of our public Debts, which bring on inevitable Ruin, and with a Certainty which is even beyond geometrical, because it is arithmetical. I hope you have more Sense than to trust a shilling to that egregious bubble.

 I am Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume.
