Dear Sir

I see clearly by the Extracts of the Clarendon Papers, for which I am extremely oblig'd to you, that the Money, remitted by France, was entirely for the Support of Portugal, as I conjectur'd; and was not sent with a View of engaging England in any Measures which might serve the purposes of Lewis, who indeed had not at that time any Views of Conquests or Acquisitions. It was always known, that Lewis remitted Money to England for the Service of Portugal; which being directly contrary to the Treaty of the Pyrenees, it was necessary to keep it a profound Secret, though that Secret had transpird before. Indeed, I must differ widely from you; and am of Opinion, that, from the Commencement of the Reformation till the Revolution, there is not any important Secret in the English History: And, if I coud call up the Devil by any powerful Incantation and oblige him to speak Truth, I do not recollect any Questions worth the asking with regard to that Period; Nothing which cannot be known very certainly by means merely human. The Causes of the second Dutch War, even before I saw K. James's Memoirs, were not in the least doubtful to me. Some curious pretty Anecdotes of various kinds might be known by the Devil's means; but these woud only serve to the Embellishment of History, not to the Explication of any important Events.

I remember very well that I read Deageant's Memoirs and the Archbishop of Embrun's Narrative; tho‘ I cannot at present recollect particularly the Contents; I can only recollect my general Opinion on the whole; that Deageant was a pragmatical Puppy who was entirely to be disregarded; and that K. James had entertaind a silly Notion, which many Protestants have adopted, of reconciling the two Churches by mutual Concessions; and in order to show the Archbishop that he himself might be an impartial Mediator, he endeavours to convince him, that he had no bigotted Animosity against the Catholics; which was a Truth we knew before. Cardinal Bentivoglio, who was Nuncio in Flanders during that Period, and had all the English Missions under his Inspection, says, that the King woud not have been displeas'd with some middling Course with regard to Religion. He must indeed have been very blind, if he had not seen that the Puritans were much more dangerous Enemies than the Catholics.

I again repeat to you my thanks for the Communication of the Clarendon Papers, which I wish to see in print, and am sorry any delay shoud take place. I am

 Dear Sir 
Your most obedient and most humble Servant



David Hume

Edinburgh 5 of July 1770.
