Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 29 of August, 1766.

It is not easy for you, dear Madam, to imagine the pleasure which your letter gave me. Nothing could be more obliging than your writing to me on this occasion, and in such obliging terms. It was the true method of making me compensation for all the vexations occasioned by so strange and surprizing an incident, which surely never had its parallel in the world. But though I have long ago forgot all the uneasiness which it gave me, and still more when I find that you take part in it, I have suffered a real loss, which I cannot easily repair. I was just ready to set out for Scotland, in order to visit my friends, and take leave of them, when I received that horrible letter, accusing me of the blackest crimes, in return for all my favours and good offices. I was then necessarily detained at London, in order to clear up so capital a charge. I was engaged in a correspondence with Paris, which I could not in honour neglect, and thus a great deal of time has been uselessly and disagreeably lost. But it is with pleasure I hear from Lord Tavistock, that you are not to attend M. de Barbantane into Italy, and that we may still hope to enjoy your company at Paris. I should have been sorry to hear of your setting out for Florence at all; but much more without my being able to bid you adieu.

I am very well satisfied, that you think with regard to this quarrel in the same manner with Madame de Boufflers; but I am persuaded both you and she will change somewhat your sentiments after you have seen the suite of papers which I have desired her to communicate to you, after she has received them from M. D'Alembert. You will see that the only possible alleviation of this man's crime is, that he is entirely mad; and even then, he will be allowed a dangerous and pernicious madman, and of the blackest and most atrocious mind.

The King and Queen of England expressed a strong desire to see these papers, and I was obliged to put them into their hand. They read them with avidity, and entertain the same sentiments that must strike every one. The King's opinion confirms me in the resolution not to give them to the public, unless I be forced to it by some attack on the side of my adversary, which it will therefore be wisdom in him to avoid.

We hear that you was much alarmed in France with the prospect of war, upon Mr Pitt's being taken into the ministry. That apprehension was always without foundation; but now more than ever, on account of his losing all his popularity, merely on account of his accepting a peerage. Of all the caprices of the people, in all ages, never was any more ridiculous and surprizing. Lord Chatham is as much detested as ever Mr Pitt was adored, without its being possible to assign any reason for this alteration. The folly, it is true, will probably pass in time; but this minister will never fully recover his former consideration, on account of his leaving the House of Commons, which is the great scene of business.

We have heard lately very strange stories from France, which excite horror in every one, and give me a sensible concern. You conjecture that I mean the atrocious punishment of the Chevalier de la Barre by the Parliament of Paris, on account of some youthful levities. Such of my friends as are not over favourable to France, insult me on this occasion; and surely, if our accounts be true, nothing can do less honour to the country. It is strange, that such cruelty should be found among a people so celebrated for humanity, and so much bigotry amid so much knowledge and philosophy. I am pleased to hear, that the indignation was as general in Paris as it is in all foreign countries.

I saw to-day an Italian abbé, and talked to him about the Court of Florence. He says that it has become a very disagreeable place, and that nothing can exceed the narrowness of mind in the Archduke and Archduchess. That princess rubs off, with her own hands, the paint and patches from the faces of the ladies, and makes them presents of tippets to cover their bosoms. I beseech you, never go to a place where you must be virtuous by constraint, lest you should take an inclination to become otherwise. You may, perhaps be allowed, as Ambassadress from France, to keep your rouge; but are you sure that you may not take a quarrel with virtue, when you see it accompanied with so much folly and ridicule? I beg my compliments to Madame de Vierville, and that you will believe me, with the greatest regard,

 Madam, 
Your most obedient humble servant,



David Hume.
