[Late 1759 or early 1760]

My Lord

As I am told, that Dr Robertson has wrote a few Remarks, which he communicated to your Lordship, on our common Answerer about the Affair of Q. Mary, and has endeavourd to show you, that it was Contempt, & not Inability, which kept him from making a public Reply; I thought it wou'd not be amiss for me to imitate his Example: And I did not indeed know a properer Person nor a more equal Judge than your Lordship, to whom I coud submit the Cause. For if on the one hand your Lordships Regard to the Memory of that Princess might give you a Byass to that Side, I knew, that the antient & constant Friendship, with which your Lordship has always honourd me, both in public & private, woud give you a strong Byass on my Side: And there was a good Chance for your remaining neutral and impartial between these Motives.

I shall confine my Apology to the Account, which I have given of the Conference at Hampton Court, as this is indeed the chief Point, in which the Answerer has thought proper to find fault with me.

There are several Places, in which I mention Mary's Refusal to give any Reply to Murray's Charge; and have commonly said, that she annexd as a Condition, her being admitted to Q Elizabeth's Presence; as in Page 496 Line. 20 Page 501. Line 12, Line 21. I have not said, that this Condition was an unreasonable one; (the words which the Answerer puts in my Mouth) but only that it was such a one as she did not expect to be granted; and that because Q. Elizabeth had formerly refusd it, before any positive Proofs of Mary's Guilt were produc'd, merely from the general Rumor & Opinion, which were unfavorable to her. Having thus clearly express'd myself on this head; when I have Occasion afterwards, in the course of the Narration, to mention the Matter, I say once or twice simply, that Mary refus'd to give any Answer, without expressing the Condition annexd by her: My Reasons were, that the Position was sufficiently qualify'd by the preceding Narration, & because a Refusal, grounded on a Condition, which the Person does not expect to be granted, & which is accordingly deny'd, is certainly equivalent to a simple & absolute Refusal.

That your Lordship may judge of the Unfairness of the Answerer, he picks out this simple & unqualify'd Expression of mine, and ommitts the others, which explain it to the Readers of the meanest Capacity: And he opposes it by a Passage, cited with equal Unfairness from Mr Goodall's Appendix. He quotes a long Passage from Goodall p. 308. in which Q. Mary demands Copies of her Letters, and offers positively to give an Answer, without mentioning any Conditions: And this detachd Passage he opposes to the detachd Passage from me, in which I assert, that she absolutely refus'd to answer: He desires that this express Contradiction between my Narration & the Records may be remark'd. But in the first place, the Condition of being admitted to Q. Elizabeth, tho not mentiond in that Paper, is not relinquish'd, and it is even clearly imply'd: Because Mary there referrs to a former Letter, which we find in Goodall page 283 line 2 from the bottom, Page 289, line 13, and where it is positively insisted on. Secondly. We have in Goodall p. 184, Q Mary's Commission to break up the Conference, if that Condition be not granted. Thirdly Q. Elizabeth understands her Meaning very well, as indeed it was very plain, and offers to her Copies of the Letters if she will promise to answer without any Condition See Goodall p. 311 line 3: And this Offer is not accepted of. Fourthly In the very last Paper of all, which closes the whole, the Bishop of Ross still insists on that Condition Goodall p. 390 about the middle.

You see, therefore, My Lord, the double Trick practicd: A mangled Passage of my History is confronted with a mangled Passage of Mr Goodall's Papers; and by this gross Fraud a Contradiction is pretended to be found between them. A single Forgery would not do the Business.

I believe it will divert your Lordship to observe, that when the Answerer is employing these base Artifices, this is the very Moment he chooses to call me Lyar & Rascal. But that Trick is so frequently practicd by Thieves, Pick-pockets, & controversial Writers (Gentlemen whose Morality are pretty much upon a Footing) that all the World has ceased to wonder and wise men are tir'd of complaining of it.

I do not find, that even this Gentleman has venturd to assert, that Q. Mary offerd to answer Murray's Accusation, tho' she shoud be refus'd Access to Q. Elizabeth. Where then is the Difference between us? He asserts, that she offerd to answer, if admitted to that Queen: I say, that she refusd to answer, unless she was admitted, which are positive & negative Propositions of the same Import.

For a Proof that Q. Mary's Commission was finally revokd, I beg your Lordship to consult Goodall p. 184, 311, 387, where it is plainly asserted. The last Quotation is from the concluding Paper of the whole Collection.

I hope your Lordship, as my Friend, will congratulate me on the Resolution I took in the beginning of my Life, that is, of my literary Life, never to reply to any body. Otherwise, this Gentleman, I mean, this Author might have insulted me on my Silence. I am sure your Lordship wou'd have disownd me for ever as a Friend, if I had enterd the Lists with such an Antagonist. Mr Goodal is no very calm or indifferent Advocate in this Cause; yet he disowns him as an Associate; and confesses to me & all the World that I am here right in my Facts, and am only wrong in my Inferences.

There appear to me two infallible Marks of our opposite Parties; and as we may say, Proof Charges, which if a man can stand, there is no Fear that any Charge will ever burst him. A Whig who believes the popish Plot, and a Tory who asserts Q. Mary's Innocence are certainly fitted to go all Lengths with their Party. I am happy to think, that such People are both equally my Enemies; and still more happy, that I have no Animosity at either.

It is an old Proverb, Love me, love my Dog: But certainly it admits of many Exceptions: I am sure, at least, that I have a great Respect for your Lordship; yet have none at all for this Dog of Yours. On the contrary, I declare him to be a very mangey Cur: Entreat your Lordship to rid your hands of him as soon as possible: And think a sound beating or even a Rope too good for him.
