Dear Doctor

I have perus'd Ferguson's Papers more than once, which had been put into my hands, some time ago, at his desire. I sat down to read them with great Prepossession, founded on my good Opinion of him, on a Small Specimen I had seen of them some Years ago, and on yours & Dr Robertson's Esteem of them: But I am sorry to say it, they have no-wise answer'd my Expectation. I do not think them fit to be given to the Public, neither on account of the Style nor the Reasoning; the Form nor the Matter. My Concern for his Reputation obliges me to tell you my Opinion; which I find also to be Elliots, as well as Dr Lowthe's, a very candid & ingenious Critic. I beseech you and Robertson to give them another Perusal, with more Severity and less Prepossession. This is a very serious Matter: Any Failure of Success in this particular, besides the Mortification attending it, operates backwards, and discredits his Class, which is at present in so flourishing a Situation. He has not wrote a word to me about the Subject, so that I cannot with any Propriety give him my Judgement; and I demand of you & Dr Robertson the strictest Secrecy. Remember that you two forc'd out the Siege of Aquileia upon the Public, in spite of my Judgement. It is not natural to imagine, that these Sections, which he has sent as a Specimen, are the worst parts of the Performance: Yet surely, what I saw was much better. It is needless to enter into a Detail, where almost every thing appears to me exceptionable. If I come down to Scotland next Summer, I shoud concur in any Method to prevent or retard the Publication; but they are now put into General Clerk & Lord Shelburne's hands, who are not the most proper Judges in the World; and if you do not interpose, they will certainly be printed. I shall be agreeably disappointed, if the Success prove contrary to my Opinion.

I did not answer Yours, which Oswald delivered me; because I take it for granted that you receivd mine, which I wrote from Paris, under Lord Kaims's Cover. You have seen in the News papers enow of Particulars concerning my Pupil, who has now left me and retir'd to Chiswick. He is impatient to get into the Mountains of Wales. He is a very agreeable, amiable Man; but a great Humourist. The Philosophers of Paris fortold to me, that I coud not conduct him to Calais without a Quarrel; but I think I cou'd live with him all my Life, in mutual Friendship and Esteem. I am very sorry, that the Matter is not likely to be put to a Trial. I believe one great Source of our Concord, is, that neither he nor I are disputatious, which is not the Case with any of them. They are also displeas'd with him, because they think he over-abounds in Religion; and it is indeed remarkable, that the Philosopher of this Age, who has been the most persecuted, is by far the most devout. I do not comprehend such Philosophers as are invested with the sacerdotal Character. I am Dear Dr Yours usque ad aras

David Hume.

Lisle Street 11 of Feby 1766
