London, 17 March, 1767.

Your letter, dear Madam, for the first time in my life, gave me uneasiness and no less surprize. Surely, whenever the offer of your friend was mentioned, at the same time that I expressed the highest sense of his goodness, I never spoke of any thing but difficulties and objections. I was conscious how little qualified I am for that course of life pointed out to me, and how much the habits of study and indolence, and liberty, prevailed over me, to admit of such an attachment as was proposed. Your exhortation, and, still more, the prospect of passing much of my time in your company, had great influence over me, but were never able to overcome the internal conviction which I retained, that I should be extremely misplaced in such a situation. You will please to remember, that very early after my return to London, I wrote you a letter to this purpose, and you had the compliance to yield to my reluctance, and even to make me another proposal, the most charming and most obliging in the world, which however I delayed accepting, till I should see how far it was inconvenient to you. I mentioned the arrangements which I had taken before I left Paris, in order to convince you that I was quite serious in my resolutions of returning; resolutions in which you cannot doubt but my attachment to you had a considerable share. How it happens that you was not at the time acquainted with these arrangements, I cannot imagine: I cannot but think you have forgot. Perhaps your absence from Paris till within a few days of our departure, was the reason why I never mentioned them to you. Surely, the two persons who were so good as to promise me their assistance, live in so public a manner, that, as I never desired them to conceal the matter, they were the most likely to spread the knowledge of it among my friends and acquaintance. On the whole then, I hope to be entirely justified in your eyes; or if that should fail me, I hope to be forgiven. Provided I be restored to your favour and good opinion, I am the more indifferent about the means.

To think that I have incurred your displeasure, is too grievous to be borne; even though it should happen, as you say, that my absence from you were to be eternal. But I prognosticate better of my good fortune than to think so. Sure I am that my present connexions are rather likely to forward our re-union. This situation will not probably be durable, much less perpetual. It was only in the prospect of its terminating soon, that I accepted of it.

Last post, I informed Madame de Barbantane of this terrible accident that has happened to Lord Tavistock. I have now the pleasure to tell you that he is in a very promising way, and great hopes are entertained of his recovery.

I beg it of you, not to be long in answering me.
