Sir

I was very agreeably surprized, in returning from a jaunt in the country, to find the letter, with which you had honourd me. I did not indeed entertain any doubt of your patience of criticism. Those who are to reach great beauties, are seldom reluctant to hear of small faults. But a man must be endowd with some qualities, even above those of a good writer, and have these too fortifyd by education in the best company, to regard a criticism as an obligation, and to take thence an opportunity of commencing a friendly correspondence with the person, who had presum'd to censure his writings.

I shou'd be asham'd, after you had set me so good an example, not to make you acknowledgments for the remark, which you have made on my negligence in not quoting my authorities. I own that I was so much the less excusable for not taking this precaution, that such an exactness would have cost no trouble; and it wou'd have been easy for me, after I had noted and markd all the passages, on which I founded my narration, to write the references on the margin. But I was seduc'd by the example of all the best historians even among the moderns, such as Matchiavel, Fra paolo, Davila, Bentivoglio; without considering that that practice was more modern than their time, and having been once introduc'd, ought to be follow'd by every writer. And, tho' it be easy for the falsest and most partial historian to load his margin with quotations, nor is there any other certain method of assuring ones self of the fidelity of an author than to read most of the original writers of any period; yet the reader has reason to expect that the most material facts, at least all such as are any way new, shou'd be supported by the proper authorities. I am preparing for the press a new volume of History, from the commencement of Henry the VII to the union of the two crowns; and have there been very careful to obviate this objection.

At the same time, that I submit to this censure, I hope, Sir, you will permit me to reclaim against another sentiment, which you have rather insinuated than advanc'd; as if it were superfluous to re-write the English history, or publish on that subject any thing which has ever before in any shape appeard in print. If no man is to know the English story but by perusing all those monuments, which remain of it, few will be able to attain that useful and agreeable erudition. The original books, which instruct us in the reign of Q. Elizabeth alone, would require six months reading at the rate of ten hours a day; and most people, even after taking this pains, wou'd attain but a very confus'd idea of the transactions of that period. But what must foreigners do to get some notion of our history? What must posterity, after these monuments have farther multiply'd upon us? What must far the greatest part of ourselves, who have neither leizure nor inclination for such a laborious and disagreeable study? To allege therefore the number of historical monuments against composing a history seems not much better founded, than if one shoud give it as a reason for not building a house, that he lay near a quarry. Tho' my writings shoud fail of convincing the world of the propriety of this attempt; I am persuaded, Sir, that if your leizure permitted you to undertake such a work, your own country, as well as the learned throughout all Europe, woud acknowledge the obligation. I have the honour to be

 Sir 
Your most obedient & most humble 
servant





David Hume.

Edinburgh 2 Augt, 1758.
