Sir,

You wou'd certainly be a little surpriz'd and vext on receiving a printed copy of the Novel, which was in hands when you left London. If I did not explain the mystery to you, I believe I told you, that I hopt that affair was entirely over, by my employing Lord Marchmont and Lord Bolingbroke's authority against publishing that Novel; tho' you will readily suppose that neither of these two noble Lords ever perus'd it. This machine operated for six weeks; but the vanity of the author return'd with redoubled force, fortify'd by suspicions, and encreas'd by the delay. ‘Pardie,’ dit il, ‘je crois que ces messieurs veulent être les seules Seigneurs d'Angleterre qui eussent de l'esprit. Mais je leur montrerai ce que le petit A— peut faire aussi.’ In short, we were oblig'd to print off thirty copies, to make him believe that we had printed a thousand, and that they were to be disperst all over the kingdom.

My Lady Marchioness will also receive a copy, and I am afraid it may give her a good deal of uneasiness, by reason of the story alluded to in the novel, and which she may imagine my Lord is resolv'd to bring to execution. Be so good, therefore, as to inform her, that I hope this affair is all over. I discover'd, about a fortnight ago, that one of the papers sent to that damsel had been sent back by her under cover to his rival, Mr. M‘ — , and that she had plainly, by that step, sacrific'd him to her other lover. This was real matter of fact, and I had the good fortune to convince him of it; so that his pride seems to have got the better of his passion, and he never talks of her at present.

A few weeks ago, Mr Vincent told me, that it was his desire that my Lord, with the consent of all his friends, shou'd do such a deed in my favours, as you was so kind as to mention to me when in London; and that, if my affair in Edinburgh should fail, he was resolv'd to use his endeavours to persuade them all to be of the same opinion. My answer was, that I likt his proposal so well, and found my Lord so easy to live with, that I wou'd endeavour to disengage myself from my friends in Edinburgh, and continue my present situation. Accordingly I wrote to Mr Stewart, who very frankly and kindly allow'd me my liberty of choice; but, unluckily, before my friends in Edinburgh could be inform'd of my resolutions, the matter was brought to an issue, and by the cabals of the Principal, the bigotry of the clergy, and the credulity of the mob, we lost it. Mr Vincent, however, has wrote to Lady Annandale, who has given her consent, only hinting a little scruple with regard to the danger of my Lord's tiring of me, or I of him; and, as the settlement was to be during life, this wou'd be so much lost to the family. He answer'd her by saying, that the first danger was not to be regarded, because we were resolv'd not to comply with these momentary gusts of humour; and as to the second, that proper precaution cou'd easily be taken, by the advice of the Solicitor-General. I hope this will give entire satisfaction; but, if any difficulties remain, I shall flatter myself in your friendship and authority, to remove them.

Mr Hope exprest a great desire to Mr Vincent, of seeing my Lord at this place; accordingly, he din'd here in his way to Scotland, and found my Lord in very good health, as indeed he has been for two months; the country air and exercise operating beyond expectation. We live extremely well together, without the smallest interruption of good will and friendship, and he has done me the honour of composing some French verses in my praise. I am, Sir, Your most obedient Servant,

David Hume.

Weldehall June 18, 1745.
