Madam

I find you are desirous to hear no more of me, which, I own, is one of the greatest Surprizes, and none of the least Afflictions I have met with in the Course of my Life. However, I cou'd not forbear writing to you, because I shall put it in your Power to do an Act of Generosity, which, unless you be indeed totally changed in every respect, must give you Pleasure.

 About a fortnight ago, I received a Letter from Mr Davenport, telling me, that Rousseau had left him one morning without giving him the least warning; had carryed off only his Gouvernante, with little more Cloaths than he had on his back, leaving all his Baggage and near forty Pounds in Mr Davenport's hands: There was also found on the Table a Letter directed to his Land-lord, very abusive, and reproaching him with being an Accomplice with me in the Project of ruining him. Mr Davenport said, he took the Road towards London; and begged me to enquire him out, and learn, if possible, how his Money and Books might be sent after him. I cou'd hear nothing of him; till a few days ago, I was told, that a very extravagant Letter of his had been delivered to the Chancellor, dated from Spalding in the County of Lincoln; He there desires that Magistrate to send him a Guard, in order to escorte him safely to Dover, as he intends immediatly to leave the Kingdom, and cou'd not travel for danger of his Enemies. While I was wondering what all this woud end in, I received a new Letter from Mr Davenport, telling me, that he had just received a very penitent Letter from M. Rousseau, complaining of his own Misery and unhappy Condition, and expressing his Intention of returning Instantly to his former Retreat at Wooton. The very same day and almost the same hour, General Conway received a most melancholy Letter from Rousseau, dated at Dover near two hundred Miles distant from Spalding. It is evident, from all these Contrarieties and Extravagancies, that he is quite disordered in his Judgement; yet are his Letters, particularly that to Mr Conway, still wrote with Beauty and Elegance. He laments his being alive, and regreats his being obliged to leave England; but says, that he finds every body prepossessed against him, for what reason he cannot imagine, unless it be on account of his Conduct towards me, in which he owns he may be to blame. He accepts, however, with Gratitude the King's Pension; and says he will again write the General from Calais. He is not in his Arminian  Dress, so that he may perhaps pass unnoticed: But if he be discovered, as is more probable, there is nothing he has not to dread from the Violence of the Parliament; and little Relief can be expected from the Goodwill of the Ministers towards him. I thought it proper to inform you, that, if you hear of his being discovered and arrested, you may employ your Credit in restoring him to his Liberty, by representing him in his true Colours, as a real and compleat Madman, who is an Object of Compassion, and can be dangerous to no body.

I find myself much inclined to say a great deal more to you about other Subjects; but must check my Inclination: And therefore desire only my Compliments to Madame de Vierville and Madame de Barbantane, and to Miss Becket; and am

 Madam 
Your most obedient and most humble Servant,



David Hume.

London 22 of May 1767
