My Dear Sir

I have always had the Pleasure of conversing, from time to time, with your Sons, with Mr Liston, and with the Abbé Choquart, and never found the least Reason to alter the good Opinion, which I had at first conceivd of that Academy, and of the Conduct of every one concern'd. But the Tenor of your last Letter made me apprehend, that you had discoverd some Ground of Suspicion; and the more so, as Mr Larpent told me, that you had spoke to his Father, to desire him to require of his Son, that he shoud keep a watchful Eye over the Conduct of your Sons, and of Mr Liston, and inform him of all particulars. This it is impossible for Larpent to do; and indeed impossible for me to do, otherwise than by conversing with the Abbé Choquart & with your Sons apart. I have done this very carefully; and find Mr Liston's Conduct not only irreproachable, but laudable: The Abbé tells me, that for the first three or four Months, he scarce ever stirr'd out of the House, but convers'd with him alone, and with the other Masters; till he came to such Perfection in the Language, as to be taken for a Languedocian, or a Frenchman of some Province. Since that time the Abbé tells me, he has made a few Acquaintance among his Countrymen, and goes out sometimes; but he uses this Liberty with great Moderation and on the whole, the Abbé praises him (and with great Reason, as appears to me) for his Reserve, his Modesty, his good Sense, his Sobriety, & his Virtue. As to your Sons, he assures me, that tho' he has been employ'd nineteen Years in instructing Youth, he never knew any more happily formed; and they are the Favourites of the whole School. The Boys themselves seem to be extremely happy in their present Situation. Gilbert speaks French amost like a Parisian, and Hugh follows fast after him. This is an Advantage they have acquird, without interrupting the Course of their other Studies. The Sociableness of their Disposition has been calld forth, by living among Companions in a public School; and as they praise very much the Civility & good Humour of their fellow Students, they may themselves be the more confirmd in those Habits. But, pray, come hither yourself & judge of the Matter.

Two or three days ago, Lord Hertford wrote a very earnest Letter to Mr Greenville in my Favour. I know well that, if you find an Opportunity, you will second his Application. The Saxon Minister at this court told My Lord, that Mr Wroughton was soon to leave Dresden. My Lord has proposd that Bunbury be sent thither: If he refuses, it will be a Proof that he is resolvd to undertake no public Service; but scandalously to live at home, and enjoy a large Sallary, which shoud belong to another. Surely if Mr Greenville bore me never so little Good-will, as a suppos'd Tory, he must allow this Reasoning to be unanswerable.

You have now with you Sir James Macdonald, who is too good for you: For I am afraid you will not know to value him: He leaves an universal Regreat behind him at Paris, among all who were acquainted with him; and in none more than myself. I am Dear Sir.

 Your faithful humble Servant,

David Hume.

Paris 14 April 1765.
