London, 17 Oct. 1767.

Dear Smith.

I sit down to correct a Mistake or two, in the former Account which I gave you of Rousseau. I saw Davenport a few days ago, who tells me, that the Letter, inserted in all the News Papers, was never addressd to him: He even doubts its being genuine; both because he knows it to be opposite to all his Sentiments with regard to me, to whom he desires earnestly to be reconcild, and because it is too absurd and extravagant, and seems to be contriv'd rather as a Banter upon him. Davenport added, that Rousseau was retir'd to some Place in France, and had chang'd his Name and his Dress; but wrote to him, that he was the most miserable of all Beings; that it was impossible for him to stay where he was; and that he wou'd return to his old Hermitage, if Davenport wou'd accept of him. Indeed, he has some Reason to be mortify'd with his Reception in France: For Horace Walpole, who has very lately returnd thence, tells me, that, tho' Rousseau is settled at Cliché, within a League of Paris, no body enquired after him, no body visits him, no body talks of him, every one has agreed to neglect and disregard him: A more sudden Revolution of Fortune than almost ever happend to any man, at least to any man of Letters.

I ask'd Mr Davenport about those Memoirs, which Rousseau said he was writing, and whether he had ever seen them: He said Yes, he had: It was projected to be a Work in twelve Volumes; but he has as yet gone no farther than the first Volume, which he had entirely compos'd at Wootton. It was charmingly wrote, and concluded with a very particular and interesting Account of his first Love, the Object of which was a Person, whose first Love it also was. Davenport, who is no bad Judge, says, that these Memoirs will be the most taking of all his Works; and indeed, you may easily imagine what such a Pen wou'd make of such a Subject as that I mentiond. Mean-while, it appears clearly, what I told you before, that he is no more mad at present, than he has been during the whole Course of his Life, and that he is capable of the same Efforts of Genius. I think I may wait in Security his Account of the Transactions between us: But however, this Incident, which I forsaw, is some Justification of me for publishing his Letters, and may apologize for a Step, which you, and even myself, have been inclind sometimes to blame and always to regreat.

Tell Mr Oswald, that I saw yesterday young Fitz-patrick, Lord Ossory's Brother, who is just returnd from Caen, and who gave me very good Accounts of Jemmy in every Respect.
