June 13. 1742.

Dear Sir,

I agree with you, that Cicero's reasonings in his Orations are often very loose, and what we should think to be wandering from the point; insomuch, that now-a-days a lawyer, who should give himself such liberties, would be in danger of meeting with a reprimand from the Judge, or at least of being admonished on the point in question. His Orations against Verres, however, are an exception; though that plunderer was so impudent and open in his robberies, that there is the less merit in his conviction and condemnation. However, these orations have all a very great merit. The Oration for Milo is commonly esteemed Cicero's masterpiece, and indeed is, in many respects, very beautiful; but there are some points in the reasoning of it that surprise me. The true story of the death of Clodius, as we learn from the Roman Historians, was this. It was only a casual rencontre betwixt Milo and him, and the squabble was begun by their servants, as they passed each other on the road. Many of Clodius's servants were killed, the rest dispersed, and himself wounded, and obliged to hide himself in some neighbouring shops; from whence he was dragged out by Milo's orders, and killed in the street. These circumstances must have been largely insisted on by the prosecutors, and must have been proved too, since they have been received as truth by all antiquity. But not a word of them in Cicero, whose oration only labours to prove two points, that Milo did not way-lay Clodius, and that Clodius was a bad citizen, and it was meritorious to kill him. If you read his Oration, you'll agree with me, I believe, that he has scarce spoke any thing to the question, as it would now be conceived by a court of judicature.

The Orations for Marcellus and Ligarius, as also that for Archias, are very fine, and chiefly because the subjects do not require or admit of close reasoning. 'Tis worth your while to read the conclusion of the Oration for Plancius, where I think the passions are very well touch'd. There are many noble passages in the Oration for Muraena, though 'tis certain that the prosecutors (who, however, were Servius, Sulpicius and Cato), must either have said nothing to the purpose, or Cicero has said nothing. There is some of that oration lost.

'Twould be a pleasure to you to read and compare the two first Philippics, that you may judge of the manners of those times, compared to modern manners. When Cicero spoke the first Philippic, Antony and he had not broke all measures with each other; but there were still some remains of a very great intimacy and friendship betwixt them: and besides, Cicero lived in close correspondence with all the rest of Caesar's captains; Dolabella had been his son-in-law; Hirtius and Pansa were his pupils; Trebatius was entirely his creature. For this reason, prudence laid him under great restraints at that time in his declamations against Antony; there is great elegance and delicacy in them; and many of the thoughts are very fine, particularly where he mentions his meeting Brutus, who had been obliged to leave Rome: I was ashamed, says he, that I durst return to Rome after Brutus had left it, and that I could be in safety where he could not. In short, the whole oration is of such a strain, that the Duke of Argyle might have spoke it in the House of Peers against my Lord Orford; and decency would not allow the greatest enemies to go farther. But this oration is not much admired by the ancients. The Divine Philippic, as Juvenal calls it, is the second, where he gives a full loose to his scurrility; and without having any point to gain by it, except vilifying his antagonist, and without supporting any fact by witnesses (for there was no trial or accusation), he rakes into all the filth of Antony's character; reproaches him with drunkenness and vomiting, and cowardice, and every sort of debauchery and villany. There is great genius and wit in many passages of this oration; but I think the whole turn of it would not now be generally admired.

I thank Mrs Home for her intelligence, and have much employ'd my brain to find out the person she means. It could not be the widow: for she toasts always the Duke of Argyle or Lord Stair, and never would name a young man whom she may reasonably enough suppose to be in love with her. I shall therefore flatter myself it was Miss Dalrymple. It is now Exchequer term: She is among the few very fine ladies of Mrs Home's acquaintance, whom I have the happiness of knowing: In short, many circumstances, besides my earnest wishes, concur to make me believe it was she who did me that honour. I will persevere in that opinion; unless you think it proper to disabuse me, for fear of my being too much puft up with vanity by such a conceit.

I am obliged to you for Vaugelas and the pamphlets. I fancy I have been misinformed with regard to Kincaid. The Essays are all sold in London, as I am informed by two letters from English gentlemen of my acquaintance. There is a demand for them; and, as one of them tells me, Innys, the great bookseller in Paul's Churchyard, wonders there is not a new edition, for that he cannot find copies for his customers. I am also told that Dr Butler has every where recommended them; so that I hope they will have some success. They may prove like dung with marl, and bring forward the rest of my Philosophy, which is of a more durable, though of a harder and more stubborn nature. You see I can talk to you in your own style. Adieu. Yours, &c.

David Hume.
