Edinburgh 7 of January, 1775.

Dear Madam,

I venture to write you a letter on the new year, in confidence of your goodness, that you will forgive me my long and very blameable silence.

As often as any of my acquaintance arrived from France, who I thought had a chance of giving me any information, I never failed to find them out, and make inquiries concerning you. But of late I have not been so fortunate as to meet with any satisfaction on that head; and I could no longer forbear applying to yourself, to learn every circumstance that interests me so much. There are certain seasons allotted to sinners for making their peace with Heaven. May I hope that the new year will be equally propitious to me; and obtain me, on my sincere penitence, the pardon of all past offences? I often think of you with the same attachment as ever; and though nothing extinguishes all passions so effectually as despair, I do not find that my wish to enjoy again your amiable society, is a whit abated by that consideration, though aided by absence, time, and distance. Give me the consolation to think, that, though unworthy, I still retain some place in your memory.

I find by the public papers, that an incident has happened in the Royal Family, which, I know, could not fail to interest you. If it pave the way for your obtaining that end, which you long so naturally expected, and which from a very laudable fortitude you at last renounced, I shall rejoice. If it only rouze your sleeping hopes, it will serve to disturb that peace of mind, which is the chief, and, with health, the only blessing in human life. I would fain hope that your ideas of resignation are so fixed, as not to be disturbed even by this incident. I never write to you of public affairs, which are no object of concern between us: yet I cannot forbear expressing my joy, from the general aspect of things as it appears to us at a distance, that your friend is likely to have a shining theatre opened to his virtues, which have too long been suppressed by the malignity of fortune. I congratulate you upon it. Durst I venture to address himself, I should also congratulate him. My profound regard to him, and my sense of his goodness, gives me a title which I hope you will plead in my favour. But even to those who are placed at a distance, it must appear a beautiful and interesting spectacle, to see so firm and steady and uniform a conduct crowned at the last with the success which it has so well merited.

From so great an object to descend to myself, would form a very abrupt transition. I cannot, however, forbear informing you, that I am settled here in peace and tranquillity and opulence; and except that I am beginning to feel some of the infirmities of old age, in all other respects my situation may pass for tolerable. I hope yours is better than tolerable, though to be perfectly desirable is never to be expected.
