My Dear Sir

I had yesterday a Conference with the Chief Baron upon your Affair. He is of Opinion, that I shoud apply to Lowndes for an Order of Payment, notwithstanding this Informality; but he says, that Lowndes is a difficult Man, and it is a Chance whether I shall be able to perswade him. I shall however give him a Trial to day: For tho' I be not acquainted with him, our common Situation, as Sub-ministers gives us a Connexion together. The Chief Baron thinks, as well as I do, that it will be impossible to engraft any Advantages on this Blunder. Why, the Devil, woud you not take 100 pounds Sallary, when you might have had it?

You may perhaps have heard, that Rousseau has elop'd from Mr Davenport without giving any Warning; leaving all his Baggage except Madlle, about thirty pounds in Davenport's hands, and a Letter on the Table abusing him in the most violent Terms, insinuating that he was in a Conspiracy with me to ruin him. He took the Road to London; but was missing for about a Fortnight: At last he emerges at Spalding in Lincolnshire; whence he writes a Letter to the Chancellor, informing him that the bad Usage he had met with in England made it absolutely necessary for him to evacuate the Kingdom, and desiring his Lordship to send him a Guard to escort him in Safety to Dover; this being the last Act of Hospitality, he will desire of the Nation. He is plainly mad; tho I believe not more so, than he has been all his Life. The Pamphlet you mention was wrote by one as mad as himself, and it was believd at first to be Tristram Shandy, but proves to be one Fuseli, an Engraver. He is a fanatical Admirer of Rousseau, but owns he was in the wrong to me. The Pamphlet I sent you was wrote by an English Clergyman whom I never saw; a man of Character, and rising in the Church: For which Reason, it is more prudent in me to conceal his Name. When woud you have done so much for me?

I hear good things said of Ferguson's Book every day. Lord Holdernesse showd me a Letter from the Archbishop of Yorke, where his Grace says, that in many things it surpasses Montesquieu. My Friend Mr Dodwell says, that it is an admirable Book, elegantly wrote, and with great Purity of Language. Pray tell to Ferguson and to others all these things.

I remember I said to John Home, that I was anxious for its Success because the Success of all philosophical Writings was peculiarly precarious. This was all I said to him.

I am told the Pamphlet is very near the genuine Speech of L. Mansfield.

 I am Dear Sir 
Yours sincerely



David Hume

London. 20 of May
