London 29 May 1759

My Dear Sir

I had a Letter from Helvetius lately, wrote before your Book arrivd at Paris. He tells me, that the Abbé Prevot, who had just finishd the Translation of my History, paroit tres disposé a traduire l'histoire d'Ecosse que vient de faire Monsr Robertson. If he be engagd by my Perswasion, I shall have the Satisfaction of doing you a real Credit & Pleasure: For he is one of the best Pens in Paris.

I lookd with great Impatience in your new Edition for the Note you seemd to intend with regard to breach of the Capitulation of Perth; and was much dissappointed at missing it. I own, that I am very curious on that head. I cannot so much as imagine a Colour upon which that Accusation coud possibly be founded. The Articles of the Capitulation were only two; Indemnity to the Inhabitants, & the Exclusion of French Soldiers. Now that Scotch national Troops were not Frenchmen and Foreigners seems pretty apparent: And both Knox & the Manifesto of the Congregation acquit the Queen Regent of any Breach of the first Article, as I had observd in my Note to p. 422. This makes me suspect, that some Facts have escap'd me; and I beg you to indulge my Curiosity by informing me of them.

The chief Reason of my giving you the Trouble of this Letter is to speak to you of Ferguson's Professorship, which, I am told, is in imminent Danger of being lost, if some Remedy be not apply'd. It is hard, that two People of so much Merit as he & Russel, & whom we all love so much, shoud be Competitors; but as Ferguson's Situation is so much more disadvantageous, he certainly calls for the Preference. But I can easily forsee, that Russels Reputation for Knowledge in that Science, his being present, & his having so many personal Friends will certainly prevail; and Lord Milton, unless he stretches all his Authority, which he will not do, must infallibly be dissappointed. The only Expedient I can propose, is, that, in case you find Affairs running in that manner, you woud propose to have Ferguson appointed in Rouets Place at Glasgow, which woud be a good Retreat for him, & woud prevent a new Dissappointment to him, after so many he has undergone. I hope you will have this in your Eye: For as to all the Schemes of having Balfours Place, they appear to me quite wild & chimerical. Plague on Jardine, & his Intrigues & Politics! But if he loves Intrigues, let him embrace this Scheme, and endeavor to forward it. I know he admires & esteems Orthodoxy; and I will warrant Ferguson as orthodox as Russel, or even as himself; so that he will have Credit in appearing for him.

Our Friend, Smith, is very successful here, & Gerard is very well receivd. The Epigoniad I cannot so much promise for; tho' I have done all in my Power to forward it, particularly by writing a Letter to the critical Review, which you may peruse. I find, however, some good Judges profess a great Esteem for it; but habent et sua fata libelli: However, if you want a little Flattery for the Author (which I own is very refreshing to an Author) you may tell him, that Lord Chesterfield said to me he was a great Poet. I imagine, that Wilkie will be very much elevated by Praise from an English Earl, and a Knight of the Garter, & an Ambassador, & a Secretary of State, & a Man of so great Reputation. For I observe that the greatest Rustics are commonly most affected with such Circumstances.

Ferguson's Book has a great deal of Genius, & fine Writing, and will appear in time. I am Dear Sir

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 29 May 1759

P.S.

I wrote this with an Intention of showing it to Ferguson, before I sent it off; and accordingly have met with him: But to my great Dissappointment, I learn, that the Project of his succeeding Rouet is absolutely impracticable. The Reasons are not fit to be wrote to you; but the thing is absolutely certain. Let that therefore be no part of your Scheme. I own, that it appears to me that the best Ressource for Ferguson in this Emergency consists in Russel's Friendship; and I know no man who is more capable than he of a generous Action, & of sacrificing his own Interest to that of his Friend. If he insists absolutely upon having this Office, for aught I can see, he must have it: But what a cruel & distressful Situation does it leave poor Ferguson! I beg of you Dear Robertson (and yet I am sure I need not) to employ your Thoughts & Contrivances & good Offices on this Occasion. Let Ferguson be elected instantly, if possible: Delays are infinitely dangerous: And if any Scheme can be afterwards fallen on to provide for him, I can answer for him, that he will allow this Professorship to fall into Russel's hands, for whom indeed it is very well calculated.
