Dear Sir

I have a Friend, who has a considerable Estate in the County of Suffolk, and who is esteem'd one of the most judicious Farmers and Improvers in that part of England. I gave him an Account of your Machine for levelling Ridges; and as he tells me, that high Ridges abound very much in Suffolk, and are as destructive there as elsewhere, he has a great Desire of having that Machine both for his own Benefit and that of his Neighbours. He askd me, whether I coud use the Freedom of desiring you to order one to be made for him, and have it sent up to London, with some general Directions for using it. I said, that I knew enough of your beneficent Disposition to be certain you woud do every thing to promote so useful an Art as Agriculture: I beg, therefore, the Favour of you, that you woud order your Tradesman to make a Machine similar to yours, and to send it up by the Waggon, directed to Mr Mure in Nicholas Lane Lombard Street. He will order the Carriage and the Price to be pay'd on receiving it. He is a Gentleman of a very mechanical Head; so that the Machine itself and a short Description of its Use will be sufficient for his Understanding it. Lord Holdernesse told me, that, towards the End of Autumn, he intended to send his Steward across the Country, in order to learn the Use of this Machine. I doubt not but you will give your People Orders to communicate to him all the Instruction possible.

I am very anxious that I have receivd no Answer from your Guest to my second Letter, containing the Offer of which I gave you an Account. Were he not the most unaccountable Man in the World, I shoud be very much scandalizd and very much offended at this long Silence. After his Arrival at Wooton, I receivd a Letter from him full of the highest Expressions of Esteem and Affection; and as there has been since no Intercourse between us, except in this Affair, where he sees the strongest Proof of my Friendship, it is impossible for me to imagine, that he can be any way disgusted with me: Yet perhaps something has struck his Fancy, which I shall never be able to guess or imagine. Did you ever hear from him any Surmises of that kind? Or have you ever discoverd what that deep Affliction was, which he said overwhelmed him about the time of your Arrival at Wooton? Coud your People ever discover it from Mademoiselle? Or was there really any Affliction at all? Your Letters about that time assurd me, that he was in the best humour and the best Health in the World; and he is not surely a Man who can cover with a fair Appearance his Spleen and Peevishness. If he be with you at Davenport, be so good as to tell him, that I, having occasion to write to you of another Affair, had express'd my Surprize at not hearing from him. He woud not choose, I fancy, that you shou'd enter farther into this Matter. I am Dear Sr, with great Regard

Your most obedient and most humble Servant 
David Hume



[Lisle] Street Leicester Fields [. . .] June 1766
