Dear Sir

I confess, I was once of the same Opinion with you, & thought that the best Period to begin an English History was about Henry the 7th. But you will please to observe, that the Change, which then happen'd in public Affairs, was very insensible, and did not display its Influence till many Years afterwards. Twas under James that the House of Commons began first to raise their Head, & then the Quarrel betwixt Privilege & Prerogative commenc'd. The Government, no longer opprest by the enormous Authority of the Crown, display'd its Genius; and the Factions, which then arose, having an Influence on our present Affairs, form the most curious, interesting, & instructive Part of our History. The preceding Events or Causes may easily be shown in a Reflection or Review, which may be artfully inserted in the Body of the Work, & the whole, by that means, be render'd more compact & uniform. I confess, that the Subject appears to me very fine; & I enter upon it with great Ardour & Pleasure. You need not doubt of my Perseverance.

I am just now diverted for a Moment by correcting my Essays moral & political, for a new Edition. If any thing occur to you to be inserted or retrench'd, I shall be obligd to you for the Hint. In case you shou'd not have the last Edition by you, I shall send you a Copy of it. In that Edition, I was engag'd to act contrary to my Judgement in retaining the 6th & 7th Essays, which I had resolv'd to throw out, as too frivolous for the rest, and not very agreeable neither even in that trifling manner: But Millar, my Bookseller, made such Protestations against it, & told me how much he had heard them praisd by the best Judges; that the Bowels of a Parent melted, & I preserv'd them alive.

All the rest of Bolingbroke's Works went to the Press last Week, as Millar informs me. I confess my Curiosity is not much rais'd.

I had almost lost your Letter by its being wrong directed. I receiv'd it late; which was the Reason why you got not sooner a Copy of Joannes Magnus. Direct to me in Riddal's Land, Lawn Market. I am Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume

 Septr. 24th 1752.
