Dear Sir

I am asham'd of being so long in writing to you. If I shou'd plead Laziness, you wou'd say I was much alter'd: If Multiplicity of Business, you wou'd scarce believe me: If Forgetfulness of you and our Friendship, I shou'd lye grossly. I can, therefore, plead nothing but Idleness and a gay pleasurable Life, which steals away hour after hour & day after day; & leaves no time for such Occupations as one's sober Reason may approve most of. This is our Case, while on Shore; & even while on board, as far as one can have much Enjoyment in that Situation.

I wrote my Brother from the Coast of Brittanny giving him some Account of our Expedition and of the Causes of our Dissappointment. I suppose he receiv'd it, after you had left the Country; but I doubt not he has inform'd you of it. We were very near a great Success, the taking of L'Orient, perhaps Port Louis, which wou'd have been a prodigious Blow to France, & having an open Communication with the Sea might have made a great Diversion of their Forces & done great Service to the common Cause. I suppose you are become a great General by the Misfortune of the Seat of War being so long in your Neighbourhood. I shall be able, when we meet, to give you the just Cause of our Failure, which proceeded very little, if at all, from the General.

Our Expedition to North America is now at an End. We are recalld to England: The Convoy is arriv'd, & we re-imbark in a few days. I have an Invitation to go over to Flanders with the General, & an Offer of Table, Tent, Horses, &c; I must own, I shou'd have a great Curiosity to see a real Campaign; but I am deterr'd with the View of the Expence, & am afraid, that living in a Camp, without any Character & without any thing to do, wou'd appear ridiculous. Had I any Fortune, which cou'd give me a Prospect of Leizure & Opportunitys to prosecute my historical Projects, nothing cou'd be more useful to me; and I shou'd pick up more military Knowledge, in one Campaign, by living in the General's Family & being introduc'd frequently to the Dukes, than most Officers cou'd do after many Years Service. But to what can all this Serve? I am a Philosopher, & so, I suppose, must continue.

I am very uncertain of getting half pay, from several strange & unexpected Accidents, which it wou'd be too tedious to mention; & if I get it not, shall neither be gainer nor loser by the Expedition. I believe, if I wou'd have begun the World again, I might have return'd an Officer gratis; and am certain, might have been made Chaplain to a Regiment Gratis: But — — I need say no more.

My Brother tells me, that you do not think my Claim on the Marquis of Annandale well founded. In that Case, you may burn the two Bills I sent you; especially as Vincent, on whom they are drawn, is since dead, as I learn from the News Papers.

I shall stay a little time in London to see, if any thing new will present itself. If not, I shall return very cheerfully to Books, Leizure, & Solitude in the Country. An elegant Table has not spoilt my Relish for Sobriety: Nor Gaiety for Study. And frequent Dissapointments have taught me that nothing need be despaird of, as well as that nothing can be depended on. You give Yourself violent Airs of Wisdom, you'll say. Odi hominem ignavâ operâ, philosophicâ sententiâ. But you will not say so, when you see me again with my Xenophon or Polybius in my Hand; which I shall willingly throw aside to be cheerful with you, as usual.

My kind Compliments to Mrs Home, whom I am sorry to hear by my Brother has not yet got entirely the better of her Illness.

Please tell Lady Hall, that I see her Son frequently, who is a very fine Boy, & behaves very well. I am

Dear Sir Yours sincerely 
David Hume
