Dear Sir

In this new Edition I have corrected several Mistakes and Oversights, which had chiefly proceeded from the plaguy Prejudices of Whiggism, with which I was too much infected when I began this Work. I corrected some of these Mistakes in a former Edition; but being resolv'd to add to this Edition the Quotations & Authorities for the Reigns of James I & Charles I, I was oblig'd to run over again the most considerable Authors who had treated of these Reigns, and I happily discover'd some more Mistakes, which I have now corrected. As I began the History with these two Reigns, I now find that they, above all the rest, have been corrupted with Whig Rancour, & that I really deserv'd the name of a Party Writer, and boasted without any Foundation of my Impartiality: But if you now do me the Honour to give this part of my Work a second Perusal, I am perswaded that you will no longer throw upon me this reproachful Epithet, and will acquit me of all Propensity to Whiggism. If you still continue to upbraid me, I shall be oblig'd to retaliate on you, & cry, Whig vousmême . . . .

There are many other Improvements & Alterations throughout the whole; and I am glad that Millar has of himself made you an Offer of this Edition. Without flattering you I must say, that there is nobody whom I more desire to see my Writings as correct as I can make them; and I was thinking to desire Mr Millar to make you this Offer.

But there is no End of correcting. In this new Edition, vol. v p. 205, I have inserted a pretty curious Story of Sir George Markham, which I took from Lord Lansdowne, whom I esteem'd a safe Authority for a Whig Story. But I have since been shown Hobart's Reports, which is infinitely more authentic than Lord Lansdowne, and the Story is there told so as entirely to justify the King & the Star Chamber. So that you may still reproach me that the villanous Leaven is not entirely purg'd off.

I am engag'd in no Work at present: But if I tire of Idleness, or more properly speaking, of reading for Amusement, I may probably continue my History. My only Discouragement is, that I cannot hope to finish this Work in my Closet, but must apply to the Great for Papers & Intelligence, a thing I mortally abhor.

Is it not hard & tyrannical in you, more tyrannical than any Act of the Stuarts, not to allow me to publish my Dialogues? Pray, do you not think that a proper Dedication may atone for what is exceptionable in them? I am become much of my friend Corbyn Morrice's Mind, who says, that he writes all his Books for the sake of the Dedications.

I am very glad to hear from Lord Minto, that you intend to pass a great part of the ensuing Summer in this Country. Tho' you be now become a great Man, I doubt not but I should receive very much Satisfaction from your Society & Conversation: That is, if I be not jostled out by Suitors who will press in upon you.

 Meanwhile, I am Dear Sir 
Your affectionate Friend & Servant



David Hume.

Edinburgh 12 March, 1763.
