Dear Sir

This will be deliver'd to you, along with a corrected Copy of my philosophical Pieces by Dr Robertson. I remind you to send me six Copies, as usual. This is the last time I shall probably take the pains of correcting that work, which is now brought to as great a degree of accuracy as I can attain; and is probably much more labour'd (I know not with what degree of success) than any other production in our Language. This power, which Printing gives us, of continually improving and correcting our Works in successive Editions, appears to me the Chief Advantage of that Art. For as to the dispersing of Books, that Circumstance does perhaps as much harm as good: Since Nonsense flies with greater Celerity, and makes greater Impression than Reason; though indeed no particular Species of Nonsense is so durable. But the several Forms of Nonsense never cease succeeding one another; and Men are always under the Dominion of some one or other, though nothing was ever equal in Absurdity and Wickedness to our present Patriotism.

I long much for an Opportunity of bringing my History to the same degree of Accuracy. Since I was settled here, I have, from time to time, given Attention to that Object; though the Distance and Uncertainty of the new Edition threw a damp on my Industry: But I shall now apply seriously to the Task; and you may expect the Copy about August. I beseech you do not make this Edition too numerous, like the last. I have heard you frequently say, that no Bookseller woud find profit in making an Edition which woud take more than three Years in selling. Look back, therefore, and learn from Mr Millar's Books what has been the Sale for the last six Years; and if you make the usual Allowance for a Diminution during the ensuing three, from the Number of Copies already sold, I am persuaded you will find 1500, a number large enough, if not too large. Be not over-sanguine. An Error on the one hand is more easily corrected than one on the other. I am perhaps the only Author you ever knew, who gratutiously employ'd great Industry in correcting a Work, of which he has fully alienated the Property; and it were hard to deny me an Opportunity of exercising my Talents; especially as this practice turns so much to the Advantage of the Bookseller.

I have another Proposal to make you in the same View. I have found by Experience that nothing excites an Author's Attention so much as the receiving the Proofs from the Press, as the Sheets are gradually thrown off. Now I have had an Opportunity of passing the last four Volumes of my History more than once through this Scrutiny, the most severe of any: The first four Volumes have only been once reviewd by me in this manner. I shall send you the whole Copy about the time above mention'd, and the last four Volumes you may throw off at your Leizure: But the Sheets of the first four, I shoud wish to receive by the Post five times a week. They will make about 250 Sheet and might be finishd in thirty weeks. For this Purpose I shall apply to Mr Fraser, my former Collegue in the Secretary's Office, who will supply you with Franks, and such as are not confind to the usual Weight of two Ounces. The corrected Copies I shall send under his Cover; and you will only have to send for them to the Secretary's Office, the same as if I were in London. Mr Fraser is as regular as an astronomical Clock, and will never disappoint you. I am almost as regular; and you may give Orders to your People to be the same.

This Affair, therefore, being, I presume, settled to mutual Satisfaction, I come to give you thanks for the Perusal of Mr Johnson's Pamphlet, which is a good one, and very diverting from the Peculiarity and Enormity of the Style. One sees he speaks from the Heart, and is movd with a cordial Indignation against these Ruffians. There is, however, one material Circumstance, which either he did not know, or did not think fit to mention; namely, that the French had regularly settled Falkland Island full three Years before us, and upon Remonstrances from the Court of Madrid, gave up their Right and Colony to the Spaniards, who never had abandond that Settlement. Their Right, therefore, was prior and preferable to ours. For as to our ridiculous Right from the first Di(s) covery, allowing the Facts to be true; will any one say, that a Sailor's seeing a Mountain from the Top mast head, conveys a Title to a whole Territory, and a Title so durable, that even tho' it be neglected for two Centuries, it still remains with the Nation? Our Ministry, therefore, have acted a Part most unjust, most insolent, and most imprudent; and which the Spaniards will deservedly remember long against us. But this Conduct proceeds entirely from the Timidity of our Ministry, who dread more the contemptible Populace of London than the whole House of Bourbon. I am curious to see how they will get out of the present Scrape; though their past Measures prognosticate nothing good for the future. I say still, had they punishd Beckford, disfranchisd the City, and restord the Negative to the Court of Aldermen, they woud have prevented the present and many future Frays: But still it is not too late; tho it may very soon become so.

When I blame the Insolence of our Ministry with regard to Spain, I must at the same time confess, that we do right to swagger and bounce and bully on the present Occasion: For we have not many Years to do so, before we fall into total Impotence and Languor. You see, that a much greater and more illustrious People, namely the French, seem to be totally annihilated in the midst of Europe; and we, instead of regarding this Event as a great Calamity, are such Fools as to rejoice at it. We see not that the same Catastrophe or a much worse one is awaiting us at no distant Period. The monarchical Government of France (which must be replac'd) will enable them to throw off their Debts; ours must for ever hang on our Shoulders, and weigh us down like a Millstone.

I think that Mr Johnson is a great deal too favourable to Pitt, in comparing him to Cardinal Richelieu. The Cardinal had certainly great Talents besides his Audacity: The other is totally destitute of Literature, Sense, or the Knowledge of any one Branch of public Business. What other Talent indeed has he, but that of reciting with tolerable Action and great Impudence a long Discourse in which there is neither Argument, Order, Instruction, Propriety, or even Grammar? Not to mention, that the Cardinal, with his inveterate Enmities, was also capable of Friendship: While our Cut-throat never felt either the one Sentiment or the other. The Event of both Administrations was suitable. France made a Figure during near a Century and a half upon the Foundations laid by the one: England — as above; if I be not much mistaken, as I wish to be.

I was pretty sure that Sir John Dalrymple was an Historian, with regard to the Price offerd him for his Book. So then, his Pride is interested in being esteem'd as good a Writer as Dr Robertson! I am diverted with conjecturing what will be the Fate of this strange Book: Will it run a few Years? Or fall at once dead born from the Press? I think the last Event more probable, notwithstanding the Precedent of Mrs Macaulay, and notwithstanding the Antitheses and Rant and Whiggery of which it is full. After you have offerd him 750 pounds, my Pride, in case I shoud write another Volume, woud make me demand the Equivalent of a parliamentary Subsidy: I think without Vanity, my Book will at least be equal in Value to Falkland Island.

But I have writ you a Letter as long as an Essay; and for fear of making it a Treatise, I shall conclude by telling you, that I am with great Sincerity

 Dear Sir Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 25 of March 1771.
