Sir

I am sorry to be oblig'd to write you in a Hurry: Tho' it is as well so: For if I had never so much Leizure, I shoud never be able to express sufficiently my Sense of the Civilities, which you confer upon me. I hereby send you some Sheets of my History, & shall send you the rest successively by the Post. I shou'd be entirely indifferent about Fame (which can be the Case with no Writer, and indeed with no Man) were I not very anxious to have you undertake this Translation. As you thought, that the informing the Public of the Correspondence carry'd on betwixt us, wou'd prevent any other Translator from interfering with you, I have subjoind in the next Page, a Letter, such as may not be improper to insert in some of the literary Journals. I cannot mention any thing particularly of your Translation of the political Discourses; as I have not yet receiv'd it, tho' I long for it very impatiently. The Booksellers in London have a Custom, that when an Author enters into any Engagement with any of them for a Translation, no other Bookseller will engage any other Person in the same Translation. I hope this is also the Custom at Paris: In which Case, the Advance, which I give you, will prevent all Danger of your losing your Labor. If you have receiv'd the Copy sent by Boulogne, you will have still a more considerable Advance. Please enquire of the Coche or Waggon of Boulogne. In the Parcel, there was also a new Edition of the political Discourses: But the Alterations, which I sent in my last, refer'd to the Edition, from which you made your Translation, viz the first or second. It will therefore be necessary for you to recall your Copy for a few days. If that shou'd be difficult, you wou'd still be able, by a little Computation, to find all the Passages in the new Edition, which I send. The former Edition had 304 Pages; this has 270. By employing the Rule of three, and computing as 304 to 270, so is the Number mention'd in my paper, to a fourth Number; which will be the Page in the third Edition, where the Alteration is to be inserted. The Alterations in some places are of Moment; so that I wish a new Edition might not be made without inserting them.

The whole Reign of James the I will come to you in a few Posts. The Narration is pretty often interrupted by Digressions, which were necessary to clear up Difficulties in the History. The Reign of Charles flows more smoothly, & is much more interesting. If there be some strokes of the L'esprit fort too strong for your Climate, you may soften them at your Discretion. That I am a Lover of Liberty will be expected from my Countrey, tho' I hope, that I carry not that Passion to any ridiculous Extreme.

The subsequent Letter, being intended entirely for your Service, I am not only willing but desirous, that you alter and model it as you think proper. Had I the Honor of being personally known to you, you woud be sensible that nothing wou'd be more agreeable to me than a free Censure and Criticism. I have a great Deference for the Taste of your Nation, & for yours in particular. Be so good as to inform me, with the most unreserv'd Freedom, of the Faults, which either Yourself or the Public find with my Performance. I shou'd regard it as a very blameable Action to invite you to use a Liberty, which I were not conscious I cou'd receive, not only without Resentment, but with the highest Gratitude.

I cannot recollect the Contents of my Letters to the President Montesquieu; but I can trust to his Judgement with regard to the Propriety of publishing them. Any Expressions of my Esteem for the President, I must certainly desire to have known; because they wou'd do honor to my Understanding all over the World.

I shall endeavor to keep back the Publication in London, till the first of December.

I am Sir with great Regard Your most obedient & most humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh. 15 of Octr 1754

Since I wrote this, I find that the Cargo of Books, which I sent by Boulogne, have been mislaid, & that you will receive them latter than I propos'd.
