Sir

I shou'd not have dropped an epistolary Commerce with you, for which I was beholden to our Friend, Lord Mareschal, and which did me so much honour and pleasure, had I not been afraid of being in the Number of those troublesome People, who, on pretence of being your Admirers, never cease persecuting you with their Letters. But a Conversation which I lately had with a Lady, who is much your Friend, the Marquise of Verdelin, revived in me the Hopes, that I might be of some Service to you in your present Situation; and that you woud deign to accept of my good Offices. Your singular and unheard-of Misfortunes, independant of your Virtue and Genius, must interest the Sentiments of every human Creature in your Favour: But I flatter myself, that in England you woud find an absolute Security against all Persecution, not only from the tolerating Spirit of our Laws, but from the Respect, which every one there bears to your Character. I have gone so far as to write to a Friend to that purpose: His Answer was such as I coud wish: Madame de Verdelin wou'd inform you of the particulars: We are of Opinion, that you should set out on your Journey as soon as possible, in order to escape the bad Season, and  deprive your Enemies of all Opportunity of doing you farther Injury. I shou'd have esteemed it a great Pleasure to have joined you in Switzerland, and to have accompany'd you on your Journey: But as I have been here some time in a public Character, I am obliged, on its Expiration, to return immediatly to the King of England, in order to give an Account of my Conduct. From thence, I set out for Ireland, in order to join the Vice-roy, the Earl of Hertford, who was lately Ambassador at Paris. These Accidents will deprive me of the Pleasure of seeing you in England till next Summer. Mean-while, I hope, that you will allow me to consign you over to the Care of my Friend, who has a great Ambition of being in the Number of yours,  as he is worthy of it: His name is Elliot, and he lives in Seymour-row, London. If you let him know of your Arrival, he will immediately wait on you, and will conduct you to your Retreat. I hope that it will prove secure and happy: the small Share, which you will allow me to have in procuring it, I shall always regard as one of the most fortunate Incidents of my Life.  As the English Booksellers can afford higher Prices to Authors than those of Paris, you will have no Difficulty to live frugally in that Country, on the Fruits of your own Industry. I mention this Circumstance, because I am well acquainted with your Resolution of laying Manking under Obligation to you, without allowing them to make you any return.
