Dear Edmondstone

I believe it is a Rule in Law, that any Summons prevents [P]rescription, and in like manner that the wakening a Process keeps one's Rank in the Lord's Row. It is with some such View, that I now write to you; not to send you a formal Letter, which woud require a formal Answer, & woud therefore get no Answer at all: But just to take a Shake of your hand, & ask you how you do, and speak a little Nonsense to you as usual, and then fall into S[ilence] without giving myself the trouble of supporting the Conversation any lo[nger.] And in a word, keep you from forgeting that you have some such Friend in the World as myself.

But pray, why did you not write me as you promisd, & give me your Direction? Was you afraid I shou'd write to you. You see I can find out a Method of directing to you without your Information.

Tell me about the Epigoniad: Was there ever so much fine Versification bestow'd on so indifferent a Story? Has it had any Success in Ireland? I fancy not: For the Criticklingys in Dublin depend on the Criticklings in London, who depend on the Booksellers, who depend on their Interest, which depends on their printing a Book themselves. This is the Cause, why Wilkies Book is at present neglected, or damn'd as they call it: But I am much mistaken, if it end so. Pray, what says the Primate of it? I hear he has the Generosity to support damnd Books, till their Resurrection; and that he is one of the Saints who pray them out of Purgatory. I hope he is an honest Fellow and one of [us.] Captain Masterton told me, that he was not quite of my Opinion with regard to the Douglas, & that he blam'd my dedicatory Address to the Author. But I persist still, and will prove, in spite of him & you, and of every man, who [wears eit]her black or scarlet, that it is an admirable Tragedy, comparable [to the ex]cellent Pieces of the good Age of Louis quatorze. The Author is here at present, and is refitting his Agis for the Theatre, which I hope will have Justice done it. Il est le mieux renté de touts les beaux esprits: He has a Pension from his royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, as you have probably heard.

I hear some times from the Doctor, who desires me to tell him something about you: But I am no Necromancer. Only as the Antients said, Prudentia est quaedam divinatio: I conjecture, that you are lownging & reading & playing at Whist, and blaming yourself for not writing Letters, and yet persisting in the Neglect of your Duty.

 I am engag'd in writing a New Volume of History from the Beginning of Henry the VII till the Accession of James the I. It will probably be published winter after the next. I believe I shall write no more History; but proceed directly to attack the Lord's Prayer & the ten Commandments & the single Cat; and to recommend Suicide & Adultery: And so persist, till it shall please the Lord to take me to himself. My Compliments to Dr Leland, & tell him, that he has certainly mistaken my Character.

Addio, caro Giuseppe: Io bacio le mani a la vostra signoria

David Hume.

Edinburgh 29 September 1757
