Lisle Street, Leicester Fields, 16 May, 1766.



. . . He will also deliver to you six prints of Rousseau, done from an admirable portrait, which Ramsay drew for me. I desire you to accept one of these prints for yourself; to beg Madame de Luxembourg, in my name, to accept of another; Madame de Barbantane of a third; Mademoiselle de L'Espinasse of a fourth; M. de Malesherbes of a fifth; and Madame de Montigny of a sixth. This lady lives in your neighbourhood, in the Rue des Vieilles Audriettes . All these are enthusiasts for our friend, and this trifle will give them satisfaction.



I am afraid, my dear Madam, that notwithstanding our friendship, and our enthusiasm for this philosopher, he has been guilty of an extravagance the most unaccountable and most blameable that is possible to be imagined. You know what steps I took, with his knowledge and consent, towards obtaining him a pension from the King, and the success I had met with. As soon as I got an answer from Lord Marischal, approving the acceptance of the pension, I informed General Conway, whose bad health detained him in the country several weeks. When he came to town, he renewed his application to the King, who renewed his consent. The General informed me of this matter in a letter, where he expressed his satisfaction of being serviceable to a man of so much genius and merit; and he added, that, if he had known his direction, he would have wrote to him himself. I sent immediately this letter to Rousseau. I waited yesterday on Mr Conway, who put into my hands a letter of which the enclosed is a copy. He is so good-humoured as not to be angry; but begs me to use every expedient to overcome this objection. You see that our friend objects to the pension's being a secret; whereas, in his letter to Lord Marischal, he said, that he liked it the better on that account, as it was a testimony of esteem from his Majesty, without any mixture or suspicion of vanity. I shall write to him, and tell him that the affair is no longer an object of deliberation: he had already taken his resolution, when he allowed me to apply to the minister; and again, when he allowed the minister to apply to the King; and again, when he wrote to Lord Marischal; and again, when he allowed me to notify Lord Marischal's answer to the minister; and again, when he acquiesced two months in this determination; and that the King, General Conway, Lord Marischal, and I, shall all have reason to complain of him. Was ever any thing in the world so unaccountable? For the purposes of life and conduct, and society, a little good sense is surely better than all this genius, and a little good humour than this extreme sensibility.



As to the deep calamity of which he complains, it is impossible for me to imagine it. I suppose it is some trifle, aggravated by his melancholy temper and lively fancy. I shall endeavour to learn from Mr Davenport, who is just gone to that neighbourhood. Lady Aylesbury and General Conway believe, that it is Horace Walpole's letter which still torments him. That letter was put into our newspapers; which produced an answer, full of passion, and indeed of extravagance, complaining in the most tragical terms of the forgery, and lamenting that the imposter should find any abettors and partizans in England. Mr Walpole has wrote a reply, full of vivacity and wit, but sacrifices it to his humanity, and is resolved that no copy of it shall get abroad. He assures me that he, as well as Madame du Deffan, were entirely innocent of that publication at Paris: it was a lady, a friend of yours, who gave the first copy.



You have probably seen Voltaire's letter to our exotic philosopher. I fancy it will rouse him from his lethargy. These two gladiators are very well matched: it is like the combat of Dares and Entellus, in Virgil. The sprightliness and grace, and irony and pleasantry of the one, will be a good contrast to the force and vehemence of the other.
