8 June 1758

Dear Smith

I sit down to write to you along with Johnstone, and as we have been talking over the Matter, it is probable we shall employ the same Arguments. As he is the younger Lawyer, I leave him to open the Case; and suppose that you have read his Letter first. We are certain, that the Settlement of you here and of Ferguson at Glasgow woud be perfectly easy by Lord Miltons Interest. The Prospect of prevailing with Abercrombie is also very good: For the same Statesman, by his Influence over the Town Council, cou'd oblige him either to attend, which he never woud do, or dispose of the Office for the Money which he gave for it. The only real Difficulty is then with you. Pray then consider, that this is perhaps the only Opportunity we shall ever have of getting you to Town: I dare swear, that you think the Difference of Place is worth paying something for; and yet it will really cost you nothing. You made above 100 Pound a Year by your Class when in this Place, tho' you had not the Character of Professor: We cannot suppose that it will be less than 130 after you are settled. John Stevenson; and it is John Stevenson, makes near 150; as we were inform'd upon Enquiry. Here is 100 Pounds a Year for 8 Years Purchase; which is a cheap Purchase, even considerd as the way of a Bargain. We flatter ourselves that you rate our Company as something; and the Prospect of settling Ferguson will be an additional Inducement. For tho' we think of making him take up the Project if you refuse it, yet it is uncertain whether he will consent; and it is attended in his Case with many very obvious Objections. I beseech you therefore to weigh all these Motives over again; The alteration of these Circumstances merit that you shoud put the matter again in Deliberation. I had a Letter from Miss Hepburn, where she regrets very much, that you are settled at Glasgow, and that we had the Chance of seeing you so seldom. I am

Dear Smith 
Yours sincerely 
David Hume.





P.S.

Lord Milton can with his Finger, stop the foul Mouths of all the Roarers against Heresy.
