Dr Sir

I did not think it had been possible for you to have so many Copies of the first Volume upon hand: The Number you mention makes the whole that was printed above the second. This Incident alters a little my Views & Resolutions; tho' I have still a great Desire to have that Volume reprinted; and am much obligd to you for complying with my Inclination. I must compute, however, in a different manner, even if I were willing to go the half of the Expence. I compute only the Charge, which the reprinting so many Copies wou'd cost, without minding the former Price to Hamilton. Now 250 Copies makes a Rheam for every two sheet, at 14 or 15 Shillings a Rheam. You pay only two Shillings a Sheet for printing 250, when you add that Number to an Edition. As to the binding; I fancy you will find that you have very few bound, if you order the Matter to be examin'd. For you wou'd naturally dispose of all the bound Copies first; and if you found that difficult or impracticable, the binding is a great Loss, and it was wrong to take these Copies from Hamilton: The Folly ought to have fallen on his own head. We must therefore neglect altogether this Article. Please to make any of your Clerks, compute the Charge of this Number of Copies; and you will find the half of it far inferior to the 25 pounds, the Sum you mention.

I know you will incline to deal frankly with me on this head: And as an additional Motive, I must inform you, that this new Volume will amount nearly to 700 pages. The Title & Subject are entirely different from those of the former Volumes; and there is no manner of Reason for selling it at the same Price, so that the Profit will be more considerable on this Volume, tho' I am contented, that the Copy Money be the same.

I send enclos'd a Letter from Mr Robertson: He wishes it were practicable to send him more than one Sheet every Post. I am afraid, if this be not done, our Publications will interfere, which woud be disagreeable to you as well as to both of us.

I have read a small Pamphlet calld Sketches, which from the Style I take to be Dr Armstrong's, tho' the public Voice gives it to Allan Ramsay. I find the ingenious Author, whoever he be, ridicules the new Method of Spelling, as he calls it: But that Method of spelling, Honor, instead of Honour, was Lord Bolingbrokes, Dr Middletons, & Mr Pope's; besides many other eminent Writers. However, to tell truth, I hate to be any way particular in a Trifle; and therefore, if Mr Strahan has not printed off above ten or twelve Sheets, I shoud not be displeas'd, if you told him to follow the usual, that is, his own, way of Spelling throughout. We shall make the other Volumes conformable to it. If he be advancd farther, there is no great Matter.

I am very sorry for your Illness; especially as it shall deprive us of the Pleasure of seeing you in this Place: But I shoud think a Journey, the properest Method of recovering your Health & Strength entirely.

I am Dear Sir Your most obedient Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 20 June 1758.
