Dear Sir

I never enjoyed myself better, nor was in better spirits, than since I came down here. I live as I please, spend my time according to my fancy, keep a plentiful table for myself and my friends, amuse myself with reading and Society, and find the generality of the people disposed to respect me more on account of my having been well receiv'd in greater and more renowned places: But tho‘ all this makes my time slide away easily, it is impossible for me to forget that a man who is in his 59th Year has not many more years to live, and that it is time for him, if he has common Sense, to have done with all Ambition. My Ambition was always moderate and confind entirely to Letters; but it has been my Misfortune to write in the Language of the most stupid and factious Barbarians in the World; and it is long since I have renounced all desire of their Approbation, which indeed coud no longer give me either pleasure or Vanity.

As to my Notion of public Affairs, I think there are very dangerous Tempests brewing, and the Scene thickens every moment. The Government has, no doubt, great Resources, if they employ them with Prudence and Vigour and Unanimity. But have we any reason to think they will do so? The Parliament will certainly be [. . .] by the Populace every day next winter. If they bear it, they degrade . . . and draw on [. . .] If they punish, they will still more enrage the Faction, and give a Pretence for the Cry that Liberty is violated. Are we sure, that the popular Discontent may not reach the Army, who have a Pretence for Discontents of their own? The General in chief is a weak man, and fond of low popularity: It is true, you have a very honest Chancellor and a very courageous Chief Justice, who will be a great Ressource in difficult times. But is it certain that Lord Bute will abstain from tampering and trying some more of his pretty Experiments? What if he take it in his head to open the Door to Pitt and his Myrmidons, who will, no doubt, chain the King for ever, and render him a mere Cypher. Our Government has become an absolute Chimera: So much Liberty is incompatible with human Society: And it will be happy, if we can escape from it, without falling into a military Government, such as Algiers or Tunis. The Matter will only be worse, if there be no shooting or hanging next Winter: This Frenzy of the people, so epidemical and so much without a Cause, admits only of one Remedy, which however is a dangerous one, and requires more vigour than has appeard in any minister of late. I have a very good Opinion of the Duke of Grafton but his Youth deprives him of Experience and still more of Authority. I dare [not ve]nture to play the Prophet, but think you are in great Danger. I see [. . .] low: Have the People sense enough to see their Danger, and to withdraw from that precarious Security. If they coud see it in time, and catch the Alarm, it woud be a great Ressource to Government: But this is more than can reasonably be expected from them.

You say I am of a desponding Character: On the contrary, I am of a very sanguine Disposition. Notwithstanding my Age, I hope to see a public Bankruptcy, the total Revolt of America, the Expulsion of the English from the East Indies, the Diminution of London to less than a half, and the Restoration of the Government to the King, Nobility, and Gentry of this Realm. To adorn the Scene, I hope also that some hundreds of Patriots will make their Exit at Tyburn, and improve English Eloquence by their dying Speeches. I think, indeed, that no body of common Sense coud at present take the Road of Faction and Popularity, who woud not upon occasion have joind Catiline's Conspiracy; and I have no better opinion of the Gentleman you call my Friend.

Pray have you seen Lord Stormont since he came home? Did he enquire after you?

I think, if you throw off the Errata as it is printed, it will do very well. It is not long for 8 Volumes; and they are not all Errors of the Press. You mention nothing of the small Edition of my Essays, whence I conclude it is not going forward. I am Dear Sir Yours sincerely and beg the continuation of your Friendship, tho‘ it shoud be our Lot not to pass much of our time together. I wish much to see you possessd of some Farms in this Country, where there is great Unanimity at present, and a Desire to support Government.

D. H.

Edinburgh, 
 25 of Octr 1769.
