I am inform'd by my Brother, in a Letter dated June 3d, that you had wrote me two Letters, neither of which I have ever receiv'd. I wish you wou'd inform me, how you directed them, whether to St Albans or under Cover to some Member of Parliament.

I find my Affair at Edinburgh is over upon two Accounts, both because I am glad to be off with it (as I inform'd you in mine dated June. 1) & because I find it wou'd not succeed, if I had been never so much dispos'd for it. I can now laugh at the Malice of those who intended to do me an Injury, without being able to reach me.

I am sorry you shou'd have found yourself oblig'd to print the Letter I wrote to Mr Couts, it being so hastily compos'd that I scarce had time to revise it. Indeed the Charge was so weak, that it did not require much time to answer it, if the Matter had been to be judg'd by Reason. The Principal found himself reduc'd to this Dilemma; either to draw Heresies from my Principles by Inferences & Deductions, which he knew wou'd never do with the Ministers & Town Council. Or if he made use of my Words, he must pervert them & misrepresent them in the grossest way in the World. This last Expedient he chose, with much Prudence but very little Honesty. I think Mr Wallace's Conduct has been very noble & generous; & I am much oblig'd to him.

I am offer'd here two Expedients for the Security of the Annuity I mentiond to you, either to have an heretable Bond on my Lords Scotch Estate or to have so much Money consign'd in the Stocks as woud yield the Sum offerd. The last is to be sure the best Offer by far, but cannot take place for 6 or 7 Months & therefore still lyable to Accidents; for which Reason I rather chose the other. But if there be any Doubts as to my Lord's Power of giving me such a Security, I wou'd return to the first Offer. Mr Ferguson I believe knows all my Lord's Business & cou'd satisfy you in this Point.

It gives me great Sorrow, by the Turn this Affair has taken, that I shou'd have so little Prospect of seeing you, for a long time: But I hope we shall still preserve the same Friendship, & that no Distance of time or place shall ever be able to make us Strangers to each other.

If there be any thing material in your Letters, I must beg of you to write it over again. For I am afraid they will not now come to hand.

I am My Dearest Friend. Yours most sincerely

Da. Hume.

Welde-hall. June. 13. 1745.

Please direct to me at Welde-hall to the Care of Mr Thompson at the Checquer at Colney, Barnet Bag, by London.

P.S.

Since I wrote the above, I receiv'd yours of June the 4th, & I am as little supriz'd as I am vext at the Turn this Affair has taken. I have indeed a great Regard as well as Sense of Gratitude for Mr Couts, & am heartily sorry he shou'd have been defeated by a Pack of Scoundrels, tho it was entirely by his own Fault.

The kind Sentiments you express towards me, & of which I never doubted, renew the Regret that I shou'd have so little Prospect of passing my Life with you, whom I always regarded as the best Friend, in every respect, I ever possest, Mais tel est notre sort. And in the main I am far from being displeasd with my present Situation. I shall pass the Winter in London, & the Summer en famille with very agreeable People, & at such a Distance from London that I can be there once a week or fortnight, if I please. My Friend's Bizarreries may give me Diversion sometimes, sometimes l'ennui but never Trouble. And there is a pretty certain Prospect, that tho his Case will become, perhaps, more melancholy for him, yet it will become every day more easy for me. At all Adventures I shall be able to save Money; & if my Course of Life shoud become tiresome to me, I may give up their Bond of Annuity, & retire to the South of France or home with such a Competency as may satisfy my Wants, & which consequently ought to satisfy my Ambition. I never was very fond of this Office of which I have been dissappointed, on account of the Restraint, which I forsaw it wou'd have impos'd on me.

I receive very melancholy Letters from my Brother, which afflict me very much. My Mother's Death, which makes such an immense void in our Family, along with my Absence, & his Dissappointment in Love, sink him I find very much. I recommend it to you to oblige him to go to Town with my Sister next Winter. As he speaks of himself as a Person, whose Connexions are all dropt off from him, I have advisd him to marry as soon as he can find one to his Mind. I hope you will second me in this Advice.

You never mention Mrs Home to me. I hope she is quite recover'd.

As you are a great farmer, & I a little one, I intend to pick up some Information for your Use in this County, which is esteemd the best in England for that Purpose. And luckily we have an excellent farmer just at our Door, with whom I have made Acquaintaince.

I have Leizure enough for reading; but scarce for writing at present.

However I intend to continue these philosophical & moral Essays, which I mention'd to you.

June. 15. 1745

I wish you wou'd show Jack Stewart & Mr Couts my Letter of June. 1. wherein I desir'd to give up my being candidate for the Professorship, that they may more fully know my Sentiments & way of thinking on that head, & may see, that I was fully resolv'd not to do any thing of that Nature without their full Consent.
