Edinburgh 13 of Novr 1775

Dear Sir

Your Memory has fail'd you. The last Quarto Edition of my philosophical Pieces in 1768 was in two Volumes, and this Advertisement may be prefixed to the second Volume. There was another Quarto Edition in one Volume six or seven Years before; but that Edition must be all sold off, as you have made four or five Editions since. Your Correction is certainly just; and I had evidently been guilty of an Error in my Pen.

I am glad to find there is a Prospect of a new Edition of my History. I was indeed apprehensive, that the blind Rage of Party had entirely obstructed the Sale of it. I am as anxious of Correctness as if I were writing to Greeks or French; and besides frequent Revisals, which I have given it since the last Edition, I shall again run over it very carefully, and shall send you a corrected Copy. About six Weeks hence, I shall send off by the Waggon the four first Volumes; and shall direct them to Mr Cadel's Shop, which will be more easily found than your House. The other four Volumes shall follow at Leizure. I remember an Author, who says, that one half of a man's Life is too little to write a Book; and the other half to correct it. I think, that I am more agreeably employ'd for myself in this manner, and perhaps more profitably for you, than if I were writing such Volumes as Macpherson's History, one of the most wretched Productions that ever came from your Press.

I am sorry, that I cannot agree with you, in your hopes of subduing and what is more difficult, of governing America. Think only of the great Kingdom of France which is within a days sailing of the small Island of Corsica; yet has not been able, in eight or nine Years, to subdue and govern it, contrary to [the] Sentiments of the Inhabitants. But the worst Effect of the Loss of America, will not be the Detriment to our Manufactures, which will be a mere trifle, or to our Navigation, which will not be considerable; but to the Credit and Reputation of Government, which has already but too little Authority. You will probably see a Scene of Anarchy and Confusion open'd at home, the best Consequence of which is a settled Plan of arbitrary Power; the worst, total Ruin and Destruction.

I am extremely oblig'd to you for your Letter to Professor Wilson. I am afraid, however, that all Efforts in favour of Dr Wight will be in vain.

It seems, Dr Hunter supports a Friend of his; and nothing can be refusd him by the University. I am Dear Sir Yours most sincerely

David Hume.
