Edinburgh, 4 July 1762

Sir

I have read over your Friend's Performance & read it over with Pleasure, because it has a Quality seldom to be met with in Performances of that Nature; which is that it is wrote in a lively entertaining manner & will be able to fix the Attention even of those who are the least curious about metaphysical Reasonings. You desire me also to give my Judgement of the Argument and of the Piece in general: I own this is not easy, unless one had seen the whole; because the Scope and Tendency of the Parts is not other wise easily discover'd. However, such an imperfect Judgement as I can form, I shall very candidly deliver to you, leaving you to transmit what part of it you think proper to the ingenious Author. I believe the whole of what I can say may be compriz'd in two or three Remarks.

First As far as I can judge, there seems to be some Defect in Method; at least, I do not find the Subject open up gradually, and one part throwing light upon another: The Author digresses frequently: For Instance, under the Article of Smelling, he gives you a Glimpse of all the Depths of his Philosophy. I own, however, that this Censure of mine is premature, on account of my not having seen the whole.

Secondly. The Author supposes, that the Vulgar do not believe the sensible Qualities of Heat, Smell, Sound, & probably Colour to be really in the Bodies, but only their Causes or something capable of producing them in the Mind. But this is imagining the Vulgar to be Philosophers & Corpuscularians from their Infancy. You know what pains it cost Malebranche & Locke to establish that Principle. There are but obscure Traces of it among the Antients viz in the Epicurean School. The Peripatetics maintaind opposite Principles. And indeed Philosophy scarce ever advances a greater Paradox in the Eyes of the People, than when it affirms that Snow is neither cold nor white: Fire hot nor red.

Thirdly. It surpriz'd me to find the Author affirm, that our Idea of Extension is nothing like the Objects of Touch. He certainly knows, that People born blind have very compleat Ideas of Extension; & some of them have even been great Geometers. Touch alone gives us an Idea of three Dimensions.

Fourthly. If I comprehend the Author's Doctrine, which, I own, I can hitherto do but imperfectly, it leads us back to innate Ideas. This I do not advance as an Objection: For nothing ought ever to be supposd finally decided in Philosophy, so as not to admit of a new Scrutiny; but only that, I think, the Author affirms I had been hasty, & not supported by any Colour of Argument when I affirm, that all our Ideas are copy'd from Impressions. I have endeavourd to build that Principle on two Arguments. The first is desiring anyone to make a particular Detail of all his Ideas, where he woud always find that every Idea had a correspondent & preceding Impression If no Exception can ever be found, the Principle must remain incontestible. The second is, that if you exclude any particular Impression, as Colours to the blind, Sound to the Deaf, you also exclude the Ideas.

These were the most material Remarks, which occurd to me. As to one particular Insinuation, I rather choose not to take notice of it at all because I could not properly reply to it without employing a Style, which I woud not willingly use towards one for whom I have otherwise a great Regard and who has the Honour of bearing the Name of your Friend. I wish the Parsons wou'd confine themselves to their old Occupation of worrying one another; & leave Philosophers to argue with Temper, Moderation & good Manners. I am Sir

Your most obedient Servant 
David Hume
