My Dear Sir

I am inform'd, that such a popular Clamour has been raisd against me in Edinburgh, on account of Scepticism, Heterodoxy & other hard Names, which confound the ignorant, that my Friends find some Difficulty, in working out the Point of my Professorship, which once appear'd so easy. Did I need a Testimonial for my Orthodoxy I shoud certainly appeal to you. For you know that I always imitated Job's Friends, & defended the Cause of Providence when [you] attackt it, on account of the Headachs you felt after a Deba[uch]. But as a more particular Explication of that particular seems superfluous I shall only apply to you, for a Renewal of your good Offices with your Nephew Lord Tinwal, whose Interest with Yetts & Allan may be of Service to me. There is no Time to lose; so that I must beg you to be speedy in writing to him or speaking to him on that head. A word to the Wise. Even that is not necessary to a Friend such as I have always esteemd & found you to be.

I live here very comfortably with the Marquess of Annandale, who I suppose you have heard, sent me a Letter of Invitation, along with a Bill of 100£ about two Months ago. Every thing is much better than I expected, from the Accounts I heard after I came to London. For the Secrecy, with which I stole away from Edinr, & which I thought necessary for preserving my Interest there, kept me entirely ignorant of his Situation. My Lord never was in so good a Way [before]. He has a regular Family, honest Servants, & every thing is [m]anag'd genteely & with Oeconomy. He has entrusted all his English Affairs to a mighty honest friendly Man, Capt Vincent, who is Cousin Germain to the Marchioness. And as my Lord has now taken as strong a Turn to Solitude & Repose as he formerly had to Company & Agitation, tis to be hopd that his good Parts & excellent Dispositions may at last being accompanyd with more Health & Tranquillity, render him a Comfort to his Friends, if not an Ornament to his Countrey. As you live in the Neighbourhood of the Marchioness, it may give her a Pleasure to hear these particulars. I am Dear Sir

Your most affectionate humble Servt

David Hume.

Welde-hall near St. Albans. 
Aprile. 25. 1745
