Edinburgh Aug. 26 1760

Dear Sir

I am very much oblig'd to you for allowing me a Perusal of Mr Campbell's Letter, which contains many excellent Remarks, and shows a great Knowlege of the Subject. Above all, I esteem his great Impartiality; a State of Mind, which I have always endeavourd to bring myself to, and which, tho' I hop'd to attain it by my total Freedom from particular Interests and Attachments, I am yet uncertain how far I have been able to reach. The Approbation of so good a Judge as Mr Campbell gives me some Encouragement to think I have not been altogether unsuccessful; and the Anger of both Parties against me, I am also so vain as to think a good Sign.

I agree with Mr Campbell, that the Charge against Queen Mary is far from resting solely on the Letters: Her public Conduct was so monstrously imprudent, in a multitude of Particulars, that we must conclude, that nothing but Guilt coud lead a Woman of common Sense & common Honour into it. Yet is it material to examine the Authenticity of the Letters; both, because, if genuine, they fix her Character beyond Controversy, and if forg'd, they determine that of her Adversarys, particularly the Earl of Murray, whom otherwise I shou'd incline to think, as the Age went, not a very bad Man. But unhappily, this Fact, which ought to end all Controversy, becomes the Source of fresh Dispute, and I am a little dissappointed to find that Mr Campbell, after reading Dr Robertson's Dissertation, shoud think the Question still doubtful. I ran over the Enquiry, which he mentions; and really found nothing new in it, nor anything capable in the least to shake my former Opinion: This perhaps proceeded from my Opinions being already fixt; and Mr Campbel, being a Neuter, must be the better Judge. The Enquirer's Learning on this Subject seems all to lie within a few Pages of Goodall; and these, according to the usual Artifice of controversial Writers, he has perverted, misrepresented, & curtaild at his Pleasure. It was not surely Goodall, who forc'd Dr Robertson & me, to allow that the French Copy of these Letters was not the Original, but a Translation of a Translation. For the very Title Page of the Book bears it; and it was never conceiv'd to be other wise that I know of. As to the Improbability, that Buchannan, who was an Assistant to the Commissioners at the Conference of York & Hampton-court, woud translate from the Scotch Translation and not from the French Originals themselves, which were in the hand of the Commissioners; this Improbability, I say, is easily solvd. Buchanan might no doubt get a Sight of the Originals; but it is not to be believd, that Murray woud entrust him or any Mortal with the Keeping of them: Murray woud never surely allow them to go out of his own hands; especially as he knew there were false Brethren among the Commissioners, particularly Leddington, who woud have been well-pleas'd to take an Opportunity of destroying them. Besides, can any one doubt, that there were French Letters in Murray's Custody, genuine or forg'd? The Objection is equally strong in either Case, or rather is of no force in both Cases: For the Scotch Translation being taken for just & faithful in the main, it woud suffice well enough for the Ground of another Translation, which servd all the Purposes desird, if it contain'd the Sense of the materiall Passages, as it was only intended to satisfy the Public, & was not meant to be us'd in any judicial Trial.

I find the Enquirer rests much upon the Tryal of Dalglish, where his carrying the Casket is never mention'd. But Dalgliesh was tryd & punishd for having an active hand in the King's Murther: His carrying the Casket was no Crime & coud not be mentiond on that Occasion. How Morton woud have supported his Narrative of the manner of his intercepting the Casket, is uncertain; but as the Queen recoil'd from the Trial we are left to imagine, that the Proof woud have been full & satisfactory. If Dalgliesh was never askd any Questions about it at no time, the Story woud indeed have been somewhat lame; but surely his Tryal was not the proper time for asking such Questions.

And here I cannot forbear remarking a curious Controversy between the Enquirer & me. I have said no less than three times, that Queen Mary after Murray gave in his Accusation at Hampton Court refus'd to make any Answer except she was admitted to Queen Elizabeth's Presence: He says, that she offerd to make an Answer, provided she was admitted to that Queens Presence. And for this Difference, which, I fancy, will be undiscernable both to you & Mr Campbel, he very plainly insinuates that I am a Lyar & a Rogue & a Rascal. O! I am happy in my Resolution never to answer to any of these People on any Occasion. For if I had ever been weak enough to have made any Reply to any Remarker, my Silence on this Occasion woud have been taken for a Conviction of Guilt. And how coud I have reply'd? I think it woud scarce have been becoming to have spoke calmly to this Imputation: And had I answer'd a Fool according to his Folly, I must have justly pass'd for a Man of as base a Mind & low an Education as the Person, who coud handle an intricate historical Question in such a manner.

I have indeed inferd, that Queen Mary knew beforehand, that this Condition, which had been refusd her from the first, woud not now be granted her: But allowing this Inference to be false (and it can only be given as an Inference), a Man is not Rogue and Rascal and Lyar because he draws a false Inference.

There is no Doubt Queen Mary ought to have had Copies of these Letters; and we accordingly find that Q. Elizabeth offers them to her Commissioners, provided she woud promise to answer, without insisting on the Condition already rejected, which surely coud never lead to clear any thing: But she woud not grant Copies that Q. Mary & her Partizans might pick Flaws & make Objections, which Murray & the Scotch Commissioners coud not have an Opportunity of answering: And this Conduct was undoubtedly reasonable.

I am not altogether of Mr Campbell's Opinion (which I also find to be Dr Robertson's) that Q. Elizabeth never desird that the Controversy shoud go farther. I believe indeed that she woud never have pronouncd any Sentence either for or against the Scotch Queen; but as she undoubtedly believd her guilty (which was also Cecil's & Norfolk's Opinion) she woud have been pleasd to see her non-plus'd and confounded & reducd to Silence; and Mary to prevent this Triumph of her Enemy broke off the Controversy.

I am sorry to differ from Mr Campbell, who thinks that there is good presumptive Evidence brought against Murray, as having a hand in the King's Murther. Leddington, I believe, had some Share in it; but Leddington was a man of so fickle a Conduct & vary'd his Friendships & Parties so often that his Guilt forms not the slightest Presumption against Murray. I remember, that talking to Dr Robertson, soon after the publishing this Enquiry, I said to him, that I believd Leddington was guilty, and wonderd he had not said so in express Terms in his History. To tell you the Truth, replyd he, my own Book is perhaps the Book in the World which I remember the least, and can the least speak about: For I was so tir'd with writing & correcting & printing it, that I have not now patience to look into it; and ever since it was out of my hands, I have endeavourd to shake off all Thoughts of it. This Sentiment in so fine a Writer I thought curious and remarkable.

As to Morton's Guilt, it is true he was condemnd and sufferd for it; but the Trial is lost, and we know not the Proofs brought against him: And you & Mr Campbell are well enough acquainted with the Iniquity of State Trials during that Age in England as well as in Scotland, to know that a Sentence of Condemnation alone forms not the slightest Presumption of a Man's Guilt.

We have only Morton's own Account of the Matter, which is so coherent & sensible & agrees so well with the known Facts & Situations of the Persons, (and is also given on or near the Scaffold) that it ought to have considerable Weight with us.

Besides we are to consider, that tho Morton, sometime before & some time after the Kings Murther, was in Confederacy with Murray; there was at that time a great Coldness, if not Animosity between them. Morton had savd Murray by Rizzios Murther; yet the latter, who was not acquaintd with the Design, deserted his Friend &, after making his own Peace, left him in Banishment without making any Effort in his Favour. It was Bothwel who recalld him, the mortal Enemy of Murray; and Morton naturally fell into a close Union with this new Confederate; at least till some new Interest occurd to separate them.

The Enquirer insists much on the Maxim Malum minatum & damnum secutum; and because Murray had conspird formerly against Darnely at Beith, infers that he was now his Murtherer; But the Difference or rather Contrariety of the times will not allow that Maxim to be at all apply'd in the present Case. Darnely in the former Period was the Queen's Favourite and had expelld Murray from the Administration, & his Death restord that Nobleman's Power. In the latter Period, he was hated & despisd by the Queen & every Body; & his Death was of no Consequence but as it made her a Widow, & allowd another Person to be admitted as her Husband & Co-partner in the Royalty; a Design, which Murray woud never form in favour of Bothwel.

Mr Campbel is certainly in the right, in thinking with Dr Robertson, that when such able men as Lord Herrers & Bishop Lesly took a false Step in the Management of the Conference, tho without the Queens Knowlege, it forms a Presumption against her. And he may add, that they persist in the same Measure for six Weeks after, when she was undoubtedly acquainted with it, and concurd in it.

I shall add to all these Reflections, that if Mary had been innocent, & if these Letters had been Forgeries, she engag'd in the Controversy with great Advantage; as Leddington, the Man of the greatest Penetration in his Age, & who was in all the Secrets of her Enemies, was become secretly her Confederate, & coud have supplyd her with ample Materials for detecting the Forgery. Her declining the Trial is therefore a Presumption, or rather a full Proof of Guilt. I desire Mr Campbel to look to the Passages in the Duke of Norfolk's Trial, to which I refer; and he will find that Lessly & Leddington, as well as Norfolk, always proceed upon the Supposition of Mary's Guilt, in their most secret Conversations with each other.

I shall not lengthen out a tedious Letter by making any Apologies for it; & shall only desire you to make my Acknowlegements to Mr Campbell for the Permission he has granted me of perusing his Letter. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

P.S.

I forgot to mention Hubert's Confession, which I say was a regular judicial Paper regularly judicially given in, & ought to have been answerd at the time. It was certainly a judicial Paper, countersignd by a Notary Public, & sent by the Privy Council of Scotland to the Privy Council of England. But I ought not perhaps to have said that it shoud have been answerd at the time; because it was sent up long after the Conferences were ended, and it is likely that Mary & her Commissioners had never heard of it. I have accordingly struck out the last Clause of the Sentence, in case of a second Edition; & shall willingly give this Triumph to the Enquirer; allowing him at the same time to call me, if he pleases, Rogue & Rascal & Lyar for it. I only desire you & Mr Campbel to reflect, that, if these Letters had been forg'd, the Forgers woud never have mentiond Hubert's Name in them; since they must have already had sufficient Experience of his Obstinacy; & it was a Year & a half after, before they coud bring him to a Confession; or rather, according to the Enquirer's Supposition, coud never bring him to any Confession at all, and he dy'd obstinate in maintaining that he never carryd such Letters.
