Paris April 1764

Dear Edmondestone,

I was just projecting to write a long Letter to you and another to Mr Vivian, when your last obliging Epistle came to hand. I immediatly put Pen to Paper, to assure you, that the Report is entirely groundless, and that I have not lost nor ever coud have lost a Shilling by Fairholm's Bankruptcy. Poor John Adams is very deeply engaged with him, and was at first believd to be ruin'd: But I had a Letter last Post from Dr Blair, which informs me that he will yet be able to save 15 or 16000 Pounds. I am glad to give you also this Piece of Intelligence.

What! do you not know, that Lord Bute is again all-powerful, or rather, that he was always so; but is now acknowledg'd for such by all the World? Let this be a new Motive for Mr Vivian to adhere to the ecclesiastical Profession, in which he may have so good a Patron: For civil Employments for Men of Letters are scarcely to be found: All is occupyd by Men of Business, or by Parliamentary Interest.

It is putting too great a Respect on the Vulgar, and on their Superstitions, to pique one'self on Sincerity with regard to them. Did ever one make it a point of Honour to speak Truth to Children or Madmen? If the thing were worth being treated gravely, I shoud tell him, that the Pythian Oracle, with the approbation of Xenophon, advisd every one to worship the Gods νόμῳ πόλεως . I wish it were still in my Power to be a Hypocrite in this particular: The common Duties of Society usually require it; and the ecclesiastical Profession only adds a little more to an innocent Dissimulation or rather Simulation, without which it is impossible to pass thro the World. Am I a Lyar, because I order my Servant to say I am not at home, when I do not desire to see company.

How coud you imagine that I was Under-Secretary to Lord Hertford, or that I cou'd ever be prevail'd on to accept of such a Character? I am not Secretary at all but do the Business of Secretary to the Ambassy, without any Character. Bunbury has the Commission and Appointments; a young man of three or four and twenty; somewhat raw and ignorant, whom Lord Hertford refus'd to accept of, as thinking he woud be of no Use to him. The King gave me a Pension of 200 a year for Life to engage me to attend his Lordship. My Lord is very impatient to have me Secretary to the Embassy, and writes very earnest Letters to that Purpose to the Ministers, and among the rest, to Lord Bute. He engagd me, somewhat against my Will, to write also to such of my Friends as had Credit with that Favorite, Oswald, Elliot, Sir Harry and John Hume: The King has promisd that my Lord Hertford shall soon be satisfyd in this particular; and yet, I know not how, I suspect that some Obstacle will still interpose. Tho' nothing can be more scandalous than for a man to enjoy the Revenue of an Office, which is exercisd by another; Mr Bunbury has great Interest, being marryd to a Sister of the Duke of Richmond and Sister in law to Lord Holland. The Appointments of this Office are above 1000 a Year, and the Expense attending it nothing and it leads to all the great Employments.

I wait the Issue with Patience and even with Indifference: At my Years and with my Fortune a man with a little common Sense, without Philosophy may be indifferent about what happens. I am Dear Edmondestone, 
Yours sincerely



David Hume.
