5 of Augst 1766



Do not entertain the least Suspicion, My Dear Sir, that your Letters were not extremely acceptable and agreeable to me; tho' they have been occasioned by a disagreeable Subject and tho' you differ sometimes in Opinion from me. My friends to whom I have shown the Letters of this  . . . (I leave you to fill the blank) are also of different Sentiments among themselves: All of them allow that there is a strong Mixture of Frenzy and of Wickedness in them; but some maintain, that the former Ingredient prevails and some the latter. But on the whole, what Epithet cou'd you give to a Man like this, when you must allow, that it is safer to take a Basilisk or a Rattle-Snake into your Bosom than to have the least Intercourse with him; and that above all things it is sovereignly dangerous to lay him under Obligations? He now allows, that it is above four months since he put into the public Papers the most atrocious Article against me, tho' neither I, nor any body else then understood it. This long Letter itself which he wrote after near a month Deliberation is full of the utmost Malice, Violence and Impertinence. What think you of this Passage near the beginning? 'Le premier soin de ceux qui trament des noirceurs est de se mettre a couvert des preuves juridiques. Il ne serait pas bon leur intenter des procés. La conviction intérieure admet un autre genre de preuves qui réglent les sentiments d'un honnete homme: vous sçaurez sur quoi sont fondés les miens.' You see then that he has never had a Moment's relenting with regard to me. For he proceeds, in very good Language, to prove, from his internal Conviction that I am a perfidious Traitor, and a Villain, and one of the deepest Rascals in the World. You wou'd think it were as easy for me to have had an internal as well as external Conviction of the contrary: No ! but he hates me; and he sees every thing about me in the blackest Colours. But why? For no other reason, but because I have laid him under the greatest Obligations. I need not mention about a dozen of palpable Lyes, which he had inserted in his Letter in order to help out his internal Convictions. But I shall not anticipate your Judgement: I send the whole to D'Alembert with a short Narrative to connect the Letters; and if he and my Friends at Paris think fit to publish them, they shall be very welcome. The Pacquet will probably arrive before the first of September. I beg you to peruse it with care, and your Sentiments will have a great Weight with me.



I agree with you, that a little Precipitation after such Injuries, is but a slight Fault, yet really I cannot reproach myself even with that Fault. I immediatly saw with what a dangerous Man I had to do, on account of his Talents, his Malice and his lying, and I determined not to keep Silence, till he shou'd give the Blow. I was indeed anxious till I received this long Letter, as not knowing the Extent nor Grounds of his Imputations; but now I am perfectly at Ease: The partizans of Rousseau have only to chuse whether he is a Villain or a Madman, or a Mixture of both, which is my own Opinion.



Horace Walpole is perfectly innocent as well as M. D'Alembert and I, in this whole Affair. He always acknowledged that Letter as soon as Copies of it were dispersed. He has now acknowledged it under his hand, as D'Alembert wou'd tell you. When you see D'Alembert desire him to show you all my Letters: For there is nothing which needs be kept a Secret. I wou'd not have any Secret in this whole Affair: It concerns too much my Character, to have it buryed in Darkness. And on all accounts I am extremely anxious to stand well in your Judgement. You imagine, that I had employed some Pleasantry against Rousseau while he was in Paris; and that this gave Occasion to Walpole's Letter. But surely, there never was any such thing; and Mr Walpole informs me that his Letter was wrote before Rousseau's Arrival at Paris, tho' totally unknown to me. In this long list of Grievances, Rousseau mentions no such things. [. . .]



[. . .] I coud wish that Mde Du Pré and M. Trudaine had just Notions of my Conduct in this strange Affair with Rousseau. I trusted to their being in Paris about this time and have not wrote to them about it, being mortally tired of the Subject. If Mde du Pré comes to Town, be so good as to carry her my Letters to D'Alembert or at least explain to her and M. Trudaine the Contents of them. A Friend of mine has, I believe, wrote something of the Subject to M. de Montigny. I beg very sincerely the Continuance of your Friendship and promise you a very sincere return. I am Dear Sir

Your most obedient and most humble Servant 
David Hume





P.S. Mr Smith was entirely mistaken in his Conjecture. Rousseau's Letter to General Conway was a plain Refusal, and was so understood both by the General and by me; and is confessed to be so meant by himself. You will find when you see all the Papers that every Circumstance of this Affair is more atrocious one than another.
