Dear Sir

About ten days ago, I received a Letter from you with four enclosd which I deliver'd. Mr Kincaid immediatly pay'd me the Money; Mr Gordon said he woud pay me this Week; Mr Balfour desird a little delay, & said he wou'd pay me as soon as he conveniently coud: Mr Wright I have not yet met with.

Some time before that, I got yours; where you had inserted the Passage which probably gave Dr Brown Occasion for his fine Reflexion; which surely I shall never take the least Notice of. I must however beg the Favor of you, in order to prevent all such Misrepresentations for the future, that you woud burn all my Letters, which do not treat of Business; that is, I may say all of them. For as all Business is clos'd between us, there can be no use of keeping the Letters. I own to you, that it woud be very disagreeable to me, if by any Accident these Letters shoud fall into idle People's hands, and be honord with a Publication. As to what you say, about your Frankness & Openness in mentioning things, which malevolent People sometimes make a bad Use of, I can readily excuse you: For I find it is an Infirmity of my own.

I must desire you to put up in one Parcel three Copies of my History small Paper, in boards, both Volumes; together with three Copies, like binding, of my four Dissertations: And direct the whole to Monsr de la Rouviere a Rotterdam: And to send it thither by a sure hand, together with the smallest of these two Letters enclos'd. Monsr de la Rouviere is to send them as Presents to Paris, one to L'Abbe le Blanc who is translating my History: The other two to different Persons, who have desir'd them from me. Please to state them to my Account, at the Bookseller's Price; and send me the whole Account I owe you, that I may deduct it from your Bill.

The largest of the Letters to Monsr de la Rouviere, please to put into the Post. I have sent you a Copy of Douglas, which you will be so good as to put up in the same Parcel with my History & Dissertations. The Edinburgh Edition is more correct than yours, & contains some Lines, which were struck out in the latter. I hope to get it translated into French, & acted at Paris.

L'Abbé le Blanc tells me of a Work called L'Ami de l'homme ou Traité de la Population wrote by the Marques de Mirabaut. He extolls this Piece much, & says it has met with vast Success at Paris. He also tells me, that it speaks much of my Writings, & that the Author had sent me a Copy which never came to hand. If the Book be in Nourse's or Vaillant's, I shoud be very desirous of having a Copy; and if you get it in Sheets please send it by the Post. Mr Elliot will frank it for you.

The Translation of the first Volume of my History will be publishd next Winter at Paris: The same Person is to translate the second, but wants a Copy. This makes me very anxious that these Copies may go by a safe hand.

I shoud be glad to hear what the Connoisseurs with you say of that singular Piece the Epigoniad. I am dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 21 July. 1757
