St. Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, Feb. 10, 1773

My dear Sir

. . . . Lord Mareschal had a very bad opinion of this unfortunate prince, and thought there was no vice so mean or atrocious of which he was not capable; of which he gave me several instances. My Lord, though a man of great honour, may be thought a discontented courtier, but what quite confirmed me in that idea of that prince was a conversation I had with Helvetius at Paris, which I believe I have told you. In case I have not, I shall mention a few particulars. That gentleman told me that he had no acquaintance with the Pretender, but some time after that prince was chased out of France, "A letter", said he, "was brought me from him, in which he told me that the necessity of his affairs obliged him to be at Paris, and, as he knew me by character to be a man of the greatest probity and honour in France, he would trust himself to me, if I would promise to conceal and protect him. I own," added Helvetius to me, "although I knew the danger to be greater of harbouring him at Paris than at London, and although I thought the family of Hanover not only the lawful sovereigns in England, but the only lawful sovereigns in Europe, as having the full and free consent of the people, yet was I such a dupe to his flattery that I invited him to my house, concealed him there, going and coming, near two years, had all his correspondence pass through my hands, met with his partisans upon Pont Neuf, and found at last that I had incurred all this danger and trouble for the most unworthy of all mortals, insomuch that I have been assured, when he went down to Nantes to embark on his expedition to Scotland, he took fright and refused to go on board, and his attendants, thinking the matter gone too far, and that they would be affronted for his cowardice, carried him, in the night-time, into the ship, pieds et mains liés." I asked him if he meant literally. "Yes," said he, "literally. They tied him, and carried him by main force." What think you now of this hero and conqueror?

Both Lord Mareschal and Helvetius agree that with all this strange character, he was no bigot, but rather had learned from the philosophers at Paris to affect a contempt of all religion. You must know that both these persons thought they were ascribing to him an excellent quality. Indeed, both of them used to laugh at me for my narrow way of thinking in these particulars. . . .
