Paris 28th of August 1765

Sir

When I was carry'd into the Duke of Praslins yesterday at Versailles, I found that he had in his hands my memorial, of which I send your Excellency a Copy. He told me, that he wou'd run over successively the several articles of it, and hoped that he wou'd be able to give satisfaction to my court with regard to all of Them.

As to the first complaint against the French for frequenting the Bays and Harbours of Newfoundland, he said that he believed the chief purpose of that Irregularity, for such it undoubtedly must be esteem'd, was to carry on a smugling Trade, a Guilt in which the English participated equally with the French. But this practice of smugling was never before made the ground of Complaint between Court and Court: Every Country guarded itself against this Evil in the best manner it cou'd, without making its neighbours answerable for the conduct of subjects, whose Malversations were not authorized by their Sovereign. If the Inhabitants of Miquelon & St Pierre frequented Newfoundland for any other purpose, such as fishing in the rivers or cutting Timber, the same answer might suffice: It was an Irregularity which the French Government disavow'd, which it concern'd us to prevent; and for which the Persons guilty were punisha[ble] by the Laws of England, but not by thos[e] of France. It was none of their concern to watch over our Police: We were alone entitled, as we were alone enabled to exercise that Function: and if it was objected, that in so wide and desart a Coast, the English Government cou'd not entirely prevent the intrusion of Frenchmen, it might be answer'd, that for the same reason, they were not capable of doing us much mischief. What harm was there, for instance, if a few Frenchmen, disavow'd by the Government, shou'd cut some Oaks in a Country which consisted of one boundless and unmeasurable Forrest? wou'd we refuse a thirsty Foreigner the Liberty of drinking in the Thames?

As to the second Point, the Irregularities of their Fishermen, the Duke of Praslin said, that the same answer might be employd. These Fishermen were blameable, were punishable by us, and they transgress[ed] the orders given by their own sovereign. For his part he disavow'd all right of Fishing in the places mentioned in my memorial; and if the Governor of St Pierre had claimed such a right, it was without any authority from France, or rather, perhaps, he only seem'd to do so from a want of accuracy in his expressions. When he sent out any fishing Vessels he always gave them for instructions, the fifth Article of the late definitive Treaty by which they were prohibited to come within three Leagues of the English coast: How then cou'd he consistently claim a Vessel, which he himself confess'd to be seized within the distance of half a League? But, added M. de Praslin, there is one circumstance to be observed: The Islands of St Pierre and Miquelon are in some places not three Leagues remov'd from your Coast. How shall we do in these intermediate seas? I think, says he, they ought to be fished in common, as belonging in common to both nations. You may there fish on our Coast and we on yours. But to tell the Truth, these two Islands are so very small, and cover so inconsiderable a part of your extensive coast, that the Matter is scarce worth disputing on either side. We only hope, that when our Vessels are any where caught at an ambiguous Distance from your Coast, such as two Leagues or two Leagues and a half you will not rigorously execute the Treaty against People whose Intentions you many candidly suppose to be innocent.

When the Duke of Praslin came to the third article of my Memorial — viz the complaint against the French armed Frigates, which had enter'd the Harbour of St. Pierre, he said, that here was a claim advanc'd which appear'd to him extraordinary, and which he coud not account for either from Treaties or from any Principles of natural Equity. The Islands of St Pierre & Miquelon were ceded to the french King in full Property, only burthen'd with one condition, that he shou'd erect no Fort upon them; nor maintain a military Force exceeding fifty men. It was not said, that his Ships of war shou'd never enter the Harbour; and this condition cannot in any reason be infer'd from the other. All conditions, which burthen Property, ought always to receive a strict interpretation; from one we ought not to conclude another even tho' similar; much less, ought we to draw such wide inferences. It was necessary for the French King to send over a few Frigates, in order to carry Provisions for the Colonies in those Islands: At another time perhaps he might also send over some, in order to keep the French Fishermen from transgressing Treaties: In both cases they must enter the Harbour of St. Pierre, which, as it belongs in full property to his most Christian Majesty, ought to be open for the reception of his Ships of war. If he sent over a great Force, the English Court had reason to take umbrage and to demand the reason of such an unusual Armament: But we disgrac'd our own power, by making Exceptions to the appearance of a few small Frigates, which never cou'd have been equip'd with any bad Intention.

With regard to the fourth Article of my Memorial, the Duke said that he believed it to be founded on a Mistake: For he was assur'd by the Duke of Choiseul that neither this Year nor the last, had the French any armed Vessel of 50 Guns, who enter'd the Gulph of St. Laurence.

Your Excellency will please to observe that I deliver the Duke of Praslins answer, as nearly as I can remember it; That his Majesty may see where it is satisfactory, either by disavowing past Encroachments, or by justifying the French Pretensions.

In conclusion the Duke said, that, as we had made complaints, he wou'd also make some, in return; particularly against Captain Palisser. The actions of that Gentleman, he said, seem'd to be laudable, and he had last year merited the approbation of his most Christian Majesty. But there were several expressions in his letters to the Governor of St. Pierre and to the French naval Officer, which were so harsh, so imperious, and so much fitted to rip up past Quarrels, that he wonder'd any person of his merit and education cou'd have been guilty of them. The positive orders in particular which he sent to the naval officer to depart from St. Pierre and to evacuate those Seas, were framed in a Style very unusual among independant powers, & fitted to give more offence than even real Injuries.

The Duke said that a written answer to my Memorial was preparing, which he hoped wou'd give Satisfaction to his Majesty. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard Sir

 Your most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

P.S. I have just been honour'd with your Excellency's Letter of the 23d Instant, notifying the happy Incident of her Majesty's safe Delivery of a Son. I shall deliver the several Letters, according to form.
