Fontainebleau 23d of October 1765

Sir

Your Excellency's of the 11th Instant, sent by Mr Maclane, came not to hand till the 20th; which proceeded partly from Mr Maclane's being retarded by contrary Winds and bad Weather, partly by his sending the Letter to me, for greater Security, by a private hand. As soon as I receiv'd it, I went to the Duke of Praslin, and had a Conference with him on the several Articles, which it contain'd.

The Duke confirm'd to me, what I had before the Honour of informing your Excellency, that M. de Guerchy, who sets out to day for London, carries with him full Powers and Instructions to negotiate and conclude the Affair of the Canada Bills. He is to make the Proprietors such an Offer, according to the Duke, that they must be manifestly unreasonable, if they refuse it. As this is the State of the Case, he thought it superfluous, either to give a written Answer to my Memorial, or to enter into Reasoning with me about the Contents of it.

He repeated his Assurances of giving me a written Answer to my Memorial concerning the Newfoundland Fishery. He told me, that he wou'd insert in his Answer the Complaint against the indecent Terms, employ'd by Capt. Palisser, in his Letter to the Governor of St Pierre. This is a Matter, which, I find, is highly resented here.

With regard to Dunkirk, the Duke confess'd, that the farther Demolition of the Jettees was suspended by Orders from Court; but he deny'd, that these Orders were issu'd on account of the new Inspection which His Majesty propos'd to make by marine Officers. He insisted, in plain Contradiction to the terms of your Excellency's Letter to M. de Guerchy, that this Suspicion was involv'd in the original Agreement, when the French consented to begin that Demolition. This Operation was only consider'd as an Experiment; and if the Matter had succeeded to the Wish of both Parties, the Demolition, after some Interval, wou'd have been continu'd. But I am sorry to observe, said he, that nothing cou'd have more confirm'd the Fears of our Enginiers, and bely'd the Expectations of yours, than the Event of this Experiment. The Sand has already risen twenty two Inches in the Harbour: And if, in so short a time, the Effects of so small a Demolition are so considerable, you may judge what woud be the Issue of an entire one, in a Period of several Years. Instead of complying, therefore, with the Demand of your Court, and continuing the Destruction of the Jettees, we have reason to fear, that we have already gone too far; and we shall certainly stop our hands, till we are assur'd, that we can proceed with Safety. It was in vain I urg'd to him, that the rising of the Sand was not only the natural or rather necessary Effect of the Demolition agreed to, but was the very End for which that Operation was insisted on: For how was the Harbour to be injur'd but by the rising of the Sand? But it did not follow, that the flowing out of the Back-water wou'd thereby be obstructed. If that was an inevitable Consequence, it had been better to have refus'd from the beginning to demolish those Jettees; since nothing cou'd have a worse Grace than to stop, merely because an Effect had ensu'd, which was forseen and fortold and propos'd from the first. The Duke still insisted, that it was now the Opinion of the French Enginiers, that the farther rising of the Sand wou'd obstruct the Passage of the Back-water.

Here I took Occasion to renew my Complaint against M. de Ramsault, that he had kept shut the Sluice of Bergue, and had not allow'd the Waters to flow out as usual. The only Interpretation I told him, that coud be put on this Conduct, was, that he sought a Pretence for that Opinion, which was now pleaded as a Reason for stopping the Demolition of the Jettees. If the Passage had been opend to the Waters, at the stated times, they wou'd have made their way to the Sea, tho'perhaps by a narrower and less profound Channel than at present; a Channel, which wou'd have been sufficient to drain the Country, without being proper for the Entry of large Vessels into the Harbour. The Duke answerd, by informing me of a Fact, which, I own, appear'd to me very difficult to account for. He said, that upon my former Complaint, M. de Guerchy had wrote to M. de Ramsault, and had receiv'd for Answer, not only that he had always open'd the Sluice of Bergue at the stated times, but that Coll. Desmaretz, when challeng'd on that head, had acknowledg'd it, and had even deny'd, that he had ever given to his Court any Intelligence to the contrary. I reply'd, that there was here some grievous Mistake, either in M. de Ramsault or in Coll. Desmaretz. I cou'd assure him, that the latter had made a formal Complaint against the Conduct of the French at Dunkirk, which appear'd to him plainly affected; and a Copy of his Letter to that Purpose was transmitted to me from London. The Duke desir'd a Copy of the Passage, that the Matter might be search'd to the bottom; but I declin'd Compliance on account of some harsh Expressions, which I found in it. The Passage is in Coll. Desmaretz Letter to your Excellency dated the 10th of Septr. I doubt not but the Collonel can very well justify himself from the Imputation here attempted to be thrown upon him.

I shall finish this Subject, by mentioning a slight Complaint which the Duke made against Mr Desmaretz. He said, that M. de Ramsault had sounded the Harbour, that Mr. Fraser held the Plummet, that it appeard plainly that the Sand had risen twenty two Inches since the Destruction of the Jettees, that this Fact was stated in a Narrative compos'd by M. de Ramsault, and that Coll. Desmaretz had refus'd to sign the Narrative, tho'he cou'd not but be sensible of its Veracity.

I endeavour'd to make M. de Praslin sensible of the Spirit of Moderation, which prevail'd in His Majesty's Councils, by not pushing to the utmost Rigour the just Rights acquir'd by Treaty to his Subjects resident in France, tho'he never cou'd depart from the plain Sense and Spirit of the Treaty. The Duke reply'd, that there was certainly no Intention in the French Court to give the least Vexation to the English: And he cited as a Proof the late Permission given Booth to return to France, and to remain there as long as he should think proper.

I am to acknowledge your Excellency's of the 8th Instant with the Inclosure. I find, that the Cardinal de Bernis is informd of the Fate of his Nephew; but I shall take care to let him know the Attention, which your Excellency has given to his Request.

It is scarce possible for the Dauphin to be in a worse State of Health than he is at present. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard, Sir

 Your Excellency's 
Most obedient and most humble Servant



David Hume

Mr Secretary Conway
