Dear Coll

I have many Subjects to congratulate you upon: The Honour you acquir'd at Sandberg, your Safety, & your Success in your Elections. You are equally eminent in the Arts of Peace & War. The Cabinet is no less a Scene of Glory to you than the Field. You are a Hero even in your Sports & Amusements; and discover a superior Genius in Whist as well as in a State Intrigue or in a Battle.

I suppose you begin to suspect by this Preamble, that I am going to ask some Favour of you: And really, that is the Case. Not that I think it necessary to coax you, in order to engage you to do a good natur'd Action; but still a little cajoling will not be amiss. And therefore I hope, that having given you your just Praises as a Soldier a Statesman, & a Whist-player, you will not grudge to give me your Advice with regard to the Management of our Affair of half-pay.

You have been inform'd, I suppose, that the Secretary at War, tho he never has positively refus'd us, yet discovers no good Intentions towards us; & the least we can suspect, is, that he will delay us as long as possible, & if he be oblig'd at last to lay the Matter before the Treasury, will endeavour to give it such a Turn as to disappoint us. On the Treasury it must at last depend; & therefore it seems requisite alone to make Interest with the Commissioners of that Board, particularly Mr Pelham. The Question is, when & how to apply to him.

You have heard, no doubt, that Lord Marchmont & his Brother have deign'd to take the Court into Favour; & this is an Event, on which I ought to congratulate you among your other Pieces of good Fortune, as being a clear Proof, that the last remaining Dregs of Walpolian Corruption are now entirely purg'd away from amongst you. However this may be, Mr Hume-Campbell has offerd very kindly, without my asking it, to use his Interest with Mr Pelham in order to procure us Justice with regard to our half-pay; & I believe his Interest, at present, is not contemptible. And as this is an Affair of Justice, more than Favour, I have some Trust also in his Method of Reasoning & enforcing the proper Arguments. But as Lord Sandwich & Lord Anson had undertaken to employ their good Offices to the same Purpose; I am at a Loss whether to desire Mr Hume [-Campbell] to break the Matter with the first convenient Opportunity, or delay it till these noble Lords shall all be in Town, & shall receive a proper Remembrancer from their Friends. On the one hand, Delays are dangerous, & in a little time, we shall seem to be reviving some obsolete Claim. On the other hand, it seems better to unite all our Forces at once, & make one bold Push for Success, rather than come in a scatter'd manner, & be baffled one after another.

If your opinion incline to the latter Method, it will be proper for us to have some Concert; and the best way of contriving the Matter seems to be this. That there be some one Person, as Mackenzie or Jemmy Abercromby, if he be in London, who shall receive all the Letters from Dr Clephane, Myself &c and having observ'd the Time, when all the Persons, to whom they are address'd, are in Town, shall then get them all deliver'd, & spring all the Mines at once. It will be of great Advantage, if this Affair be manag'd by your Advice & Direction: And therefore, I must desire you to deliver your Sentiments fully to Mackenzie the first time you see him.

I can entirely depend upon Oswald's Assistance (who by the by, is now chosen for the County of Fife). He has great Influence on Greenville & Lyttleton; & I believe some on Mr Pelham. The General may also be put in Mind; & I hope Tom Wilson, in default of Colonel Erskine, will be a Spur to his Vigilance. And since I am recapitulating all our Stock of Friends, I must also make mention of Colonel Abercromby as a general Patron of the Distresst & Misfortunate.

I wou'd come up to London, if I thought I cou'd be of any Service, or if I thought the Affair on such a Footing as to give us any great Probability of Success.

I hope you recover well of your Wound; & I beg of you to inform me. I shoud be glad to know what became of Forster, & whether Bob Horne got the Majority.

I write to you upon the Supposition of your being at London; because Dr Clephane wrote me some time ago, that you was just setting out for it. If that be the Case, please make my most humble Compliments to Mrs Abercromby; If the Colonel be still detain'd abroad by any Accident, I must beg it of you, Mrs Abercromby, to take these Compliments to yourself, & to keep this Letter till the Colonel comes over: For it is not worth while to pay Postage for it. I suppose, Madam, that Lady Abercromby informd you of our happy Voyage together, & save Arrival in Newcastle. Your young Cousin was a little noisy & obstreperous. Our Ship was dirty: Our Accomodation bad: Our Company sick: There were four Spies, two Informers, & three Evidences who saild in the same Ship with us: Yet notwithstanding all these Circumstances we were very well pleas'd with our Voyage, chiefly on Account of its Shortness; which indeed is almost the only agreeable Circumstance that can be in a Voyage. I am Madam and Sir

Your most obedient humble Servant 
David Hume.



Ninewells near Berwick 7th of August. 1747

Is the Royal in Bergen-op-zoom? Have they lost any Officers? I hope Guidelianus is safe? I hope Fraser is converted?
