My Lord

I am assur'd, that there arriv'd yesterday an Express from New York to the board of Trade, which is kept Secret, and contains the most interesting Articles of Intelligence. I was told, that the general Assembly of the Provinces, when they first heard of Mr Pitt's Declaration in their Favour, were so much encourag'd, that they pass'd the most extraordinary Votes and Resolutions, much beyond the Principles avow'd by that Gentleman. They voted that the Parliament of England had no Right to impose on them any Taxes whatsoever; that they had no Right to make any Laws for them without their Consent; that the Colonies had a Right to trade freely to any Part of the World where they found their Advantage; that they were determin'd to maintain these Principles to the last Drop of their Blood; and that the whole Militia and Arms be carefully inspected, in order to maintain the Colonies in a State of Defence against all Invaders. A Gentleman of very good Sense told me these Circumstances, which he heard from a Person who had perus'd the Letters in the board of Trade. If this Intelligence hold to the Extent here related, there will certainly be a considerable Revolution in the Ministry. Mr Pitt will be sent for and receiv'd on his own Terms, as the only Person who has Authority sufficient to extricate us from so dangerous a Situation.

At present, even before the Arrival of this surprizing Piece of News, the Ministry seem to be in great Perplexity. The Duke of Grafton has in effect, resignd, and goes no longer near the Office, except for the Dispatch of such necessary Business as cannot wait, till his Successor be appointed. There are three Noblemen commonly namd for that Office Lord Hardwicke, Lord Egmont, and the Duke of Richmond. Many People think Lord Egmont will be Secretary and that the Duke of Richmond will succeed him in the Admiralty. In all cases, it is not thought probable, that the Duke of Richmond will return to France: It is believ'd that Lord Holdernesse will succeed him in that Employment.

Mr Pitt's Politics, in the End of the Sessions, appear to have been as remarkable and peculiar as during the whole Course of it. He threw out Appearances of a Union with his Brothers, the Greenvilles, in order to alarm the Ministry; he attack'd all the Measures of Administration with great Vehemence; sometimes he voted differently from George Grenville, in order to show that the Union was not entirely cemented, and that the Court need not despair of gaining him; and having thrown all the Ministers into Confusion by these Proceedings, he retires to Bath at the very Instant when the Supplies came before the House, and when he had it in his Power to perplex still more all the public Measures. The Meaning of this Conduct is commonly understood to be, that he wants to be Minister with full Power of modelling the Administration as he pleases: Had he routed the Ministry entirely, the Grenvilles and the Duke of Bedford must have come in, Men whom he regards as the least obsequious and pliable in England. He therefore keeps aloof from all positive Engagements with them; he lets the Ministry see, that, if his Terms be not comply'd with, this Union must in time have place; he knows that such a Union must overwhelm them as every one sees visibly that they enjoy not the King's Confidence or rather are exposd to his secret ill-will; so that a Pretence is only wanted to turn them all out of office, and the first considerable Vote they lost wou'd serve to that Purpose. Mr Pitt concluded, that these Considerations woud soon open the Door to him on his own Terms; and his Opinion appears very probable: But these Events in America, if true, as I believe, they are, must quicken extremely the Operation of all those Causes. He seems to be the only Man, who can either bring the Americans to submit peacably by his Authority; or subdue them by his Vigour. It does not seem probable that the Repeal alone of the Stamp Act will suffice.

Lord Holdernesse had an Intention of taking soon a Journey to France in order to visit his Friends, and he press'd me much to be of the Party: But I declind it, in order to have the Honour of accompanying your Lordship thither: These late Events have made him delay his Journey: As far as one can see thro such a misty Air, it appears to me very probable, that he will be our Ambassador at that Court. He has Connexions with Mr Pitt, as far as any one can have with that Gentleman, which at all Adventures will facilitate his Nomination; and it woud be difficult to find in England a Person more fit for the Office or who woud be more acceptable to the Court of France.

I hope we may now flatter ourselves with the hopes of seeing your Lordship soon in this Part of the World. I am with the utmost Regard My Lord

 Your Lordship's Most obedient & most humble Servant

David Hume

Lisle Street Leicester Fields 8th of May 1766.
