Dear Sir

I sympathize very heartily with you in the Loss you mention. I have indeed heard the same Character you give of your Friend; and am sensible, that no Affliction can be greater than that of being bereav'd of such a one, after that a long Course of Years, intimate Acquaintance & other Connexions have bred the most cordial Friendship with the Person. We should be very unhappy, if Time & other Occupations did not contribute to alleviate the Grief, which we fell so naturally on these Occasions.

As to my Opinions, you know I defend none of them positively: I only propose my Doubts, where I am so unhappy as not to receive the same Conviction with the rest of Mankind. It surprizes me much to see any body, who pretends to be a man of Letters, discover Anger on that Account; since it is certain, by the Experience of all Ages, that nothing contributes more to the Progress of Learning than such Disputes & Novelties.

Apropos to Anger, I am positively assurd, that Dr Warburton wrote that Letter to himself which you sent me; and indeed the Style discovers him sufficiently. I shou'd answer him; but he attacks so small a Corner of my Building, that I can abandon it without drawing great Consequences after it. If he woud come into the Field, and dispute concerning the principal Topics of my Philosophy, I shou'd probably accept the Challenge. At present, nothing coud tempt me to take the Pen in hand, but Anger, of which I feel myself incapable, even upon this Provocation.

I have finish'd the Index to this new Collection of my Pieces. This Index cost me more Trouble than I was aware of when I begun it. I am oblig'd to Mr Strahan for the uncommon Pains he has taken in making it correct. The Errata which I have given consist mostly of small Alterations in the Style, which I made myself. You know I always expect half a dozen of Copies on each new Edition. I wou'd wish that Mr Strahan wou'd accept of one, as a Proof of the Sense, which I have of his Care on this Occasion. Please keep one by you, which I fancy I shall have Occasion to send abroad: And be so good as to send the other four, with any other Parcel you are sending hither.

I am very assiduous in writing a new Volume of History, and am now pretty well advanc'd: I find the whole will be comprized in one Volume, tho' somewhat more bulky than any of the former. The Period of time is a great deal longer than that of either of the former, but is not near so full of interesting Matter; and as the original Historians are much fewer, there are not so many Circumstances transmitted to us. I am pretty certain, that I shall be able to deliver to you the Manuscript about a twelvemonth hence; and shall certainly be in London myself for that Purpose. You seemd desirous, that we shoud mutually enter into Articles about this Volume, which I declin'd, till I shoud be so much advanc'd as to be sure of my Resolution of executing it, and coud judge with some Certainty of the Bulk: Now that I am satisfy'd in both these Particulars, I am willing to engage with you for the same Price, viz seven hundred Pounds, payable three Months after the Publication. If you approve of this Proposal, please write me a Letter for that Purpose; and I shall also in Return send you an obligatory Letter. I think this Justice is due to you, that you may see, I do not intend, on account of any Success, to screw up the Price, or ask beyond what you have already allowd me, which I own was very reasonable.

Mr Dalrymple has pay'd me 20 pounds & a Crown. I can never meet with Mr Wright, tho I call often at his Shop. Mr Balfour does not name any Day.

I am glad of the Approbation, which Mr Dalrymple's Book meets with: I think it really deserves it. Nothing surprizes me more than the Ill Usage which the Epigoniad has receiv'd. Every body here likes it extremely. The Plan & Story is not so much admired; as the Poetry & Versification: But your Critics seem willing to allow it no Merit at all. I fancy it has not been enough dispers'd; and that your engaging in it, wou'd extremely forward its Success. The whole Edition is out: There were 550 disposd of here: 200 sent to London. As the Author is my very good Friend & Acquaintance, I shoud be much pleasd to bring you to an understanding together; If the bad success on the first Edition has not discouragd you, I wou'd engage him to make you Proposals for that Purpose. He will correct all the Blemishes remark'd.

I shou'd not be displeas'd that you read to Dr Warburton the Paragraph in the first Page of my Letter with regard to himself. The Hopes of getting an Answer, might probably engage him to give us something farther of the same kind; which at least saves you the Expence of advertising. I see the Doctor likes a literary Squable.

I wou'd be glad to know, how near you think you are to a new Edition of my History, and whether you intend a Duodecimo Edition of these philosophical Pieces. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient Servant

David Hume

Edinr. 3 Septr 1757.
