I have little more to say to you than to bid you adieu before I leave this country. I got an invitation from General St Clair, to attend him in his new employment at the Court of Turin, which I hope will prove an agreeable if not a profitable jaunt for me. I shall have an opportunity of seeing Courts & Camps; & if I can afterwards, be so happy as to attain leizure and other opportunities, this knowledge may even turn to account to me, as a man of letters, which I confess has always been the sole object of my ambition. I have long had an intention, in my riper years, of composing some History; & I question not but some greater experience of the Operations of the Field, & the Intrigues of the Cabinet, will be requisite, in order to enable me to speak with judgement upon these subjects. But notwithstanding of these flattering ideas of futurity, as well as the present charms of variety, I must confess, that I left home with infinite regret, where I had treasured up stores of study & plans of thinking for many years. I am sure I shall not be so happy as I should have been had I prosecuted these. But, in certain situations, a man dares not follow his own judgement or refuse such offers as these.

The subscriptions for the stocks were filled up with wonderful quickness this year; but as the Ministry had made no private bargains with stock-jobbers, but opened books for every body, these money-dealers have clogged the wheels a little & the subscribers find themselves losers on the disposal of their stocks to their great surprize.

There was a controverted election, that has made some noise, betwixt John Pitt & Mr Drax of the Prince's Family, where Mr Pelham, finding himself under a necessity of disobliging the Heir Apparent, resolved to have others as deep in the scrape as himself; & accordingly obliged Fox, Pitt, Lyttleton, & Hume-Campbell all to speak on the same side. They say their speeches were very diverting. An ass could not mumble a thistle more ridiculously than they handled this subject. Particularly our countryman, not being prepared, was not able to speak a word to the subject; but spent half an hour in protestations of his own integrity, disinterestedness & regard to every man's rights & property.

His brother, Lord Marchmont, has had the most extraordinary adventure in the world. About three weeks ago he was at the play, where he espied in one of the boxes a fair virgin, whose looks, air, & manner made such a powerful & wonderful effect upon him, as was visible to every beholder. His raptures were so undisguised: His looks so expressive of passion: His inquiries so earnest, that every body took notice of it. He soon was told that her name was Crompton, a linen-draper's daughter, that had been bankrupt last year, & had not been able to pay above 5 shillings in the pound. The fair nymph herself was about 16 or 17, & being supported by some relations, appeared in every public place, & had fatigued every eye but that of his Lordship, which being entirely employed in the severer studies, had never till that fatal moment opened upon her charms. Such, & so powerful was their effect, as to be able to justify all the Pharamonds & Cyruses in their utmost extravagances. He wrote next morning to her father, desiring leave to visit his daughter on honourable terms, & in a few days, she will be Countess of Marchmont. All this is certainly true. They say many small fevers prevent a great one. Heaven be praised, that I have always liked the persons & company of the fair sex: For by that means, I hope to escape such ridiculous passions. But could you ever suspect the ambitious, the severe, the bustling, the impetuous, the violent Marchmont, of becoming so tender and gentle a swain, an Artamenes, an Oroondates?

The officers, (I suppose from effeminacy) are generally much disgusted at the service. They speak of no less [than] 300, high & low, who have desired leave to sell out. I am My Dear Sir

 Yours most affectionately

David Hume.

London 29th Jany 1748
