Paris 18 of August, 1764.

You will never be able, Madam, to imagine the disagreeable situation in which I passed several days of this week, and still less will you be able to conjecture the cause. About an hour after I had sent off my last pacquet, a friend of mine entered my room, who informed me, with a certainty which admitted of no doubt, that you, dear Madam, you (this word cannot be too frequently repeated, in order to give emphasis to the sentence and augment surprise), that you, I say, had occasioned all the quarrel between Mr Murray and me, by telling him of the bad opinion I had of him and his lawsuit, &c. &c. My friend said, that he knew this not only by Mr Murray's inability to name any other person, whom I had endeavoured to prepossess against him, but also by circumstances of conversations between you and me, which Mr Murray repeated, and which, indeed, had some foundation in reality. Thus you, who of all human creatures are the least tracassière, are here the author of a fray; you, who have created me so many new friends, are here robbing me of my ancient ones. Have you ever had any experience of the situation of our mind, when we are very angry with the person whom we passionately love? You have, surely: can any thing be more tormenting and more absurd? How many projects of revenge, which we fondly cherish, and then fly from with horror! How many images of tenderness, which pride and indignation make us instantly regret! I thought of means, by which I might mortify and punish a person, who had behaved so treacherously towards me; for this epithet I thought your conduct richly merited: but I then reflected; is this the person for whose welfare I would sacrifice my existence; and can I now think of taking pleasure in her pain and uneasiness? I was in this state of mind when I received yours. The very sight of your handwriting, I own, began the cure: but the perusal of those soft and obliging and amicable expressions, which you employ, penetrated me to the soul; and I saw a new world around me. Those circumstances of conduct, which I had before clothed in so many black colours, and from which I drew so many strange inferences, now appeared only a trivial indiscretion; which I was glad you could sometimes be guilty of, in order to excuse much greater of my own. Accept of my penitence, Madam, for sentiments, which, though confined within my own bosom, I regard no less as violations of my duty towards you: accept also my thanks, for taking me so soon from a state of mind, in which my folly might have otherwise long detained me.

I was now in such a fit of joy and alacrity, that I instantly sat down and wrote to Mr Murray; desiring an interview with him, assuring him that I never meant him any prejudice, and, in short, employing every expression that may soften and gain him. If I can help it, there shall no traces remain of the ill you have done me. I hate it less because it is an ill, than because it is so dissimilar to the hand which sent it. I also effaced from my letter to his brother, that passage, which appears a little contemptuous to your friend. I knew it would not disoblige his brother; but I conjectured that it had displeased you.

 I beseech you, dear Madam, continue to like me a little: for otherwise I shall not be able in a little time to endure myself.
