Dear Sir,

I shou'd make many apologies for these frequent letters, which I write to you. I hope you will not altogether ascribe it to the great impatience I have of seeing you, and hearing from you, but to the necessity of our affairs. The present trouble is occasion'd by a letter wrote to my Lady by Mr V., about ten days ago, and which has since come to my knowledge. As I am in some measure ignorant both of its contents and of its consequences, I thought it proper to give you some sort of key to our present transactions, in such an imperfect manner as can be contain'd in the compass of a letter, and one which I am so uncertain will ever come to hand.

I must begin by complaining of you for having yokt me here with a man of the Captain's character, without giving me the least hint concerning it, if it was known to you, as indeed it is no secret to the world. You seemed satisfy'd with his conduct, and even prais'd him to me; which I am fully persuaded was the effect of your caution, not your conviction. However, I, who was altogether a stranger, enter'd into the family with so gross a prepossession. I found a man, who took an infinite deal of pains for another, with the utmost professions both of disinterestedness and friendship to him and me; and I readily concluded that such a one must be either one of the best, or one of the worst of men. I can easily excuse myself for having judg'd at first on the favourable side; and must confess that, when light first began to break in upon me, I resisted it as I would a temptation of the Devil. I thought it, however, proper to keep my eyes open for farther observation; till the strangest and most palpable facts, which I shall inform you of at meeting, put the matter out of all doubt to me.

There is nothing he wou'd be fonder of than to sow dissension betwixt my Lady and you, whom he hates and fears. He flatters, and caresses, and praises, and hates me also; and would be glad to chase me away, as doing me the honour, and, I hope, the justice of thinking me a person very unfit for his purposes. As he wants all manner of pretext from my conduct and behaviour, he has broken his word, and contriv'd a way of life for me which it is impossible for me or any other man ever to endure. Be not surpriz'd at this, nor imagine there is any contradiction betwixt what I here say and his seeming desire of attaching me by the offer he made me last summer. I shall explain that matter on a more proper occasion. Those, who work continually upon such dark intricate designs, must observe a conduct which, to persons at a distance, who have not the proper clue, must appear a continu'd scene of contradiction.

The long and strange letter he wrote to you in August last, and which he enclos'd to my Lady, was, in most of its articles, contriv'd for nothing but to deter her from ever meddling in her son's affairs. Now, he writes her in a great hurry to entreat her to come up, and to tell her that, without her presence, every thing must go to confusion. He imagines (and, I hope, justly) that you are to be here soon. He knows I will open my breast to you, and that all his artifices and insinuations will have no effect with you. He endeavour'd to deter me from speaking to you, by saying, very imprudently, that he desir'd you to meddle as little in my Lord's affairs as possible. Having found all this in vain, he now plays another engine.

That my Lady's presence wou'd be very agreeable, and very useful to us all, is most evident; but why the alarm shou'd be given so hot, is altogether inconceivable. For what is the mighty matter of dispute? Only about hiring a few carts to remove the family to another house, in order to quit this; which, for very good reasons, is infinitely disagreeable to your friend, very dangerous, will be uninhabitable for cold during the winter season, and costs 3 to 400 pound a year at least to the family, more than is requisite. He has been so imprudent as to confess in his letter to you that the plan I propose is the best, were he to begin. He feels the force and evidence of my reasons. He knows I will appeal to you, and that he will be confounded. Upon this account, he chooses to raise a turmoil and confusion, in order to throw us all into disorder. His secret reasons for this conduct, the very dark ones, are no secrets to me, and shall be none to you, whenever I shall have the pleasure of seeing you.

I hope my Lady is no ways prepossest in his favour, or at least has her ears open to conviction. He talks (but I don't believe him at present in any thing), as if there were a great friendship betwixt them. As to you, great care has been taken to inculcate on me, and almost every body else in the family, that you have nothing to do here; but as he is hated here, as well as every where else, I answer for all their obedience; and he shall be the boldest man in England, who will contradict whatever you and my Lady shall think proper to order. I conjoin your authorities, because they ought never to be thought of apart, and cannot be separated without the greatest disorder and confusion.

I am sorry our affairs here shou'd add new anxieties to those with which you must be opprest, both on public and private accounts, during this miserable war. I intended to have delay'd mentioning these matters till your arrival; but as that appears very uncertain, and the letter I mention'd might give false alarms, I thought it requisite to give you some notion of the matter. You'll easily see that the point I urge can be of no consequence, on the one hand, to Mr V., if his intentions were fair; tho', on the other, it may be of very great to your friend and his family. A fine reason, indeed, for obliging my Lady to take a journey of 300 miles, in a hurry, and in the midst of winter, in order to hinder you from removing us from this house to one ten or twelve miles distant.

I wish you wou'd bring this letter South with you; that, if you will allow it, I may show it to him. For I shall never make underhand insinuations to the prejudice of any man's character. Nothing would prevent my showing it at present, but my uncertainty with regard to your's and my Lady's sentiments. He knows in general my opinion of matters; but as he still perseveres in his fawning compliments and civilities, I allow him; tho', I must confess, with a little sullenness and indignation, which I cannot, and care not, to dissemble.

If you have no thoughts of being in London soon, I shall write you very fully of the whole matter, and shall show my letter to him, that he may either write or not write in opposition to it, as he shall see proper. I fancy that either way you will be equally convinc'd of what I have here told you. I am, Dear Sir, with great regard, your most obedient humble Servant,

David Hume.

 Oct. 31. [1745]
