London 22 September, 1763.

Madam,

I believe I ought to esteem myself extremely obliged to Lord Hertford, as upon many other accounts, so particularly for rousing me from a state of indolence and sloth, which I falsely dignified with the name of philosophy. For, to tell the truth, this lethargy was growing so strong upon me, that I at first declined his Lordship's invitation to attend him in his embassy to France, though that invitation was both honourable and advantageous for me, and though it came from the most amiable nobleman of the Court of England. But I now find, after his repeated applications have again embarked me in the world, that it is better for a man to keep in the midst of society; and I am particularly pleased with a scene of life, which will approach me near to your Ladyship, and give me an opportunity of cultivating the friendship of a person so much esteemed and so universally celebrated. I now give you warning, Madam, that your declarations in my favour have been so frequent and public, both in France and England, that you are bound in honour to maintain them, and that you cannot with a good grace retract upon a personal acquaintance the advantageous terms in which you have so often been pleased to speak of me. There is only one circumstance which can possibly excuse your displeasure against me; if I should be wanting in my regard and attachment towards you; since such a conduct must prove me a man not to be bound either by merit or obligation.

To show your Ladyship that I pretend to have some interest with you, I intended as soon as I had the honour of seeing you, to employ my good offices in endeavouring to remove a displeasure which M. Rousseau imagines you had contracted against him. Lord Marischal, some weeks ago, showed me a letter from him, in which he implores my Lord's intercession for that purpose; on the supposition, that this nobleman would meet you at London before your departure. M. Rousseau said, that he knew not how to make advances to any person; and that you was even the only one whom he could run after, when he found you was deserting him.

I understand by Lord Marischal that you was displeased with our savage philosopher for refusing in so peremptory a manner the advantages offered him by the King of Prussia; and my Lord devolved over to me the task of giving you satisfaction on that head. But I find that your Ladyship, by previously forgiving this one caprice more in a man, who is so little regulated by the common rules of conduct, has deprived me of all merit in my intercession. I wish your Ladyship could persuade M. de Guerchy to come to his station here in London, that I might the sooner have an opportunity of throwing myself at your feet, and of assuring you of the regard with which I am,

 Madam, 
Your Ladyship's most obedient and most humble servant,



David Hume.
