London April. 7. 1759

My Dear Sir

I have frequently thought & talk'd with our common Friends upon the Subject of your Letter. There always occurd to us several Difficulties with regard to every Subject we could propose. The antient Greek History has several Recommendations, particularly the good Authors from which it must be drawn: But this same Circumstance becomes an Objection, when more narrowly considerd: For what can you do in most places with these Authors, but transcribe & translate them? No Letters or State Papers from which you coud correct their Errors, or authenticate their Narration, or supply their Defects. Besides, Rollin is so well wrote with respect to Style, that with superficial People it passes for sufficient. There is one Dr Leland, who has lately wrote the Life of Philip of Macedon, which is one of the best Periods: The Book, they tell me, is perfectly well wrote; yet it has had such small Sale, & has so little excited the Attention of the Public, that the Author has Reason to think his Labour thrown away. I have not read the Book; but by the Size, I shoud judge it to be too particular. It is a pretty large Quarto; I think a Book of that Size sufficient for the whole History of Greece till the Death of Philip; and I doubt not but such a work woud be successful, notwithstanding all these discouraging Circumstances. The Subject is noble, & Rollin is by no means equal to it.

I own, I like still less your Project of the Age of Charles the V. That Subject is disjointed; & your Hero, who is the sole Connexion, is not very interesting. A competent Knowledge, at least, is requird of the State & Constitution of the Empire, of the several Kingdoms of Spain, of Italy, of the Low Countries; which it woud be the Work of half a Life to acquire. And tho' some Parts of the Story may be entertaining, there woud be many dry & barren, and the whole seems not to have any great Charms.

But I woud [not] willingly start Objections to these Schemes, unless I had something to propose, which wou'd be plausible; and I shall mention to you an Idea, which has sometimes pleas'd me, & which I had once entertaind Thoughts of attempting. You may observe, that among modern Readers Plutarch is in every Translation the chief Favorite of the Antients. Numberless Translations & numberless Editions have been made of him in all Languages; and no Translation has been so ill done as not to be successful. Tho' those who read the Originals never put him in Comparison either with Thucydides or Xenophon, he always attaches more the Reader in the Translation, a Proof that the Idea & Execution of his Work is in the main happy. Now I woud have you think of writing modern Lives, somewhat after that manner: Not to enter into a Detail of the Actions, but to mark the Manners of the great Personages, by domestic Stories, by remarkable Sayings, & by a general Sketch of the Lives & Adventures. You see that in Plutarch the Life of Caesar may be read in half an Hour: Were you to write the Life of Henry the 4th of France after that Model, you might pillage all the pretty Stories in Sully, & speak more of his Mistresses than of his Battles. In short you might gather the Flower of all modern History in this manner: The remarkable Popes, the Kings of Sweden, the great Discoverers & Conquerors of the new World, even the eminent Men of Letters might furnish you with Matter; and the quick Dispatch of every different Work woud encourage you to begin a new one. If one Volume were successful you might compose another at your Leizure; & the Field is unexhaustible. There are Persons, whom you woud meet with in the Corners of History, so to speak, who woud be a Subject of Entertainment quite unexpected; & as long as you live, you might give & receive Amusement by such a Work. Even your Son, if he had a Talent for History, wou'd succeed to your Subject, & his Son to him. I shall insist no farther on this Idea; because, if it strikes your Fancy, you will easily perceive all its Advantages; & by farther Thought all its Difficulties.

 Since I began to write this Letter, I have been told by General St clair, that he din'd with Lord Mansfield; with Lord Minto: When Lord Mansfield regreated that you shoud be confind to a Living in Scotland & shoud have your Leizure so broke by the Offices of your Function, that you had not Leizure to cultivate your Talents. I am sure, added he, that a Prebendary coud be procurd for him, in this Country, if you thought he woud accept of it. I immediatly went to Lord Minto to hear of farther Particulars; but missd him: I shall be sure to see him, before next Post; & shall write you farther about it, if he tells me of any thing particular. I approve of Elliots Advice about coming up; but this brings Matters nearer a Decision, & I woud have you open both Ears & both Hands to such a Proposal: Only the Matter must be kept a Secret; & you must step at once from the one Church into the other. I am perswaded Lord Hardwick woud second such a Scheme in your Favor, & many others lend their Assistance. You see I talk very loosely on this Subject at present; having never heard of the Matter till to day.

Nothing is expected of Hartes History of Gustavus Adolphus but a dull Compilation, which woud furnish a Biographer with good Materials. I am afraid Lord Clarendon will fall much below Expectation: The Style is bad & it contains few Anecdotes, as I am told.

I had a Letter from Paris, wherein I am told that the Rector of the Jesuites College is very angry with you for writing the Life of Mary without consulting 18 Volumes of MSS which they have in their College, regarding her times.

Pray order Millar to give me a Copy of you[r] new Edition; but without your paying for it: I sent mine to Helvetius. You have a right to ask for a few Copies every new Edition. I am Yours sincerely

David Hume

P.S.

I agree in your Opinion of the Siege of Aquileia.
