Dear Sir,

You shou'd have heard oftener from me this summer, if Mr V. had not told me frequently that he had written, or was going to write, to you; and as nothing remarkable has past amongst us, I left it to him to inform you of the common course of our affairs. He wrote you lately a very long letter, which he read to me, and from which I know not if you was able to collect the true state of our case, or if it will be necessary for me, in a few words, to tell you freely what judgement shou'd be form'd of it. I shall endeavour to give you my opinion, which I am certain would be yours, were you to pass a day amongst us. I am sorry, therefore, to inform you, that nothing now remains but to take care of your friend's person, in the most decent and convenient manner; and, with regard to his fortune, to be attentive that the great superplus, which will remain, after providing for these purposes, shou'd be employ'd by my Lady and your nephews, as the true proprietors, for their honour and advantage. No delicacy or nicety of management is now requisite to the execution of this scheme. The most simple word or command from my Lady or you is sufficient. That will carry an authority with it which nothing can resist.

I shall be impatient till I can have one evening's free and open conversation with you on all these points, and hope you will favour us with your company in your way South. I hope it will be soon. The present unhappy troubles may render you uncertain; if so, I shall write you more at large, with regard to a circumstance of management pretty material, which indeed cou'd be better discust if you were present, and for that reason, I do not now enter upon it.

Mr Vincent, in his last, made you a proposal for my advantage, which I beg'd him not to do. I must now beg you to answer him in general terms of esteem for me (if I am so happy as to deserve these sentiments from you), but to delay all such schemes for farther consideration. I desire no greater advantages than those I reap at present for my attendance on your friend. I shall only be ambitious of enjoying them with honour, and the good opinion of you and my Lady Marchioness.

I wish earnestly I cou'd join another more agreeable task to this I have undertaken, — the inspection of your nephews' education; where the little I know of books or the world, being sown on a proper soil, might give me the satisfaction of seeing some effects of my care and attention.

Please favour me with a letter as soon as consists with your convenience; and direct to me at Weldehall, to the care of W. Thompson, at the Chequer at Colney, Barnet Bag. There is no need of any precaution with regard to your friend, and your letter will come more readily to hand this way than any other. I am, Dear Sir, with great regard, your much oblig'd humble servant,

David Hume.

Weldehall September 19, 1745.
