Dear Baron

If I were not the most lazy Person in the world at writing — I mean of Letters, I certainly shoud have taken an Opportunity to express to you my Indignation at the strange, tho' long expected, Issue of your great Cause. I was present at it, and surely never was present at more scandalous Proceedings. If I was positive before, concerning the Justice of your Cause (and you know I was always sufficiently positive) I am much more so at present: Because formerly, tho' I cou'd not conceive how it was possible to break in upon the Solidity of your Proofs, yet, hearing frequent hints that Lord Mansfield was to be against you, I cou'd not but remain somewhat in suspence, and suspect that he might perceive some Flaw in them, unimagin'd by me. But when I heard his pleading, and found on what infamous Topics, he rested his Judgement, I then knew that no thing farther cou'd be said, and saw the whole Mystery, which is, in the most egregious Degree, a Mystery of Iniquity. He, as well as the Chancellor, had no other Ressource but to cry out perpetually, Subornation of Perjury, for which there is not the least Ground of Suspicion, and of which all the Douglas Lawyers before the Court of Session, both in their pleadings and Memorials, were entirely silent. Almost without a Pretence, he puff'd off, at one Breath, fifteen Witnesses, who prove the Enlevement of Mignon's Child to have been about the middle of July, and he calld them all perjur'd, tho' it appears certainly, that the first time Andrew Stuart saw them, was in the presence of four Gentlemen of Character: By a like Sweep, he carryd off at once eight unexceptionable Witnesses, in order to re-habilitate Mrs Hewit: He pronounc'd Godfrey and his Wife perjur'd; tho' their Evidence is irrefragably confirm'd, by every Circumstance of the fact, and by the absolute Necessity which people in their Situation lie under of keeping Books in the manner which they explain. But I need not run over points which have been fully related to you: I shall only say in a few words, that never, in one Instant, was so evidently display'd the Imbecillity of Men and their Villainy; the first in the Approbation of the Peers to such Arguments, and the second in the advancing of them by the two Law Lords.

What renders the Affair more vexatious, is, that the Question, tho' not in the least intricate, is so complicated, that it will never be review'd by the public, who, sway'd by Compassion and by a few popular Topics, are entirely satisfy'd with the Decision, and will scarce ever be perswaded to give the Matter a Revisal. The only Chance for bringing it up again, woud be by the Publication of the Speeches with a few Notes; but I despair of seeing so compleat a Copy of them as will not be disownd by the Speakers. It was to this Prejudice of the Public, together with the Complicateness of the Cause, that Mansfield trusted; and he thought, that, with the greatest Security in the world, he coud indulge his Prejudices, which, from the beginning, had been violent against you. I am afraid he has judg'd but too well, of the Nature of Mankind.

No body, Dear Baron, can be more sensible than I am of the Vexation, which you must feel, from this unfortunate Issue of your Labours and from the insolent Triumph of your Enemies; and I heartily sympathize with you upon it. But I own, there is another Person, whose Condition affects me still more sensibly; it is that of poor Andrew Stuart, who had conducted this Affair with singular Integrity and Ability, and who yet must lie under such unmerited Reproach, and for aught I can see without remedy. Pulteney's Behaviour to him is noble, but is not sufficient; and yet I know not what farther can possibly be done, to throw the Infamy where it ought so justly to be laid. I see his heart is crushd by this cruel Usage; and I own, that never any Incident, which passd within my Knowledge, seems so justly the Object of Regret and Indignation.

You must allow me, however, to distinguish in what I said a little above, that this Decision will never be review'd by the Public. I speak only of England, where there are always so many public and important Affairs in Agitation, that a private Cause must soon fall into Oblivion. But in Scotland, this has become, in a manner, a public Cause, and all Men of Sense are so much agreed in one Opinion, that Truth, supported by the excellent Writings on that Side, must at last triumph, over Prejudice, Clamour, and Nonsense. I know, that you have the Good sense to wait with Patience till that time; and as your Conduct, from the very Nature of your Situation, is without all Reproach, you can the more easily acquiesce in that Resolution.

My Compliments to Mrs Mure and all your Family; not forgetting the two young Gentlemen, whom you have withdrawn from us. I am with great Sincerity Dear Baron

 Your affectionate Friend and Servant

David Hume.

Park Place 30 of March 1769.
