Dear Sir

I happend yesterday to visit a Person three hours after a Copy of Ferguson's Performance was open'd for the first time in London. It was by Lord Mansfield. I accept this Omen of its future Success. He was extremely pleas'd with it; said it was very agreeable and perfectly well wrote; assur'd me, that he wou'd not stop a Moment till he had finishd it; and recommended it strongly to the Perusal of the Archbishop of Yorke who was present. I have wrote the same Article of Intelligence to Ferguson himself; but as he is the likeliest Person in the World to suppress it, I thought it safest to put it into your hands, in order to circulate it.

General Conway told me on my Arrival, that Rousseau had made an Application to him, thro' the Canal of Mr Davenport, to have his Pension granted to him. The General's Answer was, that I was to be in town in a few days; and without my Consent and even full Approbation he woud take no Step in that Affair. You may believe, that I exhorted him to do so charitable an Action. I wish he may not find a Difficulty with the King, who is very much prejudicd against Rousseau. This Step of my old Friend confirms the Suspicion which I always entertain'd, that he thought he had Interest enough to obtain the Pension of himself, and that he had only pick'd a Quarrel with me in order to free himself from the humiliating Burthen of Gratitude towards me. His Motives, therefore, were much blacker than many seem to apprehend them.

A Gentleman told me, that he heard from the French Ambassador, that His Most Christian Majesty had given an Arret prohibiting under the severest Penalties the printing, vending or dispersing any Paper of Rousseau or his Partizans against me. I dine with the Ambassador to day; so shall know the Truth of the Matter, which scarce appears credible. It is surely very honourable for me; but yet will occasion that strange Man to complain, that he is oppressd with Power all over the World. I am Dear Dr Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 24th of Feby 1767

Mrs. Montague desires her Compliments to you.
