Paris August 1765.

Dear Brother

I am now to inform you of another pretty rapid Change in my Fortune. Lord Hertford, on his Arrival in London, found great Difficulty of executing his Intentions in my Favour. The Cry is loud against the Scots, and the present Ministry are unwilling to support any of our Countrymen, lest they bear the Reproach of being connected with Lord Bute. For this Reason Lord Hertford departed from his Project, which he did the more readily, as he knew I had a great Reluctance to the Office of Secretary for Ireland, which requires a Talent for speaking in public to which I was never accustomd. I must also have kept a kind of open House, & have drunk & carousd with the Irish, a Course of living to which I am as little accustom'd. The Duke of Bedford, to whom I mentiond these Objections, thought them very solid. I think myself at present much better provided for by a Pension of 400 a Year for Life, which Lord Hertford has procurd me. He also writes me that an Apartment is fitting up for me in the Castle of Dublin: I shall go thither as soon as I can leave France, which will not be till the End of October or beginning of November, on the Arrival of the Duke of Richmond. Mean-while, I am chargé des affaires d'Angleterre a la cour de France, which is the Title under which you must write to me, if you favour me with a Letter.

Lord Hertford had another additional Project for my Advantage in Ireland. The Keeper of the black Rod is a very genteel Office which yields about 900 Pounds during the Session. He propos'd, as I cannot be present on the opening of the Parliament, to give that Office to another, who woud officiate and woud be content with 300. But I declind this Offer, not as unjust, but as savouring of Greediness & Rapacity.

Please to write all these particulars to Katy except the last & seal & send to her the enclosd. I am charmd with the Accounts I hear of Josey from all hands. Yours sincerely

David Hume

There was a kind of Fray in London, as I am told, upon Lord Hertfords declaring his Intentions in my Favour. The Princess Amelia said, that she thought the Affair might beeasily accommodated: Why may not Lord Hertford give a Bishopric to Mr Hume
