St Andrews Square, 27 June 1772

Done ere you bade: I receivd a Letter from Clason himself, and immediately wrote to Lord Chesterfield. Baron Mure told me of the good Behaviour of Mr Clason, in attending Sir Thomas Wallace, of which I also informd his Lordship. I hope the young Man will meet with Success.

We are here in a very melancholy Situation: Continual Bankruptcies, universal Loss of Credit, and endless Suspicions. There are but two standing Houses in this Place, Mansfield's and the Couttses: For I comprehend not Cummin, whose dealings were always very narrow. Mansfield has pay'd away 40.000 pounds in a few days; but it is apprehended, that neither he nor any of them can hold out till the End of next Week, if no Alteration happen. The Case is little better in London. It is thought, that Sir George Colebroke must soon stop; and even the Bank of England is not entirely free from Suspicion. Those of Newcastle, Norwich and Bristol are said to be stopp'd: The Thistle Bank has been reported to be in the same Condition: The Carron Company is reeling, which is one of the greatest Calamities of the whole; as they gave Employment to near 10.000 People. Do these Events any-wise affect your Theory? Or will it occasion the Revisal of any Chapters?

Of all the Sufferers I am the most concern'd for the Adams, particularly John. But their Undertakings were so vast that nothing coud support them: They must dismiss 3000 Workmen, who, comprehending the Materials, must have expended above 100.000 a Year. They have great Funds; but if these must be dispos'd of, in a hurry and to disadvantage, I am afraid the Remainder will amount to little or nothing. People's [Compa]ssion, I see, was exhausted for John in his last Calamity, and every body asks why he incurr'd any more hazards. But his Friendship for his Brothers is an Apology; tho' I believe he has a projecting Turn of his own. To me, the Scheme of the Adelphi always appeared so imprudent, that my wonder is, how they cou'd have gone on so long.

If Sir George Colebroke stop, it will probably disconcert all the Plans of our Friends, as it will diminish their Patron's Influence; which is a new Misfortune.

On the whole, I believe, that the Check given to our exorbitant and ill grounded Credit will prove of Advantage in the long run, as it will reduce people to more solid and less sanguine Projects, and at the same time introduce Frugality among the Merchants and Manufacturers: What say you? Here is Food for your Speculation.

Shall we see you again this Summer?
