Dear Sir

I have now been settled in Edinburgh near two months; and so much to my Satisfaction, that there is no chance of my ever leaving it, during the few Years that I can propose to live. Among other Occupations, or rather Amusements, in which I employ myself, I am giving a new and very attentive Perusal of the last Edition of my History; and hope at last to bring it as near Correctness as possible. I tell you this, that if ever you have occasion to make a new Edition of that work, you may apply to me, or, if I be dead, to my Heirs, in order to print from this corrected Copy.

This Quarto Edition is very beautiful; but it is disfigur'd by one Circumstance, which I am at a loss to account for: Some Pages and some Paragraphs are visibly much looser and opener printed than others; insomuch that there is often a Difference of two or three Lines in a Page. As it was done from a printed Copy, I cannot imagine what was the Compositor's fancy for this Irregularity nor what he gain'd by it. Please give him Injunction to guard against it in the new Edition of my Essays, which, I hope, is in forwardness.

Before you publish the Quarto Edition please send a Copy of all the ten Volumes in boards to Lady Aylesbury in little Warwick Street, another to Lady Holderness in Hertford Street: Send a Copy of the History in 8 Volumes to Lord Hertford in Grosvenor Street: The two Volumes of Essays send with my Compliments to Lord Bathurst in St. James's Square. These make three Copies of that Set: A Copy went abroad. Please to send me two Copies to Edinburgh with the first Opportunity, which will compleat the Number, that I lay claim to on any new Edition. By the bye I hope the Copy of the History has been sent to Smithoff Bookseller in Rotterdam, who is translating it. If not, be so good as to forward it.

I think you grow every day madder in England: There is a Prospect that that worthless Generation will soon bring themselves to ruin, by their own folly.

Send me about the new Year an Account of what I owe you for binding these Copies in boards; and also for the Chronicle, which supplies me with all I want to know of the present Age.

 I am Dear Strahan 
Your most obedient humble Servant



David Hume

Edinburgh James's Court. 16 of October 1769.
