Dear Sir

I know not whether I ought to congratulate you upon the success of your elections where you prevailed so unexpectedly. I think the present times are so calamitous, & our future prospect so dismal, that it is a misfortune to have any concern in public affairs, which one cannot redress & where it is difficult to arrive at a proper degree of insensibility or philosophy, as long as one is in the scene. You know my sentiments were always a little gloomy on that head; & I am sorry to observe, that all accidents (besides the natural course of events) turn out against us. What a surprizing misfortune is this of Bergen-op-zoom which is almost unparalleled in modern history. I hear the Dutch troops, besides their common cowardice & ill discipline are seized with an universal panic. This winter may perhaps decide the fate of Holland. And then where are we? I shall not be much disappointed if this prove the last Parliament, worthy the name, we shall ever have in Britain. I cannot therefore congratulate you upon your having a sent in it: I can only congratulate you upon the universal joy and satisfaction it gave to every body; and this popularity I doubt not but you will endeavour to preserve as more valuable than any thing that politics can give you, especially in the present times. I have some thoughts of taking advantage of this short interval of liberty that is indulged us and of printing the Philosophical Essays I left in your hands. Our friend, Harry, is against this, as indiscreet. But in the first place, I think I am too deep engaged to think of a retreat. In the second place, I see not what bad consequences follow, in the present age, from the character of an infidel; especially if a man's conduct be in other respects irreproachable. What is your opinion?

You told me, that it would be requisite to give you a power to receive from the Navy Office that small sum for which I left a ticket with you. I have enclosed one which I hope will be sufficient. I should ask your pardon for the trouble but as it will be easy for you to desire some of your old friends about these offices to inform you when the ship is paid off, I have made the less scruple.

I have no thoughts of being in London this winter, because Col. Abercromby thinks it will not be requisite in order to solicit my half-pay. The Colonel has small hopes of success in that matter. You will see him sometimes in the House, where he will inform you of the obstacles that occur. Hume-Campbell without my asking it offered to lend me his assistance, in surmounting these obstacles. I thanked him, but desired him not to move, till the Colonel should inform me of the proper time & persons to whom he should apply. The Colonel thinks it depends altogether on the Secretary at War, who seems to be inexorable.

As you travel with Mrs Oswald I cannot desire you to go so far out of your way as to come to this place: But if you would inform me of your motions I would wait on you with pleasure at Berwick. Direct to me to the care of Mr William Stowe, Merchant. For by that means, I shall receive your letter presently. Otherwise, it will be some days; & I miss you.

You sent Sir James Johnstone a copy of Grotius, which he sent to me, desiring me to deliver it to you: But I had not an opportunity; & therefore left it to Fraser, who will deliver it to you. I am Dear Sir, Yours most sincerely

David Hume.

Ninewells Octr 2d 1747.
