[3, 4, or 5 August 1764.]

I could never yet accuse myself, dear Madam, of hypocrisy or dissimulation; and I was surely guilty of these vices in the highest degree, if I wrote you a letter, which carried with it any marks of indifference. What I said in particular, I cannot entirely recollect, but I well remember in general what I felt, which was a great regard and attachment to you, not increased indeed (for that was scarce possible) but rendered more agreeable to myself, from the marks you had given me of your friendship and confidence: I adhere to these; I will never, but with my life, be persuaded to part with the hold which you have been pleased to afford me: you may cut me to pieces, limb by limb; but like those pertinacious animals of my country, I shall expire still attached to you, and you will in vain attempt to get free. For this reason, Madam, I set at defiance all those menaces, which you obliquely throw out against me. Do you seriously think, that it is at present in your power to determine whether I shall be your friend or not? In every thing else your authority over me is without control. But with all your ingenuity, you will scarce contrive to use me so ill, that I shall not still better bear it: and after all, you will find yourself obliged, from pity, or generosity, or friendship, to take me back into your service. At least, this will probably be the case, till you find one who loves you more sincerely and values you more highly; which with all your merit, I fancy it will not be easy for you to do. I know, that I am here furnishing you with arms against myself: you may be tempted to tyrannize over me, in order to try how far I will practise my doctrine of passive obedience: but I hope also that you will hold this soliloquy to yourself: This poor fellow, I see, is resolved never to leave me: let me take compassion on him; and endeavour to render our intercourse as agreeable to him and as little burdensome to myself as possible. If you fall, Madam, into this way of thinking, as you must at last, I ask no farther; and all your menaces will vanish into smoke.

Good God! how much am I fallen from the airs which I at first gave myself! You may remember, that a little after our personal acquaintance, I told you, that you was obliged à soutenir la gageure, and could not in decency find fault with me, however I should think proper to behave myself. Now, I throw myself at your feet, and give you nothing but marks of patience and long-suffering and submission. But I own, that matters are at present upon a more proper and more natural footing; and long may they remain so.

I went to Villers-Cotterets, as I told you, on Sunday last, and I stayed till Tuesday. Madame de Vierville arrived on Monday evening, whom I questioned about the manner of life at Staure. Nothing could be more ravishing, more delightful than her description of it, and of the person who inspired gaiety and amenity into all around her. And can you treat me with contempt because I am willing to be that person's slave? For, let me tell you, there is an expression in your letter against slavery, which I take a little to myself, as said against me; but I still maintain

Nunquam libertas gratior extat 
Quam sub rege pio.



Pray, go to your Latin dictionary to interpret this passage: you will find that regina, if it would agree with the measure, would suit much better with the sense.

What can I say, dear Madam, to the arrangement which you are pleased to communicate to me? Can I think of it without satisfaction, and without vexation? I shall be in Paris on the 11th or 12th of the month, perhaps a day sooner or a day later. I shall watch the opportunity, and endeavour that you shall not pass without my paying my respects to you. The party you propose after that, does me great honour, and still greater pleasure. But, in the present state of our affairs, I cannot promise that it will be possible for me to be above a day absent. And, to add to my embarrassments, there is just now arrived in France a very ancient and very intimate friend of mine, Mr Elliot, who is wholly a stranger there, and whom I cannot entirely neglect. He is justly regarded as one of the ablest and most considerable men among us; he was my friend long before I knew anything of the name of Boufflers, except that of the famous and virtuous Maréchal of the last reign. Is it not strange, that I should think my attention to him an incumbrance on the present occasion? I know not by what accident I did not receive your letter till yesterday. I will not begin a new sheet, lest I be tempted to give you eight pages. Adieu, adieu.
