Dear Sir Gilbert

I send you my Letter enclosd to Mr Stewart, which I hope is calculated to encourage a young Man of Merit, without overstraining the Compliment. It were better, however, for him, and for every body, to pursue, in Preference to the idle Trade of Writing, some other lawful Occupation, such as Cheating like an Attorney, Quacking like a Physician, Canting & Hypocrising like a Parson &c &c &c. It is for very little Purpose to go out of the common Track. Does he expect to make Men wiser? A very pretty Expectation truly!

I fancy the Ministry will remain; tho' surely their late Remissness or Ignorance or Pusillanimity ought to make them ashamd to show their Faces, were it even at Newmarket. These are fine doings in America. O! how I long to see America and the East Indies revolted totally & finally, the Revenue reduc'd to half, public Credit fully discredited by Bankruptcy, the third of London in Ruins, and the rascally Mob subdu'd. I think I am not too old to despair of being Witness to all these Blessings.

I approve of your farming Scheme; notwithstanding the Expence: Tho' your Situation, as well for Markets as Means of Improvement, is not advantageous. My Brother's Advice may be of Use; but you are always to remember that he is of the Sect of the Medecin tant pis. Had he possess'd Enterprise proportiond to his Industry, and Skill, he might have gone far in that way.

I continue my parasitical Practices, that is, of dining at all the great Tables that remain in London. We are likely to be plagu'd with this King of Denmark; tho' not so much as formerly with Canute the Great. I have some Thoughts of paying a visit to France this Autumn; that is, if I can collect enough of Resolution to leave the present place of Abode.

When I wrote last, I did not know that Lady Elliot had elop'd. That Practice continues very fashionable here; and it is to be hop'd, will spread itself more and more every day.

I thought Sir David had been the only Christian that coud write English on the other Side of the Tweed: I did not think of Balfour: It is very true: He woud fain, I see, be candid, and civil, as in his other Book; if his Zeal for the House of the Lord woud permit him.

Lord Bute certainly sets out this day sennight, and it is said, is in a very bad State of Health.

Lord Chatham is a greater Paradox than ever: Is seen at home by no human Creature, absolutely by none! Rides twenty Miles every day: Is seen on the Road and appears in perfect good Health: But will now speak to no Creature he meets. I am much perswaded all is Quackery; he is not mad; that is, no madder than usual.

 22 of July 1768
