I have wrote to Mr Oswald by this Post, in order to promote an Intimacy & Friendship betwixt you. I exhort you to persevere in your Intention of cultivating a Friendship with him. You cannot possibly find a Man of more Worth, of a gentler Disposition or better Understanding. There are infinite Advantages attending an Intimacy with such Persons; among which this is not the least, as far as I can judge by my own Experience, that I always derive from it an additional Motive to preserve my Character for Honour & Integrity; because I know that nothing else can preserve their Friendship. Shou'd I give you an Exhortation of this kind, you might think me very impertinent; tho really you ought to ascribe it more to my Friendship than my Diffidence. Tis impossible ever to think Ourselves secure enough, where our Concern is extremely great; and tho' I dare be confident of your good Conduct as of my own, yet you must also allow me to be diffident of it, as I should be of my own. When I consider your Disposition to Virtue, cultivated by Letters, together with your Moderation, I cannot doubt of your Steddiness. The Delicacy of the Times does not diminish this Assurance, but only dashes it with a few Fears, which rise in me without my Approbation & against my Judgement. Let a strict Frugality be the Guardian of your Virtue; & preserve your Frugality, by a close Application to Business & Study. Nothing woud so effectually throw you into the Lumber & Refuse of the House as your Departure from your Engagements at this time; as a contrary Behaviour will secure your own good Opinion, & that of all Mankind. These Advantages are not too dearly purchas'd even by the Loss of Fortune; but it belongs to your Prudence & Frugality to procure them, without paying so dear a Purchase for them. I say no more; & hope you will ascribe what I have said, not to the Pedagogue or even to the Philosopher but to the Friend. I make Profession of being such with regard to you; & desire you to consider me as such no longer, then I shall appear to be a Man of Honour. Yours

D. Hume.

 Jany. 26 [1743].

Mr. Carre either has wrote or is to write to L. Marchmont about you
