Lisle Street Leicester Field 25 of July 1766 [commencé vers le 15]



Tho' I have great Reason, Madam, to be ashamed, when I am prevented by you, in writing, I own, that your Letter gave me a sensible Pleasure: I am happy in retaining some Share in your Memory and Friendship; and I hope, that the same Disposition will incline you to have Indulgence for me in my very culpable Silence. But my Indolence in this particular is unaccountable even to myself. You know, I lived almost with M. de Montigny and his Family and that there are no Persons in the World for whom I have a greater Value: Yet except one letter to Mde Dupré, I have given them no Testimony of my Gratitude or Esteem. I cannot possibly tell a stronger Instance of my ill Behaviour in this particular.



You desire an Account of my Transactions with M. Rousseau, which are certainly the most unexpected and most extraordinary in the World. I shall endeavour to abridge them as much as possible. It is needless to give you a long Detail of my Behaviour towards him while he lived here and in this Neighbourhood, the Marks of Affection and Attachment which I gave him, my Compliance with all his Humours, my constant Occupation in his Service. I was blamed by all my Friends for giving him so much of my Time and Care and was laughed at by others. All the Letters which I wrote to any part of the World, were honourable and friendly for him; and he, on his part, gave me the warmest Testimonies of Gratitude, seemed transported whenever he saw me, and after he went to the Country, he wrote me Letters, which I have happily preserved, and which contain Expressions of Friendship that even the Energy of his Pen cou'd not carry farther. I settled him in a most beautiful Country,  with a very honest Gentleman of about 7000 Pounds Sterling a Year, and who at my Entreaty takes 30 Pounds a year of board for him, & his Gouvernante. The Gentleman himself lives at about 20 Miles distance  from him; so that every thing seemed, as if it were contrived to make  our philosopher happy and easy. I was also very fortunate in my Negotiations for his Pension. I first consulted himself: he gave his Consent: He wrote the same thing to Lord Mareschal, I than applyed to the Ministers, particularly to General Conway, Brother to Lord Hertford: I was favoured by their compliance;  only on Condition, that the affair shoud remain a Secret. In introduced Rousseau to them, who thanked them for their Goodness: The Affair was not brought to a full Conclusion before he went to the Country by reason of General Conway's Sickness; but was soon after finished. I informed Rousseau: He wrote to M. Conway that he cou'd not take the Pension as long as the King was resolved to keep it a Secret. I then desired M. Rousseau to recollect, that he was informed of this Circumstance from the beginning, and that he not only agreed to but was pleased with it; and I entreated him to return to the same way of thinking. I received no Answer; upon which I concluded that he was ashamed to write to me, and being determined to consumate my good Work, I applyed again to the Ministers and prevailed on them to depart from this Circumstance of the Secrecy. I very joyfully informed Rousseau of my Success; and by the Return of the Post, I received an Answer, by which he informed me, that I am the greatest Villain alive, le plus noir de tous les hommes; that I conducted him into England with no other View than to dishonour him; and he henceforth renounces all Friendship and Commerce  with me. At the same time, he most impudently asserts to my face the grossest and most impudent Lye in the World. This wonderful Incident opened my Eyes which had been long shut: I then found, that he wanted to bring on the Offer of a Pension merely that he might have the Ostentation of refusing it; and that he sought by a pretended Quarrel to cancel all his Obligations to me, Being also tired of the Security and Tranquillity of England, and finding himself entirely forgot in the Country, he wished to draw the Attention of the Public by a Fray with me. I answered him however with great Temper and Decency: I supposed that some Lyar and Calumniator had accused me to him: I entreated I conjured, I urged him to come to Particulars, and to tell me any the most minute Circumstance in which I had been wanting  to him . I received no Answer for above three Weeks, tho' the Post cou'd have brought me the return of my Letter in four days. It was then I broke out, and told the Affair to my Friends: I needed but to have told it to one Person: The Account flew like Wild-fire all over London in a Moment. Everybody's Surprize at his Ingratitude to me, whose Friendship towards him  had been so generally remarked; the Singularity of the Man and of his Conduct; his Celebrity itself and any Degree of Reputation I may have attained; all these Circumstances made the Story the Subject of general Conversation. I find the same thing has happened at Paris from my Letter to the Baron, which I never desired him to conceal. I have also sent to M. d'Alembert a Copy of  Rousseau's Letters and of mine. I had many Reasons for not concealing the Affair. I know Rousseau is writing very busily at present, and I have Grounds to think that he intends to fall equally on Voltaire & on me. He himself had told me, that he was composing his Memoirs, in which Justice wou'd be equally done to his own Character, to that of his Friends, and to that of his Enemies. As I had passed so wonderfully from the former Class to the latter, I must expect to make a fine Figure; and what, thought I, if these Memoirs be published after his Death or after mine? In the latter Case, there will be no-one to vindicate my Memory: In the former Case, my Vindication will have much less Authenticity. For these Reasons I had once entertained Thoughts of giving the whole instantly to the public: but more mature Reflection made me depart from this Resolution, and I am glad to find, that you concur  in the same opinion.



When I had come to this Part of my Narration, I receive unexpectedly a Letter from Rousseau which had been extorted from him by the Authority of Mr Davenport, the Gentleman with whom he lives. It consists of 18 Folio Pages, in a very small hand, and would make a large Pamphlet. Never was there such a heap of Frenzy and Wickedness united.  I shall give you a few Extracts from it, to satisfy your Curiosity. He says, that d'Alembert, Horace Walpole, and I enter'd into a Conspiracy together at Paris to ruin him; that the first Operation of the Conspirators was to write a feigned Letter in the King of Prussia's Name, which was compos'd by M. d'Alembert and fathered by M. Walpole; that young Tronchin, the Son of his capital Enemy, lodged in the same house with me, and that he observed my Landlady to look coldly on him (Rousseau) one day as he met her in the Passage; that I live also in Friendship with Lord Lyttleton, who is his Enemy; that the People of England were at first very fond of him, but by Mr Walpole's Intrigues and mine were rendered very indifferent about him; and that the first Discovery which he made of my Treachery, was at Senlis, where we lay together in the same Chamber, and where I spoke aloud,  as he supposes, in my Sleep and betray'd all my black Designs against him. He owns, however, that before he left London, his Doubts went no further than Suspicions; but rose to Certainty after he was settled in the Country. For first D'Alembert's Letter was published in the English Newspapers; and he is sure, from internal Conviction, it was done by me. Secondly There was published, in one of our Journals, a Paper reflecting on him, which for the same Reason he ascribes to me. Thirdly There was another Piece published in another News Paper, which he believes also to be mine. Fourthly M. Voltaire in his satyrical Letter published at London, does not mention that I conducted him into England: Therefore I am in the Conspiracy with Voltaire. This is the Substance of the Letter: But wou'd you believe it, that in a Piece so full of Frenzy, Malice, Impertinence & Lyes, there are many strokes of Genius and Eloquence; and the Conclusion of it is remarkably sublime. The whole is wrote with great Care, and I fancy he intends it for the Press. This gives me no manner of Concern.  The Letter will really be a high Panegyric on me; because there is no one who will not distinguish between the Facts which he acknowledges, and the Chimaeras which his Madness & Malice have invented: he even says, that, if my Services were sincere, my Conduct was  above human Nature; if they were the Result of a Conspiracy against him, it was below. I own, that I was somewhat anxious about the Affair till I received this mad Letter; but now I am quite at my ease. I do not however find, that, in other Respects, he is madder than usual, nor is his Conduct towards me much worse than toward M. Diderot about seven Years ago. I beg my Compliments to Monsr de Menieres to whom I wish you would explain this Letter. The President des Brosses can read it in the Original: Please mark to him my Respects. I coud wish also that Monr de Montigny saw it. I have not room to subscribe myself regularly as I ought

David Hume
