Dear Sir

I find it has been often objected to My natural History of Religion, that it wants order. That I may obviate that Objection, I am resolv'd to prefix the enclosd Contents to it, if the Volume be not yet finish'd, which I hope it is not. These are the Titles of the several Sections. I shoud likewise desire, that the Title of each Section be prefixd to the Section. This will help the Reader to see the Scope of the Discourse. If you make a whole Leaf of a Title Page to the Natural History, the Summary of the Contents may be printed on it: If you do not, it may be printed at the End of the natural History.

I must also desire you to print the enclosd Advertisement. I fancy the most commodious Place for it will be at the End of the general Contents of the whole Volume.

If it be not too late, please also to make this slight Alteration in the 4 Dissertations. P. 94 l 7. read and must augment. P. 216. l. 11. for Dissertation read Essay. But I am afraid this last correction comes too late. P. 229. l. 16. for Dissertation read Essay.

I have begun a new Work some time ago, tho' I did not fix my Resolutions of persevering, till I shoud find, that I was pleas'd [with] it. It is the writing the History of England from the Accession of Henry the VII. I wish I had from the first begun at that Period. It is really the Commencement of modern History; and I shoud have obviated many Objections to my History of the Stuarts, by taking Matters so high. However this retrogade  Motion is not unusual. Tacitus wrote his Annals after his History; tho' they treat of a preceding Period. I do not however preclude myself from the Purpose of writing the Period after the Revolution, by my undertaking this Work; but shall be somewhat advanc'd before I go to London. I have more Command of Books here, than I cou'd easily have had in that Place; at least such Books as suit this Subject. For it is much to be lamented that there are no public Libraries in London.

I am extremely pleasd with the Correctness of this Edition of my philosophical Writings, so far as it has gone. I have not seen any thing better executed in that particular. The Type & Paper are also very good. I am Dear Sir

 Your most humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinr 25 May 1757

I have receivd eleven Sheets & shall have an Index ready very soon.

I have wrote to Mr Millar of a new Epic Poem that is to be publishd this Week in Edinburgh: It is calld the Epigoniad, & is wrote by one Mr Wilkie, a Minister. It is a Production of great Genius. I recommend it to you to read it when it comes to London. If you like it you will naturally speak of it among your Acquaintance.
