Dear Sir

You were never worse informd in your Life. Not only I have never wrote a Line of the English History since the Revolution, but I have not read one Page with a View to it, and have but a distant Prospect of ever undertaking it. One of my greatest Inducements to think of it was your former Letter, from which I had reason to hope, that we shoud so soon see your History of the Duke of Marlborough, and shou'd receive so many new Lights with regard to K. William's & Q. Anne's Reigns. I did indeed imagine, that it would have been in the Press before this time. You have certainly every Inducement to the Publication of that Work: Not only the Peace is concluded, which you thought necessary to the procuring some farther Materials; but Faction is in a manner extinguished, at least the Factions of Whig and Tory; and Truth may now hope for a favourable Reception from the Public.

I am sensible, that there passd many extraordinary Events during the latter End of Q. Anne's Reign, especially in the Councils & Cabals of the Whigs. I have heard several particulars of that kind, very well attested, which yet have never come to the Knowledge of the Public: But I believe the History of all Periods is somewhat imperfect, and that many important Particulars are for ever buryd in Oblivion. Besides why may not you & I hope to get authentic Vouchers and Documents of these Facts; you especially, who have resided in London, who have taken Journeys to Holland & to France for that Purpose, who have convers'd with so many Persons engag'd in the Events, and who have employ'd Yourself so many Years upon one Period. I always laid my Account with your going before me in that Road: You were too far advanced to run any risque of being overtaken: And I expected, that, as I shoud lose the Honour of the first Discovery, I shoud at least be spard a good deal of the Trouble attending the Research. I wonder indeed at your Dilatoriness, where every inducement of Reputation & Profit contributes to impell you: And I own, that, if it were in my Power to stimulate you, by pretending, tho' contrary to the Truth, that I were engag'd in the Work, I shoud be tempted to make use of that Artifice in order to rowse you from your Lethargy and Indolence.

Meanwhile, instead of abusing you, as I am inclind to do, for your Indolence, I recollect, that I have much greater Reason to thank you for the Pains you have taken on my Account. You cou'd not possibly have laid me under a more sensible Obligation, than by running over these Volumes of my History, & by marking any Errors, whether of Expression or Thought, which occurd in them. I am extremely impatient to have this Copy in my hands, and shall be much beholden to you, if you will send it me by the first Opportunity; or if none offer soon, you will be so good as to sent it to Mr Millar, who will convey it to me, either by the Waggon, or by the first Ship, which carries down a Parcel of his to the Edinburgh Booksellers. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obliged humble Servant,

David Hume

Edinburgh 
 7 April 1763
