Dear Sir

I find at last that the Mistake has proceeded from my own Want of Clearness, which has occasiond a new Mistake. I ought to have repeated the Title of the Sheets I wanted in my last Letter; and in that Case you would not have sent me the enclos'd, instead of Sheet B of the first Volume.

I like much better your publishing in Volumes than in Numbers: Tho' this last Method has been often practic'd, it has somewhat of a quackish Air, which you have always avoided as well as myself. I know not what to do for Frontispieces: I have no manner of Skill myself in designing; and am not able to point out the most proper Subjects nor the Method of executing them. On the whole, I think it an Expence which may be spar'd; but if you continue in the Resolution of having some such Ornament, I could write a Letter to Allan Ramsay, who, I hope, would take the Pains of directing the Engraver. As to my Head, I think that also a superfluous Expence; and as there is no Picture of me in London, I know not how it can be executed. With Submission to you, would it not be better to throw these Charges on the Paper & Print? I do not imagine, because these Ornaments have help'd off the Sale of Smollets History, that mine would be the better for them. These Arts are seldom practic'd twice with the same Success.

I do not lose View of my Design to continue my History, at least for two Reigns more: But I question whether Party Prejudices with regard to me are as yet sufficiently subsided to enable me to carry on that Work without meeting with Repulses & Disgusts from those, who have the Materials in their Power, which must serve for the Foundation of my Narrative. A little farther time will, I hope, operate that Effect.

I rejoice heartily in your Recovery: I hope your Indisposition was nothing more than this Cold which has been so epidemical in London, and is beginning to spread here.

I believe you once askd me a Question with regard to Dr Robertson's History, which I neglected to answer. The Dr says it will be ready for the Press by the Winter after the next. He thinks it will make two Volumes in Quarto. I hope it will be as successful as his last Performance.

I remove my House this Week to James's Court. Please send the enclosd to Mr Strahan: And remember me to Mrs Millar. I am Dr Sir

 Yours sincerely

David Hume.

Edinburgh 
 17 May 1762
