Dear Brother

I write to you because it is long since we had any Correspondence, tho‘ I have nothing particular to say to you. The time of your going to Edinburgh approaches, which makes a great Change in your way of Life, and will naturally make Yourself, as well as all your Friends, anxious about the Issue of it. However, I cannot but think, that you will there live more cheerfully with all your Children about you, than in the Country during the Winter, when your Boys were absent. At first only, as your Spirits are not very strong at present, you may feel uneasy at the Alteration; as you are at present somewhat apprehensive about it.

As to myself I pass my time as I told you, in an agreeable enough kind of Business, and not too much of it. My Income also is at present very considerable, over 1100 Pounds a Year, of which I shall not spend much above the half. Notwithstanding, I sometimes wish to be out of Employment, in order to prosecute my History, to which every body urges me. When Mr Conway was on the Point of resigning, I desird him to propose to the King that I might afterwards have the Liberty of inspecting all the public Offices for such Papers as might serve to my Purpose: His Majesty said that he was glad that I had that Object in my Eye; and I shoud certainly have all the Assistance in his Power. He was also pleasd some time after to send to me the Baron Behr, Minister for Hanover, to tell me that he had orderd over some Papers from Hanover, to be put into my hands, because he believd they woud be of Use to me. I believe I have told you, that the Use of the Marlborough Papers had been promisd me by Lord and Lady Spencer but Marchmont, who had some Pretence of Authority over them, as Trustee, delay'd giving them up, suspecting, I suppose, the Use they intended to make of them. But I know, that a Word from the King must immediatly determine him: For however malicious he be, he is still more servile. I am told, that he is wonderfully broken of late both in his Health and Spirits, and is even falling fast into a State of Imbecillity which is strange at his Years. But I suppose Rage and Malignity have worn all the Fibres of his Constitution. I desire to be rememberd to Mrs Home and Katy; as likewise to my three young Friends. I take it for granted that Jock is quite recoverd. You say nothing to me about Aby Home, whom I am much concernd for. Pray is this a good Crop with you? The Accounts we have from different Parts of England are so various, that there is no forming a Judgement of it, till more of it be threshd out. I am

 Dear Brother Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 6 Octr 1767
