Paris 5th of Septr. 1765

Sir

As Lady Hertford was to have her audience of Leave on Monday, I attended her to Versailles on that day, & had a conference with the Duke of Praslin, with regard to all the Points, contained in the dispatch of your Excellency, of the 27th of August, which I received by Pearson the Messenger.

I told him that, I had mention'd to your Excellency, the condition, which he had in a former Conference annex'd to the Demolition of the Jettees of Dunkirk, viz, that the French retain'd a right not only of stopping the Demolition, but of rebuilding what was demolished, in case the Destruction of the Jettees prevented the flowing out of the Backwater: But I added, that your Excellency had annex'd a Clause to this Condition, viz, that the Jettees were to be rebuilt only provided no other Expedient cou'd be found out for draining the Country. But suppose, reply'd the Duke, that the Expedient propos'd is not acceptable to both Parties; in that Case, you must certainly allow us to rebuild the Jettees till we come to an Agreement on the Point; or Suppose, that the Expedient propos'd & agree'd to requires time to be carry'd into Execution, in that case also you must permit us to retain the same Liberty; since the total destruction of the Country is the immediate consequence of the stopping of the Water. I told him, that I shou'd inform your Excellency of this reply.

I then inform'd him, that it had been agree'd with Monsieur de Guerchy, that His Majesty might send over any other Engineers or any understanding Sea Officers, to inspect anew the Harbour and Coast of Dunkirk; since it had been complain'd of by the Court of France, that Admiral Durell & Captain Campbell had not employ'd sufficient time or care, in the execution of that Service. The Duke reply'd; With all my heart; provided we may instantly send down orders to stop the Destruction of the Jettees: No, said I, by no means: I have no Orders to that purpose: I suppose that the King of England only proposes to send over Engineers, in order to find some other Expedient, which may be employ'd, in case the present one, of destroying the Jettees, shou'd on tryal be found to fail, or shou'd prevent entirely the Passage of the Backwater. But it is impossible, reply'd the Duke, that we can be toss'd about in this manner from Project to Project: Your new Engineers may hatch some new Scheme: All our Trouble and Expence in demolishing the Jettees will be lost: And we are not certain that the Mischief done by that Operation will be entirely remedy'd. The best method is to see fully the Effect of one Expedient before we think of any other: I hope that this Trial which we now propose to make, will prove successful; and so much the rather, as I am told, by the Duke of Choiseul, who has inspected carefully the Place, that it will be very difficult to find any other Expedient; since the Canal of Mardyke cannot be open'd but at an infinite Charge, and will prove at best very ineffectual for draining the Country. I must also inform you, that the Opening the canal of Bergues was not executed during the War: That Work was begun when the two Nations were in full Peace; and was the result of Necessity, for rendering the Country habitable; not of any Project for improving the Harbour, which is little or nothing benefited by it.

The Duke, after finishing this Topic of Conference, seem'd very unwilling to enter upon the Subject of the Canada Paper; both because he profess'd not to understand it fully, as not lying within his Department; and because he had been told by M. de Fontanieu, that some Lights had been communicated by him which he hoped wou'd prove satisfactory. Let us wait, said the Duke, till the Answer arrive from your Court. At present, we shou'd only throw away Time by arguing upon false and erroneous Suppositions. M. de Fontanieu is the very Person, who form'd the Arrangement with regard to that Paper Money; and he is the properest Person to instruct you in his Reasons. I hope, that they will be found liable to no considerable Objection.

When we came to confer about the Treatment given to the English Inhabitants of Dunkirk, I told him that the fourth Article of the commercial Treaty of Utrecht was very clear in favour of the English; and that the only Condition annex'd to their abode in France was their Obedience to the Laws of the Country: All arbitrary or discretionary Power in Governors and Commandants or even in the King and his Ministers was effectually remov'd, and cou'd no longer extend to them. To say that even after this Treaty, the King might expel any Englishman who displeas'd him, & was only oblig'd to admit such as were agreeable to him, was to put an Interpretation on that Article, totally destructive of its Force; since even without any Compact it was always certain that the King of France might admit whom he pleased into his Kingdom. It must reasonably be supposed that every Article of a publick Treaty impos'd some Obligation on one side, & granted some Rights or Privilege on the other; nor did Ministers and Embassadors reduce a Treaty to form, merely to make an Exchange of Compliments of Civility. But according to the Sense put upon this article by his Court, it wou'd be difficult to tell what Obligation was impos'd on France, & what Privilege acquir'd by Englishmen. The Duke ask'd me, whether I pretended, that every Englishman expell'd France, must be previously condemn'd by a Trial at Law. I told him, that, according to the Orders received by Lord Hertford, I found, that the Court of England expected, that either the Guilt of any Englishman expell'd shou'd be proved by a Trial at Law, or that at least the English Embassador at Paris shou'd be satisfied in the Matter. The Duke then said, that he did not decline this Condition, but the English Embassador, added he, must in that case be contented to receive reasonable Satisfaction. He ought not to demand a particular Detail of Proofs which it may not always be convenient or possible to give him. It is sufficient to him, if he sees in general that the French Ministers have no bad Intentions against the English Nation; and shou'd their Authority fall sometimes heavy on two or three Individuals, amidst twenty or thirty Thousand who remain unmolested, he ought to conclude that they are in those cases actuated by just & reasonable Motives tho'unknown to him. For as to the Pretension, that the King is to have no sovereign Authority over Englishmen who reside in France, it is in vain to pretend to it. We shou'd rather chuse to admit no Foreigners at all amongst us, than to receive them on that condition, and if you shou'd ask me, what Privilege Englishmen have acquir'd by the fourth Article of the commercial Treaty of Utrecht, I shou'd reply that their Embassador has thereby acquir'd a Right of expostulating and of demanding the reason of any Violence offer'd to any of them: But he ought sometimes to rest satisfy'd with a general answer, when he is convinc'd in the main of our good Intentions. On the whole, the Duke promis'd to consult Monsr. de Choiseul whether Booth cou'd be permitted to return to Dunkirk, and to give me an Answer.

On Saturday last, I sent to the Duke of Praslin the enclos'd Memorial with regard to the German accompts: He promis'd to make it be examined by the proper offices, and to return me an answer.

The Dauphin, it is pretended, is entirely recover'd; but I am sorry to find that his health is still very indifferent, and that his constitution is in the main very much broken.

I have the Honour to transmit the King of France's Answer to His Majesty. The Queen is at present in Lorrain.

 I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard

 Sir Your Excellency's 
Most obedient and most humble Servant



David Hume
