My Friends at Paris have thought it absolutely necessary to publish an Account which I sent them, of my Transactions with Rousseau, together with the original Papers: The Affair had made a great Noise every where, and he had been such a Fool, as to write Defiances against me to all parts of Europe; so that the Justification of my Character they thought requir'd a Publication, which, however, is very much against my Will, coud it have been prevented. The whole will compose a pretty large Pamphlet, which, I fancy, the Curiosity of the Public will make tolerably saleable. I desire you to take upon you the printing and publishing of it; and if any Profit result from it to you, I shall be very happy; reserving the after property and Disposal of the Pamphlet to myself. You will take in what Bookseller you please; Becket or Caddel or any other: For Mr Millar woud not think such a Trifle worthy of his Attention.



I shall immediatly send you up a Copy of the original Manuscript, which is partly English, partly French; but more of the latter Language, which must be translated. I shall employ Mr Coutts's Cover. The Method the Translator must proceed is this: My Friends at Paris are to send me over in a Parcel ten Copies, which will be delivered to Miss Elliot. I have desird her to send them to you; open the Parcel and take out one Copy for your own Use. Get a discreet and careful Translator: Let him compare exactly the French Narration with my English: Where they agree, let him insert my English: Where they differ, let him follow the French and translate it: The Reason of this is, that I allowd my Friends at Paris to make what alterations they thought proper; and I am desirous of following exactly the Paris Edition. All my letters must be printed verbatim, conformable to the Manuscript I send you.



My Parisian Friends are to add a Preface of their own composing, which must be translated: Add, by way of Nota bene, that the Original Letters will all be deposited in the Musæum. The Reason of this is, that Rousseau has been so audacious as to write, that I dare not publish his Letters without falsifying them.



If you think, that a Republication of the French Edition will answer the Expence, I am also willing you should do it.



Of the remaining nine Copies, send one to Lord Hertford, lower Grosvenor Street, another to Mr Secretary Conway, another to Horace Walpole, Arlington Street, another to Lady Hervey, St James Place. Send the remaining five to me by any private hand or by the Waggon. . . . .

I am Dear Sir Your most obedient Humble

Servant 
David Hume
