Dear Brother

You wou'd see by the News Papers, that Lord Hertford was come over, and that he was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland: You woud know of Course, that I am charg'd with the Affairs of England at this Court. Before the Ambassador set out, he told me, that he woud not accept of the Lord Lieutenancy unless every thing was settled to his Mind, and among the rest, that he shoud have the naming of the Secretary to that Kingdom. He also told me that he intended that Office for me, in conjunction with his Son, Lord Beauchamp. My Sallary will be about 2000 a Year: It is impossible, that any Revolutions at the English Court can at present affect this Destination, as the Irish Parliament must necessarily assemble about the Middle of October. This is an Office of Credit & Dignity; and the Secretary has always an unquestiond Claim, whenever his Term expires, of being provided for in a handsome Manner. Thus you see a splendid Fortune awaits me, yet you cannot imagine with what Regreat I leave this Country: It is like Stepping out of Light into Darkness to exchange Paris for Dublin. The most agreeable Circumstance is the Friendship & Confidence of the Lord Lieutenant; and if the present Credit of that Family continue, as it is likely to do, I shall probably have it in my Power to do Service to my Friends, particularly to your young Folks. For as to you and myself, it is long since we thought our Fortunes entirely made. These Events we may now look upon as certain; yet in case of Accidents, to which all Events are subject, it will be better not to speak of them, till they be entirely finishd, which I shall probably be able to inform you of, in a few Posts. When you hear that Lord Hertford's Successor, who will probably be the Duke of Richmond, is set out for France, you will know pretty exactly the time of my Departure from this Country. I shall be but a short time in England. I shall remain all the Winter and Spring in Ireland; and no more, for two Years. We hear that the King has a great Affection & Esteem for Lord Hertford, which is no wise surprizing.

Compiegne 4th of Augt 1765
