Paris 9 January, 1764.

Dear Edmonstoune,

I was fully settled, and, as I thought, for life, at Edinburgh; had bought a very pretty little house, which I had repaired and furnished to my fancy; had purchased a chaise, and fixed everything about my family on such a footing as to continue there the rest of my days. But while I was in this situation, which was far from disagreeable, I received a letter from my friend Mr Wood, wrote by direction from Lord Hertford, by which I was invited to attend his Lordship in his embassy to Paris, and to perform the functions of Secretary to the Embassy. I had never seen Lord Hertford, tho I had heard an excellent character of him; but as I thought myself too old to enter on a new scene of life, and found myself settled to my mind, I at first refused the invitation; but on its being urged more home to me, I came up to London, where I found that Mr Bunbury, a gentleman of considerable fortune, and married to the Duke of Richmond's sister, had already been appointed Secretary; but was so disagreeable to the Ambassador, that he was resolved never to see, or do business with his Secretary, and therefore desired I should attend him, in order to perform the functions. He also thought himself certain that Bunbury could not possibly continue in the situation; but in order to make me more secure, he procured me a pension of £200 a year for life, from the King. As I became every day better acquainted with my Lord, I liked him every day better; and I do not believe there is in the world a man of more probity or humanity, endowed with a very good understanding, and adorned with very elegant manners and behaviour. My Lady is also a person of great merit; and nothing can be more amiable than my Lord Beauchamp: so that you see I have every domestic means of happiness; and the good reception I have met with at Paris, particularly, as you observe, by the ladies, renders my present course of life, tho somewhat too hurried and dissipated, as amusing as I could wish. My Lord appears zealously my friend, and has urged the matter so home, in my favour, to the King and the ministers, that he has obtained a promise, that I shall soon have the appointments and commission of Secretary to the Embassy, which is about £1000 a year added to what I already possess: so that you see, dear Edmonstoune, I am in the high road to riches; and as there is no instance of a Secretary to the Embassy at Paris, that has not been advanced to the most considerable employments, I am at the same time in the high road to dignities. You must know, that Lord Hertford has so high a character for piety, that his taking me by the hand is a kind of regeneration to me, and all past offences are now wiped off. But all these views are trifling to one of my age and temper. The material point is (if anything can be material) that I keep my health and humour as entire as I possessed them at five-and-twenty. I am sorry to hear, dear Edmonstoune, that the case is not the same with you, at least with regard to the former; and perhaps somewhat with regard to the latter. Your situation is no doubt tiresome, and somewhat disagreeable. What is the fancy of sending one of the first noblemen in the kingdom to pass years in a country town? Why do you not go forward to Italy, or back to Paris? When I arrived here, all M. Voltaire's friends told me of the regard he always expressed for me; that some advances on my part were due to his age, and would be well taken. I accordingly wrote him a letter, in which I expressed the esteem which are undoubtedly due to his talents; and among other things I said, that if I were not confined to Paris by public business, I should have a great ambition to pay him a visit at Geneva. This is the foundation of the report you mention; but I am absolutely confined to Paris and the Court, and cannot on any account leave them so much as for three days.
