Dear Sherriff

Are you lazy, or are you busy, or are you both, or have you forgot your Promise to write to me, or do you think nothing of breaking your Word, or have you frequently taken the Pen in hand to write, & then thrown it aside for want of News or want of Invention? If this last be your Case, I sympathize with you. For it has also been mine.

I hear the Town at present is as dull as the Countrey, & that we rural Folks keep all the Money to Ourselves, as well as our Company. I cannot say, that I am much guilty in the former way: And as to the other Blessing, viz my Company, I shall endeavour to make the Town some Amends, tho' latter than I at first intended, because of my Mother's bad State of Health, whom I am unwilling to leave for any time, in her present Condition.

I was in Berwick lately a Night, & going to a Shop next Morning to buy Something, the Shopkeeper told me he had a Lodger of my Name, whom upon Enquiry I found to be your Uncle the Captain. He had tir'd it seems for want of Company, & having resolv'd to go to Edinburgh, he coud not find a Horse to hire, that cou'd carry him so far; so he took a sudden Resolution of going to Berwick. Notwithstanding your Contempt of Homer & Xenophon, I find it is a good thing to like their Company. It makes other Company less necessary; & is a kind of Treasure against Old Age.

I hear your Cousin, Jenny Kinloch, is marryd to the Provost: And my Flame, Betty Dalrymple, to the Laird of Udney. O Sherriff, why do not you think of propagating your Species in a lawful Way. Must our noble Clan perish for want of Representatives?

Tell Jack Stuart, if his Squinzies, & his crackt Skull will permit him to be in the Countrey this Vacation, that I desire him to bring along with him Faction detected &c if he has it.

Having now fairly turnd the Page, & made out a reasonable Letter from nothing (which, by the bye, are commonly the longest Letters) I think I may honestly bid you adieu.

 Decr. 11. [1743]

If you do not know my Hand, my Name is David Hume.
