Dear Sir

Your Notion of correcting Subtility of Sentiment is certainly very just with regard to Morals, which depend upon Sentiment; & in Politics & natural Philosophy, whatever Conclusion is contrary to certain Matter of Fact must certainly be wrong, and there must some Error lie somewhere in the Argument, whether we be able to show it or not. But in Metaphysics or Theology, I cannot see how either of these plain & obvious Standards of Truth can have place. Nothing there can correct bad Reasoning but good Reasoning: and Sophistry must be oppos'd by Syllogism. About seventy or eighty Years ago, I observe, a Principle like that which you advance prevail'd very much in France amongst some Philosophers & beaux Esprits. The Occasion of it was this. The famous Mons. Nicole of the Port Royal, in his Perpetuité de la Foi, push'd the Protestants very hard upon the Impossibility of the People's reaching a Conviction of their Religion by the way of private Judgement; which requir'd so many Disquisitions, Reasonings, Researches, Erudition, Impartiality, & Penetration, as not one of a hundred, even amongst Men of Education, is capable of. Monsr Claude & the Protestants answer'd him, not by solving his Difficulties (which seems impossible) but by retorting them (which is very easy). They show'd that to reach the Way of Authority, which the Catholics insist on, as long a Train of acute Reasoning & as great Erudition was requisite as woud be sufficient for a Protestant. We must first prove all the Truths of natural Religion, the Foundation of Morals, the divine Authority of the Scripture, the Deference which it commands to the Church, the Tradition of the Church &c. The Comparison of these controversial Writings begot an Idea in some, that it was neither by Reasoning nor Authority we learn our Religion, but by Sentiment. And certainly this were a very convenient Way, and what a Philosopher wou'd be very well pleas'd to comply with, if he coud distinguish Sentiment from Education. But to all Appearance the Sentiment of Stockholm, Geneva, Rome antient & modern, Athens, & Memphis, have the same Characters. And no thinking man can implicitly assent to any of them; but from the general Principle, that as the Truth in these Subjects is beyond human Capacity, & that as for one's own Ease he must adopt some Tenets, there is more Satisfaction & Convenience in holding to the Catechism we have been first taught. Now this I have nothing to say against. I woud only observe, that such a Conduct is founded on the most universal & determin'd Scepticism, join'd to a little Indolence. For more Curiosity & Research gives a direct opposite Turn from the same Principles.

The Origin I assign to Paederasty from the Frequency of the gymnastic Exercises amongst the Greeks is founded. (1) On the plain Testimony of Cicero. But I cannot readily point you out the Passage. (2) We may observe, that in that full, natural, undisguis'd Picture of ancient Manners drawn by Homer in his two Poems, there is not the smallest Traces of this Vice. The Friendship betwixt Achilles & Patroclus was pure. They were both middle-ag'd Men, & Patroclus was the elder. Besides, Homer takes Care to lay them apart, & gives each of them a Wench in his Arms. The more antient Greeks therefore were free from this Corruption. Now Thucydides says that the Introduction of the gymnastic Exercises was late. The first Antients had always part of their Body cover'd in their Exercises. (3) Plato says, by way of Reproach both to the Barbarians & Asiatic Greeks, that they were ignorant of Paederasty & the gymnastic Exercises. He speaks of them as connected. Tho' this Question be foreign to my Subject in the Dialogue, I know not but I had better add a Note containing these Arguments.

The Greeks seem rather to have been restrain'd in the Use of Women. A Commerce with a Slave was reproachful. Even wenching or a Commerce with a Courtezan was somewhat scandalous & its Punishment was to render a Man incapable of all public Offices; at least, he was not allow'd to speak to the People. This appears from the Oration of Demosthenes contra Androt. However, I own, this is not reconcilable with many Passages in Antiquity; particularly, that Solon establish'd public Stews by Law. I have put this down amongst my Greek Doubts. I find Alcibiades much reproach'd for his wenching by Isocrates, never for Paederasty.

I have amus'd myself lately with an Essay or Dissertation on the Populousness of Antiquity, which led me into many Disquisitions concerning both the public & domestic Life of the Antients. Having read over almost all the Classics both Greek and Latin, since I form'd that Plan, I have extracted what serv'd most to my Purpose: But I have not a Strabo, & know not where to get one in this Neighbourhood. He is an Author I never read. I know your Library (I mean the Advocates') is scrupulous of lending Classics; but perhaps that Difficulty may be got over. I shou'd be much oblig'd to you, if you coud procure me the Loan of a Copy, either in the original Language or even in a good Translation.

The Greeks had military Dances, particularly the Pyrrichia; but these were not practic'd in their Festivals nor amidst their Jollity. Their way of dancing was very good for an indolent Fellow: For commonly they rose not from their Seats, but mov'd their Arms and Head in Cadence. Tis difficult to imagine there coud be much Grace in that kind of dancing.

I send you enclos'd a little Endeavour at Drollery against some People who care not much to be jok'd upon. I have frequently had it in my Intentions to write a Supplement to Gulliver, containing the Ridicule of Priests. Twas certainly a Pity that Swift was a Parson. Had he been a Lawyer or Physician, we had nevertheless been entertain'd at the Expense of these Professions. But Priests are so jealous, that they cannot bear to be touch'd on that Head; and for a plain Reason: Because they are conscious they are really ridiculous. That Part of the Doctor's Subject is so fertile, that a much inferior Genius, I am confident, might succeed in it.

Tell Jack Stuart, as soon as you see him, that I have sent you this Copy, if he can make any use of it. I intended to have had it printed, but I know not how, I find it will not do. If you like the thing, I wish you woud contrive together some way of getting over the Difficulties that have arisen, the most strangely in the World.

 I am Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume.

Ninewells near Berwick. 18 February, 1751.
