Lisle Street, Leicester Fields April 3, 1766.

It is impossible for me, dear Madam, to express the difficulty which I have to bear your absence, and the continual want which I feel of your society. I had accustomed myself, of a long time, to think of you as a friend from whom I was never to be separated during any considerable time; and I had flattered myself that we were peculiarly fitted to pass our lives in intimacy and cordiality with each other. Age and a natural equability of temper were in danger of reducing my heart to too great indifference about every thing: it was enlivened by the charms of your conversation, and the vivacity of your character. Your mind, more agitated both by unhappy circumstances in your situation and by your natural disposition, could repose itself in the more calm sympathy which you found with me. But behold! three months are elapsed since I left you; and it is impossible for me to assign a time when I can hope to join you. Lord Hertford has wrote me, that he expects to quit Ireland in a few weeks, and that he hopes to find me in London. I know that he proposed to be in France this summer; and he may probably desire me to delay my journey, that we may go together. I still return to my wish, that I had never left Paris, and that I had kept out of the reach of all other duties, except that which was so sweet and agreeable to fulfil, the cultivating your friendship, and enjoying your society. Your obliging expressions revive this regret in the strongest degree; especially where you mention the wounds which, though skinned over, still fester at the bottom.

Oh, my dear friend, how I dread that it may still be long ere you reach a state of tranquillity, in a distress which so little admits of any remedy, and which the natural elevation of your character, instead of putting you above it, makes you feel with greater sensibility. I could only wish to administer the temporary consolation, which the presence of a friend never fails to afford.

The chief circumstance which hinders me from repenting of my journey, is the use I have been to poor Rousseau, the most singular, and often the most amiable man in the world.

I have now settled him in a manner entirely to my satisfaction, and to his own. There is one Mr Davenport, a worthy man, a man of letters, and sense, and humanity, and of an ample fortune, about 6 or 7000 pounds a year, an elderly man, and a widower. Among several country seats which belong to him, he has one in the county of Derby, situated amid rocks and mountains, and rivulets and forests, and surrounded with the most beautiful savage country in England. As he seldom lives there, he proposed to me to give an apartment to our friend; and as he has there a gardener and other servants, for whom he must keep a table, he told me that he could easily supply him with his diet, and all other conveniences. I accepted of the offer, provided that he would take thirty pounds a year of board for M. Rousseau and Mademoiselle Le Vasseur. He laughed very heartily, but had the good nature to agree to my proposal. It is a fortnight since poor Rousseau left me, and here is a paragraph of a letter he writes me . . . .

I must however confess, that I have not the consolation to think he will long be happy there. Never was man, who so well deserves happiness, so little calculated by nature to attain it. The extreme sensibility of his character is one great cause; but still more, the frequent and violent fits of spleen and discontent and impatience, to which, either from the constitution of his mind or body, he is so subject. These disqualify him for society, and are the chief reason why he so much affects solitude. When his health and good-humour return, his lively imagination gives him so much entertainment, that company, by disturbing his musing and meditation, is rather troublesome to him; so that, in either case, he is not framed for society. He is commonly however the best company in the world, when he will submit to live with men. Every one who saw him here, admires the simplicity of his manners, his natural unaffected politeness, the gaiety and finesse of his conversation. For my part, I never saw a man, and very few women, of a more agreeable commerce.

I shall tell you a very singular story of him, which proves his extreme sensibility and good heart. Mr Davenport had thought of a contrivance to save him part of the expenses of his journey. He hired a chaise, and told him that it was a retour chaise, which would only cost a trifle. He succeeded at first; but M. Rousseau, the evening before his departure, began to entertain suspicions from some circumstances which had escaped Mr Davenport's attention. He complained to me grievously of the trick, and said that, though he was poor, he chose rather to conform himself to his circumstances, than live like a beggar upon alms; and such pretended favours were real injuries. I replied, that I was ignorant of the matter, but should inform myself of Mr Davenport. No, cried he, no; if this be a contrivance, you are not ignorant of it: it has not been executed without your connivance and consent; but nothing could possibly be more disagreeable to me. Upon which he sate down in a very sullen humour; and all attempts which I could make, to revive the conversation and turn it on other subjects, were in vain. After near an hour, he rose up, and walked a little about the room. Judge of my surprise when, all of a sudden, he sat down upon my knee, threw his arms about my neck, kissed me with the greatest ardour, and bedewed all my face with tears! Ah, my dear friend, exclaimed he, is it possible you can ever forgive my folly? This ill humour is the return I make you for all the instances of your kindness towards me. But notwithstanding all my faults and follies, I have a heart worthy of your friendship, because it knows both to love and to esteem you.

I hope, dear Madam, that you have not so bad an opinion of me as not to think I was extremely affected with this scene. I confess that my tears flowed as plentifully as his; and that I embraced him with no less cordiality.

Please to tell this story to Madame la Maréchale de Luxembourg, to whom I desire that my sincere respects be presented. I also allow you to tell it to Madame de Barbantane, and to such of her female friends as you think worthy of it. I scarce know a male who would not think it childish. Ask Madame L'Espinasse, whether she can venture to tell it to D'Alembert. I own that I am ashamed to mention that lady's name, as I have not yet answered the letter with which she honoured me. What do you think also of my ingratitude, when I tell you that I have not yet wrote to Madame Geoffrin? I thank God, however, that I have not the impudence to desire you to make my apology, when I know that no apology can possibly be made. I am at a loss in what terms to express my acknowledgments to the Prince of Conti. Nothing can be more honourable as well as agreeable to me, than the offer which he is pleased to make me. I leave you to judge what addition the pleasure of living in your company must make to all the other inviting circumstances that attend it. But there is only one particular which we must weigh together, when we meet.

When I return to Paris, it will be necessary for me to lay a plan of life more conformable to my character and usual habits: I must resolve to pass a great part of my time among my books, and in retreat. How far will such a plan be consistent with the situation projected?

I forgot to tell you, that Lord Marischal has given an answer such as I expected: but General Conway has been ill, so that we have not yet attained the warrant for the pension; though there is no doubt to be entertained of it.

I must add, that Davenport told me he intended to leave our friend, by will, the life-rent of the house in which he lives, if he finds that his attachment to it continues. You see, then, that in point of circumstances he is not to be pitied: for I have also discovered, that he has some little resources beyond what he mentioned to the President Malesherbes and to me. It is one of his weaknesses, that he likes to complain. The truth is, he is unhappy, and he is better pleased to throw the reason on his health, and circumstances and misfortunes, than on his melancholy humour and disposition.

Please to make my compliments to Miss Becket: Lord Tavistock was so good as to execute her commission. I kiss your hands, with all the devotion possible.
