Edinburgh 25 of January, 1772.

I am truly ashamed, dear Madam, of your having prevented me in breaking our long silence; but you have prevented me only by a few days: for I was resolved to have writ to you on this commencement of the year, and to have renewed my professions of unfeigned and unalterable attachment to you. While I was at London, I had continual opportunities of hearing the news of Paris, and particularly concerning you; and even since I had settled here, I never saw any body who came from your part of the world that I did not question concerning you. The last person to whom I had the satisfaction of speaking of you, was Mr Dutens. But there were many circumstances of your situation which moved my anxiety, and of which none but yourself could give me information. You have been so good as to enter into a detail of them, much to my satisfaction; and I heartily rejoice with you, both on the restoration of your tranquillity of mind, which time and reflection have happily effected, and on the domestic satisfaction which the friendship and society of your daughter-in-law afford you. These last consolations go near to the heart, and will make you ample compensation for your disappointments in those views of ambition which you so naturally entertained, but which the late revolutions in France might perhaps have rendered more full of inquietude than satisfaction.

For my part, I have totally and finally retired from the world, with a resolution never more to appear on the scene in any shape. This purpose arose, not from discontent, but from satiety. I have now no object but to

Sit down and think, and die in peace —

What other project can a man of my age entertain? Happily, I found my taste for reading return, even with greater avidity, after a pretty long interruption: but I guard myself carefully from the temptation of ever writing any more; and though I have had great encouragement to continue my history, I am resolved never again to expose myself to the censure of such factious and passionate readers as this country abounds with. There are some people here conversible enough: their society, together with my books, fills up my time sufficiently, so as not to leave any vacancy; and I have lately added the amusement of building, which has given me some occupation.

I hearken attentively to the hopes you give me of seeing you once more before I die. I think it becomes me to meet you at London; and though I have frequently declared that I should never more see that place, such an incident, as your arrival there, would be sufficient to break all my resolutions. I only desire to hear of your journey as soon as it is fixed, and as long before it is executed as possible, that I may previously adjust matters so as to share the compliment with others of my friends, particularly the Hertford family, who may reasonably expect this attention from me.

Can I beg of you to mention my name to the Prince of Conti, and assure him that the world does not contain any person more devoted to him, or more sensible of the obligations which he imposed on me? I suppose Madame de Barbantane is very agreeably situated with her pupil, the Duchess of Barbantane. Will she be pleased to accept of the respects of an old friend and servant? I beg to be remembered to Madame de Vierville. If Miss Becket be still with you, I wish to make her my compliments. I am, with the greatest truth and sincerity,

 Ever yours,

David Hume.
