Edinburgh 18 of March 1776.

Dear Sir

As I ran through your Volume of History with a great deal of Avidity and Impatience, I cannot forbear discovering somewhat of the same Impatience in returning you thanks for your agreeable Present, and expressing the Satisfaction which the Performance has given me. Whether I consider the Dignity of your Style, the Depth of your Matter, or the Extensiveness of your Learning, I must regard the Work as equally the Object of Esteem; and I own, that if I had not previously had the Happiness of your personal Acquaintance, such a Performance, from an Englishman in our Age, woud have given me some Surprize. You may smile at this Sentiment; but as it seems to me that your Countrymen, for almost a whole Generation, have given themselves up to barbarous and absurd Faction, and have totally neglected all polite Letters, I no longer expected any valuable Production ever to come from them. I know it will give you Pleasure (as it did me), to find that all the Men of Letters in this Place concur in their Admiration of your Work, and in their anxious Desire of your continuing it.

When I heard of your Undertaking (which was some time ago), I own I was a little curious to see how you woud extricate yourself from the Subject of your two last Chapters. I think you have observ'd a very prudent Temperament; but it was impossible to treat the Subject so as not to give Grounds of Suspicion against you, and you may expect that a Clamour will arise. This, if anything, will retard your Success with the Public; for in every other respect your Work is calculated to be popular. But, among many other marks of Decline, the Prevalence of Superstition in England, prognosticates the Fall of Philosophy and Decay of Taste; and though no body be more capable than you to revive them, you will probably find a Struggle in your first Advances.

I see you entertain a great Doubt with regard to the Authenticity of the Poems of Ossian. You are certainly right in so doing. It is, indeed, strange, that any men of Sense coud have imagin'd it possible, that above twenty thousand Verses, along with numberless historical Facts, could have been preservd by oral Tradition during fifty Generations, by the rudest, perhaps, of all European Nations; the most necessitous, the most turbulent, and the most unsettled. Where a Supposition is so contrary to common Sense, any positive Evidence of it ought never to be regarded. Men run with great Avidity to give their Evidence in favour of what flatters their Passions, and their national Prejudices. You are, therefore, over and above indulgent to us in speaking of the Matter with Hesitation.

I must inform you, that we are all very anxious to hear that you have fully collected the Materials for your second Volume, and that you are even considerably advanc'd in the Composition of it. I speak this more in the Name of my Friends than in my own; as I cannot expect to live so long as to see the Publication of it. Your ensuing Volume will be more delicate than the preceding, but I trust in your Prudence for extricating you from the Difficulties; and, in all Events, you have Courage to despise the Clamour of Bigots. I am with great Regard Dear Sir

 Your most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume .
