Edinburgh, 2nd December 1766

. . . Thanks to God, my affair with Rousseau is now finally and totally at an end, at least on my part: for I never surely shall publish another line on that subject. It was with infinite reluctance I consented to the last publication. I lay my account that many people will condemn me for it, and will question the propriety or necessity of it: but if I had not published, many people would have condemned me as a calumniator, and as a treacherous and false friend. There is no comparison between these species of blame; and I underwent the one, to save me from the other.

There is a concluding circumstance in this affair, which has given me some vexation: you are named, as well as Madame de Verdelin, in the English translation. I sent up to a book-seller in London copies of my original letters, that they might be inserted in the English translation. I had erased your name; but it seems not so, but that it was legible; and it is accordingly printed. The bookseller, the printer, and the compositor, all throw the blame on each other, for this accident. I ask you ten thousand pardons: but as I had the delicacy on your account to erase your name even from the manuscript copy you sent over to my friends at Paris; you may easily believe, that I would never willingly have allowed it to be printed contrary to your orders.

A few posts ago I received a very curious letter from a Swiss gentleman, who resides in London, but whom I never either saw or heard of before: his name is Deyverdun, and he calls himself a native of Lausanne. He says, that he was extremely surprized to find that Rousseau had, in page 8(d)–(d)6, and in page 9(d)–(d)6, accused me for being the author or accomplice of the two libels wrote against him; and he says, with regard to the last, that he has an intimate and a certain conviction of it: I was not able to give any other answer, than that I had never so much as seen either of these pretended libels. Now the Swiss gentleman tells me, that he himself was the author of them; and gives me leave to publish his letter for that purpose to the whole world. But my aversion to farther publications on that head is so great, that I shall not give this letter to the press. I have only sent a copy of it to Mr Davenport, to be delivered to Rousseau. If he has the least remains of a sentiment of honour, he must fall on his face before me, upon the perusal of this letter. . . .
