Sir,

About a twelvemonth ago, my friend Mr Smith, of Boulogne, who has the honour of being known to you, having occasion to go to Paris, had the goodness to charge himself with a copy of my Political Discourses, then newly published, with an intention of delivering it to you. By some accident, it has miscarried, for which I am sorry, as it has deprived me of an opportunity, however trivial, of marking my sincere respect for you.

Since that time, the work has undergone a second edition and I have desired our friend Mr Stuart to transmit to you a copy of it and I hope it will be more fortunate than the former.

Mr Wallace has honoured me with a very polite, as well as learned and judicious answer, which, he tells me, you have seen. I should be much afraid that I am entirely refuted, had I not, all along, in my essay, kept on the sceptical and doubtful side, which, in most subjects, gives a man so much the advantage of the ground, that it is very difficult to force him. To have been dogmatical, indeed, on this subject had in me been the most unpardonable temerity. For besides many other reasons of diffidence, I knew that you had already expressed your sentiments to be contrary to that opinion, which I discovered some propensity to support.

I believe the chief merit of my performance was my forcing Mr Wallace, by a kind of challenge, to publish the learned Dissertation which he had, for some time, kept by him. I acknowledge that he has detected me in several errors and mistakes and it is owing to his politeness that he has spared me in many more. I learn from him that you proposed to get his Dissertation translated into French and that the translator throught it would be requisite, for the better understanding Mr Wallace's work, to prefix a translation of mine. If he continues his intention of doing me that honour, I must desire him to make a very few alterations according to the enclosed paper.

I could have made many more amendments, by correcting the errors remarked by my antagonists; but, as that would have injured his work, I shall abstain at present, in hopes that a new edition will give me an opportunity. I have the honour to be with great regard Sir 
Your most obedient and most humble servant



David Hume.
