26 April, 1768.

I should have sooner replied, dear Madam, to your most obliging letter, had I not been prevented by an accident. Soon after, General Conway demitted his office, and my commission expired of course. Lord Hertford then told me, that he and his brother had made a point with the King and the ministers, that in consideration of my services, I should have some farther provision made for me, which was immediately assented to, only loaded with this condition, by the King, that I should seriously apply myself to the consummation of my History. I replied to my Lord, that I did not think I had any farther claim, either on the public or his family; and that for a man of letters and a good economist, I had reason to esteem myself very rich. He said, that this was a more proper way of thinking for me than for my friends; but he could not yet tell me what was the provision intended, because nothing was fixed. Ever since, the ministry have been so occupied by the elections, that nothing has been done; and our politics have been in such perpetual fluctuation, that every prospect of this nature that is delayed, must be looked on as uncertain; but, luckily, a disappointment will give me no great vexation. Meanwhile I delayed writing to you from week to week, in hopes of communicating to you this mark of goodness of my Sovereign, in return for what you was so good as to tell me of your Sovereign's goodness towards you. I suppose it was not proper for you to enter into particulars, otherwise you would have done so; as you must be sensible, that nothing can interest me more than every thing that concerns you. I do not find that this sentiment diminishes by time or absence; and even the loss of those once flattering ideas, that I was to pass my latter days with you, gives me the same sting of regret as formerly. You cannot imagine with what satisfaction I heard lately of the Count de Bouffler's marriage: I hope it is as advantageous for him, as it is represented to me. I foresee, that he and his family are to be the consolation of your future life: I hear him mightily well spoken of; and as he is in every respect put into a flourishing situation by your care and attention, you will better be able to compensate the injustice of fortune in one particular, by her favour in another.

I salute and embrace M. de Pont de Ville for the part he has had in this transaction.

I hope, dear Madam, you will throw me at the Prince of Conti's feet. My sense of his goodness to me will be indelible, as well as my personal regard to him.

L'Abbé le Bon gave me lately an account of the Prince's benevolent disposition, in taking himself a journey to Trie, that he might accommodate some quarrels, which Jean Jacques had had with some of his neighbours.

I think that this philosopher now speaks less of his return to this country; which indeed does not well suit him, as he would here be neither courted nor persecuted. He does well to enjoy his pension at a distance from us.

I could wish it were proper for me to present my respects to Madame de Luxembourg; but I am told that I have incurred her displeasure by my unlucky quarrel with the above-mentioned personage.

This is the only subject of regret it leaves me; and I could wish to be justified in her eyes, as I am in those of all Europe. Nobody can have a greater regard for her than I have, nor a greater desire of recovering her good graces. I hope Madame de Mirepoix allows me the honour of saluting her, as also Madame de Bussi, whose situation, I am sorry to hear, is not more agreeable than formerly.

The Archbishop of Toulouse, I am told, has distinguished himself at the head of a commission for examining into the regulations and laws of convents; and it is resolved that hence-forth nobody shall be allowed to take the vows before one-and-twenty years of age. In that case, this prelate will be the greatest reformer that has arisen since Luther.

I beg my compliments to him, as well as to the Bishop of Lavaur, whose funeral panegyrics I have read with some regret: they were so well wrote, that I wished to see his pen employed on some better subject. I am in Madame de Barbantane's debt, and shall answer her in a few days, as soon as I have fully executed her commission. Be so good as to mention my name to her, and to Madame de Vierville. I bid you adieu, dear Madam, and kiss your hands, with all the sincerity possible. I should be sorry to forget Miss Becket on this occasion.
