The success of the Book, Dear Dr, which you mention, gives me great Satisfaction, on account of my sincere Friendship for the Author; and so much the rather, as this Success was to me unexpected. I have since begun to hope, and even to believe, that I was mistaken; and in this Perswasion have several times taken it up and read Chapters of it: But to my great Mortification and Sorrow, I have not been able to change my Sentiments. We shall see, by the Duration of its Fame, whether or not I am mistaken. Helvetius & Saurin both told me at Paris, that they had been consulted by Montesquieu about his Esprit des loix: They us'd the Freedom to tell him, as their fix'd Opinion, that he ought to suppress the Book; which, they forsaw, wou'd very much injure his Reputation. They said to me, that, no doubt, I thought, they had reason to be ashamd of their Judgement: But still, added they, you may observe, that the public are very much returnd from their first Admiration of that Book, and we are perswaded, that they will daily return still more. I hope, that I shall be found a false Prophet as much as these Gentlemen: For tho' the Esprit des loix be considerably sunk in Vogue, & will probably still sink farther, it maintains a high Reputation, and probably will never be totally neglected. It has considerable Merit, notwithstanding the Glare of its pointed Wit, and notwithstanding its false Refinements and its rash and crude Positions.

Helvetius and Saurin assurd me, that this Freedom of theirs never lost them any thing of Montesquieu's Friendship: I believe the like woud be my Case; but it is better not to put it to a Trial. On that Account, as well as others, I recommend to you Secresy, towards every Person, except Robertson.

My way of Life here is very uniform, and by no means disagreeable. I pass all the Forenoon in the Secretary's House from ten till three, where there arrives from time to time Messengers, that bring me all the Secrets of this Kingdom, and indeed of Europe, Asia, Africa and America. I am seldom hurry'd; but have Leizure at Intervals to take up a Book, or write a private Letter, or converse with any Friend that may call for me: And from Dinner to Bed-time is all my own. If you add to this, that the Person, with whom I have the chief, if not only Transactions is the most reasonable, equal temperd, and gentlemanlike man imaginable, and Lady Aylesbury the same, you will certainly think I have no reason to complain: And I am far from complaining. I only shall not regreat when my Duty is over; because to me the Situation can lead to nothing; at least, in all Probability; and reading and sauntering and lownging and dozing, which I call thinking, is my supreme Happiness, I mean my full Contentment.

I send you a Pamphlet, which was publishd near three Months ago; but I never heard of it till last Week, nor saw it till two days ago. Neither Mr Walpole nor I know any thing of the Author; tho' I am told the public ascribd it to himself, which he positively denies, and I entirely acquit him, tho the piece is not ill-wrote.

I thank you for the Acquaintaince you offer me of Mr Percy: But it woud be impracticable for me to cultivate his Friendship, as Men of Letters have here no Place of Rendesvous, and are indeed sunk and forgot in the general Torrent of the World. If you can therefore decline without harshness any Letter of Recommendation, it woud save Trouble both to him and me.

 Direct to me as under-Secretary of State, at the Secretarys Office.

 1 of April 1767
