Dear Edmondestone

I was fully settled, and as I thought for Life, at Edinburgh: Had bought a very pretty little House, which I had repair'd and furnishd to my Fancy: Had purchas'd a Chaise, and fix'd every thing about my Family, on such a Footing as to continue there the rest of my Days: But while I was in this Situation, which was far from disagreeable, I receivd a Letter from My Friend, Mr Wood, wrote by Directions from Lord Hertford, by which I was invited to attend his Lordship in his Ambassy to Paris and to perform the Functions of Secretary to the Ambassy. I had never seen Lord Hertford; tho I had heard an excellent Character of him: But as I thought myself too old to enter on a new Scene of Life, and found myself settled to my Mind, I at first refus'd the Invitation; but on its being urg'd more home to me, I came up to London; where I found that Mr Bunbury, a Gentleman of considerable Fortune & marry'd to the Duke of Richmond's Sister, had already been appointed Secretary, but was so disagreeable to the Ambassador that he was resolvd never to see nor do Business with his Secretary and therefore desird I shoud attend him in order to perform the Functions. He also thought himself certain that Bunbury coud not possibly continue in this Situation; but in order to make me more secure, he procurd me a Pension of 200 a Year for Life from the King. As I became every day better acquainted with my Lord, I likd him every day better; and I do not believe there is in the World a man of more probity & Humanity, endowd with a very good Understanding, and adornd with very elegant Manners & Behaviour. My Lady is also a Person of great Merit, and nothing can be more amiable than my Lord Beauchamp; so that you see, I have every domestic means of Happiness; and the good Reception I have met with at Paris, particularly, as you observe, by the Ladies, renders my present Course of Life, tho' somewhat too much hurry'd and dissipated, as amusing as I coud wish. My Lord appears zealously my Friend; and has urgd the Matter so home in my favour to the King & the Ministers, that he has obtaind a Promise, that I shall soon have the Appointments & Commission of Secretary to the Embassy which is about 1000 a Year, added to what I possess already. So that you see, Dear Edmondestone, I am in the high Road to Riches; and as there is no Instance of a Secretary to the Embassy of Paris, that has not been advancd to the most considerable Employments, I am at the same time in the high Road to Dignities. You must know, that Lord Hertford has so high a Character for Piety, that his taking me by the hand is a kind of Regeneration to me; and all past Offences are now wip'd off. But all these Views are trifling to one of my Age and Temper: The material Point is, (if anything can be material) that I keep my Health & my Humour as entire as I possessd them at five & twenty. I am sorry to hear, Dear Edmondestone, that the Case is not the same with you, at least with regard to the former: And perhaps somewhat, with regard to the latter. Your Situation is no doubt tiresome, & sometimes disagreeable. What is the Fancy of sending one of the first Noblemen in the Kingdom to pass Years in a Country-Town? Why do you not go forward to Italy or come back to Paris?

When I arriv'd here, all M Voltaire's Friends told me of the Regard he always express'd for me; and they perswaded me, that some Advances on my part were due to his Age & woud be well taken. I accordingly wrote him a Letter, in which I expressd the Esteem which are  undoubtedly due to his Talents; and among other things I said, that, if I were not confind to Paris by public Business, I shou'd have a great Ambition to pay him a Visit at Geneva. This is the Foundation of the Report you mention: But I am absolutely confind to Paris & the Court and cannot on any account leave them for so much as three Days.

 Just before I left Scotland, I passd some days at Blair, where I saw your House from the other Side of the Water. It appears to me a very agreeable Situation: But the House will be a little costly. Write me soon & longer. I wrote you a long Letter from Edinburgh, which I hope came to hand. I sent it under Cover to Sir Harry. I am too great Politician to write any News. Have you read the two last, first, Volumes of my History in English?

Paris. 9th January 1764
