Compiegne 8 of Augst 1764

My Lord

I am very happy, that my Letter gave some Satisfaction to your Lordship. I carryd both Lord Holderness and Lord Holland to the Scots College, and show'd them some remarkable Passages in K. James's Memoirs. I believe, that Lady Holderness was also there; tho' I had not the Honour to accompany her. Father Gordon tells me, that there is in the same place a great Collection of Letters wrote by K. James after the Revolution; and some of them by Persons, whom, from their Character & Professions, we should little suspect of that Correspondence. It will not give much Surprize, that Lord Marlborough is one of the Number. Father Gordon thinks, that it will not be difficult, after the Death of the old Gentleman at Rome, to procure his Son's Consent to the Publication of the whole; which may be of use to throw Light on the English History. I found nothing remarkable in the Memoirs with regard to the popish Plot. The Duke treats of the whole as a gross Imposture & Forgery of Oates & the other Evidences, assisted by the Knavery of Shaftesbury & the blind Zeal of the other Whig Leaders. I believe there is little doubt that this is the real State of the Case.

The Duke of York says, that his Brother, a little before his Death, had determind, at the Perswasion of Lord Sunderland, to send him to Scotland, and to make some considerable Alterations: He also says, that after he went to France he discoverd, that that Nobleman, while in his Service, had secretly receivd Pensions both from Lewis & the Prince of Orange; so that he had found means to be at once a Traitor to three Princes. For it is not to be imagin'd that he servd any of them with Fidelity.

Besides this Book of Memoirs, there is a long Letter of Advice or Instructions of the King to his Son for the future Government of his Kingdoms. It is a very silly Performance, which I do not think to be the Case with the Memoirs. That Prince's arbitrary Principles appear strongly in the Instructions: He represents particularly the pernicious Effects of the Habeas Corpus Bill. But the greatest Part of those Instructions is employd to warn his Son against the Allurements of Women, particularly the Court Ladies, whom he calls a dangerous kind of Cattle. He owns, that, in his Youth, he was much led astray by them; but he seems to expect that the warning given to his Son will preserve that Prince's Youth from a like Danger.

Your Lordship's Offer to communicate Lights for the Correction of such Errors as I may have fallen into in my History, is extremely obliging. I know how great Advantage I might reap from your Lordships extensive Knowledge and sound Judgement. But it is unfortunate, that my present Situation shoud make it impossible for me to avail myself of them. I have always sought Truth, I am sure without Interest, and I hope, without Partiality. What gives me some Security in the latter particular is, that I had several Prepossessions of my own to correct during the Course of my Work. I found in particular, that the two first Princes of the House of Stuart, if their Administration be compard with that of their Predecessors, were not exposd to so much blame as Party Zeal has commonly thrown upon them and as I myself believed to be the Case. This Representation of Matters was as much contrary to my former pre-conceiv'd Opinions as to my Interest. But I am so sick of all those Disputes and so full of Contempt towards all factious Judgements and indeed towards the Prejudices of what is call'd the Public, that I repent heartily my ever having committed any thing to Print. Had I a Son I shou'd warn him as carefully against the dangerous Allurements of Literature as K James did his Son against those of Women; tho' if his Inclination was as strong as mine in my Youth, it is likely, that the warning woud be to as little Purpose in the one Case as it usually is in the other. I shall be in Paris in a few Days, where I shall be proud to obey your Lordships Commands in any particular. I have the Honour to be, My Lord,

 Your Lordships 
most obedient & most humble Servant



David Hume
