Rheims.  Sept. 12 1734. N.S.

My Dear Michael

I suppose you have receiv'd two Letters from me dated at Paris, in one of which was enclos'd a Letter to My Lord Stairs. I am now arriv'd at Rheims, which is to be the place of my Abode for some considerable time, & where I hope both to spend my Time happily for the present, & lay up a Stock for the future. It is a large Town, containing about 40.000 Inhabitants, & has in it about 30 families that keep Coaches; tho by the Appearance of the Houses you wou'd not think there was one. I was recommended to two of the best Families in Town, & particularly to a man, who, they say, is one of the most learned in France. He is just now in the Countrey, so that I have not yet seen him; tho' , if I had seen him, it wou'd be some time before I cou'd contract a Friendship with him; not being yet sufficient Master of the Language to support a Conversation, which is a great Vexation to me, but which I hope, in a short time, to get over. As I have little more than this to say about Business, I shall use the Freedom to entertain you with any idle Thoughts, that come into my Head, hoping at least you will excuse them, if not be pleas'd with them, because they come from an absent Friend.

When I parted from Paris, the Chevalier Ramsay gave me a his Advice to observe carefully & imitate as much as possible, the manners of the French. For (says he) tho' the English, perhaps, have more of the real Politeness of the Heart, yet the French certainly have a better way of expressing it. This gave me occasion to reflect upon the Matter, & in my humble Opinion, it is just the Contrary, viz that the French have more real Politeness & the English the better Method of expressing it. By real Politeness I mean Softness of Temper, & a sincere Inclination to oblige & be serviceable; which is very conspicuous in this Nation, not only among the high but low, insomuch that the Porters & Coachmen here are civil, & that not only to Gentlemen but likewise among themselves, so that I have not yet seen one Quarrel in France, tho' they are every where to be met with in England. By the Expressions of Politeness, I mean these outward Deferences & Ceremonies, which Custom has invented, to supply the Defect of real Politeness or Kindness, that is unavoidable towards Strangers & indifferent Persons even in men of the best Dispositions of the World. These Ceremonies ought to be so contriv'd, as that, tho they do not deceive, nor pass for sincere, yet still they please by their Appearance, & lead the Mind by its own Consent & Knowledge, into an agreeable Delusion. One may err by running into either of the two Extremes, that of making them too like Truth or too remote from it; tho we may observe, that the first is scarce possible, because whenever any Expression or Action becomes customary it can deceive no body. Thus when the Quakers, say Your Friend, they are as easily understood, as another, that says your humble Servant. The French err in the contrary Extreme, that of making their Civilities too remote from Truth; which is a Fault, tho they are not design'd to be believ'd; just as it is a Transgression of Rules in a Dramatic Poet to mix any Improbabilities with his Fable; tho' tis certain that in the representation, the Scenes, Lights, Company & a thousand other Circumstances, make it impossible he can ever deceive.

Another Fault I find in the French Manners, is that like their Cloaths, & Furniture, they are too glaring. An English fine Gentleman distinguishes himself from the rest of the World, by the whole Tenour of his Conversation, more than by any particular part of it; so that tho' you are sensible he excells, you are at a loss to tell in what, & have no remarkable Civilities & Complements to pitch on as a proof of his Politeness. These he so smooths over that they pass for the common Actions of Life, & never put you to trouble of returning thanks for them. The English Politeness is alwise greatest, where it appears least.

After all it must be confest, that the little Niceties of the French Behaviour, tho' troublesome & impertinent, yet serve to polish the ordinary Kind of People & prevent Rudeness & Brutality. For in the same manner, as Soldiers are found to become more couragious in learning to hold their Musquets within half an Inch of a place appointed; & your Devotees feel their Devotion encrease by the Observance of trivial Superstitions, as Sprinkling, Kneeling, Crossing &c, so men insensibly soften towards each other in the Practice of these Ceremonies. The Mind pleases itself by the Progress it makes in such Trifles, & while it is so supported makes an easy Transition to something more material: And I verily believe, that tis for this reason you scarce ever meet with a Clown, or an ill bred man in France.

You may perhaps wonder that I who have stay'd so short time in France & who have confest that I am not Master of their Language, shou'd decide so positively of their manners: but you'll please to observe that 'tis with Nations as with particular Man, where one Trifle frequently serves more to discover the Character, than a whole Train of considerable Actions. Thus when I compare our English Phraze of humble Servant, which likewise we ommit upon the least Intimacy, with the French one of the Honour of being your most humble Servant, which they never forget, this, compar'd with other Circumstances lets me clearly see the different Humours of the Nations. This Phraze of the Honour of doing or saying such a thing to you goes so far, that my Washing Woman to day told me, that she hopt she shou'd have the Honour of serving me, while I stay'd at Rheims; & what is still more absurd it is us'd by People to those who are very much their Inferiours.

Before I conclude my Letter I must tell you, that I hope you will excuse my Rudeness, if I use the Freedom to desire of you, that the next time you do me the Honour of writing to me, you'll be so good as to sit down a day before the post go away; for I cannot help being afraid that in your Haste you have ommitted several things, which otherwise I wou'd have had the Honour & Satisfaction of hearing from you. When you are so good as to condescend to write Please to direct so.

A Monsieur

Monsieur David Hume Gentilhomme Ecossois chez Monsieur Mesier au Peroquet verd proche la porte au feron. Rheims.
