Dear Sir Gilbert

I am very much obligd to you for the Pains you have taken to give me an Account of your Son's Expences and Management at Oxford. I found my Brother undetermind, or rather averse, to the Project. He thinks his Son rather inclines to be dissipated and idle; and believes that a Year or two at Oxford woud confirm him thoroughly in that Habit, without any other Advantage than the acquiring of a little better Pronounciation: For this Reason, he rather inclind to try him a Year in the Law College here, before he makes him so much his own Master.

I have been settled here two Months, and am here Body & Soul, without casting the least Thought of Regreat to London, or even to Paris. I think it improbable that I shall ever in my Life cross the Tweed, except perhaps a Jaunt to the North of England, for Health or Amusement. I live still, and must for a twelvemonth, in my old House in James's Court, which is very chearful, and even elegant, but too small to display my great Talent for Cookery, the Science to which I intend to addict the remaining Years of my Life; I have just now lying on the Table before me a Receipt for making Soupe a la Reine, copy'd with my own hand. For Beef and Cabbage (a charming Dish), and old Mutton and old Claret, no body excels me. I make also Sheep head Broth in a manner that Mr Keith speaks of it for eight days after, and the Duc de Nivernois woud bind himself Apprentice to my Lass to learn it. I have already sent a Challenge to David Moncrief: You will see, that in a twelvemonth he will take to the writing of History, the Field I have deserted: For as to the giving of Dinners, he can now have no farther Pretensions. I should have made a very bad use of my Abode in Paris, if I coud not get the better of a mere provincial like him. All my Friends encourage me in this Ambition; as thinking it will redound very much to my Honour.

I am delighted to see the daily and hourly Progress of Madness and Folly and Wickedness in England. The Consummation of these Qualities are the true Ingredients for making a fine Narrative in History; especially if followd by some signal and ruinous Convulsion, as I hope will soon be the Case with that pernicious People. He must be a very bad Cook indeed, that cannot make a palatable Dish from the whole. You see in my Reflexions and Allusions I still mix my old and new Profession together. I am Dear Sir Gilbert

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 16 of Octr 1769

PS. 
I beg my Respects to Lady Elliot.
