London, 19 of June, 1767.

It was not surely, dear Madam, with indifference that I regarded your displeasure against me. Nothing could have given me more uneasiness; and I was more afraid of the coolness of your reproaches than even of your anger. But your last letter has brought me great relief. Though our commerce should never go beyond letters (an idea however which I will never allow myself to entertain) your friendship would still be dear to me, and I should regard the loss of it as a great calamity.

Happily my dread of that event proceeded more from my own anxiety than from any reality on your part. You are only unkind not to have told me so sooner.

You ask the present state of our politics. Why, in a word, we are all in confusion. This, you'll say, is telling you nothing new; for when were we otherwise? But we are in greater confusion than usual; because of the strange condition of Lord Chatham, who was regarded as our first minister. The public here, as well as with you, believe him wholly mad; but I am assured it is not so. He is only fallen into extreme low spirits and into nervous disorders, which render him totally unfit for business, make him shun all company, and, as I am told, set him weeping like a child, upon the least accident. Is not this a melancholy situation for so lofty and vehement a spirit as his? And is it not even an addition to his unhappiness that he retains his senses? It was a rash experiment, that of repelling the gout, which threw him into this state of mind; and perhaps a hearty fit of it may again prove a cure to him. Meanwhile, the public suffers extremely by his present imbecility: no affairs advance: the ministers fall in variance: and the King entertains thoughts of forming a new administration. The first person, whom he addresses himself to, is your friend the Duke of Bedford, whose consideration is very great, on account of his quality and riches, and friends, and above all, of his personal character. It was very happy for the Duke that, at the time of poor Tavistock's death, there were public transactions of moment before the Parliament, in which his friends urged him to take part. The natural fervour of his character insensibly engaged him in the scene. He was diverted from his own melancholy reflections, and business thus proved to him the best consolation. He has not however recovered thoroughly that terrible shock; and the Duchess, to whom the world did not ascribe so great a degree of sensibility, is still more inconsolable. On the whole, you see, that we are at present in a crisis. The Duke of Bedford would be received with open arms; but he has formed some connexions, particularly with Mr Greenville, which are not so acceptable; and it is uncertain, whether we are to have a change of ministry or not, though the former is much more probable.

But pray, who are you to give us as Ambassador from France, in place of M. de Guerchi, who has succeeded very well among us? I think I know more or less all your grands seigneurs; and I amuse myself by forming conjectures on that head. M. de Chatelet, it is said, might be the man; but he did not like us enough, when he made us a visit, to be willing to pass years among us. M. de Castries is named, and I believe he would succeed perfectly, except only that he has not a wife whom he could bring along with him; but he is not on such cordial terms with your Minister, as to make him hope for this employment. I believe the Count d'Ayen aspires to that embassy: but he is perhaps too young, and has besides something of the pedant about him. Would the Prince of Beauveau wish for this station? He is not supple nor pliable enough: though the Princess is likely to succeed extremely, could she submit to the drudgery of being affable to all the world, as Madame de Guerchi is. The other day I was talking of this subject to the Prince of Masserane; who said, that he knew not whom your Court would choose; but surely, added he, they ought to choose the wisest man in France, for a station so delicate, and so essential towards preserving the general tranquillity. I wish the choice may fall on the Prince and Princess of Beauveau, and that you may come over with them. I should like to have affairs of state to transact with you and her.

General Conway will not allow that Rousseau is mad: he says, he is only whimsical and capricious. I know not whether I told you, that he had wrote from Dover a long letter to the General, in which he entreats him to give him his liberty; warns him of the danger of assassinating him in private; promises never to publish his memoirs, nor complain of the ministers and people of England, if he may be allowed to go abroad; and even engages in that case to speak well of me. All this, you'll say, is mad enough: but yet the letter is coherent and seemingly rational, and so probably will his memoirs be; and perhaps as full of genius as any others of his writings. So strange a prodigy is he! The affair of his pension was entirely settled; but as he has given authority to nobody to receive payment, he may perhaps meet with difficulties in case of a change of ministry.

You know that ministerial falls are very light accidents in this country: a fallen minister immediately rises a patriot, and perhaps mounts up to greater consideration than before. For this reason, our tottering situation does not hinder us in this family from being in great joy, by the marriage of Miss Conway to Mr Damer. They are both your acquaintance, and seem to make a very proper marriage.

You say, that you have many interesting matters to tell me, but do not care to trust them by the common post. If they interest you, they cannot be indifferent to me. Give me some hint of them. Do they concern yourself in particular? Are there any new prospects opening to — ? You know my meaning; or what is next best, have you lost all hopes, and laid aside all desire of that object?

You made me very happy by telling me, that your young gentleman in Florence pleased as well as interested you very much. I hope the accounts you receive of him are still satisfactory.

 Adieu, my dear friend.
