My dear Sir

Before I was favourd with Yours, I had seen Coll Lesly, who waited on me, as is usual with the British, who come to Paris. I returnd his Visit, and introduc'd him to the Ambassador, who askd him to dinner, among seven or eight of his Countrymen. You will be surpriz'd, perhaps, when I tell you, that this is the utmost of the Civilities, which it will ever be possible for me to show Mr Lesly; for as to the ridiculous Idea of Foreigners, that I might introduce him to the good Company of Paris, nothing can be more impracticable: I know not one Family to which I coud present such a man, silent, grave, awkward, speaking ill the Language, not distinguishd by any Exploit or Science or Art: Were the French Houses open to such People as these, they woud be very little agreeable, considering the immense Concourse of Strangers to this Place. But it is quite otherwise: No people are more scrupulous of receiving Persons unknown; and I shoud soon lose all Credit with them, were I to prostitute my Recommendations of this Nature. Your Recommendations have great Weight with me; but if I be not mistaken, I have often seen Coll. Lesly's Face in Edinburgh: It is a little late, he has bethought himself of being ambitious, as you say, of being introducd to my Acquaintance: The only Favour I can do him is, to advise him, as soon as he has seen Paris, to go to a Provincial Town, where People are less shy of admitting new Acquaintance, and are less delicate Judges of Behaviour. It is almost out of the Memory of Man, that any British has been here on a Footing of Familiarity with the good Company, except My Lord Holderness, who had a good Stock of Acquaintance to begin with, speaks the Language like a Native, has very insinuating Manners, was presented under the Character of an old Secretary of State, and spent, as is said, ten thousand Pounds this Winter, to obtain that Object of Vanity. Him indeed I met every where in the best Company; but as to others, Lords, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes, they went about to Plays, Operas, & Bawdy-houses: No body minded them; they kept Company with one another; and it wou'd have been ridiculous to think of bringing them into French Company. I may add General Clerk, who was lik'd and esteemd by several People of Merit, which he ow'd to his great Cleverness & Ingenuity, and to his surprizing Courage in introducing himself. I enter into this Detail with you, that People, with whom I am much more connected than with the Leven Family, may not at any time be surprizd, that I am able to do so little for them in this way, and may not form false Ideas of the Hospitality of the French Nation. But I fancy there will not arrive at Paris many People, who will have great Claims of past Civilities to plead with me.

What you tell me of John Adams gives me great Consolation. I had heard the alarming News of his Connexions with Fairholm, and things were put in the worst Light. I was just ready to write to Ferguson to get from him a just State of the Case; but if he has 15 or 18.000 Pounds remaining, his Industry will recover him, and he may go on, in his usual way of Beneficence and Generosity. That Family is one of the few to whose Civilities I have been much beholden, and I retain a lively Sense of them.

Our Friend, I mean, your Friend, Lord Kaims had much provokd Voltaire who never forgives, & never thinks any Enemy below his Notice. He has accordingly sent to the Gazette Literaire an Article with regard to the Elements of Criticism, which turns that Book extremely into Ridicule, with a good deal of Wit. I tryd to have it suppress'd before it was printed; but the Authors of that Gazette told me, that they durst neither suppress nor alter any thing that came from Voltaire. I suppose his Lordship holds that satiric Wit as cheap as he does all the rest of the human Race, and will not be in the least mortify'd by his Censure.

The Taste for Literature is neither decayd nor depravd here, as with the Barbarians who inhabit the Banks of the Thames. Some People who had read your Dissertation, affirmd to me, that it was the finest Piece of Criticism incomparably to be found in the English Tongue. I know not if you have read the Poetique de Marmontel: It is worth your Perusal. Voltaire has publish'd an Edition of Corneille, and his Notes, & Dissertations contain many fine things. There is a Book publishd in Holland in two Volumes Octavo calld De la Nature. It is Prolix and in many parts whimsical; but contains some of the boldest Reasonings to be found in Print. There is a Miscellany in three Volumes Duodecimo publishd here, where there are many good Pieces. It is perhaps more amusing to me, than it will be to you; as there is scarce a Poem in it, whose Author I do not know, or the Person to whom it is addressd.

It is very silly to form distant Schemes: But I am fix'd at Paris for some time, and to judge by Probabilities, for Life. My Income wou'd suffice me to live at Ease, and a younger Brother of the best Family woud not think himself ill provided for, if he had such a Revenue. Lodgings, a Coach, and Cloaths are all I need; and tho' I have enterd late into this Scene of Life, I am almost as much at my ease, as if I had been educated in it from my Infancy. However, Sickness or the Infirmities of Age, which I may soon expect, may probably make me think of a Retreat: But whether that will be better found in Paris or elsewhere, Time must determine. I forbid myself all Resolution on that head.

I shall indulge myself in a Folly, which I hope you will make a discreet Use of. It is the telling you of an Incident, which may appear silly, but which gave more Pleasure than perhaps any other I had ever met with. I was carry'd about six Weeks ago to a Masquerade by Lord Hertford: We went both unmaskd; and we had scarce enterd the room, when a Lady in mask, came up to me and exclaimd, Ha, Monsr Hume vous faites bien de venir ici a visage decouvert. Que vous serez comblé ce soir d'honnetetes et des politesses! Vous verrez, par des preuves peu equivoques, jusqu'a quel point vous etes cheri en France. This Prologue was not a little encouraging; but as we advanc'd thro' the Hall, it is difficult to imagine the Caresses, Civilities and Panegyrics which pourd on me from all Sides: You wou'd have thought, that every one had taken Advantage of his Mask to speak his mind with Impunity. I cou'd observe, that the Ladies were rather the most liberal on this Occasion; but what gave me chief Pleasure was to find, that most of the Elogiums bestowd on me, turnd on my personal Character; my Naivety & Simplicity of Manners, the Candour & Mildness of my Disposition &c. Non sunt mihi cornea fibra. I shall not deny, that my Heart felt a sensible Satisfaction from this general Effusion of good will; and Lord Hertford was much pleas'd and even surpriz'd; tho', he said, he thought that he had known before upon what Footing I stood with the good Company of Paris.

I allow you to communicate this Story to Dr Jardine. I hope it will refute all his idle Notions, that I have no turn for Gallantry & Gaiety, that I am on a bad footing with the Ladies, that my turn of Conversation can never be agreeable to them, that I never can have any Pretensions to their Favours &c &c &c. A Man in Vogue will always have something to pretend to with the fair Sex.

Do you not think it happy for me to retain such a Taste for Idleness & Follies at my Years; especially since I have come into a Country where the Follies are so much more agreeable than elsewhere? I coud only wish that some of my old Friends were to participate with me of these Amusements; tho' I know none of them that can on occasion be so thoroughly idle as myself.

Between Ourselves, I know not whether I ought to rejoice at Ferguson's getting the Class of moral Philosophy: He succeeded perfectly in his former Department, to speak in the ministerial Style. But I am glad that Russel is provided for to his mind.

I am perswaded you will find great Comfort in my House, which in every respect is agreeable. I beg of you and Mrs Blair (to whom I desire my Compliments) that you woud sometimes pay some Attention to my Sister, who is the Person that suffers most by my Absence. I am Dear Sir

 Yours very sincerely

David Hume.

Paris 26 April 1764
