Dear Ruat

I am very much oblig'd to you for the Desire you express to Miss Elliot of hearing from me; and particularly your wishing to be inform'd by me of any News that pass. As soon as I knew certainly how to direct to you, I have sat down to write; and tho' the Occurrences are noway extraordinary, which I can communicate, they shall all be strictly, & literally & certainly true; and you may venture to tell them as such to all the idle People that frequent Buxton.

This Morning there arrivd an Express from Admiral Hawkes's Fleet, giving an Account that the French Fleet had sally'd out of Brest with twenty four Ships of the Line, and had engagd the English Fleet in a desperate & bloody Battle from Morning to Night, which ended in a total Victory on our Side. There are seven of the French Ships sunk & burnt & four taken. There are two of our capital Ships sunk; & the Admiral's Ship was blown up with its whole Company, not one of whom is sav'd. Prince Edward in the Phœnix behavd to Admiration; but towards the End of the Engagement an unlucky Cannon ball carry'd away both his Legs, by which it is feard we shall lose that promising young Prince. Our Friend poor Dr Blair wou'd not go below deck; but stood by the Prince's Side during the whole Engagement: Till his head was carry'd off by a double headed Shot.

About three Hours after the Arrival of this Express, there arrivd another from the West, giving an Account of the landing of the French in Torbay to the Number of 20.000 Foot & 5000 Horse: They believe already in London that they are 60.000 strong. The Panic is inconceivable. The People in the Country are hurrying up to Town: Those in the Town are hurrying down to the Country: No body thinks of Resistance. Every one believes the French, Popery, & the Pretender to be at their Heels.

What adds to our general Confusion is the Discovery of Treachery in our Councils: Mr Pit is sent to the Tower for holding a Secret Correspondence with the French: His Cyphers & Letters are taken. Mr Wood, our Friend (if he can be said to deserve that Name) is thrown into a Dungeon; & there will be certain Proofs to convict him of that Treachery.

In order to prepare the way for this Blow, the perfidious French had employd some body to blow up the Magazine in the Tower: I heard the Explosion this Morning about five o'clock: All London is coverd with Rubbish, & Stones & Brick, & broken Arms. There fell into our back Court a shatterd Musket; and the bloody Leg of a Man. I thought the day of Judgement was come, when I first heard the Explosion; and began seriously to think of my Sins.

These Events will all of them make a Figure in future Historians; and it is happy for these Gentlemen (who are or ought to be very scrupulous with regard to Matter of Fact) that they can so well reconcile the true & the marvellous.

As to private News; there is little stirring; Only Dr Warburton turnd Mahometan, & was circumcis'd last Week. They say, he is to write a Book, in order to prove the Divine Legation of Mahomet; and it is not doubted but he will succeed as well as in proving that of Moses. I saw him yesterday in the Mall with his Turban; which really becomes him very well.

Our Friend, little Hall, was marry'd yesterday to Kitty Fisher. Few People approve of his Choice; but his Friends are glad to find he has so much Vigor in him.

Poor Andrew Millar is declard bankrupt: His Debts amount to above 40.000 Pounds, and it is said his Creditors will not get above three Shillings in the Pound. All the World allow him to have been diligent & industrious; but his Misfortunes are ascribd to the Extravagance of his Wife; a very ordinary Case in this City.

Miss Elliot yesterday Morning declard her Marriage with Dr Armstrong; but we were surpriz'd in the Afternoon to find Mr Short, the Optician, come in & challenge her for his Wife. It seems she has been marry'd privately for some time to both of them. Her Sister has been much more prudent, whom we find to have confind herself entirely to Gallantry; and to have privately entertaind a Correspondence with three Gallants. I am Dr Ruat

 With great Truth, 
Your most sincere Friend and humble Servant



David Hume.

 July 6th [1759.]
