Fontainebleau 12 October, 1764

Lord Beauchamp, who leaves us on Monday next, was mentioning to-day his great desire of being well recommended to M. Chauvelin, the French Ambassador at Turin. Upon which I recollected your connexions with that minister; and as I knew your inclination to oblige every body, particularly Lord Beauchamp, (and shall I add, myself?) I easily yielded to his Lordship's solicitations, who desired me to procure a letter of recommendation, with which he should think himself so highly honoured. My Lord added, that he knew it was too great freedom for him to desire from the Countess de la Marche any letter to her Court; but if her Highness, on any occasion, would mention him as a person who had the honour to be known to her, he was sensible of the advantages that he might reap from it, and would be ever grateful for the favour.

My Lord desires me to accompany this application with some expressions of his great regard to you, and of his sincere acknowledgments for the many civilities which he has received from you during his stay in France. He seemed to regret, on this occasion, his own giddiness, which had not permitted him to cultivate sufficiently a friendship, on which he set so high a value; and he promised himself great satisfaction on his return, by making himself amends for this negligence.

These regrets put me in mind of those expressed to me for the same cause by poor Tiepolo, the Venetian Ambassador, whose death you have probably heard of. I thank Heaven, my conscience will always be clear from all remorse of this nature; both because I shall never, I hope, be obliged to leave the place where you dwell, and because I cannot reproach myself with a neglect of marking my sentiments towards you.

You see, my dear Madam, that while I am making application to you in favour of another, I would not entirely forget myself. I beg a share in your remembrance. Believe me (and surely you do believe me), that no one can bear you a more tender and more sincere friendship, or desire more earnestly a return of like sentiments on your part. This long absence convinces me more fully than ever before, that no society can make me compensation for the loss of yours, and that my attachment to you is not of a light or common nature.

P.S.

Though this letter should not reach you in time, so as to allow your answer to reach this place, before My Lord's departure, be pleased still to write; because your letter can be sent after him. Be so good also to put the Chevalier Lorenzi in mind of his promise, to give My Lord letters to his friends in Florence.
