12 of January, 1766.

I have the satisfaction to tell you, that the project which I had formed for our friend's service, has succeeded. You remember the conversation between him and me at Calais, of which I gave you an account. I found means to have that conversation related to the King, by a friend of mine, who possesses much of his confidence. He was pleased with it; promised our philosopher a pension, without naming the sum; and there now wants only Lord Marischal's consent to his accepting it. We have wrote to Berlin for that purpose; and I entertain no doubt of our obtaining it. You know that our Sovereign is extremely prudent and decent, and careful not to give offence. For which reason, he requires that this act of generosity may be an entire secret. As I am sensible it would give you great pleasure, and as I am well acquainted with your secrecy and discretion, I would not conceal it from you; allowing you to inform the Prince of Conti alone, who, I know, will take part in this success. I pretend also, that you are to like me a little better, on account of the share I have had in it.

Our friend is surprised he does not hear either from you or Mademoiselle Le Vasseur. I persuade him, that she is on the road; otherwise you would have sent me by the post the letters which you mentioned to me. If any accident has happened, please to relieve his anxiety by a line or two. I should be glad to know how your inquiries at Rougemont's have turned out. It is only matter of mere curiosity. For, even if the fact should prove against him, which is very improbable, I should only regard it as one weakness more, and do not make my good opinion of him to depend on a single incident. I shall write, this post or next, to Madame de Barbantane; and as she is one of the numerous enthusiasts of our modern Socrates, I shall amuse her by an account of several particulars concerning him.

I suppose, that by this time you have learned it was Horace Walpole who wrote the Prussian letter you mentioned to me. It is a strange inclination we have to be wits, preferably to every thing else. He is a very worthy man; he esteems and even admires Rousseau; yet he could not forbear, for the sake of a very indifferent joke, the turning him into ridicule, and saying harsh things against him. I am a little angry with him; and I hear you are a great deal: but the matter ought to be treated only as a piece of levity.

I find, that I might have spared myself the trouble of a journey to London, and that other foreign ministers, of a higher rank, have, without scruple, remained in the place of their mission. As I shall not get back as soon as I intended, I sometimes wish that I had taken this party.

The method of living is not near so agreeable in London as in Paris. The best company are usually, and more so at present, in a flame of politics: the men of letters are few, and not very sociable: the women are not in general very conversible. Many a sigh escapes me for your sweet and amiable conversation: I paint you to myself all serenity, and cannot believe that ever I had the misfortune to displease you. I often steal an hour's chat with you: Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori. As often as I see Lady Hervey, or Lord Tavistock, or the Holdernesse family, I have the satisfaction of hearing your name mentioned, which is some consolation in this land of banishment.

 Adieu, my amiable friend!

P.S.

Since I wrote the above, I have seen General Conway, who tells me that the King has spoke to him on the same subject, and that the sum intended is a hundred pounds a year; a mighty accession to our friend's slender revenue.

A letter has also come to me open from Guy the bookseller, by which I learn that Mademoiselle sets out post, in company with a friend of mine; a young gentleman, very good-humoured, very agreeable, and very mad. He visited Rousseau in his mountains, who gave him a recommendation to Paoli, the King of Corsica; where this gentleman, whose name is Boswell, went last summer, in search of adventures. He has such a rage for literature, that I dread some event fatal to our friend's honour. You remember the story of Terentia, who was first married to Cicero, then to Sallust, and at last, in her old age, married a young nobleman, who imagined that she must possess some secret, which would convey to him eloquence and genius.
