My dear Baron

As I am not sure where you are nor whether this Direction be right, I am obligd to speak to you with reserve, both of public Affairs & of my own. Of the latter, I shall only say, that, notwithstanding of my first Reluctance, I am entirely reconcild to my present Situation, and have a great Prepossession or rather indeed a great Esteem & Affection for the Person & Family, whom I am to accompany to France. The Prospect of my being Secretary to the Embassy is neither very distant nor is it immediate; but Lord Hertford will certainly, before our Departure, obtain a Settlement for me for Life; which at any Events will improve my Fortune, and is a great Pledge of his Friendship and Regard. I have insulted Elliot, Sir Harry, Oswald & all our Friends of that Administration: The former said to me, that my Situation was, taking all its Circumstances, the most wonderful Event in the World: I was now a Person clean & white as the driven Snow, and that, were I to be proposd for the See of Lambeth, no Objections could henceforth be made to me. What makes the Matter more extraordinary, is that the Idea first came into my Patron's Head without the Suggestion of any one Mortal.

You must have heard of the late most astonishing Events with regard to public Affairs. Yesterday Lord Bute had a pretty large Company dining with him, to whom he gave an Account of the whole Transaction & desird them to publish it. One of them, a Friend of mine, as soon as he went home, took it down in writing of which he gave me a Copy, & which I transmit to you. He is a military Man & his Style is not elegant; but I am sure, from another certain Authority, that the Account is in the main just; only I have reason to think that Lord Halifax was proscribd along with the rest: At least, he said so yesterday to a Friend of mine. I wish this high Spirit of his M: may be supported. But Femme qui ecoute et ville qui parle soni bientot renduës. Lord Bute goes abroad very soon: Some pretend, that the present Administration is more enragd against him than is the Opposition, on account of his taking this important Step without consulting them. Never in any History was there so curious a Scene; nor was there ever so formidable a Demagogue as this Man. Lord Sandwich, it is said, will be Secretary (for some Weeks): Our Friend Wood is so at present. Many of the leading Men in the Opposition were left out on Mr Pitt's Plan; which it is thought will breed Dissensions among them.

I dind yesterday with Lord Chesterfield along with Collonel Irwine. The Collonel made an Apology for our arriving so late on account of his being detaind at Court. At Court, said my Lord, I shoud be glad to know, what Place that is.

Be so good as to mark my affectionate Regard to Mrs Mure & to your Sisters; and believe me to be with the greatest Sincerity

 Dear Mure 
Yours



D. H.

Lisle Street 1 Sept 1763.

PS. We set out in a fortnight or three Weeks, so I shall not expect to hear from you.

PS. I left poor Blacklocke as a Legacy upon you which you was so good as to accept: But by some Letters I have since receivd, I am much afraid any Settlement in the Church would be equally unhappy for him. Please consult with George Clerk on that head.
