My Dear Sir

You have very good Reason to be satisfy'd with the Success of your History; as far as it can be judged of by a few weeks Publication. I have not heard of one who does not praise it warmly; and were I to enumerate all those whose Suffrages I have either heard in its favor or been told of, I shoud fill my Letter with a List of Names: Lords Granville, Chesterfield, Bathe, Corke, Bute &c., &c. Mallet told me, that he was sure there was no Englishman capable of composing such a Work. The Town will have it, that you was educated at Oxford; thinking it impossible for a mere, untraveld Scotchman to produce such Language. In short, you may depend on the Success of your Work, and that your Name is known very much to your Advantage. The only thing, you may now be sollicitous about is the Sale, & Mr Millar's Profit. He thinks, that the first Sale to the Trade upon Publication, was but indifferent, being only 240 in London, besides what he disposd of in his own Shop: But this, he owns, was what he had Reason to expect, as the Subject was not inviting, & the Author's Name unknown. But the Booksellers are beginning to return for more Copies, and the Applause it receives from the Readers will gradually encrease the Purchasers. However, I do not expect any sudden Flush of a Run. The Work has too much Merit, and is wrote with too much Simplicity to please the Populace: This Edition, whatever you may think, is large, for a Book of that Size, being 1250: But you ought to be preparing for a new Edition.

The Word Interference is Scotch: The Whole Nobles is the same; the English never use the whole but to a Singular; as the whole Body of Nobility. I beseech you change the Word Nobles, nine places in ten, for Nobility, Peers, Barons, Great men, Chieftains. I warn'd you, after reading the first Chapter, that that Word, which is not the simple Expression, but somewhat rhetorical, recurd too often; but I assure you, the Ear is quite satiated with it in the Course of the History; and I am not the only Person who has remarkd it. I wonder you shoud have confounded the national Covenant with the solemn League & Covenant; or that none of your Friends remarkd to you this Mistake.

But I stop short in making Remarks of this kind. Your History, tho perfectly well wrote, and even carefully collected, wou'd Occasion more Reflections that I have leizure just now to write. You are at present the best Critic in Britain of my Performance; as I am perhaps of Yours; and if Entreaties can prevail on you to make you be particular in your Remarks on me, I woud not spare them: If the Promise of a reciprocal Censure will do, I make you the same Promise. This is the best Way in which we can now supply the Place of a previous Communication. I find a Blunder either mine or of the Press with regard to Queen Marys Age at her Death. I call it the 46th instead of the 45th Year:

Dr Browne praises your Work excessively, & says it is superior to mine in the Style & Composition. I am diverting myself with the Notion how much you will profit by the Applauses of my Enemies in Scotland. Had you & I been such Fools as to have given way to Jealousy, to have entertaind Animosity & Malignity against each other, and have rent all our Acquaintance into Parties; what a noble Amusement shoud we have exhibited to the Blockheads, which now they are likely to be dissappointed of? All the people whose Friendship or Judgement either of us value, are Friends to both, & will be pleas'd with the Success of both; as we will be with that of each other. I declare to you, I have not, of a long time, had a more sensible Pleasure than the good Reception of your History has given me within this Fortnight.

As to the Age of Leo the tenth; it was Warton himself who intended to write it; but he has not wrote it, & probably never will. If I understand your hint, I shoud conjecture, that you had some thoughts of taking up the Subject. But how can you acquire Knowledge  of the great Works of Sculpture, Architecture, Painting, by which that Age was chiefly distinguishd? Are you versd in all the Anecdotes of the Italian Literature? These Questions I heard proposd in a Company of Literati, when I enquird concerning this Design of Warton. They apply'd their Remarks to that Gentleman, who yet, they say, has traveld. I wish they do not all of them fall more fully on you. However, you must not now be idle. May I venture to suggest to you, the antient History, particularly that of Greece. I think Rollin's Success might encourage you, nor need you be in the least intimidated by his Merit. That Author has no other Merit, but a certain Facility & Sweetness of Narration; but has loaded his Work with fifty Puerilities.

Our Friend, Wedderburn, is advancing with great Strides in his Profession. He only stops now & then to take up an Apple; & sometimes a Cockleshell. But no body entertains at present any doubt of his Success.

I desire my Compliments to Lord Elibank. I hope his Lordship has forgot his Vow of answering us, & of washing Queen Mary white. I am afraid that is impossible; but his Lordship is very well qualifyd to gild her. I am

 Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 8th February 1759
