Dear Sir

I was very much surprizd with what you tell me, that you had made a new Edition in Quarto of my History of the Tudors, and might probably do the same with that of the Stuarts. I imagind that the Octavo Edition woud for a long time supercede the Necessity of any Quarto Edition; and I wonder that of the Antient History did not first become requisite. You were in the wrong to make any Edition without informing me; because I left in Scotland a Copy very fully corrected, with a few Alterations, which ought to have been follow'd. I shall write to my Sister to send it you, and I desire you may follow it in all future Editions, if there be any such. I shall send you from hence, the Alterations, which my Perusal of K. James's Memoirs has occasioned. They are not many; but some of them, one in particular, is of Importance. I have some Scruple of inserting it on your account, till the Sale of the other Editions be pretty considerably advanc'd. You have not yet informed me how many you may have upon hand. I suppose a very considerable Number.

Father Gordon of the Scots College, who has an exact Memory of K. James's Memoirs, was so kind as to peruse anew my History during the Commonwealth, & the Reigns of the two Brothers; and he markd all the Passages of Fact, where they differd from the Memoirs. They were surprizingly few, which gave me some Satisfaction; because, as I told you, I take that Prince's Authority for a plain Fact to be very good.

I never see Mr Wilkes here but at Chapel, where he is a most regular, & devout, and edifying, and pious Attendant. I take him to be entirely regenerate. He told me last Sunday, that you had given him a Copy of my Dissertations, with the two which I had suppressd; and that he forseeing Danger from the Sale of his Library, had wrote to you to find out that Copy and to tear out the two obnoxious Dissertations? Pray how stands that Fact? It was imprudent in you to intrust him with that Copy: It was very prudent in him to use that Precaution: Yet I do not naturally suspect you of Imprudence, nor him of Prudence. I must hear a little farther before I pronounce.

I heard lately of & from Ruat, who is well and will be here in a Month or two: He is at present at Berlin. I hear good of his Pupil, which will give Satisfaction to our Friend.

I have not yet receiv'd the last Parcel of my Books; but expect them in a few days. I beg my sincere Respects to Mrs Millar; and I am Dear Sir

 Your most faithful Servant

David Hume

Paris 23 May 1764
