Dear Sir

As yours of the 16 of last Month did not require any immediate Reply, I have us'd the Freedom to delay answering it. I am glad to find your two new Editions so well advanc'd. I hope they will be successful. Some People tell me, that, as the two Volumes last publishd, do not shock any party prejudices, they have been better receivd than the former, & procure a good Reception for the whole. If I shoud see them make any farther Progress, it would be the best Encouragement for me to proceed in writing the more recent History. I am far from losing Sight of that Project; but it is better not to begin it, till Matters are more ripe for the Execution, and till I find, that every one would frankly concur in opening their Cabinets, and allowing me the Use of all Papers, which may be necessary for my Purpose. I had a Letter from Mr Mallet lately, by which I find, that he will no longer be an Obstacle in my way; for he tells me that his History of the Duke of Marlborough is ready for the Press: Which is more than I or most People expected.

Lord Marischal wrote me lately, that the celebrated Rousseau had taken Shelter with him at Neufchatel; but that he had thoughts of coming to England, and desird to know of me, if he could make an Edition of his Works by which he could gain a little Money for his Subsistance, as he was not interested: He wishd also, that I could recommend him to a Bookseller. You have told me, that you do not care to deal in French Books; but if he should publish any new Work, might he not have a Translation of it ready to be published at the same time with the Original? And would not you be willing to deal with him in that Shape? I should think him very fortunate, if he were in your hands. I beg my Compliments to Mrs Millar, who, I hope, is at Bath, more for her Amusement than her Health. I am Dear Sir

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

Edinburgh 22 Nov 1762

P.S.

As your Edition on royal Paper is not numerous, I shall only desire three Copies of it to be sent me, and shall reserve the other three for the Octavo Edition. Be so good therefore as to embark three Copies in any Parcel you send to Edinburgh. The Peace will now make the Intercourse of Trade more open between us. The mention of Peace reminds me to thank you for your Assistance in making out my Subscription last Year, which is likely to turn out so much to my Advantage. The Stocks are now very high; but I suppose will not come to their full Height this twelvemonth; and till then I fancy you will not think it prudent in me to sell out.
