I am surpriz'd you shou'd find Fault with my Letter. For my Part I esteem it the best I ever wrote. There is neither Barbarism, Solecism, Œquivoque, Redundancy, nor Transgression of one single Rule of Grammar or Rhetoric thro the Whole. The Words were chosen with an exact Propriety to the Sense, & the Sense was full of masculine Strength & Energy. In short it comes up fully to the Duke of Buckingham's Description of fine Writing. Exact Propriety of Words & Thought. This is more than what can be said of most Compositions. But I shall not be redundant in the Praise of Brevity, tho much might be said on that Subject. To conclude all, I shall venture to affirm, that my last Letter will be equal in Bulk to all the Orations you shall deliver during the two first Sessions of Parliament. For let all the Letters of my Epistle be regularly divided, they will be found equivalent to a dozen of No's & as Many Ay's. There will be found a No for the Triennial Bill, for the Pension Bill, for the Bill about regulating Elections, for the Bill of Pains & Penalties against L. Orford &c. There will also be found an Ay for the Standing Army, for Votes of Credit, for the Approbation of Treaties &c. As to the last No I mention'd with regard to Lord Orford, I beg it of you as a particular Favour. For having publish'd to all Britain my Sentiments on that Affair, it will be thought by all Britain, that I have no Influence on you, if your Sentiments be not conformable to mine. Besides, as you are my Disciple in Religion & Morals, why shou'd you not be so in Politics? I entreat you to get the Bill about Witches repeal'd, & to move for some new Bill to secure the Christian Religion, by burning Deists, Socinians, Moralists, & Hutchinsonians.

I shall be in Town about Christmas, where if I find not Lord Glasgow, I shall come down early in the Spring to the Borders of the Atlantic Ocean, & rejoice the Tritons & Seagods with the Prospect of Kelburn in a Blaze. For I find, that is the only way to unnestle his Lordship. But I intend to use the Freedom to write to himself on this Subject, if you will tell me how to direct to him. In the mean time do you make use of all your Eloquence & Argument to that Purpose.

Make my humble Compliments to the Ladies, & tell them I shou'd endeavour to satisfy them, if they wou'd name the Subject of the Essay they desire. For my Part I know not a better Subject than themselves; if it were not, that being accus'd of being unintelligible in some of my Writings, I shou'd be extremely in Danger of falling into that Fault, when I shou'd treat of a Subject so little to be understood as Women. I wou'd, therefore, rather have them assign me, the Deiform Fund of the Soul, the passive Unions of Nothing with Nothing, or any other of those mystical Points, which I wou'd endeavour to clear up, & render perspicuous to the meanest Readers.

Allow not Miss Dunlop to forget, that she has a humble Servant, who has the Misfortune to be divided from her by the whole Breadth of this Island. I know she never forgets her Friends; but as I dare not pretend to that Relation upon so short an Acquaintaince, I must be beholden to your good Offices for preserving me in her Memory; because I suspect mightily that she is apt to forget & overlook those who can aspire no higher than the Relation I first mention'd.

This I think is enough in all Conscience. I see you are tir'd with my long Letter, & begin to yawn. What! can nothing satisfy you, & must you grumble at every thing. I hope this is a good Prognostic of your being a Patriot.

 Novr. 14. [1742]
