Dear Michael

I cannot sufficiently express my sense of your kind letter. The concern you take in your friends is so warm, even after so long absence, & such frequent interruptions as our commerce has unhappily met with of late years, that the most recent familiarity of others can seldom equal it. I might perhaps pretend, as well as others, to complain of Fortune; but I do not, and should condemn myself as unreasonable, if I did. While Interest remains as at present, I have £50 a year, £100 worth of Books, great Store of Linnens and fine Cloaths, & near £100 in my Pocket, along with Order, Frugality, a strong Spirit of Independency, good health, a contented Humour, & an unabating love of Study. In these circumstances, I must esteem myself one of the happy & fortunate: And so far from being willing to draw my Ticket over again in the Lottery of Life, there are very few prizes with which I would make an Exchange.

After some Deliberation, I am resolved to settle in Edinburgh, & hope I shall be able with these Revenues, to say with Horace, Est bona librorum & provisae frugis in annum. Besides other Reasons, which determine me to this Resolution; I would not go too far away from my Sister, who thinks she will soon follow me; and in that case we shall probably take up House either in Edinburgh or the neighbourhood. Our Sister in law behaves well and seems very desirous we should both stay;... And as she [my sister] can join £30 a year to my Stock, & brings an equal love of Order & Frugality, we doubt not to make our Revenues answer. Dr Clephane, who has taken up House, is so kind as to offer me a Room in it; & two Friends in Edinburgh  have made me the same offer: But having nothing to ask or sollicit at London, I would not remove to so expensive a Place; and am resolved to keep clear of all Obligations & Dependencies even on those I love the most.

Part of my baggage is already packt up, & I remove in a few weeks; however as I cannot give you any other Direction at present, I must beg of you to direct here as usual. I believe I shall live in Mrs Freebairn's till Katty come to a Resolution; but this autumn, I shall probably take a Jaunt to the West Country. If you come down this summer, I hope there to have the pleasure of seeing you.

Have you seen our Friend Harrys Essays? They are well wrote; and are an unusual instance of an obliging method of answering a Book. Philosophers must judge of the question; but the Clergy have already decided it, & say he is as bad as me. Nay some affirm him to be worse, as much as a treacherous friend is worse than an open Enemy. His Health is pretty good at present, but he has of late been subject to fits of low Spirits, very unusual with him: Which makes his Friends wish to see him on the Bench, and on the first Vacancy we shall probably have that satisfaction: Marchmont violently opposed him last Occasion, as we hear; and from no other Reason but because he has not pay'd sufficient Court, according to his Lordships fancy. He is surely the strangest man in the World.

I am Dear Mich,

Your most affectionate Friend & humble Servant 
David Hume



Ninewells 22d of June 1751
