London 18 Octr 1768

Dear Baron

Immediatly upon receiving yours, I dropped a line to Graffigni, who call'd on me next day. I express'd to him your Regret, that he shoud no longer have the Direction of the Academy; and told him, that you were anxious to know the Reason. He said, that the Term of his Agreement with Elin was expird; that on his Proposal to renew it, with some Alteration of the Conditions, Elin had refus'd his Conditions; that in short Elin was desirous of being Master entirely, and thought his superintendance a Burthen. In the main, he spoke very decently of Elin; and said, that he believ'd the Academy, with regard to Language, and Diet and other Circumstances woud go on as before: There only was now no person who had sounded the Depths of the human Understanding, who was perfectly acquainted with all the Faculties of the Soul, and who knew how to direct, and govern, and restrain and push them at his Pleasure. As I did not think this a very material Loss, I was not much alarm'd at the Alteration. However, I drove to Norlands yesterday, and had a like Conversation with Elin: He also spoke decently of Graffigni; but he said, that the Share he demanded of the Profit, far exceeded the Share he took of the Trouble; that he came only for a few hours two days of the week yet expected half of the Profit; he expected also to govern entirely the House in every branch of it, which he (Ellin) thought inconvenient and burdensome: He had, however, offerd Graffigni the Inspection of the Classes, and a certain Share of the Profits, which he refus'd, and upon that they parted.

I need not tell you, that I saw the two boys, who are in good health, tall, handsome, pleasd and pleasing Children. They seem to speak French more naturally and familiarly than English, tho Elin assures me, that they have the English Accent perfectly. I see however a danger from this Inundation of Scots boys, of which some pour in fresh from the Caledonian Mountains, like untam'd Sarmatians, to destroy all the Arts and Civility of the South. In this respect too, the Loss of Graffigni may be felt. By his profound Study of the human Mind, he had discoverd that Decency and good Manners are very proper to be inculcated in boys, and was more attentive to that point than perhaps Elin will be, who, with a sounder Understanding, has had a more vulgar Education.

I form Schemes every day of retiring to Edinburgh, and of drinking my Claret and spending my latter days among my Friends: But it requires more Resolution than I am master of, to remove from one place and go to another. No man has been more tossd about than I have been, and no man has more reluctance to changes. Had I been born to a small Estate in Scotland of a hundred a Year, I shoud have remaind at home all my Life, planted and improvd my Fields, read my Book, and wrote Philosophy: But living among the Great, and composing History have been the Lot of the later part of my Life. I believe, however, I shall write no more History, tho‘ some people pretend to urge me to it, and I find no Obstacle but Indolence, with the Want of any proper Object as a Motive. I have had reason to entertain such an extreme Contempt for the public, as not to think their Approbation a Motive to renounce the pleasures of sauntering and Idleness: And my Experience of the little addition, which riches give to Happiness, makes that View still more contemptible. You will think me, however, somewhat inconsistent when I tell you, that one reason of my remaining in London is the correcting a new Edition of my History, which I oversee as anxiously, as if any body were concern'd about it, or ever woud perceive the Pains I take in polishing it and rendering it as accurate as possible. I can only say, that I do it for myself and that it amuses me.

Have you read any of Robertson's new History? It is admirably well writ in my Opinion.

You will have heard of Chatham's Resignation: His Letter to the King was decent and respectful and dutiful: He only pleads his bad Health, without hinting at any Grievance, public or personal. Lord Shelburne assures me, that he was not previously acquainted with this Step, and he believes the same of the Chancellor. It is however thought that these two Peers will either resign or be turnd out; and it is likely a thorough Alteration will ensue. Our Administration is like a Heap of loose stones, where, if you remove one, the rest will all tumble. This is the least of the numberless Evils under which we labour. What do you think of our being such compleat Beggars as not to be able to subsist, and yet labouring under the Jealousy and Envy of all Europe, on account of our supposd Power and Opulence? With regard to Administrations, the present one behavd so scandalously during the late Mobs, when the Laws, and Constitution and the King and the whole Legislature were openly insulted with Impunity, that it is impossible to think we can be Losers by any Alteration.

My Compliments to Mrs Mure, and your Sister and the Captain: Remember me also to Mrs Cockburn, when you see her. I am Dear Baron

 Yours very sincerely

David Hume
