Lisle Street, Leicester Fields, April 3, 1766



[. . .] The chief circumstance which hinders me from repenting of my journey, is the use I have been to poor Rousseau, the most singular, and often the most amiable man in the world.



I have now settled him in a manner entirely to my satisfaction, and to his own. There is one Mr Davenport, a worthy man, a man of letters, and sense, and humanity, and of an ample fortune, about 6 or 7000 pounds a year, an elderly man, and a widower. Among several country seats which belong to him, he has one in the county of Derby, situated amid rocks and mountains, and rivulets and forests, and surrounded with the most beautiful savage country in England. As he seldom lives there, he proposed to me to give an apartment to our friend; and as he has there a gardener and other servants, for whom he must keep a table, he told me that he could easily supply him with his diet, and all other conveniences. I accepted of the offer, provided that he would take thirty pounds a year of board for M. Rousseau and Mademoiselle Le Vasseur. He laughed very heartily, but had the good nature to agree to my proposal. It is a fortnight since poor Rousseau left me, and here is a paragraph of a letter he writes me. [. . .]



I must however confess, that I have not the consolation to think he will long be happy there. Never was man, who so well deserves happiness, so little calculated by nature to attain it. The extreme sensibility of his character is one great cause; but still more, the frequent and violent fits of spleen and discontent and impatience, to which, either from the constitution of his mind or body, he is so subject. These disqualify him for society, and are the chief reason why he so much affects solitude. When his health and good-humour return, his lively imagination gives him so much entertainment, that company, by disturbing his musing and meditation, is rather troublesome to him; so that, in either case, he is not framed for society. He is commonly however the best company in the world, when he will submit to live with men. Every one who saw him here, admires the simplicity of his manners, his natural unaffected politeness, the gaiety and finesse of his conversation. For my part, I never saw a man, and very few women, of a more agreeable commerce.



I shall tell you a very singular story of him, which proves his extreme sensibility and good heart. Mr Davenport had thought of a contrivance to save him part of the expenses of his journey. He hired a chaise, and told him that it was a retour chaise, which would only cost a trifle. He succeeded at first; but M. Rousseau, the evening before his departure, began to entertain suspicions from some circumstances which had escaped Mr Davenport's attention. He complained to me grievously of the trick, and said that, though he was poor, he chose rather to conform himself to his circumstances, than live like a beggar upon alms; and such pretended favours were real injuries. I replied, that I was ignorant of the matter, but should inform myself of Mr Davenport. No, cried he, no; if this be a contrivance, you are not ignorant of it: it has not been executed without your connivance and consent; but nothing could possibly be more disagreeable to me. Upon which he sate down in a very sullen humour; and all attempts which I could make, to revive the conversation and turn it on other subjects, were in vain. After near an hour, he rose up, and walked a little about the room. Judge of my surprise when, all of a sudden, he sat down upon my knee, threw his arms about my neck, kissed me with the greatest ardour, and bedewed all my face with tears! Ah, my dear friend, exclaimed he, is it possible you can ever forgive my folly? This ill humour is the return I make you for all the instances of your kindness towards me. But notwithstanding all my faults and follies, I have a heart worthy of your friendship, because it knows both to love and to esteem you.



I hope, dear Madam, that you have not so bad an opinion of me as not to think I was extremely affected with this scene. I confess that my tears flowed as plentifully as his; and that I embraced him with no less cordiality.



Please to tell this story to Madame la Maréchale de Luxembourg, to whom I desire that my sincere respects be presented. I also allow you to tell it to Madame de Barbantane, and to such of her female friends as you think worthy of it. I scarce know a male who would not think it childish. Ask Mlle L'Espinasse, whether she can venture to tell it to D'Alembert. I own that I am ashamed to mention that lady's name, as I have not yet answered the letter with which she honoured me. [. . .]



I forgot to tell you that Lord Marischal has given an answer such as I expected  but General Conway has been ill, so that we have not yet attained the warrant for the pension; though there is no doubt to be entertained of it.



I must add, that Davenport told me he intended to leave our friend, by will, the life-rent of the house in which he lives, if he finds that his attachment to it continues. You see, then, that in point of circumstances he is not to be pitied: for I have also discovered, that he has some little resources beyond what he mentioned to the President Malesherbes and to me. It is one of his weaknesses, that he likes to complain. The truth is, he is unhappy, and he is better pleased to throw the reason on his health, and circumstances and misfortunes, than on his melancholy humour and disposition.
