Edinburgh 28 of Octr 1753

Dear Doctor

I know not, if you remember the Giant in Rabelais, who swallow'd, every Morning, a Windmill to Breakfast; and at last was choak'd upon a Pound of melted Butter, hot from an Oven. I am going to compare myself to that Giant. I think nothing of dispatching a Quarto in fifteen or eighteen Months; but am not able to compose a Letter once in two Years: And am very industrious to keep up a Correspondence with Posterity, whom I know nothing about, & who probably will concern themselves very little about me; while I allow myself to be forgot by my Friends, whom I value and regard. However, it is some Satisfaction, that I can give you an Account of my Silence, with which, I own, I reproach myself. I have now brought down my History to the Death of Charles the first; and here I intend to pause for some time: To read & think & correct: To look forward & backward: And to adopt the most moderate & most reasonable Sentiments on all Subjects. I am sensible, that the History of [the] two first Stuarts will be most agreeable to the Tories: That of the two last, to the Whigs. But we must endeavour to be above any Regard either to Whigs or Tories.

Having thus satisfy'd your Curiosity: For I will take it for granted, that your Curiosity extends towards me: I must now gratify my own. I was very anxious to hear, that you had been molested with some Disorders this Summer; I was told, that you expected they wou'd settle into a Fit of the Gout. Tis lucky when that Distemper overtakes a man in his Chariot: We foot walkers make but an awkward Figure with it. I hope no body has the Impertinence to say to you, Physician cure thyself. All the World allows that Privilege to the Gout, that it is not to be cur'd. It is itself a Physician; and of course, sometimes cures and sometimes kills. I fancy one Fit of the Gout wou'd much encrease your Stock of Interjections; and render that part of Speech, which, in common Grammars, is usually the most barren, with you more copious than either Nouns or Verbs.

I must tell you good News of our Friend, Sir Harry. I am informed, that his Talent for Eloquence will not rust for want of Employment: He bids fair for another Seat of the House; & what is the charming Part of the Story, it is General Anstruther's Seat which he is to obtain. He has made an Attack on the General's Burroughs, & by the Assistance of his Uncle's Interest & Purse, is likely to prevail. Is not this delicious Revenge? It brings to my Mind the Story of the Italian, who reading that Passage of Scripture, Vengeance is mine saith the Lord; burst forth; Ay to be sure; It is too sweet for any Mortal. I own, I envy Sir Harry: I never can hope to hate any body so perfectly as he does that renown'd Commander: And no Victory, Triumph, Vengeance, Success, can be more compleat. Are not you pleas'd too? Pray, anatomize your own Mind, & tell me how many Grains of your Satisfaction is owing to Malice & how many Ounces to Friendship.

I leave the rest of this Paper to be filled up by Edmonstone, &... Yours most sincerely

David Hume.

After having this by me eight days, I have never been able to meet with Edmonstone. I must therefore send off my own part of a Letter, which we projected in common. I shall only tell you, that I have since seen Mr Oswald, who assures me that Anstruther's Defeat is infallible.
