Sir

I was out of Town for some days otherways the Sheet shou'd have been return'd sooner, along with an Answer to your obliging Letter. I am of your Opinion, that it were much to be wish'd we cou'd publish the 2d Volume the ensuing Winter; but I am afraid it will be impossible; at least, without hurrying myself more than I desire: To tell the Truth, I was so discourag'd this last Winter, that I have not been so assiduous as I might have been. Surely, never man was so torne in Pieces by Calumny. I thought I had been presenting to the Public a History full of Candor & Disinterestedness, where I conquer'd some of the Prejudices of my Education, neglected my Attachments & Views of Preferment, & all for the Sake of Truth: When behold! I am dub'd a Jacobite, Passive Obedience Man, Papist, & what not. But all this we must bear with Patience. The Public is the most capricious Mistress we can court; and we Authors, who write for Fame, must not be repuls'd by some Rigors, which are always temporary, where they are unjust. I am not surely unfavorable to the Parliament. Till they push'd their Advantages so far as to excite a civil War, so dangerous & unnecessary, I esteem their Conduct laudable; & to this Extremity nothing carry'd them but their furious Zeal for Presbytery: A low Bigotry, with which they sully'd a noble Cause. I did indeed endeavour to paint the King's Catastrophé (which was singular & dismal) in as pathetic a manner as I cou'd: And to engage me, needed I any other Motive, than my Interest as a Writer, who desires to please & interest his Readers?

I am glad that Mr Millar has renewd his Offer, which I find Baillie Hamilton is resolv'd to accept of. Every body writes me & tells me, that the Conspiracy of the Booksellers contributed very much to retard the Sale. I hope, that Mr Millar's Industry will redress this Inconvenience; tho' it is not so easy to put right what has once been set wrong. We must have Patience, & trust to time. If things succeed at present, Mr Millar, like the last Doctor, will get the Praise. You are better acquainted with these Matters than me: But if the Booksellers had not a great Influence, whence coud proceed the great Difference of the Sale in Scotland & England? The Freedoms with Religion ought here to have given more Displeasure; & the Cry of Jacobitism as much, notwithstanding what may be imagin'd.

I shall use the Precaution you desire with regard to our Letters; & beg the Continuance of our Friendship & Correspondence. I am Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 
 3d of May, 1755
