Dear Sir

It was with much Regreat, I left the Town, & was depriv'd of the Satisfaction of seeing you & Mr Stowe on your Return from Glasgow. I had long promis'd a visit to a Friend in the Countrey; and he brought Horses to Town with him, and carryd me away of a sudden. I must, however, beg a Share in your Remembrance; and shall be proud to cultivate a Friendship & Acquaintance with you, if ever an Opportunity offer.

Your Curiosity to see my History does me a great deal of Honor. It will be publish'd in less than two Months. When I desird Hamilton's Consent to the supplying you with a Copy for your Amusement on the Road, he showd so much Reluctance, that I was oblig'd to desist: His Interest, he fancies to be much concern'd that no Copies get out before the Publication.

I am glad you got so good Weather in your Journey to the West. That woud make some Compensation for bad Roads & bad Inns. If your time had permitted, you shoud have gone into the Highlands. You woud there have seen human Nature in the golden Age, or rather, indeed, in the Silver: For the Highlanders have degenerated somewhat from the primitive Simplicity of Mankind. But perhaps you have so corrupted a Taste as to prefer your Iron Age, to be met with in London & the south of England; where Luxury & Vice of every kind so much abound. There is no disputing Tastes; and no Opinion is so extravagant as not to find some Partizans.

I do not remember whether I mention'd to you a Poet of this Countrey, one Blacklocke, a poor Tradesman's Son, & born blind. I think he is the greatest Curiosity in the World. By his Industry he has acquir'd Greek, Latin & French, & has become a good general Scholar. He is a very elegant, correct Poet: He even employs the Ideas of Light & Colors with great Propriety. Dodesley intends this Winter to reprint his Poems by Subscription at half a Guinea a Copy. I am sorry I did not give you a Copy when you was here. I am sure you woud have thought the Author highly deserving of Encouragement. He is besides, a modest, virtuous, good Man; and from his Blindness, entirely helpless.

I am Dear Sir 
Your most obedient & most humble Servant 
David Hume





Edinburgh 
 8 of Octr. 1754.
