Dear Sir

You gave me a very sensible Pleasure in informing me so early of the Success of The Siege of Aquileia on its first Representation. I hope it sustain'd its Reputation after it came into Print. I show'd Mr Kincaid your Letter; & he has publishd an Edition here of a thousand, which go off very well. As he had publish'd a Pamphlet this winter, which he got from you, I told him, that I fancy'd you wou'd be satisfy'd with the same Terms, which he then agreed to.

I am very busy & am making some Progress; but find, that this Part of English History is a Work of infinite Labour & Study; which however I do not grudge: For I have nothing better nor more agreeable to employ me. I have sent you a short Catalogue of Books, which either are not in the Advocates’ Library or are not to be found at present. I must beg of you to procure them for me & to send them down with the first Ship. Send me also the Prices; for I shall be able to engage the Curators of the Library to take from me such as they want at the Price. Dr Birch (to whom make my Compliments) will be so good as to give you his Advice about buying these Books; and will tell you, if several of them are collected in Volumes, as is often the Case with the old English Historians.

I hope Lord Lyttleton & Mr Mallet are as busy as I: If so, we may expect to see their History soon. Please to inform me what you hear of them. We are inform'd that Lord Lyttleton is soon to appear. I wish very much to have the Benefit of his Work before I go to the Press.

Donaldson told me, that Strahan has at last finishd the small Edition of my Essays, & that you have ship'd his and Kincaid's Number. They are resolvd, I find, to dispose of them all in this Place. I hope you have not forgot to send me half a dozen of Copies in Sheets, the Number which we agreed to on any new Edition.

Your Press in London has been somewhat barren this Winter. We have had nothing from you but a good Pamphlet or two; & have, I think, payd the same in kind. Our Militia Pamphlet was certainly wrote with Spirit; and has been twice re-printed, as I hear, in London.

I beg to be rememberd to Mrs Millar; & please tell her that I am very sorry we shall not have the Pleasure of seeing her here this Summer. I coud wish her just as much Sickness as to make her sensible that travelling is good for her. My Compliments to Dr Douglas & Strahan, and to Friend Cummin, who I hope sees now a better Prospect of overcoming all his Difficulties. I am Dear Sir

Your most obedient Servant 
David Hume



Edinburgh. 22 March 1760
