[Nov. or Dec. 1773]

Dear Sir

I use the Freedom of sending you Mr Bradshaw's Note to me, which I mentiond to you and which was written soon after Mr Conway's Resignation. In answer to your Question, why I have so long neglected an Affair of so great Consequence, I reply, that I have not altogether neglected it: Some time after the Duke of Grafton's Resignation, I wrote to Mr Bradshaw, desiring him to lay my Claim before Lord North: He sent my letter to Mr Robinson, who wrote to me, that he wou'd take a proper time of laying it before his Lordship: As this Letter was dated from My Lord's Country-house, I concluded, that he had previously laid it before him, and that the Answer was a civil Evasion or Denial.

You seem to think that I may possibly be mistaken; and that as the Affair may never have been expo[sed] in a proper manner to Lord North, I shoud do wisely to have it fairly represented to him. Perhaps, you are in the right; but I own, that, for one reason or other, I have ever found myself at some loss how to proceed in that Matter. The Duke of Grafton was the Minister who was so good as to take the Engagement with me, and who woud naturally incline to see it [fulfilled]: But though there is no Person in England to whom I woud more willingly owe an Obligation, I have so little the honour of being known to his Grace, that I coud not presume to trouble him for a favour which it did not immediatly lie in his power to confer. My Obligations to Lord Hertford and Mr Conway are so great and essential; that I scruple to give them any farther Trouble, tho I can entirely rely on their Goodness to me, and tho this Reversion was voluntarily procurd by them without the least Sollicitation on my part. You may tell me, that my case may here appear somewhat peculiar. I have a Claim or a sort of Claim of Justice in my favour: The civil List will save 200 pounds a Year by its being complyd within: And few Persons have been placd in that trust of Under-Secretary who have not retird with greater Emoluments than have been bestowd on me; for the Pension with Deductions amounts only to about 150 pounds a Year. Perhaps these Considerations ought to give me more Courage in solliciting this Claim; Yet, if no Incident happen to overcome my Reluctance, there is danger, I own, of its lying for ever in its present neglected State. I only thought it requisite to explain to you in a few words the Motives of my Conduct, in expectation of your Approbation, at least of your Indulgence. Though I shoud not wonder, if you, as a Man of the World, laugh a little at the Scruples, which sometimes direct the Conduct of a recluse and Philosopher.
