Dear Doctor.



I had asked M. Rousseau the Question you propose to me: He answer'd, that the Story of his Heloise had some general and distant Resemblance to Reality; such as was sufficient to warm his Imagination and assist his Invention: But that all the chief Circumstances were fictitious. I have heard in France, that he had been employ'd to teach Music to a young Lady, a Boarder in a Convent at Lyons; and that the Master & Scholar fell mutually in love with each other, but the Affair was not attended with any Consequences. I think this Work his Master-piece; tho' he himself told me, that he valu'd most his Contrat sociale; which is as preposterous a Judgement as that of Milton, who preferd the Paradise regaind to all his other Performances.



This Man, the most singular of all human Beings, has at last left me; and I have very little hopes of ever being able  for the future to enjoy much of his Company; tho' he says, that, if I settle either in London or Edinburgh, he will take a Journey on foot every Year to visit me. Mr Davenport, a Gentleman of 5 or 6000 pounds in the North of England, and a Man of great Humanity and of a good Understanding, has taken the Charge of him. He has a House, called Wooton, in the Peake of Derby, situated amidst Mountains and Rocks and Streams and Forrests, which pleases the wild Imagination and solitary Humour of Rousseau; and as the Master seldom inhabited it, and only kept  there a plain Table for some Servants, he offer'd me to give it up to my Friend: I accepted, on condition that he wou'd take  from him 30 pounds a Year of Board, for himself and his Gouvernante, which he was so good natur'd as to agree to. Rousseau has about 80 pounds a Year, which he has acquird by Contracts with his Booksellers, and by a Liferent Annuity of 25 pounds a Year, which he accepted from Lord Mareschal. This is the only Man who has yet been able to make him accept of Money.



He was desperately resolv'd to rush into this Solitude, notwithstanding all my Remonstrances; and I forsee, that he will be unhappy in that Situation, as he has indeed been always, in all Situations. He will be entirely without Occupation, without Company, and almost without Amusement of any kind. He has read very little during the Course of his Life, and has now totally renounc'd all Reading: He has seen very little, and has no manner of Curiosity to see or remark: He has reflected, properly speaking, and study'd very little; and has not indeed much Knowledge: He has only felt, during the whole Course of his Life; and in this Respect, his Sensibility rises to a Pitch beyond what I have seen any Example of: But it still gives him a more acute Feeling of Pain than of Pleasure. He is like a Man who were stript not only of  his Cloaths but of his Skin, and turn'd out in that Situation to combat with the rude and boisterous Elements, such as perpetually disturb this lower World. I shall give you a remarkable Instance of his turn of Character  in this respect. It passd in my Room, the Evening before his Departure.



He had resolv'd to set out with his Gouvernante in a Post chaise; but Davenport, willing to cheat him and save him some Money, told him, that he had found a Retour Chaise for the Place, which he might have for a Trifle, and that luckily, it set out the very day in which Rousseau intended to depart: His Purpose was to hire a Chaise, and make him believe this Story. He succeeded at first; but Rousseau, afterwards ruminating on the Circumstances, began to entertain a Suspicion of the Trick. He communicated his Doubts to me, complaining that he was treated like a Child, that tho' he was poor he chose rather to conform himself to his Circumstaces than live like a Beggar, on alms, and that he was very unhappy in not speaking the Language familiarly, so as to guard himself against these Impositions. I told him, that I was ignorant of the Matter, and knew nothing more of it than I was told by Mr Davenport; but if he pleas'd I shou'd make Enquiry about it. Never tell me that, reply'd he, if this be really a Contrivance of Davenports, you are acquainted with it, and consenting to it; and you cou'd not possibly have done me a greater Displeasure. Upon which he sate down very sullen and silent; and all my Attempts were in vain to revive the Conversation and to turn it on other Subjects: He still answerd me very dryly & coldly. At last, after passing near an Hour in this ill-humour, he rose up and took a Turn about the Room: But Judge of my Surprize, when he sat down suddenly on my Knee, threw his hands about my Neck, kiss'd me with the greatest Warmth, and bedewing all my Face with Tears, exclaim'd, Is it possible you can ever forgive me, my Dear Friend: After all the Testimonies of Affection I have receivd from you, I reward you at last with this Folly & ill Behaviour: But I have notwithstanding a Heart worthy of your Friendship: I love you, I esteem you; and not an Instance of your Kindness is thrown away upon me. I hope you have not so bad an Opinion of me as to think I was not melted on this Occasion: I assure you I kissd him and embrac'd him twenty times, with a plentiful Effusion of Tears. I think no Scene of my Life  was ever more affecting.



I now understand perfectly his Aversion to company, which appears so surprizing in a Man well qualify'd for the Entertainment of Company, and which the greatest Part of the World takes for Affectation. He has frequent and long Fits of the Spleen, from the State of his Mind or Body, call it which you please, and from his extreme Sensibility of Temper. During that Disposition, Company is a Torment to him. When his Spirits and Health & good Humour return, his Fancy affords him so much & such agreeable Occupation that to call him off from it gives him Uneasyness; and even the writing of Books, he tells me, as it limits and restrains his Fancy to one Subject, is not an agreeable Entertainment. He never will write any more; and never shou'd have wrote at all, coud he have slept a nights. But he lies awake commonly, and to keep himself from tiring he usually compos'd something which he wrote down when he arose. He assures me, that he composes very slowly and with great Labour and Difficulty.



He is naturally very modest, and even ignorant of his own Superiority: His Fire, which frequently rises in Conversation, is gentle and temperate; he is never, in the least, arrogant & domineering, and is indeed one of the best bred Men I ever knew. I shall give  you such an Instance of his Modesty as must necessarily be sincere. When we were on the Road I recommended to him the learning of English, without which, I told him, he wou'd never enjoy entire Liberty, nor be fully independant, and at his own Disposal. He was sensible I was in the right; and said, that he heard there were two English Translations of his Emile or Treatise of Education: He woud get them, as soon as he arriv'd in London; and as he knew the Subject, he woud have no other Trouble than to learn  or guess the Words: This woud save him some Pains in consulting the Dictionary; and as he improved, it woud amuse him to compare the Translations, and judge which was the best. Accordingly, soon after our Arrival, I procurd him the Books; but he returnd them in a few days, saying that they coud be of no Use to him. What is the Matter, reply'd I. I cannot endure them, said he, they are my own Work; and ever since I deliverd my Books to the Press, I never coud open them or read a Page of them without Disgust. That is Strange, said I, I wonder the good Reception they have met with from the World has not put you more in conceit with them. Why! said he, if I were to count Suffrages, there are perhaps more against them than for them. But, rejoind I, it is impossible but the Style & Eloquence and Ornaments must please you. To tell the Truth, said he, I am not displeasd with myself in that particular: But I still dread, thatmy Writings are good for nothing at the bottom, and that all my Theories are full of Extra[va]gance. Je craigne toujours que je peche par le fond, et que touts mes systemes ne sont que des extravagances. You see, that this is judging himself with the utmost Severity, and censuring his Writings on the Side where they are most expos'd to Criticism. No feign'd Modesty is ever capable of this Courage. I never heard Robertson reproach himself with the godly Strain of his History: No body ever heard you express any Remorse for having put Ossian on the same footing with Homer.



Have I tir'd you, or will you have any more Anecdotes of this singular Personage? I think I hear you desire me to go on. He attempted once to justify to me the Moral of his new Heloisa, which, he knew, was blam'd, as instructing young People in the Art of gratifying their Passions, under the Cover of Virtue and noble refind Sentiments. You may observe, said he, that my Julia is faithful to her Husband's Bed, tho she is seduc'd from her Duty during her single State. But this last Circumstance can be of no Consequence in France, where all the young Ladies are shut up in Convents & have it not in their power to transgress: It might indeed have a bad Effect in a protestant Country. But notwithstanding this Reflection,  he told me, that he has wrote a Continuation of his Emilius, which may soon be published: He there attempts to show the Effect of his Plan of Education, by representing Emilius in all the most trying Situations, and still extricating himself with Courage & Virtue. Among the rest, he discovers that Sophia, the amiable, the virtuous, the estimable Sophia is unfaithful to his Bed, which fatal Accident he bears with a manly, superior Spirit. In this Work, added he, I have endeavourd to represent Sophia in such a light that she will appear equally amiable, equally virtuous, and equally estimable, as if she had no such Frailty. You take a Pleasure, I see, said I, to combat with Difficulties in all your Works. Yes, said he, I hate marvellous & supernatural Events in Novels. The only thing that can give pleasure in such Performances is to place the Personages in Situations difficult and singular. Thus you see, that nothing remains for him but to write a Book for the Instruction of Widows; unless perhaps he imagines that they can learn their Lesson without Instruction.



Adieu, Dear Doctor: You say that you sometimes read my Letters to our common Friends; but you must read this only to the initiated. Yours, usque ad aras

David Hume

Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 25 of March 1766

To The Reverend Dr Hugh Blair at Edinburgh
