Dear Sir

You will find, that the Good-Nature & friendly Disposition, which I have experienc'd in you, is like to occasion you more Trouble; & tis very happy, that the same Good-Nature, which occasions the Trouble, will incline you to excuse it.

Since I saw you, I have been very busy in correcting & finishing that Discourse concerning Morals, which you perus'd; & I flatter myself, that the Alterations I have made have improv'd it very much both in point of Prudence & Philosophy. I shall set out for London in three Weeks or a Month with an Intention of publishing it. The Bookseller, who printed the first two Volumes, is very willing to engage for this; & he tells me that the Sale of the first Volumes, tho' not very quick, yet it improves. I have no Acquaintaince among these Folks, & very little Skill in making Bargains. There are two Favours, therefore, I must ask of you, viz to tell me what Copy-Money I may reasonably expect for one Edition of a thousand of this Volume, which will make a four Shillings Book; And, if you know any honest Man in this Trade, to send me a Letter of Recommendation to him that I may have the Choice of more than one Man to bargain with. Tis with Reluctance I ask this last Favour; tho' I know your Authority will go a great Way to make the Matter easy for me. I am sensible, that the point is a little delicate. Perhaps you may not care to recommend even to a Bookseller a Book that may give Offence to religious People: Perhaps you may not think it calculated for public Sale. I assure you, therefore, that I shall not take in the least amiss, if you refuse me. I shall only say with regard to the first Article, that the Book is pretty much alter'd since you saw it; & tho' the Clergy be always Enemys to Innovations in Philosophy, yet I do not think they will find any great Matter of Offence in this Volume. On the contrary I shall be disappointed, if Impartial Judges be not much pleas'd with the Soundness of my Morals. I have sent you the Conclusion, as I have alter'd it, that you may see I desire to keep on good Terms even with the strictest & most rigid. You need not return this Copy, unless you point out any Passage, which you think it proper for me to alter.

My Bookseller has sent to Mr Smith a Copy of my Book, which I hope he has receiv'd, as well as your Letter. I have not yet heard what he has done with the Abstract. Perhaps you have. I have got it printed in London; but not in the Works of the Learned; there having been an Article with regard to my Book, somewhat abusive, printed in that Work, before I sent up the Abstract. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient & most humble Servant.

David Hume.

Ninewells near Berwick. March 4. 1740.
