As I am conscious of having ever acted towards you the most friendly part, of having ever given you the most tender, the most active Proofs of sincere Affection, you may judge of my extreme Surprize on perusing your Epistle: Such violent Accusations, confined altogether to Generals, it is as impossible to answer as to comprehend them. But Affairs cannot, must not remain on that Footing. I shall charitably suppose, that some infamous Calumniator has belyed me to you: But in that Case, it is your Duty, and I am perswaded it will be your Inclination, to give me an Opportunity of detecting him, and of justifying myself, which can only be done by your mentioning the Particulars, of which I am accused. You say, that I myself know, that I have been false to you; but I say it loudly, and will say it to the whole World that I know the contrary, that I know my Friendship towards you has been unbounded and uninterrupted, and that tho' the Instances of it have been very generally remarked both in France and England, the smallest part of it only has as yet come to the Knowledge of the Public. I demand that you will produce me the Man who will assert the contrary; and above all I demand that he will mention any one particular, in which I have been wanting to you. You owe this to me, you owe it to yourself, you owe it to Truth and Honour and Justice, and to every thing that can be deemed sacred among men. As an innocent Man; I will not say, as your Friend; I will not say, as your Benefactor; but I repeat it, as an innocent Man, I claim the Privilege of proving my Innocence, and of refuting any scandalous Lye which may have been invented against me. Mr Davenport, to whom I have sent a Copy of your Letter, and who will read this before he delivers it, I am confident will second my Demand, and will tell you, that nothing possibly can be more equitable. Happily, I have preserved the Letter you wrote me after your Arrival at Wooton; and you there express, in the strongest Terms, indeed in Terms too strong, your Satisfaction in my poor Endeavours to serve you: The little epistolary Intercourse, which afterwards passed between us, has been all employed on my Side to the most friendly Purposes: Tell me what has since given you Offence: Tell me, of what am I accused: Tell me the man who accuses me. Even after you have fulfilled all these Conditions to my Satisfaction and to that of Mr Davenport, you will have great Difficulty to justify the employing such outrageous Terms towards a Man, with whom you have been so intimately connected, and whom on many accounts you ought to have treated with some Regard and Decency.

Mr Davenport knows the whole Transaction about your Pension, because I thought it necessary, that the Person, who had undertaken your Settlement, shoud be fully acquainted with your Circumstances; lest he shoud be tempted to perform towards you concealed Acts of Generosity, which, if they came to your Knowledge, might give you some grounds of offence.

I am Sir

Your most humble Servant 
David Hume



Lisle Street Leicester Fields 
 26 of June 1766
