Dear Sir

I am very glad that Mr Robertson is entering on Terms with you. It was indeed my Advice to him, when he set out for London, that he shoud think of no other Body; and I ventur'd to assure him, that he woud find your way of dealing frank & open & generous. He read me part of his History, and I had an Opportunity of reading another Part of it in Manuscript above a twelvemonth ago. Upon the whole, my Expectations, both from what I saw, & from my Knowledge of the Author, were very much rais'd; and I consider it as a Work of uncommon Merit. I know that he has employ'd himself with great Diligence & Care in collecting the Facts: His style is lively & entertaining: And he judges with Temper and Candor. He is a man generally known & esteemd in this Country; and we look upon him very deservedly as inferior to no body in Capacity & Learning. Hamilton & Balfour have offerd him a very unusual Price; no less than 500 Pounds for one Edition of 2000; but I own, that I shoud be better pleas'd to see him in your hands. I only inform you of this Fact, that you may see how high the general Expectations are of Mr Robertson's Performance. It will have a quick Sale in this Country from the Character of the Author; and in England from the Merit of the Work, as soon as it is known.

Some part of his Subject is common with mine; but as his Work is a History of Scotland, mine of England, we do not interfere; and it will rather be an Amusement to the Reader to compare our Method of treating the same Subject. I give you Thanks, however, for your Attention in asking my Opinion.

By hurrying myself, I coud with some Difficulty be ready at the time you desire: But it will be better both for me & the Book that you do not publish, till after the Christmas Holydays. I am glad to hear, that you intend to be in this Country soon. We shall then have an Opportunity of speaking of that Matter.

You would oblige me much, if you woud prepare the way for an Acquaintaince between Dr Birch & me, when I shall be in London. I have a great Esteem for his Character; have heard that he is very communicative; and is very willing, and even desirous, to give Information to any Body that applies to him. Such an Acquaintance woud be very useful and agreeable to me.

I sent Mr Elliots Letter the Instant I receivd it. Do you not intend to print a new Edition this Autumn of the other two Volumes? I am afraid, this extraordinary Run upon Dr Smollet has a little hurt your Sales: But these things are only temporary.

I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinr 6 April 1758

P.S.

The Service I receivd from Mr Strahan made me recommend it to Mr Robertson, if he agreed with you, to desire that he might be the Printer, if it consisted with your Convenience.
